                             NBER WORKJNG PAPER SERIES




                              FOREIGN INVESTMENT WITH
                               ENDOGENOUS PROTECTION




                                       Gene Grossman
                                      Elhanan Helpman




                                   Working Paper No. 4876



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1994


We thank the National Science Foundation and the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation for
financial support. Grossman also thanks the John S. Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, the
Sumitomo Bank Fund, the Daiwa Bank Fund, and the Center of International Studies at Princeton
University. Part of this work was carried out when the authors were visiting I.G.I.E.R. in Milan
and when Grossman was at L.E.Q.A.M. in Aix-en-Provence. Needless to say, these were very
hospitable environments. This paper is part of FIBER's research program in International Trade
and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Gene Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4876
                                                                                October 1994


                               FOREIGN INVESTMENT WITH
                                ENDOGENOUS PROTECTION


                                          ABSTRACT


       Jagdish Bhagwati coined the phrase quid pro quo foreign investment to describe
international investments made in anticipation of host country trade policy and perhaps with the

intention of defusing a protectionist threat. We apply Ehagwati's notion to situations where (i)

foreign investment is best described as the (uncoordinated) opening of branch plants by

multinational corporations, and (ii) protection is a political response by an incumbent government

to offers of policy-contingent campaign contributions by domestic firms. We examine the

determinants of anticipatory foreign investment and study some of its welfare implications. We

also allow for lobbying by workers with sector-specific skills and show how the conflicting

interests of these workers and the industrialists are resolved in determining policy toward foreign

investment.




Gene Grossman                                        Elhanan Helpman
Woodrow Wilson School                                The Eitan Berglas School of Business
Princeton University                                 Tel Aviv University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013                             Ramat Aviv, Tel Aviv
and WRER                                             ISRAEL
                                                     and NBER
1 Introduction
Jagdish Bhagwati coined the phrase quid pro quo foreign investment to describe in-
vestments undertaken in anticipation of trade policy and perhaps with the intended
purpose of defusing a protectionist threat. In a series of papers beginning with Bhag-
wati (1987), he and several colleagues and former students have explored the rote that
such direct foreign investment (DFI) may play in shaping tariffs, quotas, voluntary
export restraints, and more.1 These authors typically took the probability of future
protection to depend on the extent of import penetration and the stock of DFI, and
viewed DFI as a transfer of capital from one country to another. In this context.
firms move their capital and restrict their exports so as to maximize the expected
present value of their profits, taking into account the effects of their investment deci-
sions on subsequent policy formation. The foreign government is usually assumed to
coordinate investment decisions, although occasionally it has been supposed that for-
eign oligopolists independently exploit the intertemporat ramifications of their actions
(e.g., Dinopoulos, 1989). This literature—motivated in large part by the behavior of
Japanese firms in the early and mid 1980's—has produced many interesting insights
and has enriched our understanding of the link between foreign investment and the
formation of trade policies.
   Our aim in this paper is to extend Bhagwati's concept of anticipatory investment
to situations where (i) DFI is best seen as the opening of a subsidiary by a multi-
national corporation and (ii) trade policy represents anoptimal political response by
politicians to the pressures applied by special interest groups. We follow Markusen
(1984) and Helpman (1984) in modeling multinational investment as the costly es-
tablishment of a branch plant by a firm that has the exclusive right or the exclusive
ability to manufacture a particular product. The foreign owners of such an intan-
gible asset face a choice between bearing the cost of opening a new subsidiary and
producing in their existing parent facility- In making this choice. they recognize that
   1See, for example, BhagwaLi, Brecher a at (1987), Dinopoulos (1989. 1992), Wong (1989).
Bhagwati, Dinopoulos et a!. (1992).


                                            1
their attempts to export may be impeded by subsequent home-country trade barri-
ers. We combine this view of DFI with the approach to policy formation that we
developed in Grossman and Helpman (1994a). We suppose that an incumbent gov-
ernment receives offers of campaign contributions that are (at least implicitly) tied
to its ultimate policy actions. it sets policy with a view toward the trade-off between
the extra contributions that may be associated with protectionist interventions and
the loss of voter goodwill that may be a consequence thereof. At first we assume that
there is only one organized interest group attempting to influence policy, namely a
lobby representing domestic firms in the industry with DFI. Later we allow also for
contributions from a lobby representing domestic workers with skills specific to the
industry.
   Prospective multinationals anticipate the mechanism by which policy will be set
when they make their foreign investment decisions. We treat DFI as a decentralized
process wherein each foreign company takes the investment decisions ol the others
as beyond its control. Given the extent of DFI by other companies, each firm forms
expectations about the host country's eventual trade policy and evaluates the prof-
itability of its own potential foreign investment accordingly. A firm establishes a
subsidiary if by doing so it can earn greater profits net of investment costs than it
can by exporting from its parent facility. It recognizes that the cost of opening a
foreign subsidiary cannot be recovered once the investment has been made. Finally,
an equilibrium entails a level of DFI and a rate of protection such that the political
process supports the particular rate of protection as an outcome in the stage game,
and the expectations about protection that foreign firms hold when they make their
investment decisions are fulfilled.2
   2Hor*tmaan.and Markusen (1992) have studied how protection affects the equtlibrium level of
DFI under the awnption that home-country trade policy is exogenously given. Meanwhile, Hill-
man and Unprung (1993) have examined how the extent of multinational investment influences the
determination of trade policy, given the numbers of national and multinational firms- Our anal-
ysis is distinguished by the fact that we treat both multinational investment and Lrade policy
endogenously (and jointly) determined.


                                               2
   We develop the basic model in section 2. This is followed in section 3 by an
analysis of the determinants of equilibrium tariffs and levels of DEl. There often
exists a single, stable equilibrium. However, if the cost of opening a subsidiary is
small and politicians happen to place great weight on the well being of the average
voter, then two stable equilibria may coexist. In one of these equilibria no DEl takes
place, while in the other all foreign firms establish offshore production facilities. We
show that, whenever only a fraction of foreign companies choose to build plants in the
home country, an increase in the fixed cost of foreign investment reduces the number
of multinationals in equilibrium. Also, the greater the home government's concern for
the plight of the average voter, the smaller is the extent of multinationality. When
the politicians' concern for the average voter's is great and the cost of DEl is low, an
increase in the weight attached to average welfare results in a higher rate of protection.
   These results suggest some interesting efficiency properties of our model. To
explore these, we develop in section 4 a measure of net welfare that allows for the
possibility that some (and perhaps all) of the contributions to politicians are wasted
in the course of the election campaign. Using this notion of net welfare, we ask, Do
restrictions on DFI raise net welfare? And does a government that attaches greater
weight to the interests of the average voter necessarily deliver a higher standard
of living? The first question is particularly interesting when manufacturing costs
happen to be higher in the home country than abroad. Then restricting the entry of
foreign multinationals diverts production to the lower cost country, but also creates
a political climate in which special interests readily can lobby for protection. In such
circumstances, restrictions on DFI can be especially costly. As for the second question.
it appears that a change in the political environment that causes the government to
weigh more heavily the concerns of the average voter might fail to generate an increase
in net welfare. This is because such a change in the political climate might lead to a
higher level of equilibrium protection and it might induce interest groups to deliver
a higher level of wasteful contributions. However, somewhat comfortingly, we found
that extensive simulations of the model failed to turn up a single case where a more


                                            3
 public-minded government would deliver a lower level of average net welfare.
    In section 5 we extend the model to account for the interests of workers with
 skills specific to the sector with DFI. We show that the interests of these workers are
 closely aligned with the interests of the domestic manufacturers on the issue of trade
 protection. Given the level of DFI, both wage earners and profit recipients gain from
 an increase in the tariff. However, on the issue of policy toward foreign multinationals.
 the two interest groups are bound to conflict. Domestic manufacturers would benefit
 from any restriction on DFI, whereas the workers with specific human capital would be
 harmed by such a policy. If elected officials can regulate policy toward multinationals.
 the extent of DFI inequilibrium depends on the relative political strengths of the two
 competing interest groups. We examine the determinants of 'political strength" in
 this particular context.


2 Basic Model
The home country produces a numeraire good with unskilled labor alone. One unit
of labor is required per unit of output. Thus, the equilibrium wage equals 1. The
home country also manufactures an assortment of brands of a differentiated product.
Each brand requires a fixed amount of unskilled labor per unit of output. For the
time being, we assume that no other inputs are needed. The number and types of
the domestic products are treated as given throughout.
   The domestic manufacturers of differentiated products compete with a fixed set
of foreign brands. Each foreign supplier faces a choice. It can assemble its product
in an already-existing plant in its native country or it can build (or purchase) a new.
production facility in the home country. The choice between exporting and foreign
investment is made based on a comparison of expected profits, where profits from
a potential subsidiary are calculated net of the fixed costs of building the facility.
These costs, which must be borne before the home country finally sets its trade
policy, cannot be recouped in the event that the plant is not used. Thus, each foreign


                                           4
company must form some expectations about the likely outcome of the home country's
political process.3 We focus on equilibria with self-fulfilling expectations.
   After the foreign investment takes place, the home government sets a tariff on
imported varieties of the differentiated product. The level of the policy reflects the
conflicting political pressures it faces. On the one hand, the government is concerned
with the welfare of the average voter, because its prospects for re-election depend
on the standard of living it provides. On the other hand, it conceivably can collect
political contributions from the special interest groups to which it caters. We assume
that the domestic lobbies—which, to begin with, comprise only a single group rep-
resenting the domestic manufacturers of brands of the differentiated product—offer
donations that are contingent on the tariff imposed by the government. Presumably.
a higher tariff will elicit a larger contribution from the domestic industry, although
the interest group is free to design its contribution schedule in any way it chooses.
Faced with the contribution schedule, the government sets the policy that maximizes
its own political objective function. We take the latter to be a simple weighted sum
of total campaign gifts and average welfare.4 All of this is well understood by the
foreign companies at the time that they must make their entry decisions.
    We now describe the domestic economy in more detail.
   3We choose this order of play in order to emphasize that investments in plan'. and equipment are
often irreversible, whereas policy can be changed by the government at will. In these circumstances.
foreign finns must realize that long-run trade policy will reflect political conditions prevailing alter
all decisions regarding DF1 are made.
   4This political objective function can be derived as a reduced form of a game in which the
incumbent government must compete in an election with an opposition party. See Grossman and
Relpman (1994b).




                                                    5
 2.1 Consumption and production
The home country is populated by a continuum of individuals with measure I. The
utility function of each individual is given by


                            u=z0+°z(6_1)/9. 9>1.                                      (1)

where X    represents   consumption of the numeraire good and z is an index of con-
sumption of the differentiated products. The consumption index takes the form
                                                              c/(—I)
             r = JjEf'l,. r(j)(Cl)/Cdj + f x(j)t'"dj
                                      iEt1
where  x(j) denotes consumption of brand j, and Nh and N1 are the sets of brands
manufactured by home and foreign firms, respectively (the latter either in a native
plant or in a subsidiary located in the home country).
    As is well known, this structure of preferences yields constant-elasticity demand
functions for each brand, with f being the elasticity of demand. In fact, given the
two-tier structure of preferences, the demand for any brand j can be represented by

                                   r(j) = p(j)_CqC_O,
where p(j) is the price of brand j and qis a price index for all differentiated products.
We assume that c > 0, which implies that the different brands substitute more closely
for one another than they do for the numeraire good. This assumption ensures a
positive cross-elasticity of demand. That is, an increase in the price of competing
brands always causes substitution from these brands to variety j. At the same time.
it raises the price index q, which causes consumers to substitute the numeraire good for
the entire group of differentiated products. When c > 9, the former effect dominates
and the demand for good j increases.
   Each manufacturer of a brand of the differentiated product maximizes prohts by
equating marginal revenue to marginal cost. A foreign firm manufacturing in its
native facility faces the constant marginal cost     -   In the home country, CA units of
labor are needed to produce a unit of any brand of the differentiated product. This

                                           6
means that the marginal cost for home ftrms and foreign subsidiaries is also ch. since
the wage rate equals 1. The mark-up pricing rule then implies

                I          .Sjc,1     for j manufactured in the home country,
                                                                           -
                                                                                                (2)
                i l'i    -1-j-c1r      forj manufactured in the foreign country.
where p, i = h,f, denotes the consumer price of a variety manufactured in country
i and r represents one plus the ad va/orem tariff rate. We denote by Ith the number
of brands owned by home-country firms (the measure of the set Nh) and by nj the
number of brands owned by foreign firms (the measure of the set N1). In addition, we
let in denote the number of foreign firms that have established production facilities
in the home country. Then the price index for x can be written as

                          q=         +   m)p' +(n1 —       n)p']'.                              (3)

assuming that all foreign firms with subsidiaries in the home country actually use these
facilities to produce their output.5 Finally we calculate output levels and operating
profits (i.e., revenue minus manufacturing costs) for firms producing in each location,
which gives
                                    x1—p'q'8 fori=h,f,                                          (4)

                                tj= Cr1              for   i = h,f.                             (5)

Here, ir1 represents the operating profits derived from a single brand and we use the
notational convention that th = I and rj = r.
   For the time being we assume that the tariff is the only policy instrument available
to the government. The government redistributes any tariff proceeds to the voters on
an equal, per capita basis. We can now use (1) to express the average (gross) welfare
level of a citizen in the home country as a function of the tariff rate and the number
   1f this is not the case, then rn in (3) should be replaced by the number of multinationals Lhat
supply the home market with output produced in their subsidiaries. Of course, in an equilibrium
with fulfilled expectations, all firms that make costLy investments in (oteign plants wtil use these
plants for production.


                                                 7
of products supplied by subsidiaries of multinational corporations. \Ve have
                                                               I
              W(r;m) = L +     hh +       '(nj — m)pjz1 +                           (6)
where L is average labor income in view of an assumed inelastic supply and the fact
that the wage rate is equal to 1. The remaining terms on the right-hand side represent
average profit income, the average tariff rebate, and the average surplus derived from
the consumption of differentiated products, respectively. The complete functional
dependence of W on r and in is obtained by substituting equations (2)-(5) into (6).


2.2 The special interest group and the government
The government chooses the rate of protection r to maximize its political objective
function, which we take to be linear in political contributions and the average welfare
of voters. In selecting a trade policy the government faces a contribution sched-
ule C(r) 0 that has been proposed by the domestic lobby group. We write the
governments' objective function as

                                G = C(r) + aW(r; m),                                (7)

where a > 0 is the weight that the government attaches to (gross) voter welfare
relative to political contributions.
   The lobby represents all of the home-country manufacturers of differentiated prod-
ucts. Somehow they ovetcome Mancur Olson's "collective-action" problem (see Olson.
1965) and coordinate their efforts to influence policy. Multinational corporations with
subsidiaries in thehome country do not participate in lobbying for protection. We
assume for simplicity that the set of voters who own shares in companies that produce
brands of the differentiated product is of measure zero. In the event, owners of home
firms instruct their lobby to design a contribution schedule that maximizes their joint
profits net of campaign contributions. In short, we take the lobby's objective to be
the maximization of flhrh — C.
   The lobby's leaders know that once a contribution schedule has been proposed
to the politicians, the latter will set policy to maximize (7). Moreover, they know

                                          8
that they cannot drive the politicians' welfare below the level that the latter could
attain by declining all contribution offers. The government's reservation welfare level
is given by aW'(m), where

                               W(ra) =    max W(r;m).                                (8)

The curve GG in Figure 1 depicts the combinations of contributions and tariff levels
that yield the government a value of C equal to aW(rn). Curves above GG represent
government indifference curves with higher welfare levels. If the lobby designs       a
contribution schedule that is located everywhere below GtG., the government will
choose r, which secures its reservation welfare. In view of this, the best the lobby can
do is to induce the government to choose point A, where the lobby's own indifference
curve !1L is tangent to the government's indifference curve. Clearly, there are many
contribution schedules that will generate this outcome; one example is a contribution
schedule that coincides with the horizontal axis to the left of the lowermost point of
LL and coincides with LL to the right of that point.
   Our argument suggests that the lobby implicitly solves the problem:

                                 max7.c &'a — C
                     .s.t. C + aW(r; in) aW(m) and C 0.


Thus, the political equilibrium is characterized by a tariff that maximizes the joint
welfare of the lobby and the government (i.e., r' = argmaxr[nhra + aW{r; m}1) and
a level of contributions that satisfies the participation constraint with equality (i.e.,
C" = [aW{m} — W{rP;m}]).
   Using (6), we can express the equilibrium tariff as

                                                                                     (9)
        r=argmax [(1+a)nr+at(nf_rn)pfxJ+a0l1c(9_0].
When written in this way, we see that the political tariff maximizes a weighted sum
of profits, tariff revenue, and consumer surplus. Whereas these components would re-
ceive equal weight from a benevolent social planner, the political process gives greater

                                            9
 weight to the profits, which accrue to art organized interest group, and relatively less
 to the tariff revenue and consumer surplus, which go to the general pubtic .Next we
 can use the first-order condition for (9) together with (2)-(5), to derive an implicit
 formula for the equilibrium tariff, namely

                   r—1      —
                            —
                                I-i-a                (c—O)nh
                                 cc e(n4 + in) + 9(n1 — m)(rPc,/ch)I-t                         ( I0)

 This tariff applies provided that in c nj and so long as the equation has a solution
 with 'r > (ch/cf)'. The latter condition ensures that foreign multinationals
 who have invested in subsidiaries will use these facilities to serve the home market.
 Otherwise, the multinationals leave their subsidiaries idle, and the home government
sets the tariff r = (c4fcj)'". Finally, when all foreign companies establish sub-
sidiaries in the home country (i.e., in = it1) any tariff level r (ch/cJ) '" solves
the maximization problem, because variations in the tariff rate have no real effects
as long as the tariff is high enough to induce the multinationals to make use of their
offshore production facilities.6


2.3         Multinationals
We now turn to the first stage, when each foreign firm must decide whether to invest
in a foreign subsidiary. We will assume that the entry process is decentraliied; that
is, each finn makes its own decision taking those of all of the other companies as
given. Given its beliefs about aggregate DFI, each firm forms expectations about the
tariff rateusing (9)1 Then it calculates the difference between expected profits from
operating a subsidiary and expected profits from exporting. Finally, it compares this
   'Our discuton in the text ignores one last possibility. It may happen that: given in, a choice of
r <(ch/rJ)'t', which is low enough to make the multinationals export to the home market, pro-
vides higberjoint welfare to the lobby and the government than any policy with 0' > (ch/c/)'
This case cannot arise in equilibrium, however, because foreign firms would not bear the positive
cost of DFI if they expected such a low tariff.
   TWith a continuum of firms, the aggregate amount of DEl is independent of the decision of any
one firm.


                                                10
difference to the fixed cost, 4', of establishing an offshore facility.
   From (2)-(5) we can calculate the difference in operating profits as a function of
the tariff level and the number of subsidiaries. The resutt is

              —         6(r;rn) =
                                                  B (c — r'c')
                  ir1                            —                                           (11)
                                    [(nh + m)4 + (nj — m)(rcjTh]
where B = c°(c— 1)0_I >0. A foreign company expecting the tariff rate to be r and
observing a measure rn of foreign firms establishing subsidiaries in the home country
will invest itself if E(r; m) > 0. If 6(r; in) C 4', the company will certainly not open
a branch plant, while if the two are equal, it is indifferent between the two options.
   An alternative to our specification would allow coordinated entry by foreign multi-
nationals. This would be appropriate if foreign companies could collude in making
their investment decisions or if the foreign government were inclined to regulate DEl.
In either of these cases, m would be chosen to maximize ( —                rn + a1 n-1. recogniz-

ing the dependence of the endogenous tariff rate on the choice of m (via [9]). This
alternative setup would be closer in spirit to the formulation suggested by Bhagwati
(1987) and explicitly analyzed in Bhagwati, Brecher. et a!. (1989). We wilt not
pursue it any further here.


3 DFI and Protection
We seek to characterize perfect-foresight equilibria. i1i what fotlows we assume that
manufacturing costs are higher in the home country; i.e., ch > 'I


3.1     Tariff response curves
Figure 2 depicts two tariff response curves, each describing the politicat tariff as a
function of in for a particular set of parameter values. These curves are derived
from (9).5 It is easy to verify that all curves above the broken horizontal line at
   5Equation (10) does not always provide a unique solution for r as a function of rn, Twosolutions
exist for example, when rn=O, a =0.217, e=2, 0 = 1.1, c 5. c1 = L. fln = land nj =

                                                II
* = (c/cj) (O/c)ht) slope downwards, and that all curves below this line but
above the horizontal line at: = (chief )(c_t)/e slope upwards.9 Tariff response curves
below: are horizontal, because with such low tariffs any multinational that happened
to own a subsidiary in the home country would not use its local plant to supply the
home market in any case. We restrict our attention to parameters that give a political
tariff at least as high as z. Note that the figure is drawn under the assumption that
* > :, but this need not be the case. If * < r, then all tariff response curves slope
downward. Finally, recall the discussion following equation (10), where we argued
that in the limiting case where rn = nj (i.e., when all foreign companies establish
subsidiaries in the home country), the political tariff can take any value at least as
large as z, because all of these tariffs solve (9) and all result in the same allocation
of resources.
    We note for later reference that, when the parameter a rises, the tariff response
curve shifts down. In other words, were the political climate to change so that the
government placed relatively greater weight on per capita welfare, the equilibrium
tariff would be lower for every (given) degree of multinationality.


3.2 Profit differential curves
We show in Figure 3 five profit differe ntial curves, each one representing a given differ-
ence between the operating profits of a firm manufacturing in the home country and
one manufacturing in the foreign country, as described by (11). A higher curve cor-
responds to a greater profit differential. When one plus the tariff rate equals the cost
ratio c4/cj, the profit differential does not depend on the degree of multinationality
rn (i.e., the curve is a horizontal line). For higher tariffs than this, the curves slope
upward whereas for lower rates they slope downward. A very large profit differential
in this ease neither one of them solves (9); the solution to (9) is instead an infinite tariff. Equation
(10) can be inverted, however, to express in asa function of 9.
   9We should emphasise the ambiguity in the slope of the tariff response function. Most of the
literature that follows Bhagwati assumes a pnon that an increase in the number of multinationals
reduces   the expected rate of protection.

                                                  12
that can arise when in = 0 may not be possible even with an infinite tariff for some
positive values of in c n1; this is reflected in our depiction of the uppermost curve in
the figure.


3.3 Entry
Every foreign company compares the profit differential with the fixed cost i, after
forming some expectation about the future tariff. Let re(m) describe (one plus) the
tariff rate that a foreign firm expects when the number of multinationals equals in.
Then there are three possible equilibrium configurations:

   • in = 0 and 6[re(0),Oj 0;

   • 0cm <aj and 6[r(m),m] =
   • in = n1 and 6 [re(nf), njJ .

In the first case no DFI occurs and no firm finds it profitable to enter on its own. In
the second case some multinationals form and net profits for a firm that establishes
a subsidiary are the same as for one that does not. In the third case all foreign firms
form subsidiaries and net profits are at least as high as the profits that a single firm
would attain if it refrained from investing in the home country.
   As we will see in a moment, occasionally more than one of these typesof equilibria
can exist for given parameters. When this happens we shall select among them on
the basis of a stability criterion. We adopt the following (ad hoc, but intuitive)
adjustment process:

                      th=M(6[re(m)im]_O),loro<m<nf,                                  (12)

where M(O) = 0 and M() is an increasing function for 6 — >              0.   This process
presumes that, whenever the existing number of subsidiaries is such that it would be
profitable for a single firm to invest, the number of subsidiaries rises; and whenever


                                           13
it would be profitable for a single firm to refrain from investing, the number of sub-
sidiaries falls. Of course, this "adjustment" does not take place in real time: recall
that the fixed costs of purchasing a subsidiary are assumed to be sunk, once incurred.


3.4      Equilibrium DFI and protection
We now combine these elements in order to characterize the stable, perfect-foresight
equilibria. Figure 4 depicts a case with a high fixed cost of entry 0 and a low value
of a. The latter means that the government is primarily concerned with amassing
campaign contributions. As a consequence of these parameter restrictions, the tariff
response curve and the profit differential curve corresponding to a difference of
both lie everywhere above the cost ratio chic1 for all relevant values of in. This
means that the tariff response curve TT slopes downward while the relevant profit
differential curve 1111 slopes upward.
   The point A in the figure represents a perfect-foresight equilibrium. So do all
points on the vertical line above point B- In the former case, penetration of foreign
multinationals is partial, and a firm that invests in the home country enjoys the same
net profit as one that serves the home market with exports. In the tatter case(s).
all foreign firms establish subsidiaries and the ensuing political tariff causes none
of them to regret its decision. Note, however, that these latter equilibria are all
unstable. If, for example, the number of multinationals were slightly less than nj,
then the expected tariff would be on the tariff response curve below B, causing a
reduction in the multinationals, an increase in the expected tariff, and so on, until
the economy converged (following the arrows) to the equilibrium at point A.
   To clarify the source of the instability, it may help to think as follows. Each
foreign firm knows that if all others establish subsidiaries, the home government
will be indifferent among all tariffs above z- In consequence. the government would
indeed be willing to choose a tariff above the one at point B, which would sustain an
equilibrium there. But the firm also hnows that if a single other foreign firm were to
refrain from investing in the home country, the political tariff would be well below

                                         14
that at point B. If this were to happen, the firm would very much regret any decision
to invest. So it might decide not to take the risk. If all firms think in this way,
they will all be led to expect the tariff at A and to make their investment decisions
accordingly.
   We now can examine the effects of varying the underlying parameters slightly.
We focus on the cost of entry and the degree to which the government cares about
the average voter. First consider the parameter a. The less weight the government
attaches to per capita welfare (lower a) the higher is the tariff response curve and
the higher is point A on the profit differential curve. The result is a higher rate of
protection and a greater presence of foreign multinationals. Now consider the cost
of entry. When 0 is lower, so too is the rdevant profit differential curve and the
location of point A along the tariff response curve. It follows that DPI is greater and
protection lower the lower are the costs of foreign entry.
   Figure 5 depicts another possible situation, which can arise when the government
cares significantly about welfare, entry costs are low, and * < z.'°In this case, point
A again represents the unique, stable equilibrium (as before, the arrows indicate the
adjustment path). Here again lower entry costs imply a greater number of foreign
subsidiaries and a lower rate of protection. But, unlike in the previous case, now
if the government were to concern itself more with contributions and less with per
capita welfare, the tariff rate would fall.
    A comparison of the two cases depicted in Figures 4 and .5 suggests the á.bsence of a
clear-cut relationship between a government's willingness to cater to special interests
and the degree of protection that ultimately obtains. The reason is that foreign firms
make their investment decisions in anticipation of policy formation and their decisions
can alter the political climate in which the tariffs are eventually determined. In both
cases the direct effect of a decrease in a (given in) is to generate an incipient increase
in the expected tariff; in both cases this induces more foreign firms to enter; and
in both cases recognition of this entry causes expectations of the tariff increase to
  '°Tbis requires ch/e/ <


                                              15
moderate. In the case depicted by Figure 4, the entry of multinationals does not
cause the tariff to fall below its initial level. But in the case depicted in Figure 5. the
assumed adjustment process indeed leads this to happen.
    Figure 6 depicts still another possibility. This situation can arise when the politi-
cians place a great weight on voter welfare and when fixed costs of forming a subsidiary
are low. It also requires > z- Here there are two stable, perfect-foresight equilibria.
at points A and C (whereas the equilibrium at point B is unstable). If all foreign firms
were to refrain from investing, as at point A, the political tariff would be reasonably
low. Then the firms that had expected this low tariff would be happy they had chosen
to export from their home plants. On the other hand, if all foreign firms were to form
subsidiaries, as at point C, then the political tariff would be high. and the firms would
be glad to have their production facilities inside the protected market.
   The comparative statics are simple in this case. Neither a small change in the
government's utility weights nor a small change in the fixed cost of entry has any
effect on the existence of the two extreme equilibria. If a were dramatically lower,
however, the TT curve would lie everywhere above the fill curve, and then the
unique equilibrium for firms expecting very high tariffs (at all in) entails entry by all.
Similarly, if were dramatically lower, the fill curve would lie below IT. and again
all would enter. Finally, if either a or were much higher than as depicted in the
figure, the unique equilibrium would have low tariffs or prohibitive entry costs, and
no MNC's in either cast


4 Welfare
Our analysis has focused on the joint determination of direct foreign investment and
the rate of protection when domestic companies lobby for protection. The resulting
equilibrium has, of course, implications for the well being of the general electorate.
There are many interesting welfare questions that one could address with our model.
In this section, we concentrate on two that may be particularly interesting.


                                            16
   Before we can address any normative issues, however, we need to be precise about
our welfare metric. Equation (6) gives the gross welfare of the average voter. But
this measure includes the contributions paid by members of interest groups. These
contributions might represent a pure transfer to politicians or perhaps they will be put
to some socially productive use in the course of an election campaign. Alternatively.
we night believe that the contributions will be used to finance some socially wasteful
electioneering activities. To evaluate which of these views is appropriate, we would
need a fully articulated model of the election process, which is beyond our scope here.
So instead, we introduce a welfare measure that admits alternative interpretations.
We define net welfare as
                                 NW(r;rn)—-yC,                                      (1:3)

where y is a parameter ranging from 0 to 1. We use this parameter to reflect the
extent to which campaign contributions represent a social deadweight loss.


4.1 Does DFI benefit the average voter?
First we examine whether DFI proves beneficial to the average voter in the host
country. Interest in this question arises from the fact that governments may have
the ability to restrict multinational investment by fiat, and if so, domestic interest
groups may have an incentive to lobby for such restrictions. It might seem that
such restrictions would be harmless to the average voter in our context, because
manufacturing costs are higher at home than abroad. By restricting DFI, the home
country ensures a chap source of supply and so can secure a favorable terms of trade.
However, this reasoning proves only partially correct in the light of the political-
economic response to investment restrictions.
   To demonstrate the possibility that impediments to DFI may harm the average
voter, we consider a situation where the government attaches very little weight to the
public interest and the fixed cost of establishing a subsidiary is relatively low. In the
event, the unique stable equilibrium when DFI is permitted has entry by all foreign
firms (iii = n1) and a tariff high enough to ensure that all these firms actively use

                                           17
their subsidiaries. Moreover, once all foreign firms have built their plants in the home
country, gross welfare of the average voter does not depend on the tariff rate (provided
that r — 1 > CA/cl). This means that the government may be happy to provide the
equilibrium protection without contributions from the interest group. II so. then net
welfare would equal gross welfare, which in turn could be expressed (using [2].[6)) as

                         W(q) L + nhpLq +                                          (14)

for q = (nA + nj)"0p,1.
    Now compare this outcome to the one that would obtain if foreign investment
were prohibited. A government that cared little about average welfare would cater
readily to the interest group. It would be induced by the group to choose the tariff
that maximized domestic profits, which in this case is a prohibitive one. Moreover,
it would require only a minuscule contribution in order to provide such protection.
It follows that net welfare again would equal gross welfare, and that the latter would
again be given by (14), but this time with q = nhh/(Mp%. Our comparison thus
hinges on whether W[(nh + nj)"01p,j exceeds W(nhh/(I_)pn), or vice versa.
   The function 141(q) may be everywhere increasing in q for q in the range between
flh"0ph and (n% + nj)h/(_o)p)1 In the event, the average voter must be harmed
by a prohibition on foreign investment. The source of the welfare loss is in the
political economy of the situation. Whereas the anticipatory foreign investment allows
domestic consumers to enjoy some surplus from foreign vArieties, they would realize no
such surplus in an equilibrium without DFI in which the government was induced to
erect prohibitive trade barriers. Alternatively, if W(q) happens not to be increasing
in q throughout the relevant range, then a restriction on DFI may or may not be
costly to the average voter; but it must be so if the number of foreign brands is large.
   The fact that restrictions on DFI may harm the average voter does not of course
mean that foreign firms will be able to enter freely in a political equilibrium. The
domestic industry has the same incentive to lobby for barriers to investment as it has
  'tWe calculate that dW(q)/dn has the same sign as I — (c — O)p['(   1




                                             18
to lobby for impediments to trade. So we might expect politics to stand in the way of
quid pro quo foreign investment just as it restricts potentially gainful trade. However,
we shall find in SectionS that there is an important difference in the political economy
bearing on these alternative policies; whereas all powerful domestic interest groups
are likely to unite in opposition to imports, workers with industry-specific skills may
well have an incentive to oppose domestic firms in their efforts to limit DPI.


4.2 Does the average voter prefer a responsive government?
Our second question concerns the normative properties of the political regime. One
might hope that the average voter would benefit from having a government in place
that weighs more heavily the public's well-being and that gives less weight to contribu-
tions from special interest groups. In our model, however, there is reason to hesitate
before drawing this conclusion. It appears that the average voter might actually ben-
efit from having the government cater more readily to domestic pressure groups, if as
a consequence of this there would be a lower rate of equilibrium protection or a lower
level of wasteful political contributions.
   Consider for example the equilibrium depicted in Figure 7. Here, all foreign firms
establish subsidiaries in the home country. The government might be willing to pro-
vide the associated protection even if it did not receive any campaign contributions
for doing so, because gross welfare might be higher when the foreign firms produce
locally as compared to exporting, once all such firms have already established a lo-
cal presence. Assuming this were so, net welfare would equal gross welfare in the
initial situation. Now if the political climate were to change in such a way that the
government placed less weight on campaign contributions, the curve TT would be
located lower in the figure. The equilibrium would instead be at a point such as B.
with only partial penetration by foreign multinationals. There would be fewer for-
eign subsidiaries, which has ambiguous welfare implications, but also a higher rate of
protection, which would contribute to a lower level of gross welfare. Also, domestic
lobbies would have to pay to sustain the equilibrium tariff, so net welfare would fall

                                             19
short of gross welfare if y > 0. In principle, these effects might be strong to more
than offset the direct benefit to the average voter from having a government that is
more attuned to the general electorate.
   Although we have been unable to rule out the paradoxical possibility just de-
scribed, it appears not to be characteristic feature of our model. We have conducted
extensive simulations of the model using a wide range of parameter values. These
simulations failed to turn up a single case where an increase in the parameter a would
result in a reduction in net welfare. It is somewhat conforting to know that, at least
in this context, a political reform that would reduce politicians' thirst for campaign
contributions would typically benefit the average voter.


5 Workers vs. Capitalists
The profits of the domestic industry depend on the extent of the local presence of
foreign firms on the one hand, and on the degree of protection against their export
sales on the other. We have explored these links in some detail, taking account
of the political economy of policy formation- Our discussion has focused mostly
on the implementation of import tariffs, although we have noted in passing that a
similar political dynamic might lead to impediments to DFI. Like trade barriers, such
restrictions could prove costly to the average voter.
   Our basic specification misses, however, an important distinction between the
politics of protectionism and the politics of investment barriers. Because we have
modeled an economy where skills are general and labor freely mobile, workers' inter-
ests have not been tied to their sector of employment. In reality, of course, workers
often acquire skills that are specific to an industry. Then these workers gain a stake
in the policies that affect their industry- Often we see organized labor as a distinct
interest group lobbying the government. And, whereas the interests of wage-earners
align closely with those of profit-earners on issues of protection, this may not be the
case where policy toward DFI is concerned.


                                          20
  To explore this point in more detail, we propose a simple modification to our
model. We suppose now that differentiated products are manufactured with both
"skilled" (or specific) and "unskilled" (or genera!) labor, and that the skills are not
useful for production of the numeraire good. In the numeraire sector, output is still
produced by unskilled labor alone, and a choice of units again makes the equilibrium
wage of these workers equal to 1. In the other sector, differentiated products are pro-
duced by a combination of unskilled and skilled labor, with a constant'returns-to.scale
technology. There is a fixed supply S of skilled labor. And similar factor proportions
are used in manufacturing the differentiated varieties as are used in establishing the
plants needed to produce these goods. Accordingly, we denote the marginal cost of
producing a unit of some brand of differentiated product in the home country by
Ch(W) and   the fixed cost associated with DFI by ôcp.(w), where w is the wage paid to
skilled workers.
   Before turning to the political economy, let us note the requirements for equilib-
rium in the market for skilled labor. Each firm manufacturing differentiated products
in the home country employs 3(w) units of skilled labor per unit of output. where
.5(w) dc&(w)/dw. Each foreign multinational also employs s(w) units of skilled La'
bor to establish its subsidiary. Total demand for skilled labor is the sum of demand by
manufacturers and demand by foreign firms for use in building their plants.. Finally.
market clearing requires that aggregate demand be equal to the inelastic supply, or


                            N&   + m)x4s(w) + rns(w) = S.                         (15)

   Now we can replace CA in (2) by c4(w) and combine (2)-(4) with (15), to express
the equilibrium wage as a function of the number of foreign subsidiaries and the rate
of protection; we denote this relationship by w(r;m). Note that w increases with
i-, because   a higher tariff means greater demand for locally-produced varieties, and




                                           21
so a greater derived demand for the sector-specific labor.'2 As for the relationship
between the number of multinationals and the skilled wage, we see from (15) that
there is a direct effect that is positive: each additional multinational demands some
skilled labor to build its plant and produce its output. There is also an indirect effect
that works through the induced change in ra. lithe consumer price of domestically-
produced goods exceeds the price of imports (as will be the case if rc1 c ch). then
an increase in viz raises the price index for differentiated products and so raises the
demand for each locally produced good. in this case, the indirect effect on the wage
also is positive, and the wage rate must rise as the number of multinationals expands.
On the other hand, if domestic goods are cheaper to consumers than imports, q falls
with in and so does x. Then DF1 has an adverse, indirect effect on the demand for
skilled labor. But the direct effect always dominates, and so the skilled wage always
rises when the number of foreign subsidiaries increases.'3
    Now let us return to the politics of the situation. Given the number of foreign
multinationals, in, both      Wh   and w increase with r. So, if both the capitalists and
workers are politically organized, both will have an incentive to contribute toward
                                                               with an increase in m.
protection. In contrast, while domestic profits certainly fall
the skilled wage rises in response to an inflow of foreign firms. So domestic firms
  '2Simple comparative statics reveal that the partial derivative of w() with respect to r is

                                  —     w       (1—. v)( —9)1,    >
                               WI.——
                                         r
when q a (nh +m)p'/ [(nh + m)pL + (it1 — rn)p'] and!, a (nh + m)zh/ [(n,, + m)zh + ma)
are between zero and one, e -'s'w/s> 0 is the elasticity of demand for skilled labor in each of its
uses, and fi, a sw/ep, is the share of skilled wages in the total cost of manufacturing differentiated
products or establishing subsidiaries.
  '3We calculate that


                               w   (
                                                + ')s-—-
                                             n&+m
                                       1— _2.s_.j     ti n+n, p ,j
                       Wn;
 which is non-negative, because ! < I and the terms multiplying!, in the numerator of the second
 fraction sum to something less than or equal to one.



                                                    22
and industry workers will find themselves in conflict over the issue of policy toward
multinationals.
     How will such a conflict be resolved? To gain some insight into this issue, we focus
on the extreme case where a is close to zero. In the event, the government puts no
weight on consumer surplus or tariff revenue and so is willing to accede to workers'
and firms' demands for a prohibitive tariff. Indeed, home interest groups need pay
only a tiny political contribution in order to secure a fully protected market. Foreign
firms should expect an infinite tariff no matter what the degree of rnultinationalitv.1
Accordingly, we know that some foreign firms will wish to establish subsidiaries pro-
vided w4 > 4c4(w) when in = 0. It remains to be seen only whether a government
that can set investment barriers will choose to impede the foreign investment.
    Suppose the lobbies compete to influence the government's policy toward multi-
nationals. Let each propose a contribution schedule linking the political gift to the
number of foreign firms allowed to enter. We focus on Nash equilibrium-in which,
each group's contribution schedule is optimal given the schedule of the other—and.
among these, on equilibria that are not Pareto dominated for the two lobby groups.
There is in fact a unique, Pareto-undominated Nash equilibrium in the situation we
have described; namely, the lobby groups induce the government to choose in                    so as

to maximize the sum of the skilled wage bill and domestic profits.'5
    What does this tell us about investment restrictions in the ensuing political equi-
   ''An infinite tariff with a infinitessimal contribution is the unique Nash equilibrium when both
interest groups independently set their contribution schedules. It is also the outcome if only one of
the groups lobbies for protection.
  '5Th1a conclusion follows from Theorem 2 of Bernheim and Whinston (1986). They have shown
that all coalition-proof equilibria in menu-auction games maximize the joint welfare of the principals
and theagent. Here, the government is the agent and its welfare isjust a transfer from the principals
when a = 0. So in must maximize nhr + wS in any coalition-proof equilibrium. Finally, the set
of coalition-proof equilibria coincides with the set of equilibria that are Pareto-undominated for the
principals, when there are only two principals bidding for influence.




                                                 23
librium? To answer this question. we define .1 a nhrh + wS. and calculate that

                 J = r°(c — 1)O_tnh(nh ÷     m)'ch(w)' + wS.
when the tariff is prohibitive. Also (15) reduces to

                 s(w) {r'(c — 1)8(nh + rn)@ /(c—L)(y-B + mo] = S.

as   r —. oo. From these two equations we can evaluate how the joint (gross) welfare
of the interest groups is affected by the entry of foreign firms. We find that


 di —in = — (1 —w)in(f—9) r                  IlkL— 2/ + 'k#m)(c1)
                                                           n(9—t)
 —                       + i' —1 —cu — 1)p3j                      , (16)
 dim J         (nh+m)(c—1)
where w = wS/J is the share of skilled wages in the aggregate income of members of
the two interest groups.
     Inspection of (16) reveals that joint income falls with in when w is close to zero. In
the event, the political equilibrium entails a complete ban on all foreign investment.
Intuitively, when to    0, the sector.specific factor has only a (relatively) modest stake
in the policy towards multinationals. Instead, it is the owners of domestic firms
who are most affected by DFI. So the firms' lobby outbids the workers lobby in the
competition for the government's favor. Qf course, the situation is just the reverse
when w is close to 1. Then an inflow of multinationals boosts the income of skilled
workers and these workers have the most at stake in the outcome of the policy. In
this case, the workers win the political battle and all foreign firms are free to enter.
Finally, if to is not so extreme, the political contest may give rise to compromise. The
political limit to foreign entry can be found by maximizing J with respect to in. This
numbet'will be greater the larger are skilled wages in comparison to the profits of the
domestic industry (large to), the less elastic are firms' demands for the skilled labor
(small a.), and the larger are the fixed costs of establishing a facility (large &which
implies a small l for a given in).



                                             24
6 Conclusions
We have developed a model of anticipatory foreign investment that, resembles in some
respects the quid pro quo foreign investment described in Bhagwati (1987). In the
model, foreign investment is assumed to be irreversible while trade policies can be
more readily changed. Therefore, foreign firms must base their investment decisions
on   their expectations about subsequent policy formation. The firms bear the extra
cost of establishing subsidiaries, because they fear the eventual imposition of import
barriers by the home country.
     In our model, there may be no realization of a quid pro quo, because our treatment
of the political economy implies no simple relationship between the 'iumber of multi.
nationals and politically-determined tariff rate. Moreover, the investment process is
assumed to be decentralized, so foreign firms and their government do not exploit the
relationship between investment and the ensuing protection. In an equilibrium with
endogenous trade policy but no impediments to OFI, the stock of foreign investment
increases with the home government's taste for campaign contributions and decreases
with the fixed cost of entry. Surprisingly, a government that is willing to cater more
to special interests does not necessarily provide a higher rate of protection in equilib-
rium; this depends on how the foreign firms behave in expectation of the government's
protectionist proclivities. When policy toward inward foreign investment also is po-
litically determined, there may arise be a conflict between domestic firms wanting
investment restrictions and domestic workers wanting free entry by multinationals.
We have shown how various parameters influence the resolution of this conflict.
     Finally, we have briefly examined a few normative issues that arise in the context
of our model. We have shown for example, that DFI can be welfare improving, even if
domestic manufacturing costs exceed foreign costs, so that "tariff-jumping" is the sole
motivation for the investment. This conclusion is somewhat at odds with prevailing
wisdom in the literature (see, for example, Brecher and Diaz-Alejandro, 1977). Our
result can be reconciled with the earlier literature in view of the assumed endogeneity
of protection; that is, DFI may be harmful for a given tariff rate but still beneficial if it

                                             25
induces a more liberal trade-policy outcome. We have also examined the equilibrium
response to political reform. While it appreas possible that a reduction in politicians'
tastes for campaign contributions might actually harm the average voter, we found
no examples of such a paradox in extensive simulations of our model with different
parameter values.




                                           26
References
[1] Bernheirn, Douglas B. and Michael D. Whinston (1986), "Menu Auctions, Re-
      source Allocation, and Economic Influence," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
      vol. 101, no.1, pp. 1-31.

[21   Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1987), Quid Pro Quo DFI and VIEs: A PotiUca!-
      Economy-Theoretic Analysis." International Economic Journal, vol. 1, no. 1.
      pp. 1-14.

[31 Bhagwati, Jagdish N., Brecher, Richard A., Dinopoulos, Etias and T.N. Srini-
      vasan (1987), "Quid Pro Quo Foreign Investment and Welfare: A Politicat-
      Economy-Theoretic Model," Journal of Development Economics, vol. 27, no.
      2, pp. 127-138.

[4J Bhagwati, Jagdish  N, Dinopoulos, Elias and Kar-yiu Wang (1992), " Quid Pro
      Quo Foreign Investment," American Economic Review (Papers and Proceed-
      ings), vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 186-190.

(5J Brecher, Richard A. and'Carlos F. Diaz-Alejandro (1977), "Tariffs, Foreign Cap-
      ital, and Immiserizing Growth," Journal of International Economics, vol. 7, no.
      3/4, pp. 317-322.

(6] Dinopoulos, Elias (1989), "Quid Pro Quo Foreign Investment." Economics and
      Politics, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 145-160.

[7] Dinopoulos, Elias (1992), "Quid Pro Quo Foreign Investment and VERs: A Nash
      Bargaining Approach," Economics and Politics, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 43-60.

[8) Grossman,     Gene M. and Helpman, Elhanan (1994), "Protection for Sale," Amer-
      ican Economic Review, vol. 84, no. 4, pp. ?-?.


                                              27
 [9] Helpman, Elhanan (1984), "A Simple Theory of Multinational Corporations."
    Journal of Political Economy, vol.92, no.3, pp. 451-471.

(10] Hillrnan,   Arye L. and Heinrich W. Ursprung (1993), "Multinational Firms, Po-
    litical Competition, and International Trade Policy,' International Economic
    Revieu vol.34, no.2, 347-363.

[11] Horstmann, Ignatius, and Markusen, James R. (1992), "Endogenous Market
    Structures in International Trade," Journal of International Economics, vol.32,
    no.1/2, ppJO9-129.

[12] Markusen, James ft. (1984), "Multinationals, Multi-plant Economies, and the
    Gains from Trade," Journal of International Economics, vol.16, no. 3/4, pp.205-
    226.

[13] Olson, Mancur (1965), The Logic of Collective Action (Cambridge, MA: Harvard
    University Press).

[14] Wong, Kar-yiu (1989), "Optimal Threat of Trade Restriction and Quid Pro Quo
    Foreign Investment," Economics and Politics, vol. 1. no. 3. pp. 277-300.




                                          28
          Figure 1

    Equilibrium Lobbying




C




                           L*



                           L1




                                t
               Figure 2

    Political Tariff Response Curves




t




0                       flf
                   Figure 3

           Profit Differential Curves




       t




ChIC




   0
                      Figure 4

            Equilibrium DFI and Protection




        I                  I1    B




ChIC,


   t
   1




                                             m
   0                            nf
                           Figure 5

             Alternative Equilibrium Configuration




         t



Ch



                                      B




     I


                                                     m
     0
                Figure 6

        Multiple Stable Equilibria




ChIC,




   0
                           Figure 7

              Welfare Effects of Political Reform




      t
          I


                     B
ttI                                   A
t
1




                                                    m
0
                                  nIt
