NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ELECTORAL COMPETITION AND
SPECIAL INTEREST POLITICS

Gene Grossman
Ethanan Helpman

Working Paper No. 4877

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

We thank Tim Besley and Torsten Persson for helpful comments and discussions and the
National Science Foundation and the US-Israel Binational Science Foundation for financial

Grossman also gratefully acknowledges the support of the John S. Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation, the Sumitomo Bank Fund, the Daiwa Bank Fund, and the Center of
support.

International Studies at Princeton University. Part of this work was carried out when the authors
were visiting LG.I.E.R. in Milan, Italy and the European University Institute in Florence. Italy.
Needless to say, these were very hospitable environments. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of die authors
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Gene Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4877
October 1994

ELECTORAL COMPETITION AND
SPECIAL INTEREST POLITICS

ABSTRACT

We study the competition between two political parties for seats in a parliament. The
parliament will set two types of policies: ideological and non-ideological. The parties have fixed

positions on the ideological issues, but choose their non-ideological platforms to attract voters
and

campaign contributions. In this context, we ask: Flow do the equilibrium contributions from

special interest groups influence the platforms of the parties? We show that each party is

induced to behave as if it were maximizing a weighted sum of the aggregate welfares of
infonried voters and members of special interest groups. The party that is expected to win a
majority of seats caters more to the special interests.

Gene Grossman
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER

Elhanan Helpman
The Eitan Berglas School of Business
Tel Aviv University
Ramat Aviv. Tel Aviv
ISRAEL
and NBER

1

Introduction

Special interest groups appear to wield considerable influence over public policy in
many representative democracies. The trade policies of many industrialized countries
favor vested interests in the apparel, textile, and smokestack industries. Their agri-

cultural policies give various forms of income support to farmers. Health and safety
measures show the imprimatur of the local insurance industry on the one hand, and

of powerful labor unions on the other- And manufacturers have had much to say
about a myriad of environmental and regulatory policies. It seems difficult to argue
that the poLitical process serves only the interests of the median voter.
interest groups pursue their quest for political advantage by a number of different
means. They gather information that supports their positions and make it available

to powerful politicians- They take their arguments to the public in an effort to win
voter sympathy. Sometimes they undertake disruptive activities, which are intended

to coerce rather than persuade. And, of course, they contribute to political parties
and to individual candidates' campaigns.
This paper focuses on interest groups' use of campaign contributions as a vehicle
for influencing public policy. Contributions may take the form of cash transfers
or gifts in kind. In any event, we assume that the contributions can be used by
the candidates to persuade and cajole a group of undecided voters. Our aim is to
characterize the policies that emerge when rival groups vie for the politicians' favor
while the politicians themselves compete (or voter support.
The literature on campaign giving identifies two motives that interest groups might

have when they contribute to politicians or to political parties. Contributors with an
electoral motive intend to promote the electoral prospects of preferred candidates.
Those with an influence motive aim to influence the politicians' policy pronouncements. Our model allows interest groups to entertain either or both of these reasons

for giving, but our analysis of the equilibrium emphasizes the second. We believe
that special interests do often try to use their campaign gifts to influence politicians'

positions and we find support for this view in the empirical evidence presented by
Kau and Rubin (1982), Fremdreis and Waterman (1985), Tosini and Tower (1987),
S

and others.
Our setting is one in which two political parties contest a parliamentary election.
The parliament will be called upon to set two types of policies, which we will refer
to as ideological and non-ideological. \Ve term an issue ideological if the parties have
predetermined preferences concerning the matter. Examples might include civil rights

policy, abortion policy, and aspects of foreign policy in certain countries. We take
the parties' policy preferences on the ideological issues—and indeed their platform

positions—as a given in our model. Our locus is instead on the determination of
non-ideological policies, those over which the politicians have no explicit preferences.

Many, although not all, economic policies fall into this category, as do some types of
social policy such as (perhaps) environmental protection and gun control,

Our interest groups are collections of individuals who share a common interest

in the non-ideological policies. These organized groups can offer contributions to

one or both of the political parties. Their gifts may be granted unconditionally or
they may be tied to the positions adopted by the recipients. Unconditional gifts are
used to satisfy an electoraL motive for giving, while contingent gifts are designed to
influence decisions. We assume that the groups are able to communicate the sense of

their conditional offers, even if they cannot spell out the details in

legally binding

contract.

If the interest groups choose to offer contingent contributions, they will confront
the parties with a fundamental trade-off. By setting a platform that serves the gen-

eral interest, a party can attract votes from the portion of the electorate that is
well-informed about the issues. But by choosing policies that cater to the special interests it may be able to elicit greater contributions that then can be used to influence
the voting of less-informed or less-rational voters. We assume that the parties resolve

this trade-off with the aim of maximizing their representation in the parliament. An
equilibrium consists of a pair of platforms and a set of contribution schedules, such

that no group or party can better its lot given the anticipated actions of the othersThe equilibrium platforms and associated contributions together determine the elec-

tion outcome, which in turn determines the likelihood that each party's platform will

2

be enacted.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we discuss

the relationship of our paper to several others in the literature. Section 3 describes
the details of the model. In Section 4, we examine a special case in which there is
only a single. organized interest group while Section .5 treats the general case with
competition among groups. The last section contains a summary of our findings.

2 Related Literature
There is, of course, a vast literature on policy determination in representative democ-

racies. Our goat in this section is to explain the relationship of our paper to some
others that have a similar focus. We make no claims to comprehensive coverage.
Our paper has antecedents in the literature on probabilistic voting.' Enelow and
Hinich (1982), for example, developed a 'spatial' model in which voters' utilities
comprise two additively separable components. One component relates to the policy
issue under consideration while the other reflects exogenous characteristics of the

candidates- The politicians were assumed unable to observe individual tastes with
regard to the exogenous characteristics. In consequence, they remain uncertain about
how any individual will vote, even if they know how he or she will be affected by the
policy in question.2
Lindbeck and Weibuil (1987) and Dixit and Londregan (1994) adopted a similar

probabilistic.voting approach to study policies that redistribute income to narrow
groups of voters. They assumed that the various groups differ in their predisposition
to the parties and identified characteristics of a group that make it a good candidate
to receive political largesse. Although these authors focused on the determinants of
the political success of special interests, there is an important difference between their
'We consider this label to be something of a misnomer. In our model, and in many others in
the literature, every individual votes deterministically. It is only that the politicians do not know
individuals preferences on some issues, which causes them to be uncertain about how a particular
ballot will be cast.
2See also Couglin (1984, 1986) and Whitman (t983), and Mueller (1989, ch. 11) for a survey

3

models and ours. Specifically, they did not allow interest groups to compete actively

for favors whereas we are primarily interested in how campaign contributions can he

used as a tool for such competition.
We treat campaign contributions here in much the same way as in Grossman and
Helpman (1994). There we built on Bernheim and Whinston (1986). who described
influence-seeking as an example of a "menu auction" game. In a menu auction, each

of several principals who will be affected by an action offers a bid to an agent who

will take that action. These bids take the form of schedules that associate payment
to the agent with each feasible option. Once the agent chooses an action, all of the
principaLs pay the bids stipulated by their schedules. Bernheim and Whinston dehned

an equilibrium in a menu auction as a set of contribution schedules such that each
one is a best response to all of the others, and an action by the agent that maximizes
her utility given the schedules that confront her.

Our 1994 paper provided an application of this view of influence-seeking. We
focused on the determination of import and export taxes and subsidies in a small, open
economy. We took the government to be a common agent for a group of special interest

groups, each representing the owners of some industry-specific factor. The policy
makers, who were already in power, were assumed to set trade policy to maximize a
weighted sum of total campaign contributions and aggregate (or average) welfare. In
this model, the incumbent government did not face any explicit competition from rival

candidates nor did we provide any rigorous justification for its assumed objective.

Austen-Smith (1987) and Baron (1992) addressed very similar issues to the ones

that interest us here. Both of these authors studied policy determination in a twoparty model of electoral competition. And both were interested in the effects of
campaign contributions by special interest groups. Austen-Smith assumed that the
parties use campaign funds to alleviate (risk averse) voters' uncertainty about their
policy positions. Baron, like us, allowed campaign spending to have a direct effect on
the voting behavior of a group of uninformed voters. A more important distinction
between their papers and ours concerns the motive that groups are assumed to have
for giving to the parties. In both Austen-Smith and Baron the lobbies take platforms
4

as given and offer gifts to their favorites with an eye toward affecting the probabilities

of election.3 Here, we do riot restrict interest groups to such an electoral motive, but

also afford them an opportunity to influence the parties' platforms.

3 The Model
We examine a jurisdiction with two political parties, an exogenous number of special

interest groups, and a fixed continuum of voters. Our description begins with the
voters.

3.1 The voters
Like Baron (1992), we distinguish the behavior of two classes of voters, the informed

and the uninformed. Informed voters are those who know and understand the parties'

positions on both the ideological and non'ideological issues and who vote based on

their personal evaluations of the merits of the alternative platforms. In the model
developed here, this is a dominant strategy for these voters. The uninformed voters,

by contrast, are unable to evaluate the parties's positions on (at least) the nonideological issues. These voters may have initial leanings toward one party or the
other, but at least some of them can be swayed by the messages they receive in the

course of the campaign. Let a denote the fraction of these uninformed (perhaps
'impressionable' is a better word) in the total voting population.
3Magee et at. (1989) make a similar assumption in the context of their models of trade policy
formation.
'This is Baron's assumption in the last part of his paper, where he allows for several competing
interest groups and considers the determination of "collective" policies. In the first part of his paper.

dealing with "particularist" policies, the contributions are simply an exogenous fraction of the net
benefits captured by the interest group. Although Baron refers to this as a bargaining solution, he

does not specify any explicit bargaining process and his 'solution" fails to account for the surplus

to the political party relative to the fatlback option.
An advantage that we see of our model compared to Baron's—beyond the one we stress in the

text—is that it is capable of handling both particularist policies (with a single interest group)and
collective policies (with multiple interest groups) within the same analytical framework.
3

Consider then a typical informed voter with the Label 1. This individual derives
utility tf(p") from the vector p'4 of non-ideological policies endorsed by party A, and

utility u(p5) from the vector p8 of such policies endorsed by party B. with u'(-)
continuous and differentiable. She votes for the candidates from party .4 ii and only

if u'(p4) — ulp2) 3', where 3' measures her assessment of the superiority (or
inferiority, if negative) of party 8s ideological position relative to that of party -k.

We assume that the parties cannot observe the ideological leanings of any particular
individual, although they presume these to be drawn from a known distribution of

such proclivities in the total population of informed voters. Moreover, we assume that

the distribution of ideological preferences is statistically independent of the effects of
the non-ideological policies on individuals' utilities, and that it can be described by the

cumulative distribution function, F(j3). Then both parties will perceive a probability
—

u'(p8)] that individual I will vote for the slate of candidates from party

A. Vith a continuum of informed voters, the law of large numbers implies that the

share of informed ballots cast for party A equals fE(F(u'(p") —u'(p8)Jdi, where
I denotes the set of informed voters and ui the total number (or measure) of such
in di vi duals.

voter, too, may have a predisposition toward one party or the
other. However, this leaning can be overcome with enough campaign rhetoric. In
particular, if party A spends more on its campaign than party B, some of those who
Art uninformed

were initially inclined toward party B will vote instead [or party A. We denote by
H(•) the fraction of the uninformed voters that votes for party A, and assume that
it depends on the difference in the parties' total campaign budgets.5
is perhaps more common in the literature to assume that the ratio of campaign expenditures

affects the allocation of votes. See, for example, Baron (1989, 1992), and Snyder (1989). In our
view, a specification in terms of absolute differences is more reasonable, because a luger budget
allows a campaign to reach a wider segment of the population. This view could be formalized in a
model of advertising similar to the one in Grossman and Shapiro (1984), where the fraction of the
target population that bean a given messAge is assumed to vary with the amount that i5 spent on

the advertising campaign. If each message that an uninformed voter bean makes him more likely
to vote for the party issuing the announcement, then the number of uninformed will depend on the

6

We assume that seats in the parliament are allocated by proportional representa-

don. Then the fraction of the legislature controlled by party A matches the fraction

of the total votes garnered by this party. Letting s denote this fraction, we have
=

a

I
ni

f'El
F[u'(p4) — u'(p8)ldi + 0H(CA — C8).

(1)

where CK is the total campaign spending undertaken by party K.

3.2

The parties and the government

Each party seeks to maximize its representation in the parliament (or any rnonotonically increasing function thereof). The parties may see this as their objective for one

of several reasons. First, a political party may reward its core nembers with jobs
in and around the government. The number of such jobs that a party can allocate
increases with the number of its seats in the parliament. Second, a party's prospects

for implementing its ideological program—about which it may care deeply—may in-

crease with the size of its parliamentary contingent. Third, the ideological program

that is ultimately implemented may reflect a compromise among party positions.
Then the final policy might be closer to a party's most-preferred outcome the larger

is its parliamentary representation. Of course, with two parties and propprtional
representation, the objective of maximizing seats is equivalent to that of maximizing
(expected) plurality in the election. This is a commonly assumed objective in the

literature on electoral competition.6
With this objective, parties A and B choose their platforms on the non-ideological
issues in order to maximize .s and 1 — s, respectively. They do so recognizing that

their policy endorsements will affect their popularity among the infotilLed voters. At
the same time, the non-ideological policy platforms are chosen with an eye toward
the organized interest groups, who may vary their support according to the positions
difference in the sizes of the two budgets.
6See, for example, Enelow and Uinich (1982), Denzau and Katz (1977) and Couglin and Nitzan
-

are discussed and compared
(1981). The different campaign objectives that candidates might hold
in Aranson, Hinich and Ordeshook (1974).
7

that are taken. The parties know that any contributions they collect can be

used

to

hoance electLofleering activities.
After the election is over, the parliament convenes to set policy. We do not model

the iegislative process in any detail. Rather, we assume that each party attempts to
implement its announced platform and that a party's probability of success increases

monotonicailv with the size of Legislative delegation. In other words, the parliament

adopts the vector of non-ideological policies p' with probability p(s), and the vector

= and y'(s) > 0. The function p(s)

p2 with probability 1 — p(s), where

may, for example, increase sharply just above s = [/2, if having a slight majority
of the seats in the parliament greatly enhances a party's prospects for successfully
implementing its program.t
While we believe it is reasonable to suppose that parties aim to maximize their
representation in the parliament and also that parties with legislative majorities some-

times fail to implement their programs, the appendix treats a more "pure" case. There

we examine policy determination when the parliament operates according to strict
majority rule and when parties seek to maximize their probability of winning a major-

ity. To conduct this alternative analysis, we must assume that the number of voters
is large but finite and that members of special interest groups constitute a negligible

share of the voting population. With these assumptions and a further one of equal
party popularity (i.e., the parties would each capture 50 percent of the vote if they
happened to choose ideittical non-ideological policies and to spend identical amounts

on their campaigns), the equilibrium policies are the same as the ones derived in the

main text.3
7We have also considered the possibility that the political process produces a compromise among

the positions of the two parties. tf the compromise takes the form of a convex combination of their
platforms, then our main propositions still go through, provided that it remains a dominant strategy

for informed individuals to vote for their most-preferred candidate. However, the latter proviso
requires rather restrictive assumptions on the form and distribution of preferencis: in particular. we

need that every voter i who prefers p'4 to p2 has du'[Ap'4 + (I — A)p8/dA > 0. This would be
satisfied, for example, if voters fell into one of two groups, with those in one group preferring ever
higher values of the policy instrument and those in the other preferring ever lower values.
8Lindbeclc and WeibuU (1987) come to a similar conclusion in their study of electoral competition

S

3.3 The special interests
Special interest groups are collections of voters who share a common interest in the
non-ideological policies. The members of a special interest group may differ in their
views on the ideological issues, and, in the privacy of the polling booih. wilt behave

just like any other voter. Nonetheless, these individuals may have an incentive to
cooperate with one another, if by doing so they can influence the parties' positions
on the non-ideological issues.

As Olson (1965) has discussed, the mere fact that individuals share a common
interest in some policy or policies is not enough to ensure that they will engage in
collective political action. The temptation always exists for each to free ride on the

costly political efforts of the others. But some interest groups do overcome these
free-rider problems and manage to coordinate their lobbying activities. We take the
number and identities of the organized special interests as given (while recognizing
that it would be interesting to know how the policy environment serves to galvanize
certain interests and not others), and examine how these groups influence the policy-

setting process.
As we noted in the introduction, interest groups may have two motivations for

making campaign contributions. First, they may hope to influence the outcome of
the election. An interest group may gain if it can enhance the prospects of the
party whose position on the non-ideological issues is more similar to its own. Second,

interest groups may hope to influence the parties' policy platforms; that is, to push
the candidates to support policies that serve the group's own interests- Some of the
members of an interest group may object to spending on the first of these objectives,
if their ideological attitudes differ from those of the party that is being supported.

But all members of a group will agree on the desirability of pushing the two parties
toward the group's common desiratum on the non-ideological issues. Moreover, the
second motive remains even when the individual interest groups are relatively small,
maximize
without interest groups or campaign spending. Our analysis of the case in which patties
their probability of winning is modelled after theirs.

9

so that each one has little affect on the election outcome. While our specification of

the political game allowsfor both motives, we will focus on cases where the lobbies
are small and where their interest in influencing policy positions overrides their desire

to further the prospects of one group of candidates or the other.
We denote by IV,(p) the aggregate utility that members of interest group) derive
from the vector of non-ideological policies p. If the preferences of the group's members

C,tI the non-ideological issues are literally identical, then this is simply the number of

members times the utility of the representative one. In any event, we assume that

the members of an interest group cooperate fully in their collective action, and so
seek to maximize their expected joint welfare from the non-ideological policies net of

campaign contributions. Letting C7 represent the contribution of interest group j to

party K, we write the objective function for this group as

= y(s)W(pA) + [I - y(s)] W1(p8) - C

- Cf.

(2)

If an interest group hopes to influence a party's policy choice, it must make sure
that the party sees a connection between its platform and the size of the contribution

that will be forthcoming. The group need not announce an explicit quid pro

quo:

indeed, the public might frown upon politicians who openly peddle their political
influence. Rather, the interest group needs only convey an understanding that its
contribution will vary with the position that is taken. We would argue that politicians
understand this connection quite well; proponents of gun control do not, (or example,

expect to receive any donations from the National Rifle Association.
We allow the interest groups considerable freedom in designing their contribution

schedules, Cf(p"). We assume only that the schedules are continuous, differentiable

when positive, and everywhere non-negative. The latter means that interest groups

can offer resources to the parties or withhold them, but cannot levy taxes on politicians. A group can, of course, choose to make its contribution independent of policy;

in this way it can bolster the chances of its favorite party without causing it to lose

any (additional) informed votes. A group also might choose to offer its support to
only one of the two political parties.

10

3.4 Political equilibrium
We seek a sub-game perfect Nash equilibrium of a two-stage. noncooperative, political

game. In the first stage, the various interest groups independently and simultaneously

communicate their contribution schedules, one to each of the two parties. In the
second stage. the parties choose their policy platforms. After the platforms are set.

the contributions are paid and the campaigns are waged. Then the election takes

place and finally the legislature meets to implement one of the party's platforms.
We assume that all expectations about subsequent events are accurate and that all
promises are honored.9

More formally, we propose the following definition:

Definition 1 An equilibrium consists of a pair of feasible policy vectors (pAo,pBo)
and a set of contribution schedules {CJ40(p),Cf0(pS)}, one for each lobby j, such

that
(a) v4° maximizes s given p°. {Ct0(pA ) } and {Cf(p2 ) }:
(b) pBO maximizes 1 —

given p4°, {C0(p)}

and

{Cf°(p8)};
(c) each Cf() is continuous and differentiable when positive, with C(pK)
s

0 for

all pK; and

(d) for each lobby j,

there

do not exist feasible contribution schedules Cf(p") and

such that

,,(i)W1(r) + [1 —

W,(fi8)

—

c;(r) — Cf(9) >

.(s)W(pA0) ÷ (1 — p(s)] Wj(pB0) — Ct0(p40) — C70(p80)
where fr4 maximizes and 9
1—

&

fl(

f

.Et

minimizes

F[u1(p4) — u(p8)]di +

aH[E 0(pA) + Cf V) — S Cr(p8) —

offers
one-shot game, the interest groups have an incentive to renege on their contrtbution
their
once the policy platforms are announced. Similafly. the politicians have no incentive to pursue
of
non-ideological platforms in the legisLature. after the contributions have been paid. The keeping
91n our

promises could be motivated in a repeated game, where agents would be punished for
up

to their commitments.
11

failure to live

and
=

I

-°
,_l[

JrEfF[u'(fr)-u'()]di+oH[E C0(fr)+C4(fr4)_E C°(fi)-Cf()].

Here. conditions (a) and (b) express the Nash equilibrium among parties in the second-

stage of the ame. while condition (d) ensures that no lobby can profitability deviate
during the initial stage

4

Equilibrium with One Lobby

We begin the analysis with the case in which there is only a single, organized lobby.

In this simply setting we are able to expose quite clearly the incentives facing the
lobby and thereby set the stage for the more complicated situation that arises when
several groups compete for favors. The single-lobby case also may be of independent
interest. inasmuch as it sheds light on the determination of what Baron (1992) refers
to as particularist policies. These are policies whose benefits can be denied to those
who do not contribute to the lobbying effort and whose costs are spread so thinly in
the population that they do not inspire groups to organize in opposition. Baron cites
as examples the special provisions in bills that favor particular firms or industries and

the interventions that legislators sometimes make with the bureaucracy on behalf of
their supportersTo facilitate the exposition, we now adopt particular functional forms for the
distribution function, F(.), and for the effectiveness-of-campaign-spending function,

H(-). We assume that informed voters' preferences for the ideological platform of
—
— ). Then F[u1(p%) —
party B are distributed uniformly in the range
uI(pB)J

= + 6 + f[u(p') — ut(pB)] for u'(y/) — u1(pB)

take H(-) to be linear and of the form H(CA — C8) =

—

— })- We also

+ 6 + h(C- — C8). With this

specification, if the two parties happen to choose the same non-ideological policies
and if they spend the same amounts on their campaigns, then party A will capture a

fraction + 6 of the votes. The parameter 6 can be interpretS as the cx ante voter
bias in favor of party A. We might expect 6 > 0 if party A is the incumbent party
12

and b c 0 ii pafty B is the incumbent party. Such an incumbency advantage could
reflect name recognition and perhaps the feeling that the devil you know is better
than the devil you don't." Aslo, & might differ from 0 because one party's ideological
agenda has greater public appeal than the other's. When & = 0

,

we will say

that the

parties are equally popular.
When only a single interest group curries the politicians' favors, its problem can

be treated as one of direct control. That is, we can view the lobby as if it could
implement any pair of policy platforms it desires, provided that its contributAon offers

are sufficiently large as to be acceptable to the parties. Each party always has the
option of declining the lobby's offer, in which case it would choose the platform that
attracted the greatest number of informed voters. To prevent this from happening,
the lobby's contribution must be among those that satisfy a participation constraint.
How large must the contribution to party A be in order to induce it to choose
some policy pA? Recall the relationship between the parties' platforms and campaign

budgets and the election outcome, in the light of our linearity assumptions for F()

and H(). We haves = &1+(1_c)f[W(pA)_W(p8)]+Qh(C'f Cf), where W(p) a
average welfare of informed voters when the non-ideological policy

;i; hE! u'(p)di is the
is p. If the party were to refuse to be influenced by the lobby's offer, it would choose
the policy that best served the average informed voter. This policy, which we denote

by p, satisfies VW(y) =

0.10 So

the lobby must guarantee the party at least as

many seats as it would apture by endorsing y. Evidently, it must offer to party A a
contribution of at least '1[W(p) — WQ?)J. Notice that the size ol the minimum
payment does not depend on the policy position anticipated from party B.
Similarly, the lobby must offer party B a contribution of at least "11[W(p) —
W(p8)] in order to induce it to adopt the platform p8. The lobby's problem, then,

is to choose p-4 and pB to maximize (2), subject to the constraints that

Cf (')f[wp_wpx)1 forKA,B.
L011 the

(3)

informed voters are a representative sample of the total population of voters, in the sense

the same then

that the distribution of utility functions among informed and uninformed voters is
the policy p is the one that maximizes a Benthamite social welfare function.
1:3

The constraints stipulate the minimum sizes of the campaign contributions as Functions of the platforms the group chooses.

Let us suppose, for the moment, that the lobby decides to give the two parties
exactly what is needed to induce them to support the platforms p'4 and p8, but
nothing more. \Vith these contributions, party .4 captures a fraction + b of the
seats, while party B captures the remaining fraction — b, no matter what the policies
p'4 and p8 happen to be. Then the (constrained) optimal platforms from the Lobby's
vantage point satisfy
= argmax
where

= (b+ ) and

[kw(p)

+ (1

for K = A, 8,

(4)

= 1— y(b+ ). Evidently, the lobby induces the parties

to behave as if they were maximizing weighted sums of the welfare of the interest
group and the average informed voter.
It may help to think about some specific examples to understand exactly what this

means. Consider, for instance, the classical problem of an industry that generates a
negative externality. If the externality is linked to the scale of production, then a per-

unit output tax equal to the marginal damage best serves the interests of the average

voter. But suppose that the industry's lobby links its campaign contributions to the
size of the industry tax or subsidy. Then the equilibrium platforms will be ones that
maximize weighted sums of average welfare (i.e., consumer surplus plus profits plus
tax revenue) and industry profits. These platforms may involve a tax or a subsidy,

and will certainly be more generous to the industry than the "optimal" Pigouvian
tax.tt Or consider an economy that produces a single output from fixed supplies
of capital and labor and where utility is linear in consumption. The welfare of the
average voter is maximized by a flexible wage policy that ensures full employment of

the L workers. But if a union representing the workers offers donations to the parties

that are contingent on their endorsing a minimum wage policy, then the equilibrium
Let d be the marginal damage caused by a unit of the industry's output and let t' be the
per-unit tax advocated by party K. Then in political equilibrium, t" = d — [(i—oU1 (z/r'), where

I LS industry output and z' is the slope of the industry supply curve.
14

platforms will contain such proposals as long as the elasticity of labor demand is not
too high.'2
Several features of the platforms prescribed by (4) are worthy of comment. First.

since ,(b + ) > , it

is the more popular party that applies greater weight to

the welfare of the special interest group. That is, the lobby induces the party whose
ideological agenda has greater public appeal to choose a non-ideological platform that

is closer to the lobby's ideal position. But then this party's platform is further from
the ideal of the average (informed) voter. The latter fact, together with (a), implies
that the lobby contributes more to the party with the better election prospects. The
last observation is in keeping with Snyder's (1990) view of political contributions as

investments in contingent claims (the claims pay off only if the recipients end up in
a position to influence policy), a view which he supports with evidence on campaign

gifts to candidates for the U.S. House of Representatives.
Both parties cater more to the special interest group the greater is the susceptibility of uninformçd voters to campaign spending and the larger is the fraction of these
individuals in the total voter population (i.e., the larger are h and a, respectively). On

the other hand, the platforms more fully reflect the interests of the average informed

voter the smaller is the diversity of preferences over the ideological issue. When the

range of the 's is small (i.e., f is large), there are more voters at the margin of
indifference between the two parties, and so an endorsement of a platform that ne-

glects the public interest is more costly to the parties.'3 As a final point, we note
the similarity between the form of the equilibrium platforms here and the equilibrium
'2Let F(K, 14 be the aggregate production function. The minimum wage t1I supported by patty
K maximizes ç"thL + Ukf F(K,L) subject to the constraints that L, < and FL(K,L) = tb
The solution has a minimum wage above the market-clearing wage provided that

I

ah#
where c —FL/LFLL. is the elasticity of labor demand.
'3Dixit and Londregan (1994) find similarly that transfer policies tend to favor groups of voters

that have scentrain views on the non-ideological issues, and thus many individualson the margin of
indifference between the two candidates.

15

policies that emerged from the model in Grossman and Helpman (1994). There (in

the context of tariff formation) we assumed that a single incumbent policy maker has
as her objective the maximization of a weighted sum of campaign contributions and

average voter welfare. We showed that the equilibrium policies satisfy an equation
with the same form as (4). We now find that—at least in the single-lobby case—the
government-as-agent framework represents a proper reduced form of a model with
electoral competition.

We have so far assumed that the interest group would wish to make the partici-

pation constraints bind for both political parties. In other words, the group will offer

each party exactly what it takes to win its support for the desired platform - Let us
examine now when this will be the case. We know that the first-order conditions for

the maximization of

with respect to Ct and C'f imply

— W(p2)] = — ,\4;

(5)

— W(p')] =

(6)

1. — )u,

where A' is the Lagrange multiplier on the participation constraint applicable to
party K. It is clear that \K must be positive for at least one K (i.e.. the pat-ticipatiuLl

constraint must bind for at least one party), because the left-hand sides of (5) and

(6) have opposite signs. In other words, it never pays for the lobby to give more
than is necessary to both of the parties, because if it did it could cut back on the

two contributions while leaving the platforms and the distribution of seats in the
parliament unchanged. Moreover, if the lobby does give more than is required to
one of the parties, it must be the one that endorses its more-preferred platform; for

example, (5) can be satisfied with A'4 = 0 only if W(jø) > 14'3(p8).

Indeed, only the party that is ex ante more popular is a candidate to receive
extra campaign support. To see this, suppose that the other was receiving the Larger

contribution. Then the lobby could switch the labels on its offers (i.e., offering to

party A what it had intended to offer to B, and vice versa) and at the same time
reduce its (new) offer to the more popular party, in such a way as to preserve the
16

original probability distribution over policy outcomes. This would reduce its total
contribution bill, which clearly would be profitable for the Lobby.
lithe lobby does give to the more-popular party in excess of what is needed to gain

its acquiescence. the motivation would be to help that party capture more seats. By
doing so, the lobby could increase the probability that its preferred platform would be
implemented by the parliament. Suppose that party A is the more popular party! and

suppose that the lobby contemplates giving this party a bit more than is needed to
induce the party to choose the policy p'. The expected marginal benefit from the first
dollar of "extra" contribution would be p'(s)ah( Wj(p'4) — W1(pB)], which reflects the
group's preference for A's platform and its marginal effect on the probability that this
platform wilt be implemented. The marginal cost of the extra contribution is of course

1. Evidently, the lobby finds an electoral motive to contribute to party .4 (beyond the
influence motive that always exists) only ii the lobby would fare very differently under

the alternative platforms, if campaign spending is relatively productive in buying
undecided votes (a and h are large), and if increased representation in the parliament
greatly enhances a party's prospects for implementing its program ( '(s) is large).
The size of the difference W(p4)—W(p8) reflects two considerations. First, it reflects
the extent of the voters' predisposition to party A. The smaller the bias 6, the closer
together will be the two party's platforms, and the less likely it is that the lobby will
perceive a benefit from helping party A to win more seats. Second, it reflects the
absolute size of the lobby's stake in the policy choice, in comparison to the aggregate

stake borne by the informed electorate. in other words, "a dollar" will loom large in
comparison to the potential gain W,Qø)— Wj(p8) when (1 —a)W() is large compared
to W3(-). This is because contributions are measured in units of account that reflect

the size of gift needed to compensate for a given unpopular position.

5 Equilibrium with Several Lobbies
4ow we seek a Nash equilibrium when multiple interest groups vie for influence over

the parties' platforms. Again we are free to treat the lobbies as if they were facing

17

problems of direct control, but this time we must incorporate into their constraints
the anticipated actions of the rival organizations. Consider for example the problem
confronting the interest group 1. This group behaves as if it were designing the platforms pj and p, but it takes as given the contribution schedules offered by the other

lobbies. It makes the choice to maximize its own welfare, subject to the constraint

that its offers must be large enough to induce the parties to comply. Of course, in
equilibrium. all of the lobbies' choices" must be mutually consistent; i.e., they all
must designate the same platforms, which are the ones that the two parties announce.

More formally, let CL(p")
C'f(pJ') be the aggregate contribution schedule
offered to party K by all lobbies other than 1. Then lobby I chooses pj',p. (74. and

C18 to maximize its expected welfare in (2), subject to the constraints that

cf

max

[

hfW(p) + C(p)j

—

K=
[1_a fW(pfl + ('L(pP)] for

:1. /3.

The constraints ensure that each party prefers to endorse its prescrilntd pla 1[ortii than

to choose an alternative and decline the offer from lobby 1. For future reference, we

denote by p5 the policy vector that maximizes (1 — a)JW(p) + ahC'±,(p). rthis is
the best that party K could do if it were to ignore the offer from lobby 1.

Again, let us provisionally assume that lobby I opts to make the participation
constraints bind with respect to each party. When lobby 1 pays these minimally

acceptable contributions, it anticipates that party A will capture a fraction + b+
(1 — a)f[W(p1) — W(p1)J + ah[C1(p,) — C,(p3] of the seats. Notice that this
fraction is a constant (say .,) from the lobby's point of view. It follows that the
platforms that maximize expected group 'welfare must satisfy the first-order conditions

y(flVWi(p) + hfVW(P + VC,(p) = U
and

[1 - (]VWg(p)

+ QhfVt) + VC(p) =

U .

(8)

Now look at the problem from the parties' perspective. When confronted with the
full set of contribution schedules, they set their platforms to maximize their shares of
18

the vote. The first-order conditions for these maximizations imply
(1
where

C"(p")

— a)JVW(p" ) + ahVC"(p') = 0 for K = A, 8,
is

L1

(9)

the aggregate contribution schedule conironting party

K. In words, the party balances on the margin the loss of informed votes caused by

its deviating from p against the additional uninformed votes it captures by spending
the extra proceeds from the special interest groups.

In the equilibrium, the platforms anticipated by each lobby must be the same as

those actually announced by the parties; i.e., pf' = p1' for all I and for It' = A, B.
Therefore, we can combine (7), (8), and (9) to derive
= VCj't(p'4);

[1 —

p(J)]VWs(p8) = VC(p8) -

(10)

(11)

These equations reveal an important property of the equilibrium contribution sched-

ules. Each of these schedules must be "locally truthful" in the neighborhood of the
equilibrium platforms. In other words, when a lobby treats the make-up of the parlia-

meat as a given, it designs its bids so that the shape of a schedule accurately reflects

the expected benefit it would derive from a. small change in the party's jlatform
around the equilibrium.'4

In a sub-game perfect equilibrium, all lobbies must anticipate the same election
outcome. So Je = 0 for all 1. Using this fact, (10) and (11) can be combined with
(9), to yield conditions that the equilibrium platforms must satisfy when all lobbies

opt to have both participation constraints bind. These are

pV)LVW3(PM) +
(1

—

(1

(s°)] S VWQA) +

1Vp) =
;:)fvwpai = 0.

(12)

(13)

t4see Grossman and Hctpman (1994) for further discussion of local truthfulness and its relation
to "global truthfulness", as defined by Bernheim and Whinston (1986).
19

These conditions have the following interpretation. In equilibrium, each party acts
as if it were maximizing a weighted sum of the aggregate welfare of alt interest group

members and the aggregate welfare of informed voters, In this 'as if' calculation,
the weights depend on the expected composition of the legislature, which the parties
treat as fixed.

Conditions (12) and (13) provide a partial answer to the question, Which interest
groups are most successful in influencing government policy? The answer, we hnd,

is that all organized interest groups are equally successful, in the sense that their
members receive equal weight in the parties' political calculus. The net effect of the

private campaign financing is to push policy in a direction that is favorable to the
average member of an interest group and away from the policy that would best serve

the interests of the average (informed) voter. Of course, the 6nal platform choices

will not be equalt close to the bliss points of all the lobbies; this depends on how
similar a lobby's policy preferences are to those of the average voter and how the
other interest groups line up on the issues of concern to it.

The conditions that characterize the equilibrium platforms have another interesting implication. The political system works best, of course, when all voters are
informed about the issues (o = 0). Then the interest groups are ineffectual and both

parties choose the platform that maximizes aggregate welfare. But the same outcome is achieved in a very different set of circumstances. Suppose that every voter

is a member of exactly one interest group and that the informed voters constitute
a representative sample of the electorate. Then, no matter how large the fraction
of uninformed voters nor how susceptible these voters may be to campaign rhetoric,

the equilibrium policies again will be the ones that best serve the voters' (collective)
interests.

Notice that (12) and (13) do not uniquely determine the equilibrium platforms.

Besides p't° and p, the (expected) composition of the legislature (c) appears in
these expressions. The equilibrium seat count depends, in turn, on the total amounts

of contributions collected by the parties. It is true, as in the case of a single lobby,
that an individual interest group prefers to concentrate its giving on the party that it

20

expects will be in a better position to implement its platform. And it is also true that

the party expected to capture a parliamentary majority caters more to the speciat
interests. But there is a potential here for self-fulfilling prophesies that does not exist
when a single lobby plays the contribution game. The setf-fulfllling prophesies reflect
a type of coordination failure among the lobbies.

Suppose. for example, that party A happens to be the more popular party (Li > 0).

hut that each lobby expects that party B wilt capture the majority of the seats.
These expectations are based on the belief that the other lobbies will give more
generously to party B than to party A. Then each lobby will be well justified in
concentrating its efforts on influencing B's platform and, in the end, their expectations
may be validated. Whereas an only lobby can always gain by ensuring that the more

popular party wins the majority of the seats, a lobby that is one among many cannot

necessarily do so. To reverse the fortunes of the two parties in a way that conserves
resources it may need the tacit cooperation of other lobbies.
The potential for multiplicity of equilibria can also be understood in another way.
Li + (1 — a)f[W(p±4) — W(p)] + ch[Cf(p) — C7(p,) wheit
Recall that s =
lobby 1 makes the minimal contributions needed to induce the platforms p0 and
pSO. Of course, if all lobbies give minimally, then this condition must hold for each
one. The policies P4i and p are the ones that the parties would choose if they

ignored the offer from lobby 1. Notice that these policies depend on the shapes of the
lobbies' contribution schedules away from the equilibrium. And while the equilibrium

requirements place some restrictions on the global shapes of these schedules (for
example, (1 — a)f[W(p) — W(p)] +ah[C,°(p,) — Cf,°(p1)] must be the same for
all I) the requirements are not enough to pin down the equilibrium uniquely.
Still, some of the Nash equilibria may be more compelling than others. For ex-

ample, if 6 = 0, the symmetric equilibrium—in which the lobbies treat the parties
similarly and the election yields an evenly split parliament—may be focal- If Li > 0,
the lobbies would have no particular reason to expect a preponderance of the contri-

butions to go to party B, and in some cases they will have good reasons to expect
the opposite. One such case arises when all lobbies are offering positive contributions

21

to both parties, not only in the neighborhood of the equilibrium, but also around
the various points that the parties would chose if one of the lobby groups were to be

ignored. In this situation, the equilibrium with .s c

is Pareto dominated for the

entire set of interest groups by another with $ > . The alternative equilibrium can
be constructed as follows. Let each lobby offer to party B in the new equilibrium
exactly what it offered to party .4 in the old. Let each construct its new offer to party

.4 by subtracting a fixed amount from the (positive) offers to party B in the old, plus

an additional amount that increases with the distance from the initial pTh: Finally.
Let the fixed reductions be chosen so that party A captures as many seats in the new

equilibrium as party B did in the old, and let the additional reductions be chosen so

that no party will decline the offer from some lobby in setting its platform)5 The
newly constructed contribution schedules are best responses to one another, and they

induce each party to chose the platform in the new equilibrium that the other chose
in the old. Finally, since each party wins as many seats in the new as the other did
in the old, the new equilibrium has exactly the same distribution of policy outcomes

as the old. It follows that all interest groups gain.

More generally, anytime b > 0 and s c , the lobbies are paying excessively to
enable the less popular party to capture a majority of the seats. It is never in their
collective interest to do so. But it may not always be possible to devise alternative
contribution schedules that allow each to pay a smaller contribution while preserving

the probability distribution over policy outcomes. If it is not possible to do so, then

a Pareto improvement may not be available within the set of Nash equilibria. In
such cases the realization of joint gains may require the enforcement of an explicitly
'5That is, let Cf(p) be the initial schedule offered by lobby j to party K and let Cf(p) be the
alternative. We propose Cf(p) = C(p) ior all j and Cf(p) = Cf(p) — — 2'2 (p — p8) where each

Z,() is a function that is everywhere non-negative and that reaches a unique maxtrnum at 0. Let
and the functions Z(-) so that
the constants xj be chosen so that z 0 and E, gj =
—
—
(1— cz)fW(p8) + E, Cf(p8) > max, {(1 — a)fW(p) + oh
[Cf(p) Z(p p8)J — chzi}
for all!. This will be possible, provided that the Cf (pf1) in the initial equilibrium arelarge enough.
In the event, party .4 chooses the platform fr' = p8, party B chooses 0 = pA, and Lobby I gains
relative to the initial equilibrium.

99

cooperative arrngernent. where some lobbies agree to some political actions that
are not best responses to the others and where certain of the interest groups receive
transfers as side payments under the agreement.'6
Let us return to the question of whether the interest groups would give to their
favorite parties beyond what is needed to effect their influence over the platforms.
We note first that (generically) at most one Lobby group can perceive an electoral
motive for contributing to a given party. For, suppose that lobbies I and 2 each gave

extra contributions to party A in order to bolster the party's election returrs. Then.

in equilibrium, the marginal benefit perceived by lobby j for contributing to this
party would be ;'(s)oh[W1(p'4) — W,(p8)), for j = 1,2. while of course the marginal
cost for each would be 1. Both lobbies could satisfy their first-order conditions for
optimal giving only if W1(p'4) — W1(p8) happened to equal W2(p') — %1/2(p2); that
is, if the two lobbies held exactly the same absolute preference for party A's platform
relative to that of party B. Electoral support beyond what is justified by the influence

motive constitutes a public good for all groups that prefer the recipients policy. As
in many other contexts, it is only the player that has the most to gain that might

voluntarily contribute toward the public good. Moreover, the likelihood that any
lobby will be willing to make such "excess" contributions declines as the number of
lobbies increases. As with the case of a single interest group, each lobby perceives
> 1 at the candidate
an electoral motive for giving only if ,'(s)ah(W1Qø) —
equilibrium where all participation constraints bind. But the greater is the number of
lobbies, the smaller will be the stake of any one of them in the set of non-ideological

policies. In the limit, when all interest groups are "small", the electoral motive for
giving vanishes for every group. The influence motive remains, however, and so (12)
and (13) characterize the equilibrium platforms.
L6SVe

suspect that any equilibrium that has the Less popular candidate winning a majority of the

seats will not be a coalition-proof equilibrium (see Bernheim et al., 1987). Our, we have not been

able to prove this for all types of equilibria.

23

6 Summary
Interest groups make campaign contributions either to influence election outcomes
or to influence policies. We have developed a model of campaign finance in which
special interests may have either or both of these motives for giving. In the model,
the special interests tailor schedules that link campaign gifts to policy endorsements.

The schedules are proposed to two political parties, who are vying for seats in a
parliamentary election. The parties have fixed stances on a set of ideological issues
but have yet to announce their positions on some non-ideological policies, about which

they have no inherent preferences. Confronted with offers from the various interests,

the parties announce their campaign platforms. They trade off the extra campaign
contributions that may be forthcoming if they cater to the groups1 demands against
the votes that this may cost them among the well-informed segment of the electorate.

The paper analyzes the equilibrium of a two-stage game. In the first stage, the
interest groups strategically design their contribution schedules to maximize their
expected welfare net of political pay-outs. In the second stage, the two parties choose
platforms to maximize their representation in the parliament. In the voting booth, an
informed voter casts her ballot for the party whose platform she prefers. In contrast,
an uninformed (or, perhaps, impressionable) voter may respond to campaign rhetoric.
The difference in platforms and spending levels determines the election outcome,

which in turn decides the probability that each party's platform will be implemented.

Our model predicts divergence in policy platforms. The party that is expected to
win the majority of the seats garners greater attention from the special interests. As

a result, it is induced to adopt a platform that gives more weight to their concerns.
The underdog party also caters somewhat to the special interests, but its equilibrium
platform is closer to the bliss point of the average informed voter. This finding may
have relevance for the debate over term limits. With the advantage that incumbency

brings in ternis of name recognition and reputation, incumbents are overwhelming
favorites in many elections. Our analysis suggests that these candidates may convert

their popularity into campaign war chests, with detrimental effects on the welfare of

the average voter. Term limits would periodically restore a more even election. and
24

thus might diminish the influence of the special interests.
When interest groups offer the parties contributions that are platform contingent.

they induce in them a preference ordering over the non-ideological policies. In our
model, these preferences take a particularly simple form- Each party is induced to
behave as if it were maximizing a weighted sum of the welfare levels of two groups in

the polity. The aggregate interest of infonned voters receives a weight that increases
with the share of such voters in the voting population and decreases with the diversity

of their opinions about the relative desirability of the parties' ideologicaVpositions.
The aggregate interest of members of organized interest groups receives a weight that

increases with the susceptibility of uninformed voters to campaign spending. The
weight implicitly given to the interest group members also varies with the number of
seats a party is expected to win, which accounts for the above-mentioned difference in

the parties' platforms. It is interesting to note that many political-economy models
ascribe weighted social welfare functions to politicians making policy choices. Our
mode! provides some underpinnings for this common specification.

If interest groups can communicate platform-contingent contribution often, they
will always perceive an influence motive for giving to each party whose platform might

eventually become policy. But the groups may or may not perceive an incentive
to give to their favorite party beyond what is needed to exert the desired degree
of influence. We have shown that the electoral motive for giving—which features
prominently in many previous models of campaign contributions—can operate for at
most one interest group favoring each political party. This is because gifts that bolster

a party's election prospects benefit all interest groups that prefer the party's platform.
Only the interest group with the greatest relative preference for the party is candidate
to contribute toward this public good. We find, moreover, that campaign gifts with

an electoral motive may be the exception, rather than the rule. No group will give
beyond what is needed to compensate the party for a!tering its policy position unless

the group has an aggregate stake in policy that is relatively large compared to the
stake of the electorate as a whole.
Finally, what of the election outcome? Our model predict5 a unique equilibrium

25

when only a single interest group is organized to offer contributions to the parties. In
this equilibrium, the party that is more popular with voters based on its ideological

positions alone captures a majority of the seats in the elected parliament. The interest

group contributes more to the more popular party, and at least compensates it for

choosing the less popular policies. Thus, the contributions ensure that the more
popular party captures at least as many seats as it would in the absence of the
influence- seeking.

However, once there are several interest groups that actively compete for ihfluence,
our model allows scope for self-fulfilling prophesies. Each group's giving depends upon
its expectations about the others. If a lobby expects the others to compete vigorously

for a certain party's favor, then it too will have an incentive to focus its eftorts on that

party. Then, if all happen to concentrate on the party whose ideological platform has

Less appeal, the result may be a parliament in which this party captures a majority.

In the aggregate, the lobbies may pay handsomely to overcome voters' resistance.
Still, each may be stuck with this outcome unless all can cooperate and make side
payments.

26

References
[lJ Aranson, P.. Hinich, Melvin, and Peter OrdeshooL (1974). "Election Goals and
Strategies: Equivalent and Nonequivalent Strategies." American Political Scierice Review 68: 135-152.

[2] Austen-Smith, David (1987). "Interest Groups, Campaign Contributions, and
Probabilistic Voting." Public Choice 54: 123-139.
[3] Baron, David P. (1989). Service1nduced Campaign Contributions and the Electoral Equilibrium." Quarterly Journal of Economics 104: 45-72.

[4] Baron, David P. (1992). "Electoral Competition with Informed and Uninformed
Voters." Stanford University, Graduate School of Business Research Paper No.
1174.

[5] Bernheim, B. Douglas, Peteg, Bazalel, and Michael Whinston (1987). "CoaLition-

Proof Nash Equilibria, I: Concepts." Journal of Economic Theory 42: 1-12.
[6] Bernheim, B. Douglas and Michael Whinston (1986). "Menu Auctions, Resource
Allocation, and Economic Influence." Quarterly Journal of Economics 101: 1-31.

[7] Coughlin, Peter (1984). "Expectations about Voter Choices." Public Choice 44:
4 9-59.

[8] Coughliu, Peter (1986). "Elections and Income Redistribution." Public Choice
50: 27-99.

[9j Coughlin, Peter and Shmuel 1. Nitzan (1981). "Electoral Outcomes with Proba-

bilistic Voting and Nash Social Welfare Maxima." Journal of Public Economics
15: 113-122.

27

(10] Denzau, Arthur 1. and A. Kats (1977). "Expected Plurality Voting Equilibrium
and Social Choice Functions.' Review of Economic Studies 44: 227-233.

[ii] Dixit, Avinash, and John Londregan (1994). "The Determinants of Success of
Special Interests in Redistributive Politics." Princeton University. mimeo.
(121 Enelow, James M. and Melvin J. Hinich. (1982). "Nonspatiat Candidate Characteristics and Electoral Competition." Journal of Politics 44: 11.5-130.
[131 Fremdreis, John P. and Richard W. Waterman (1985). "PAC Contributions and
Legislative Behavior: Senate Voting on Trucking Deregulation." Social Science
Quarterly 66: 401-412.

[14] Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1994). "Protection for Sale." American Economic Review 84: xxx-xxx.

[15] Grossman, Gene M. and Carl Shapiro (1984). "Informative Advertising with
Differentiated Products." Review of Economic Seudies 51: 63-81.

[16] Kau, James B. and Paul H. Rubin (1982). Congressmen, Constituents, and Contributors. Boston: Martinus Mijhoff Publishing.

[llj Lindbeck, Assar and Jôrgen W. Weibull (1987). Balanced-hudget Redistribution
as the Outcome of Political Competition." Public Choice 54: 273-297.

[18] Magee, Stephen P., Brock, William A., and Leslie Young (1989). Black Hole
Tariffs and Endogenous Policy Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
(191 Mueller, Dennis C. (1989). Public Choice II. Cambridge, U.K. :Cambridge Uni-

versity Press.
[20] Olson, Mancur (1965). The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard

University Press.

[21] Snyder, James M. (1989). "Election Goals and the Allocation of Campaign Resources." Econometrica 57: 637-660.
28

[22] Snyder. James M. (1990). Campaign Contributions as Investments: The U.S.

House of Representatives 1980-19." Journal of Political Economy 98:

1195-

1227.

[23] Tosini, Suzanne C. and Edward Tower (1987). The Textile Bill of 1985: The
Determinants of Congressional Voting Patterns." Public Choice 54:

19-2.5.

[24) Wittman. Donald (1983). Candidate Motivation: A Synthesis of Alternative
Theories." American Political Sciencg Review 77: 142-157.

29

7 Appendix: Strict Majority Rule
We assumed in the main text that political parties seek to maximize their repre-

sentation in the legislature and that a party holding a majority of seats may fail to
implement its policy program. While quite reasonable as descriptions of the political process, these assumptions are admittedly somewhat ad hoc. In this appendix,
we take a more "purist" approach, by assuming that parties maximize their chances

of winning a majority and that the legislature operates by strict majority çule. We
concentrate on the symmetric equilibrium that may emerge when the two parties are

equally popular. Equal popularity implies F(O)

= and H(O) =

, and, with the

previously-encountered linearity assumptions on F(•) and H(-). b = 0.

We now suppose that interest group members comprise a negligible fraction of
the voting population and that voters' preferences for the ideological agenda of party

B are statistically independent. Also, the total number of voters, n, is large but
finite. Then, the number of votes for party A can be approximated by a normal

distribution, with mean EEI F(A1)+anH(AC) and variance L€i F(A')fl —

anH(A')[i

—

H(Ac)], where & u(pA) — te(9). and Ac = C'4 —

C7 Party A

wins the election with (approximate) probability

(pA B AC) =

iV

E€,F(A') +anH(Ac)_
—
k V'EIEI F(&)[l F(A1)J + anH(êJfl[l — H(AG')] J

(

(14)

where N(.) represents the standardized normal distribution function.
Each interest group designs its contribution schedule to maximize the aggregate

expected utility of its members. Recognizing that with probability w(-) the nonideological policy vector will be p' and with probability 1 — ir(.) it will be p2. lobby
I chooses C/4(p'4) and C,9p8) to maximize ir(-)W(p') + (1 — ir(.)J W(p8) — Cj4(p') —

Cfl(p2), taking as given the contribution schedules proffered by the other lobbies.
The parties subsequently set p-4 and p2 to maximize r and I — r. respectively.
'TThe approximation follows from the Liapunov central limit theorem, which requires also that
the variance term becomes unbounded as n grows large. For a discussion of the applicability of this

theorem in the context of a probabilistic voting model, see Lindbeck and Weibull ([981).

30

As before, we can treat each lobbies' problem as one of direct control. Lobby
1 chooses pj1. p, C14, and

C, to maximize its expected utility, taking C±jptk) and

C'Jp8) as given. It also recognizes the participation constraints,

which require that

each party achieve at least as great a probability of winning when setting the policy

designated by lobby / as it could be choosing an alternative policy and receiving
nothing from the lobby. That is. the lobby must respect the inequality

pp,CL(pi4) + Cj4 — CdpB) — C,] maxr[p,p,C,(p) —

Cf,(p2)

—

C]

and a similar condition for party B. We focus on symmetric equilibria, wherein
= CL), lobby / chooses the same platform and contribution for each party1
and the participation constraints bind.
Let p' be the platform designated by lobby I. The first-order condition for maximizing the lobbies' expected utility with respect to the choice of p implies

VWc(p) +

VW(p) + VC1(pfl = 0.

(1-5)

where we have made use of the fact that ir(p, p, 0) = at the symmetric equilibrium.t8

Party A chooses its equilibrium platform, p0, to maximize ,r[p pRO C0(pl) —
= pV and
c80(pBo)]. Again making use of the symmetry conditions, pdAO =

= C80() = C°(), this implies
(1

—

a)fVW(p°)+crhVC°(p°) = 0.

(16)

Consistency requires p? = p° for all 1. Thus1 (15) and (16) imply

VWi(p°)

= VC,°(p°)

(17)

we find
which is another "local truthfulness" result. Finally, combining (16) and (17)

.VW,(p°) + (1 0VW(p0) = 0.

(18)

to substitute out
'81n deriving (15) we have used the Brst-order condition with respect to C(
the Lagrange multiplier on the participation constraint. We have also made extensive use of the

symmetry condttons, p(° = p0 = pT and C( = C? = Cr.
31

The platform p that satisfies (18) is the same as the platform p.40 that satisfies
(12) and the platform p that satisfies (13), when s° = . We see that, with equal
popularity, the platform that emerges in a symmetric equilibrium when the legislature

operates by strict majority rule and parties maximize their chances of winning a
majority is the same as the platform that emerges in symmetric equilibrium when
parties maximize their representation in the parliament and a minority platform has
some chance of being implemented.'9

'9Tbis result mimics a similaz tinding by Lindbeck and Weibull (1987), who assumed that all
voters are informed voters and that campaign contributions play no role in the election.

32

