                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            HEALTh INSURANCE AND THE
                            SUPPLY OF ENTREPRENEURS




                                    Douglas Holtz-Eakin
                                      John R. Penrod
                                     Harvey S. Rosen




                                  Working Paper No. 4880




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1994



We are grateful to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for fmancial support, and to David
Card, David Cutler, Roger Gordon, Jonathan (iruber, Arik Levinson and participants in the 1994
TAPES Conference in Torino, Italy for useful suggestions. Rosen's research was supported in
part by Princeton's Center for Economic Policy Studies. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in Health Care and Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Douglas HoItz-Eakin, John R. Penrod, and Harvey S. Rosen. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4880
                                                                             October 1994


                             HEALTh INSURANCE AND THE
                              SUPPLY OF ENTREPRENEURS


                                         ABSTRACT


       Some commentators have suggested that the absence of portable health insurance impedes

people from leaving their jobs to start new finns. We investigate this belief by comparing wage-

earners who become self-employed during a given period of time with their counterparts who do

not. By examining the impact of variables relating to the health insurance and health status of

these workers and theft families, we can infer whether the lack of health insurance portability

affects the probability that they become self-employed. The evidence does not support the

conjecture that the current health insurance system affects the propensity to become self-

employed. Hence, whatever its other merits, there is no reason to believe that the introduction

of universal health insurance would significantly enhance entrepreneurial activity.




Douglas Holtz-Eakin                                John R. Penrod
Department of Economics                            Department of Economics
Center for Policy Research                         Princeton Uni -; '.ity
Syracuse University                                Princeton, NJ u8544
Syracuse. NY 13244-1090
and NBER

Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
                                1f you leave your job to start a
                               small business, you're covered"
                                             — President Bill Clinton.
                                              on the advantages of his
                                              Health Security plan.'



1.     INTRODUCTION
       Most medical insurance in the United States is provided by employers. Two out of

every three Americans under the age of 65 are covered by employer-provided insurance, and

these individuals constitute roughly 75 percent of all employees (Aaron [1991]). Employer-

provided insurance is typically not portable. As a result, people who switch jobs may lose

their health insurance, a situation that may reduce labor market mobility •2 Thoughtful

observers of the U.S. health insurance system have long recognized the potential importance

of this job-Iock" phenomenon. Several recent studies are consistent with this view. For

example, Madrian [19941 claims that job-lock reduces labor force mobility by 25 percent.

       In the same vein, some have conjectured that the absence of portable insurance may

affect the decision to leave a job and start a new firm. Thus, the Wall Street Journal noted,

"If you're thinking of taking the entrepreneurial plunge, take a break from the business plans

and five-year projections, and consider your family's need for health, disability and life

insurance" (Asinof [1992]). This view was articulated more carefully by Laura D'Andrea

Tyson, Chairwoman of the Council of Economic Advisers: "The difficulty of self-employed

workers and small businesses today in purchasing health insurance creates large disincentives

for individuals to leave covered jobs to start up new businesses. Reform may thus stimulate

new business formation, particularly for small businesses. There is little economic research

on this subject to date. "



                                               —1—
       In fact, we know of 112 research on the question of whether the largely employer-

based health insurance system in the United States has reduced the supply of entrepreneurs.

The goal of this paper is to provide some evidence on this important issue.

       Our basic approach involves comparing wage-earners who make a transition to self-

employment over a given period of time with their counterparts who do not. By examining

the impact of variables relating to the health insurance and health status of these workers and

their families, we can make inferences about whether the lack of health. insurance portability

affects the probability that they choose to become self-employed.

       While no previous research has addressed this issue, there has been some related

work, and it is discussed in Section 2. Section 3 presents the model that we employ to

organize our analysis of the data. Section 4 describes the data. We ethploy two sources, the

Survey of Program Participation (SIP?) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).

We focus primarily on the SIPP data, because they are particularly suitable for analyzing our

problem. However, to reduce the likelihood that our results are an artifact of this data

source, we check the robustness of our conclusions using the PSID. The results are

presented in Section 5. Surprisingly, we find that in the overwhelming majority of cases,

health insurance portability has no impact on transitions from wage-earning to

entrepreneurship. In Section 6 we conclude with a summary and suggestions for future

research.




                                              -2-
2.     PRIOR UTERATURE

       Two strands of pi.vious research are especially relevant to our problem. The first is

the empirical literature examining transitions from wage-earning into entrepreneurship. It

has focused on issues like the effects of race, gender, occupation, and access to capital

markets. Examples of such work are provided by Evans and Leighton [1989], Holtz-Eakin,

Joulfaian and Rosen [1994] and Meyer [1990]. However, to the best of our knowledge,

there have been no attempts at all to link health insurance institutions to the supply of

entrepreneurs.
       The second strand relates to the growing concern that, because health insurance is

generally provided by a person's employer, leaving one job to take another mayentail the

loss of health insurance and reduce job mobility.4 Indeed, even if a worker is able to obtain

insurance on a new job. pre-existing condition exclusions, medical underwriting, and term-

of-service limitations may make health insurance provided by a current employer more

valuable to a worker than an otherwise comparable policy offered by a prospective

employer.5 The result in all these cases is the same — the lack of portable health insurance

may impose costs that impede mobility from one job to another. (SeeCongressional Budget

Office [1992, pp. 7, 9].)
        Economists have now begun to seek statistical evidence for the existence of this job-

lock phenomenon. Cooper and Monheit [forthcoming] use data from the National Medical

Expenditure Survey (NMES) to examine whether the probability of making a job-to-job

transition is affected by the presence of employer-provided health insurance. They find that

 there is a statistically significant negative correlation, which is consistent with the presence of

job-lock. However, Holtz-Ealdn [1994] and Madrian (1994] have pointed out a potential



                                                 -3-
problem with this approach. Because it is impossible for the researcher to obtain

comprehensive information about an individual's work environment, the presence of

employer-provided health insurance may simply be a proxy for the presence of various

unobserved characteristics of the job. That is, "good jobs" may provide a package of

desirable characteristics including health insurance (which appears in the data) and other

characteristics (which do not). Hence, the fact that workers are less likely to leave jobs with

health insurance may cell us nothing more than people hang onto "good jabs."

        To deal with this problem, both Holtz-Eaidn and Madrian employ a "differences-

within-differences" approach. Rather than compare those with employer-provided insurance

to those without it, they look within the group of people who have such insurance, and ask

whether differences in expected insurance costs affect job-to-job transitions. Using this

approach, Holtz-Eakin finds no evidence of job-lock in the PSID. Madrian's results, based

on the NMES, are suggestive of job-lock, but the statistical significance of the relevant

parameter estimates is relatively low. In any case, neither study examines job-to-

entrepreneurship transitions.

       As in the job-to-job transitions that are the subject of the above smdies, transitions to

self-employment from the wage-and-salary sector include the costs associated with the

termination of one health insurance policy and the opening of another. However, transitions

to self-employment involve two additional considerations that do not apply to job-to-job

transitions. First, health insurance benefits for wage and salary workers are not taxable

while only 25 percent of health insurance costs for the self-employed are deductible.6

Second, for reasons of market power, adverse selection or administrative costs, for




                                              -4-
comparable plans and benefits, health insurance costs are 10 to 40 percent higher for small

businesses .

       To recap, transitions to self-employment from the wage-and-salary sector entail even

higher costs than transitions between employers within the wage-and-salary sector because of

the higher premia and less favorable tax treatment of those premia in the self-employment

sector. Seven! proposals have been made to reduce the costs of such transitions. For

example, various parties have urged the Congress and the Administration to enact legislation

that would allow self-employed individuals to deduct the full value of their health insurance

premiums to avoid "putting small businesses out of business.  "   Many of the proposals for

health insurance reform contain elements intended to lower the cost of health insurance to

small firms. Most of these proposals rely on government-encouraged risk-pooling

arrangements for small businesses and others that would increase the power of the this group

in the market for health insurance, thereby lowering their cost of coverage. A premise of

such policies is that lowering the costs of making a transition to entrepreneurship would

increase the supply of entrepreneurs. However, the existence and magnitude of the response

is ultimately an empirical question.9



3.     THE MODEL

       In the simplest case, let the probability of making the transition to entrepreneurship be

given by'°

       p(entrepreneur) = •(z)     +
                                      a1d1 + a2d2 + cr3d3 +   cx4d4,                          (1)


where z is a vector of non-insurance variables that affect the propensity to become an

entrcprcneur; d1 is a dichotomous variable equal to one if the individual is the only person in


                                               -5-
 the household to have insurance and   equal to zero       otherwise; d2 is defined similarly and

 indicates that only the individual's spouse has insurance; d3 equals one if both the individual

 and the spouse are insured; t14 indicates that neither has insurance; and the a's are

 parameters. (For purposes of exposition, assume that the spouse's insurance policy provides

 coverage for the individual.) If the lack of portable insurance impedes transitions to

 entrepreneurship, then individuals whose employment and insurance are tied should have a

 lower probability of making a transition, ceteris paribus. In terms of equation (1), this

 corresponds to having d, =1. Whenever d1 = 0, an individual's access to insurance is

 independent of his or her wage-earning employment. For example, if ct2 =             1,    then the

 individual is covered by the spouse's policy, which provides coverage whether or not there is

a transition to entrepreneurship. Or if d4 = 1, the individual has no job-related insurance to

lose, and it is therefore not a factor when starting a new business.

       Following Holtz-Eakin [1994] and Madrian                    it turns out to be useful to express

equation (1) in a slightly different form:

       p(entrepreneur)    =   (z) +          fl1S'ef   +
                                                           fl2Spouse     fl3Both,                        (2)

where Self indicates that the individual has employer-provided insurance, Spouse             indicates


that the spouse has insurance, and Both is the interaction (product) of these two variables. A

bit of algebra reveals the correspondence between equations (1) and (2):

       p(entrepreneur) = (z)    +     +fl1   )dt + (fib +Ø2)d2     (0o        fi2 ÷fl3)d3   + fl0d4.      (3)


       Consider now equation (1). As argued above, the discouraging effect of the potential

loss of health insurance comes into play only when d1 1. Note that the other possibilities

are equivalent from the perspective of health insurance — the individual loses no insurance if



                                                 -6-
he or she leaves the job. Hence, one would expect a2 = a3 = a4. Thus, the notion that

lack of portability affects transitions amounts to testing the null hypothesis that

a1 = a2(.a3=a4). This hypothesis has several implications for the parameters in equation
(3): (i) a2 =   a3 implies that   +03 = 0; (ii) a3 =    a4 implies that /31+02+133 = 0, so that

these together require that $2 = 0; and (iii) a1 = a2 implies that $ =          so    that j3 must

also be zero. Collecting results, this requires that $3, the coefficient on the interaction

variable (Both) be zero. Thus, the model suggests the (not surprising) result that one should

test whether all of the coefficients on the insurance variables in (2) are equal to zero. If they

are, this is consistent with the notion that health insurance has no effect on transitions to

entrepreneurship. On the other hand, rejection of this null hypothesis is consistent with the

notion that lack of health insurance portability restricts the supply of new entrepreneurs.

        However, as stressed above, one could argue that the presence of an employer-

provided plan is really serving as an indicator of whether the individual has a good job." If

so, all that finding a1 C 0 establishes is that people are less likely to leave "good jobs" than

 bad jobs," a result that tells us little about the importance of the insurance portability issue.

However, we can use information on the spouse's insurance status to deal with this problem.

To see how, considcr two individuals, both of whom have employer-provided plans, and only

one of whom has a spouse with insurance coverage. To the extent that insurance portability

is a consideration in starling a new firm, then an individual who could be covered by the

spouse's policies should be more likely to make a transition to entrepreneurship, ceteris

paribus. Moreover, if the spouse has insurance coverage, then the impact should be greater

for those with higher expected health care expenses. In short, looking at differences within




                                                 -7-
 the group of people who have employer-provided plans should provide a much more

 convincing test.

          In terms of equation (1). the "good jobs" argument essentially says that        does not

 control completely for attributes of the job that are correlated with the presence of insurance.

 It is likely, then, that the coefficients on d1 and d3 are contaminated by these job-related

 attributes. In the same way, one could imagine a scenario in which t2 = 1 reflects the fact

 that the spouse has skills sufficient to command a good job, skills that also make it easier for

 the individual to become an entrepreneur independent of insurance considerations. Thus the

 coefficients on cia and d3 would be contaminated in a similar fashion by the spouse's

 unobserved attributes. One may therefore write equation (1) as:

         p(entrepreneur)   =   (z)   +
                                         (a1+j)d1   +
                                                        (n2+s)d2   +
                                                                       (a3+j-s)d3   .
                                                                                                 (1')
or


         p(entrepreneur) = '4(z) + 71d1      +          +      + 74d4,                               (4)



where   j is the contamination due to incomplete characterization of the individual's job and s
is the corresponding contamination due to spouse-effects. Because of the presence       of s andj.

it is not possible to use estimates of the coefficients in (4) to test the relevant hypotheses

regarding the coefficients in equation (1). Indeed, one cannot even learn about health

insurance effects by looking at (la-li). (73-Il). or (74-71)' because each contains either s or
j.   However, comparing the "differences of the differences," allows us to eliminate the

various unobserved attributes.       Algebraically, (73-72)-(7l-74) = (a3-a2)-(cr1-a), which
does not depend on s orj. Under the null hypothesis, this should equai zero. Returning to

equation (3), it is straightforward to verify that (cr3-a2)-(cr1-a4) = fl3. Thus, testing the null

hypothesis in the presence of job-effects and spouse-effects involves testing whether the


                                                 -8-
coefficient on the interaction variable differs from zero. Intuitively, if health insurance has

no effect on transitions, the impact of having an employer-provided plan should not depend

on whether the worker can be covered by a spouse's plan.

       It might be possible that whether the spouse has insurance is itself endogenous to the

transition — one spouse might obtain insurance in anticipation of the other becoming self-

employed. As discussed below, in addition to information on the health insurance available

to individuals, our data contain self-reported measures of the health status of individuals as

well as other variables that might measure expected future health care costs. Such variables

can also be used to compute another type of differences in differences estimator. For

example, individuals who are in poor health should put a higher value on having insurance,

ceteris paribus. Hence, within the group of people who have employer-provided plans, we

expect those who are in poor health and lack portable coverage (e.g., through their spouse)

to be less likely to make the transition to entrepreneurship.

        Our discussion so far has ignored the role, of laws that relate to health insurance

portability. In 1985. the United States Congress passed the Consolidated Omnibus Budget

Reconciliation Act (COBRA), which contained provisions whose purpose was to ease the

problem of job-lock. Essentially, COBRA mandated that when an employee leaves a firm

for any reason other than gross misconduct, he or she must be allowed the opportunity to

purchase he.alth insurance from the firm for up to 18 months. (See Flynn [1992].) COBRA

did not go into effect until after our sample period. However, prior to 1985 a number of

states passed their own COBRA-like statutes. This provides a "natural experiment" that can

be used to help us assess whether lack of portability affects entrepreneurship. Our data

provide infonnation on the individual's state of residence. Hence, we can determine whether



                                                -9-
 each individual had the option to purchase health insurance after separating from his job, and

 whether this influenced the probability of making a transition to entrepreneurslijp.



 4. DATA

        We use both the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) and the Panel

 Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The SIP? data contain a richer set of variables relating

 to insurance status and health. Hence, we rely primarily on the SIPP data, and use the PSID

 mainly to confirm certain of the results.

        4.1 SIPP Data

        In the SIPP data, we focus on transitions to self-employment between 1984 and 1986,

 which correspond to waves 3 arid 912• To be in our sample, individuals must be between

 16 and 62 years of age, and not be employed in the agricultural sector)3 Selecting on

these criteria left us with 21.467 observations in wave 3. Individuals were classified as

being wage-earners or self-employed according to the mode in which they spent the most

hours. This gave us 2.078 self-employed people, about 9.7 percent of the total, a figure

quite close to that found in other studies of the incidence of self-employment. Alternatively,

one might classifS' an individual as being self-employs only if he or she has no wage-

employment at all. This alternative definition leads to substantially the same results as those
reported below. 14

       The SIP? data contain a rich set of variables relating to the economic and

demographic status of the individuals (corresponding to the z vector in equation 1). Table
4.1 shows the means of these variables in wave 3 for both employed (column (1)) and self-

employed (column (2)) individuals. The table also provides the same information for the



                                             -10-
variables relating to health and insurance status. Inter alia, the table suggests that the self-

employed are on avenge older, better educated, and more likely to be white and male than

wage earners, fmdings that echo earlier studies. (See, e.g., Meyer [19901.) More

interesting for our purposes are the comparisons with respect to health and insurance status

toward the bottom of the table. The health status of self-employed individuals and their

families does not appear to differ markedly from that of their wage earner counterparts. For

example, 69.7 percent of the wage-earners characterize their health as "excellent' or "good;'

the figure for the self-employed is 68.9 percent. For our purposes, perhaps the most stiking

result to emerge from Table 4.1 is that the self-employed are much more likely to lack health

insurance than wage and salary workers — 17.9 percent of the self-employed.have no

coverage, versus 10.4 percent of wage and salary workers)5

        Although our emphasis is on transition issues, it is of some interest to.explore a bit

further this cross-sectional difference in the propensity to lack insurance. Is it a consequence

of correlations between various socioeconomic variables and self-employment status • or does

employment status have an independent effect, even after taking other variables into account?

To investigate this issue, we estimated a simple linear probability model in which the left-

hand side variable takes a value of one if the individual lacks insurance and zero otherwise.

The right-hand side variables include a set of economic and demographic variables as well as

a dichotomous variable SELF, which equals one if the individual is self-employed and zero

otherwise. The results are reported in Table 4.2. The coefficient on SELF is 0.0883

(s.c. = 0.00717), indicating that self-employment raises the probability of being uninsured
by 8.8 percentage points, which actually exceeds the 7.4 percentage point raw difference




                                                —11—
from Table 4. 1. Thus, the difference in the insurance rates does not appear to be due to the

correlation between self-employment and the individual's characteristics. t6

        Returning now to Table 4.1. columns (3) and (4) examine the 1986 employment status

of individuals who were wage and salary workers in 1984.17 Column (3) shows the 1984

values of variables for individuals who stayed wage and salary workers in 1986, and column

(4) shows the same variables for those who made a transition to self-employment.

Individuals who were white, not in a union, and with relatively short job tenures were more

likely to make a transition to self-employment.'8 On the other hand, there appear to be no

systematic differences in the health status of those who make a transition to self-employment

and those who do not. Those who were not covered by any insurance in 1984 were more

likely to make a transition to self-employment, as were those whose spouses were covered by

an employer-provided plan. These tabulations seem consistent with the notion that lack of

insurance portability does have an impact — those with no plan or a spouse with a plan (and

hence, "nothing to lose") are more likely to become entrepreneurs. Indeed, the transition

rate for those with an employer-provided plan (0.0209, s.d. = 0.143) is significantly less

than that for those without such a plan (0.0326, s.d. = 0.178). 19 Of course, a multivariate

analysis of the kind described above is required to make more definitive statements. In this

context, one should remember the importance of finding "differences in differences" before

ascribing significant effects to health insurance.

       4.2 PSID Data

       As noted earlier, we employ data from the P5W to as check on the robustness of our

results. Like the SIPP, the PSID contains a rich array of the demographic and economic
variables. Unlike the SIPP, however, the information concerning health insurance



                                               -12-
arrangements is quite limited. In the 1984 wave of the PSID. individuals (and their spouses)

were asked the question:


       "Does your employer pay for any medical, surgical, or hospital insurance that
       coven any illness or injury that might happen to you when you are not at
       work?"


We classil5' those individuals who answered "yes" as having employer-provided health

insurance, and similarly for spouses of married individuals. Also, we proceed under the

assumption that individuals are eligible for coverage under their spouse's plan, if present.2°

       With respect to health status, the PSID includes two self-assessment measures. In the

first, individuals rated their health in 1984. We classified those responding 'good," "very

good," or "excellent" as being in good health. Roughly 64 percent of the sample falls in this

classification, quite close to the value in the SIPP data. The second self-assessment question

asked individuals to rate their health in 1984 versus that in 1982; we use these responses to

identifS' those individuals who are in "worse" health. In addition, the PSID provides

information on nights spent in the hospital by each individual (and his or her spouse, if

married) during 1984 and hours of work lost by each individual (and, by spouses, where

appropriate) due to illness.

       Sample statistics for those individuals who were wage and salary workers (and thus

form the sample for our multivariate analysis) are shown in Table 4.3.




                                              -13-
       4.3 The Mandate Data

       As noted above, during our sample period several states imposed mandates that

required employers to allow employees to purchase health insurance from them for a certain

period of time after the employees were separated from the firm. The sources of the

mandate data were Hewitt Associates [1986], Gruber [1992], and, in some cases, the state

statutes themselves. Seventeen states had continuation mandates that covered voluntary

separations and became effective during 1984 or before. The length of eligibility was

typically less than the 1 8-month continuation subsequently mandated by the federal COBRA

law; the length of eligibility varied from 1.5 to 18 months.2'

       In wave 3 of the 1984 SIPP panel, 28 percent of wage and salary workers lived in

states mandating continuing coverage. Of those that lived in covered states, the avenge

length of mandated coverage was 6.7 months.



5. RESULTS

       5.1 Results from the SIPP

       The Baseline Saxnnle. Our baseline sample consists of the entire group of wage-

earners in 1984 for whom we can make matches in 1986. provided that they were either

employed or self-employed in 1986. This is a rather heterogeneous sample, so to assess the

robustness of our results we also estimated the model for various sub-samples. At the outset.

we estimated a logit model of the probability of making a transition from wage-earning to

self-employment as a function of a set of conditioning variables and EMPPLAN, the

dichotomous variable indicating the presence of an employer-provided health insurance plan

in 1984P The idea was to see if the suggestive negative relationship between EMPPLAN



                                             -14-
and the probability of making a transition from Table 4.1 continued to hold in a multivariate

framework. The results, reported in column (1) of Table 5.1 indicate that a negative and

statistically significant impact is present — the coefficient on EMPPLAN aceeds its standard

error by a factor of more than four. However, as stressed above, the fact the EMPPLAN is

a significant deterniintnt of transitions to self-employment may not be telling us veiy much

about the importance of health insurance portability. Therefore, along the lines suggested in

Section 3 above, we augment this equation with the following variables: SPLAN (=         1   if the

individual's spouse had family insurance coverage), and SPLAN*EMPPLAN (the interaction

of SPLAN and EMPPLAN)?3 The coefficient ou the interaction term is the differences-in-

differences estimator — it indicates whether the presence of a spouse with a health insurance

plan has a differential impact that depends on the individual's own insurance status. If health

insurance affects transitions, then the incremental effect of being covered on a spouse's plan

should be to generate a greater probability of making a transition for an individual with an

employer-provided plan than for an individual without such a plan. Thus, the interaction

tenn should have a positive coefficient.

       The results are presented in column (2) of Table 5.1. The addition of SPLAN and its

interaction with EMPPLAN barely changes any of the other coefficients from their values in

column (1). The key observation, however, is that the coefficient on the interaction term is

statistically.insignificant at conventional levels. Thus, using the differences-in-differences

approach, one cannot reject the null hypothesis that the absence of health insurance

portability does not affect transitions into entrepreneurship.

       The specifications in columns (1) and (2) implicitly embody the assumption that the

processes governing transitions from wage-earning to self-employment are the same for those



                                               -15-
 with and without an employer plan. To the extent that the processes differ, the estimates in

column (2) — including the estimate on the interaction term — may be inconsistent. We

therefore divided the sample on the basis of the value of EMPPLAN, estimated separate

logits for the two subsamples, and tested the hypothesis that all of the slope coefficients were

equal across the subsamples. The results for the individuals with EMPPL.AN = 0 are in

column (3), and those for EMPPLAN =         1   are in column (4). The chi-square test statistic

was 54, while the critical level at the 0.01 level is 52.2. Hence, we can reject the hypothesis

that the same process generates transitions for those with and without employer-provided

plans.

         The fact that it is inappropriate to pool individuals with and without employer-

provided plans suggests that we should try to develop a differences-in-differences estimator

that may be applied to the two groups separately. Our approach is to look only at those with

employer provided plans, who are the individuals of interest in this context. We generate a

differences-in-differences estimator through co-variation in expected health care costs and

spousal insurance coverage within this group. To illustrate this approach, suppose we

augment the regression from column (4) of Table 5.1 with the following variables: SPLAN

(= 1 if the individual's spouse has family insurance coverage), BED (= number of days that
the individual and the spouse were bedridden due to illness during the last 4 months), and
SPLAN * BED (the interaction of these variables). If health insurance portability is an

important phenomenon, then individuals whose spouses have insurance that coven them

should be more likely to make a transition, because giving up their current plan imposes a

smaller cost. Moreover, to the extent that BED is a good measure of expected future health

care costs, then the incremental effect of SPLAN on the probability of a transition should



                                                -16-
increase with BED — higher expected health costs make the spouse's insurance a more

important component of the decision. Put differently, a person with very low expected

health costs may not care much one way or the other if he or she would be covered by the

spouse's plan. The coefficient on the interaction term is thus analogous to fl in equation

(2), and is the differences-in differences-estimator of health insurance portability effects. If

such effects are present, it should be positive.

       The results of this experiment are reported in column (5) of Table 5.1. Like the

results in column (2), they are      consistent with the importance of health insurance

portability. The differences-in-differences estimator is again positive (0.007). but the

associated t-statistic is less than one. The coefficient on SPLAN, while positive, exceeds its

standard error by only a factor of 1.6 — even the simple "differences' estimator is

insignificant. Moreover. BED, SPLAN, and their interaction are jointly insignificant — the

associated F(3 ,S 173)-statistic is 1.87, which is significant only at the 0.13 level.

        One could argue that the failure for insurance portability to emerge as a significant

phenomenon is that BED is not a very good proxy for exnected health costs. For example.

an individual may have spent quite a bit of time sick at home, but these spells might not have

been associated with substantial medical costs (a bout with the flu comes to mind). Or,

whatever illness that occurred in the past may not be expected to recur in the future. As

Table 4.1 illustrated, we have at our disposal a number of alternative proxies for expected

future health costs. To detennine whether the results in column (5) of Table 5.1 are robust,

we rn-estimate the equation several times, each time replacing BED with a different proxy

for expected health care costs. Specifically, we estimate the equation replacing BED with:




                                                -17-
         NIJMCOV (the number of people in the family covered by the employer- provided

plan),

         CHILDDIS (= I if there is a child under 18 in the family who is mentally or

physically disabled).

         000DHLTH (=       1   if the person reports him- or herself as being in excellent or good

health),

         NTSI2 (number of nights in the last 12 months that the individual or spouse spent in

the hospital),

         NTS4 (defined analogously for last 4 months),

         DOCI2 (number of doctor visits by individual and spouse in last 12 months),

         DOC4 (defined analogously for last 4 months),

         EXP12 (medical expenditures associated with individual's and spouse's nights in the

hospital during the past 12 months),24

         EXP4 (defined analogously for last 4 months),

         NEWCHILD (number of babies in the family born between waves 3 and 9), and

         PREDEXP (an index of predicted future health expenditures, based on data from the

National Medical Care Utilization and Expenditure Survey.f

         Each of these variables in some way proxies for expected health care costs; or

alternatively, for the value that the worker puts upon his or her employer-provided plan,
ceteris paribus. We expect families with more members (NUMCOV) or families with

potential health problems (C}ULDDIS and the negative of GOODHLTH) to put a higher

value on insurance. To the extent that people form theft expectations about future health
care use and expenses on the basis of their recent past experiences, it is appropriate to



                                               -18-
examine NTS12, NTS4, DOC12, DOC4, EXP4, and EXP12.26 To the extent that new

babies and the associated medical expenses are anticipated, NEWCHILD should also serve as

a proxy for expected health care costs.27 PREDEXP represents a more explicit attempt to

estimate future health care costs, because it is based on the relationship between an

individual's characteristics and future health care costs.

        To conserve space, we report in Table 5.2 only the three coefficients from each

regression that are our main focus — SPLAN, the particular measure of expected health

insurance costs from the list above, and the interaction of the two variables. We also report

the significance level (p) for the joint test that all three coefficients are equal to zero.

         For the most part, these experiments confirm the results in column (5) of Table 5.1 —

one   cannot reject the hypothesis that insurance portability effects are absent. The two

exceptions are NTS4 (number of nights spent in the hospital in the past 4 months) and EXP4

(the estimated cost associated with hospital stays and doctor visits in the last 4 months).

What are we to make of these findings? One possibility is that the significance of NTS4 and

EXP4 is a statistical fluke. After all, if one tries enough proxies for a certain variable,

sooner or later one will find a significant result. Alternatively, perhaps the reason that NTS4

and EXPS4 "work" is that they really are superior measures of expected future health costs.

This would be consistent with a "theory" which says that individuals form their expectations

about future health costs as some function of their very recent health costs.

         At least for the moment, let us assume that the significance of NTS4 and EXPS4 is

not merely a statistical fluke, and examine the quantitative significance of NTS4. To begin,

one should note that only 4 percent of the sample had y nights in the hospital in the last

four months. Thus, for 96 percent of our sample, this variable is zero, and there is no effect



                                                 -19-
at all on transition probabilities. To determine the effect of alternative coverage, we

compute for each person their estimated probability of making a transition (on the basis of

the logit estimates), and compare it to the probability if each person had alternative coverage.

        The latter probability is computed by setting each right-hand side variable to its actual

value, except that in the interaction term SPLAN*NTS4. SPLAN is set equal to 1 for

everyone. We fmd that the transition probability increases from 2.086 percent to 1178

percent, or 0.092 percentage points. This is not a substantial increase.

        It is also helpful to interpret the results using our differences-in-differences

framework. To do this, we consider the effect of alternative coverage on the transition

probabilities of those with one night in the hospital in the last four months, Specifically, we

compute the transition probabilities for the sample four times, each time using one of the

four combinations of spouse plan or no spouse plan and 0 or 1 nights in the hospital. The

four transition rates are reported in the following table.


                                                        Spouse Plan


                   Nights in            0       0.019551           0.026538
                   Hospital in Last
                   Four Months                   0.019834          0.029155


The difference-in-difference estimator is 0.23 percentage points, that is, the transition

probability of those who had a night in the hospital but no alternative coverage would be

0.23 percentage points greater if alternative coverage were available. However, since less

than 5 percent of the sample experienced a stay in the hospital during the last four months




                                               -20-
and many of these already had spousal coverage, the effect on the overall transition rate into

self-employment is slight.

       In summaly, support for the hypothesis that insurance portability affects transitions to

entrepreneurship appears weak at best. When we use a conventional differences-in-

differences approach that pools individuals with and without employer-provided plans, we

find no effect. When we use an alternative estimator that relies on differences in expected

health care costs among those who have employer-provided plans, no statistically discernable

effect is present for most of our measures of expected health care costs. For the one

measure where it is present, the quantitative significance is slight, except perhaps for a very

small segment of the population. Perhaps it is the experience of this small segment which

accounts for the anecdotal evidence that lack of health insurance is an impediment to

becoming an entrepreneur.

       Alternative Soecifications. In virtually any regression model, various control

variables can be challenged on the basis that they are really endogenous. One can imagine.

for example, that people choose a particular occupation as a wage earner because it will

facilitate a future transition to entrepreneurship. While we do not think that we have too

many problems in this respect, it is nonetheless useful to determine whether the various

triples of variables presentedin Table 5.2 are significant when they are entered into the

equation without ?flY other controls. If so, we need to investigate the endogeneity issue more

carefully. If not, the issue is moot. The results are reported in Table 5.3. They indicate

that the absence of the control variables does not have much effect on our substantive results

— the only difference is that NTS4 and EXY4 are also statistically insignificant. Thus, even




                                              -21-
 if some of the controls may be suspect because of endogeneity, this does not appear to be

 driving our results.

        Another possible objection to the analysis is the heterogeneous nature of the sample,

 which includes men, women, blacks, whites, singles and marrieds. It could be that the

processes governing the transition into entrepreneurship are different for various groups, and

pooling them together obscures the effects of health insurance portability. We therefore re-

estimated the model of Table 5.1 using the following sub-samples: males, white males,

white married males, individuals who usually work full time (more than 35 hours per week)

in both periods, males who usually work full time in both periods, individuals who are not

looking for a job or on layoff during the sample period, and married males who usually work

full time.28 In effect, this gives us nine sets of results like those in Table 5.2.29 To

conserve space, we do not include those nine tables here. What the results show is that the

findings in Table 5.2 are quite robust with respect to the choice of sample. Generally, with

the exception of the NTS4 and EXP4 variables, there is no evidence for health insurance

portability effects.30' 31

        Another issue relates to the length of transition period. Our analyses thus far look at

the period 1984 to 1986. One can argue that portability effects might be more likely to be

present during a shorter transition period. To see why, imagine an earner, currently covered

by an employer-provided plan, who unexpectedly suffers a deterioration in his health, leading

to an unexpected increase in his future health costs. To the extent that it is difficult for the

employer to make rapid changes in the individual's wages, then the value of his employment

package increases in the short run — his insurance is worth more to him, while his wages

have not fallen. Thus, the inducement to stay at the current job is relatively large. Over a



                                               -22-
longer period, however, the employer can reduce the individual's wages (or some other

component of the employment package) to bring the value of the package into line with its

value before the shock occurred. If so. the inducement to stay will disappear. Thus,

according to this story, insurance portability effects might be more pronounced over a shorter

time period.
       We therefore re-estimated the models in Table 5.2 using one-year transitions. An

advantage of using one-year transitions is that it permits us to incorporate into the analysis

additional observations, giving us more employment to self-employment changes with which

to identify potential portability effects. Specifically, we pooled data for transitions from

1984 to 1985 with data, for transitions from 1986 to 1987.32 The resulting sample includes

13,247 people, about 50 percent more observations than those used to compute the estimates

in Table 5.2. Using these data changed none of the results in Table 5.2 — there is no

evidence of portability effects.

       The Role of State Laws. As noted in Section 3 above, during our sample period a

number of states had laws which mandated that when an employee left a firm for any reason

other than gross misconduct, he or she had to be given the option to purchase health

insurance from the firm for some length of time. Although the specific provisions varied

from state to state, generally the employee was supposed to be charged 100 percent of the

premium paid on the employee's behalf by the firm, and the period of time was three to

twelve months, depending on the state. To the extent that insurance portability effects are

present, we would expect individuals in states with mandates to have higher probabilities of

making a transition to self-employment, cereris paribus. Thus, along the lines suggested

above, we test for portability effects by augmenting the basic equation in column (5) of



                                               -23-
Table 5.1 with the variables SPLAN and MAND84, where MAND84 is a dichotomous

variable equal to one if the individual's state had a mandate in place in 1984, and zero

otherwise.

        The results are presented in the first column of the top panel of Table 5.4. The

coefficient on MANDS4 is not significantly different from zero, suggesting that workers who

live in states with health insurance mandates are no more likely to become self-employed

than individuals who do not. However, this specification may ignore an important aspect of

mandates. It might not be the presence of a mandate per Se, but rather the number of

months of coverage provided by the mandate that affects transitions to entrepreneurship. We

therefore created the variable M0S84, equal to the number of months of coverage mandated

by the individual's state. We then augmented the basic equation with SPLAN and M0S84.

The results are in the second panel of Table 5.4. Again, the mandate variable is statistically

insignificant.

       Of the mandates in effect in 1984, some had been recently enacted, while others had

existed for a number of years. It is possible that there are lags between the time a law

mandating benefits for former employees is passed and the time when finns and employees

become fully aware of the law and comply with it.33 If such is the case, then the

specification in column (1) of the rust panel in Table 5.4 may be incorrect. To investigate

this possibility we created the variables MAND83 and MAND82, dichotomous variables for

the presence of a mandate law in 1983 and 1982, respectively. Similarly, in analogy to

MOSS4, we created M0583 and M0S82 for the number of months for which coverage was

mandated in 1983 and 1982. respectively. The results using MA14D83 and MAND82are in

the second and third columns of the first panel, respectively; those for M0S83 and M0S82



                                             -24-
are in the second panel. The mandate variables continue to    be   statistically insignificant.

Thus, the results in column (1) of the table are not a consequence of lags in compliance with

mandate laws.

        A potential problem with these results is that states whose residents have high

transition propensities might be more likely to enact mandates, ceteris paribws. In that case,

the coefficient on the respective mandate variables might not be telling us anything about the

effects of health insurance portability.M To deal with this possibility, we adopt the now

familiar strategy of interacting the mandate variables with SPLAN. The test of the

importance of mandates then becomes whether thc interaction term is significant and negative

—   in the presence of a mandate, presumably the incremental benefit of the spouse having a
plan is less.

        The results are reported in the bottom two panels of Table 5.4. In all cases, the

interaction tenns have the wrong sign and are insignificant. Once again, health insurance

portability effects appear to be absent.

        5.2 Results from the P510

        We conduct our analysis of the data from the PSID in parallel to that of the SIPP data

reported above. We begin by analyzing a sample of individuals who were wage and salary

workers in 1984; excluding those in agriculture, those who worked under five hours per

week on average,, and those younger than 16 or older than 62. We then estimate a logit

model in which the dependent variable is equal to one if the individual made the transition to

entrepreneurship in the 1986 wave of the PSID. and zero otherwise.

        Column (1) of Table 5.5 reports the parameter estimates of a specification that mimics

the SIPP specification as closely as possible. The key variable of interest, EMPPLAN. has a



                                              -25-
negative coefficient. This is another example of the empirical regularity that those with

employer-provided insurance are less likely to move into entrepreneunhip.

       An advantage of the PSI]) is that it has more information on fringe benefits than the

SIPP. Thus, we have more observable indications of "good jobs" versus "bad jobs." We

conjectured earlier that the EMPPLAN variable might simply be a proxy for a "good job."

If this conjecture were correct, then the inclusion of additional job quality variables should

reduce the importance of EMPPLAN. Column (2) shows the results when these variables —

                                                    are included. The coefficient
LIFEINS, DENTAL, and PENSION (defined in Table 4.3) —

on EMPPLAN falls in magnitude, and is no longer statistically significant, a fmding that

confirms the notion that looking at EMPPLAN alone is not a suitable strategy for

investigating job-lock.

       As before, we examine several differences-in-differences estimators. In column (3)

we present the first one, which augments the basic specification with SPLAN and the

interaction of SPLAN with EMPPLAN. As the table shows, the estimated coefficient is

incorrectly signed from a job-lock perspective. Moreover, it is statistically insignificant.

       As in the SIPP, one can reject the hypothesis that the transition processes of those

with and those without employer-provided plans are the same.35 As before, we focus on

the sample of individuals with employer-provided insurance. Recall from above that among

these individuals, the ones with more nights in the hospital, and presumably greater expected

costs, will put a greater value on insurance provided by a spouse. Hence, if job-lock is an

important consideration, one would expect the coefficient on the interaction between the

spouse plan variable and number of nights in the hospital to be positive. However, as shown




                                              -26-
in column (4) of Table 5.5, although the point estimate is positive, it is statistically

insignificant.
        One could argue that the failure for insurance portability to emerge as a significant

phenomenon is that NIGHTS is not a very good proxy for extected health costs. As

discussed earlier, the PSI]) provides alternative proxies for expected future health costs.

Thus, to determine whether the results in column (4) of Table 5.5 are sensitive to the choice

of variables, we re-estimate the equation several times, each time replacing NIGHTS with a

different proxy for expected health care costs. Specifically, we use the variables:

        000DHLTH (=          1   if the person reports him- or herself as being in excellent or good

health).

        WORSEHLTH (=             1   if the person reports him- or herself as being in worse health

than two years previously), and

        HLOST (number of hours of work lost due to illness of the individual and his or her

spouse).

        We conserve space by reporting in the left column of Table 5.6 only the three

coefficients from each logit that are our main focus — SPLAN, the variable measuring

expected health insurance costs, and the interaction of the two variables. We also report the

significance level (p) for the joint test that all three coefficients are equal to zero. In each

case, these experiments confirm the results Table 5.5. One cannot reject the hypothesis of

rio job-lock.

           Also shown in Table 5.6 (right column) are the results of estimating our transition

equations using gjfly the three variables of interest (and a constant). As noted earlier,

omitting the other covariates provides a rough check of the influence of endogeneity on our



                                                     -27-
results. Comparing the two panels indicates little reason for concern; the only noticeable

change is the greater significance of GOODHLTH in the right panel.

        Finally, we examined whether our results are the artifact of a highly heterogeneous

sample by conducting separate analyses for: males, white males, white man-ied males,

individuals who usually work full time (more than 35 hours per week), males who usually

work full time, and married males who usually work full time. The results uniformly

indicate that the rmdthgs in Tables 5.5 and 5.6 are quite robust with respect to the choice of

sample. Similarly, we investigated whether the results are sensitive to the length of the

transition period by repeating our analyses of the PSID using transitions between 1984 and

1985, instead of the longer period 1984 to 1986. Again, the qualitative nature of our results

is unchanged.

       In summary, the PSID provides no more support for the hypothesis that insurance

portability reduces transitions to entrepreneurship than does the SIPP. A conventional

differences-in-differences approach that pools individuals with and without employer-provided

plans indicates no effect. Also, alternative estimates that rely on variations in expected

health care costs among those who have employer-provided plans show no statistically

significant effect.



6. CONCLUSION

       In the current debate over the U.S. health care system, one of the most important

issues is the effect of the system on labor market outcomes. In particular, because most

individuals receive their insurance as part of their employment packages, and this insurance

is generally not portable, there have been fears that the system locks people into their current



                                              -28-
jobs, reducing mobility in the labor market. The focus of this paper is on one important

type of labor market transition that might be impeded by the lack of health insurance

portability — the movement from wage-earning to self-employment.

       Our empirical strategy is guided by a very simple idea. If one looks at a wage earner

who has employer-provided health insurance, then the greater the cost to the worker of losing

that insurance, the less likely he or she is to become self-employed, ceteris paribics. Thus.

for example, people with higher expected health costs should be less likely to give up their

current jobs to strike out on their own. We used this framework to analyze the decisions

made by individuals in two panel data sets, The Survey of Income and Program

Participation, and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics. Except for a very small segment of

the population, we were able to find no evidence for this phenomenon in either data set. We

also examined the impact of state mandates requiring that, when an employee leaves a finn.

he or she has to be given the option to purchase health insurance from the finn for some

length of time. Again, we found no evidence that the presence of such laws affects

transitions to self-employment. In short, contrary to the anecdotal evidence and the

assertions of some policymakers, the lack of health insurance portability does not appear to

affect the propensity to leave wage employment and strike out on one's own. Whatever its

other merits, there is no reason to believe that the introduction of universal health insurance

would significantly enhance entrepreneurial activity.

       Is this result plausible? Two considerations are relevant here. First, as noted above,

even in the literature on job-to-job transitions, there is considerable ambiguity about the

importance of job-lock. Second, by its very nature, the transition to entrepreneurship is very

risky. A survey by the National Federation of Independent Business found a new business



                                              -29-
failure rate of 15 percent after three years; the Small Business Administration found an even

higher failure rate: 23.7 percent after two years, 51.7 percent after four years and 62.7

percent after six years (Johnson (1991]). Perhaps it should not be surprising that individuals

who are willing to undertake such risky ventures are unimpeded by the prospect of not

having health insurance.




                                             -30-
                                         Endnotes


1.    Robin Toner, "Promising Peace of Mind," New York Times, September 23, 1993,
      p.A1.
2.    Recent legislative developments have enhanced the portability of insurance. We
      return to these developments below.
3.    Daily Labor Repon, October 7, 1993.
4.    To the extent term-of-service limitations are present, the loss of insurance may only
      be temporary.
5.    According to one survey, about 57 percent of employers' policies contain exclusions
      for pre-existing conditions. See A. Foster Higgins & Co., Inc. [1987].
6.    In fact, for the 1992 tax year, even this exclusion was permitted to lapse. Special
      legislation passed in 1993 made the self-employed retroactively eligible for the
      deduction if they file an amended return.

7.    See United States General Accounting Office [1992].
8.    See Bureau of National Affairs Pension Reporter [1993, p.858].
9.    Although the costs of making a transition to entrepreneurship exceed the costs of a
      job-to-job transition, the existence of conventional job-lock does not imply the
      existence of an effect on transitions to entrepreneurship, because the decision to
      become an entrepreneur may be fundamentally different from the decision to take
      another job.
10.   One may think of this relationship as having been generated by an underlying process
      in which the individual compares the expected utilities associated with wage-earning
      and entrepreneurship. See Evans and Jovanovic [1989] or Holtz-Ealcin, Joulfaian, and
      Rosen [1994].
11.   Such a "difference within differences" approach is used by Gruber and Poterba [1993]
      to estimate the demand for health insurance.
12.   Each wave of the SIPP corresponds to a four month reference period. Wave 3 of the
      1984 panel is of particular interest because it included a special "topical module" that
      included health and health care utilization data. For a general discussion of the
      structure of the SIPP data, see United States Depariment of Commerce, Bureau of the
      Census [1987].
13.   In addition, we drop observations if the individual is not in the sample during the
      entire wave, if the individual cannot be matched with his or her spouse, etc.
14.   About 20 percent of the self-employed also reported wage and salary income.
15.   This is similar to Gruber and Poterba's [1993] finding that in the Current Population
      Survey data for the years 1986-1990, the percentage of self-employed individuals with
      insurance coverage was nine points below the percentage for employed individuals.


           -                                -31-
 16.    This result continues to hold when different subsamples are examined. When we
        restricted the sample to married males only, the raw difference in the propensity to be
        uninsured was 9.1 percentage points; the regression corrected difference was 9.6
        percentage points.
 17.    The number of wage and salary earners represented in columns (3) and (4) of Table
        4.1 is less than that in column 1 because of the inability to match some individuals in
        waves 3 and 9. Some of the attrition is due to the fact that, in response to budgetary
        problems, the sample was randomly reduced by 17.8 percent from wave 3 to wave 5.
        (See Herriot and Kasprzyk [1986].) To determine whether there was any
        nonrandomness in the sample used for the transition analysis, we estimated a
        regression in which the left-hand side variable equalled one if there was a match in
        wave 9 and zero otherwise, and the right-hand side variables included most of the set
        in Table 4. We found that while the probability of attrition was significantly related
        to several right-hand side variables (e.g., the owner-occupied housing variable), the
        quantitative effects were rather small.
 18.   As will be seen below, the job tenure variable consistently shows up as a significant
       determinant of the probability of making a transition from wage-earning to self-
       employment. The NMES data used by Cooper and Monheit [forthcoming] and
       Madrian [1992] to investigate job-to-job transitions do not include years on the current
       job.
 19.   Similarly, the transition rate for individuals whose spouses are covered (0.0335,
       s.d. = 0.180) is significantly greater than those whose spouses are not covered
       (0.0219, s.d. = 0.147).
20.    In the SlIP data, the individual is explicitly asked if he or she is covered under the
       spouse's plan. No such question is present in the PSID.
21.    However, in contrast to the current COBRA law, firms with fewer than 20 employees
       were typically covered by the state mandates.
22.    More precisely, EMPPLAN indicates whether there was an employer-provided plan
       any time during wave 3. We also constructed a variable that indicated whether there
       was an employer-provided plan during the last month of wave 3. The two variables
       led to essentially the same substantive results.
23.    Alternatively, one could define SPLAN in terms of whether the spouse had any
       insurance coverage (as opposed to family coverage). When we re-estimated our basic
       specification using this definition, the results were substantially the same as those
       reported below.
24.    The expenditure indices were generated by summing the estimated hospital expenses
       — the avenge cost of a night in the hospital in the individual's state in 1984 times the
       number of nights spent — and the estimated physician expenses — a nationwide
       avenge physician visit charge times the number of doctor visits. The hospital costs
       were obtained from the &atistical Abstract 0/the United States 1987(1986], and the
       physician charge data were obtained from the Source Book of Health insurance Data,
       1984-1985.
25.    To formulate this index, one uses the NMCUES data to estimate a regression of total
       health expenses in a given year on variables observed at the beginning of the year.
       The regression included only the insured individuals, although the substantive results

                                             -32-
      are unchanged when the entire sample is used. The regressors include the health
      status and demographic variables that arc common to both data sets: The results from
      this regression are used to impute a value of expected health care expenditures for
      each individual in the SIPP data. For funkier details, see Penrod [1993].

26.   Note, however, that according to Eliwood and Adam [1990, p. 126], past medical
      expenditures explain vexy little of the variance in current medical expenditures.
27.   This is similar to Madrian's [1992] use of a pregnancy variable in her analysis of job-
      to-job transitions.
28.   The married group is restricted to those with stable marriages over the relevant time
      period.
29.   The set of control variables changes slightly as we move from sample to sample. For
      example, it makes no sense to control for race in a regression using a sample that is
      exclusively white.
30.   Another possible issue is that some people in the sample may receive portable
      insurance from their union; our data give us no direct information on this
      phenomenon. In one experiment, we excluded from the sample those individuals who
      were employed in the trucking and construction industries, reasoning that they were
      the most likely to have such coverage. Their exclusion did not affect our main
      results.
31.   In the subsample consisting only of individuals who were never looking for a job or on
      layoff during the sample period, DOC4 is significant at the 0.03 level. However, the
      quantitative effect is rather small—a simulation of the kind discussed above suggests an
      increase in the transition probability of 0.0035 for this part of the population.
32.   The 1986 to 1987 transitions are from the 1986 SIPP panel, a shorter panel that was
      not of use for the earlier analysis. This set of equations omits the job tenure variable
      since it is not available in the 1986 SIPP panel. Due to small cell sizes, models using
      child disability could not be estimated.
33.   Thus, for example, Flynn [1992] finds that the take-up rate of the federal COBRA
      increased from 11.2 percent in 1989 to 20.5 percent in 1991. although the increase
      was not monotonic.
34.   This point is made by Gruber and Madrian [1993].
35.   The p-value is 0.009.




                                            -33-
                                        Bibliography


A. Foster Higgins & Co., Foster Higgins Health Care Benefits Survey, New York, 1987,
       p. hA.
Aaron, Henry, Serious and Unstable Condition, Washington. DC: The Brookings
      Institution, 1991.

Asinof, Lynn, toing Solo? Pack Insurance Policies in Your Pocket,' Wall Street Journal,
      March 19, 1992, p. Cl.
Bureau of National Affairs Pension Reporter, "Congress Urged to Allow Self-Employed to
       Deduct Full Health Insurance Costs," vol. 20, April 19, 1993.

Congressional Budget Office, Economic Implications of Rising Health Care Costs, U.S.
      Congress. October 1992.

Cooper, Philip F. and Alan C. Monheit, "Does Employer-Related Health Insurance Inhibit
      Job Mobility?" Inquiry, forthcoming.

Ellwood, David T. and E. Kathleen Adams, "Medical Mysteries: Transitional Benefits,
      Medicaid Coverage, and Welfare Exits," Health Care Financing Review. 1990 Annual
      Supplement, pp. 119-131.

Evans, David and Boyan Jovanovic, "An Estimated Model of Entrepreneurial Choice under
       Liquidity Constraints," Journal of Political Economy, 1989, pp. 808-827.

Evans, David and L. Leighton, "Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship. - American
      Economic Review, 1989, pp. 519-535.

Flynn, Patricia, "Employment-Based Health Insurance: Coverage Under COBRA
       Continuation Rules," mimeo, Urban Institute, 1992.

Gruber, Jonathan, "State Mandates and Employer Provided Insurance," mimeo,
      Massachusetts Institute of Technology, July, 30 1992.

Gruber, Jonathan and Brigette C. Madrian, "Limited Insurance Portability and Job Mobility:
      The Effects of Public Policy on Job Lock," Mimeo, MIT, 1993.

Gniber, Jonathan, and James Poterba, "The Elasticity of Demand for Health Insurance:
      Evidence from the Self-Employed," mimeo, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
      1993.




                                           -34-
Health Insurance Association of America, Source Book of Health Insurance Data,
      Washington. DC, p. 61.

Herriot, Roger A. and Daniel Kasprzyk, "Some Aspects of the SIPP," SIPP Working Paper
       No. 8601, Bureau of the Census, Washington. DC, April 1986.

Hewitt Associates, "Continuation of Group Medical Coverage — A Study of State Laws,'
       Hewitt Associates, Lincolnshire, IL, 1986.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, "Health Insurance Provision and Labor Market Efficiency In the
       United States and Germany," in Blank, Rebecca and Richard Freeman (eds.), Social
       Protection Versus Economic Flaibilixy: Is there a Tradeoff?, Chicago; University of
       Chicago Press, 1994, pp. 157-188.
Holtz-Eakin, Douglas. David Joulfaian and Harvey S. Rosen, "Entrepreneurial Decisions and
       Liquidity Constraints," Rand Journal of Economics, 1994, pp. 334-347.

Johnson, Michelle Laque, "Some Displaced Executives Buy Their Own FranchiseC,
      Investor's Daily. August 28, 1991.

Madrian, Brigitte, "Employment-Based Health Insurance and Job Mobility: Is There
      Evidence of Job-Lock?', Quarterly Journal of Economics, CIX. February 1994,
      pp. 27-54.

Meyer, Bruce, "Why Are There So Few Black Entrepreneurs?' National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Working Paper No. 3537, 1990.

Penrod, John R., "Health Care Costs, Health Insurance, and Job Mobility." mixneo.
      Princeton University, 1993.

United States Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census. Statistical Abstract of the
       United States 1987, U.S. Department of Commerce Bureau of the Census,
       Washington. 1986.

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. "Survey of Income and
       Program Participation User's Guide." Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
       Commerce Bureau of the Census, July 1987.




                                           -35-
                                               TABLE 4.1
                                          Mesas ha the SW? Da&

                                   CI)                (2)            (3)            (4)
                               Wa8e.Easnen       Sm-Employed       Remain       Transition to
VARIABLE                         Wave 3           ha Wave 3      Wage.Earnen   Enurpreoeursbip
Economic and Demotrnahic
  VLjables
AGE                               35.3               41.5           35.6            35.3
                                 (12.3)             (11.1)          (11.9)         (10.6)
EDIJC (Years of Education)        12.3               13.3           12.9            13.7
                                  (2.74)            (2.98)          (2.73)          (2.67)
BLACK (—1. if black)             0.0972            0.0356           0.0363         0.0236
                                 (0.296)           (0.185)         (0.281)         (0.152)
SPOUSEw (—1, If spouse           0.619              0.559           0.618          0.636
woeb full dine)                  (0.486)           (0.497)         (0.436)        (0.482)
KIDNIJM (utumber of children     0.638              0.937           0.676          0.804
er 18)                           (1.03)             (1.18)          (1.0$)         (1.05)
METRO(—I. If lives In             0.750             0.684           0.744          0.713
meanpolitan ana)                 (0.433)           (0.465)         (0.436)        (0.453)
UNION (—I, If union               0.204            0.00770          0.212          0.0946
membership or would)             (0.403)           (0.0874)        (0.409)        (0.293)
EARNINGS (earned income)         5,333              6,177           5,663          6.530
                                 (4.308)           (3.048)         (4,237)        (5,614)
HOURS (usual hours of work        38.4               42.9            38.9           40.2
pa week)                         (11.2)             (17.7)          (10.7)         (12.5)
FAMING (family Income)            3.000             4.280           3,100          3.710
                                 (4,610)           (6,030)         (4,540)        (4,770)
REG2 (—1,11 Midwest)              0.223             0.234           0.277          0.250
                                 (0.416)           (0.424)         (0.447)        (0.434)
REG3 (—I, If South)              0.261              0.353           0.318          0.345
                                 (0.439)           (0.478)         (0.466)        (0.416)
REG4 (—I, if West)                0.327             0.217           0.182          0.230
                                 (0.469)           (0.412)         (0.386)        (0.421)
0CC! (—1,1? manufacturing)       0.216              0.331           0.232          0.294
                                (0.411)            (0.471)         (0.422)        (0.456)
0CC (—I. iftechnica], sales,     0.318              0.300           0.320          0.331
adminIstration)                 (0.466)            (0.458)         (0.467)        (0.471)
                                        TABLE 4.1 (continued)
                                        Means In tbe Sn'? Data
                                          (1)                (2)           (3)               (4)
                                      Wage-Earnen      Self-Employed     Remain         Transition to
                                        Wave 3           io Wave 3     Wage-Earners   EntrepTeacunhip
OCC3 (=1. ifservice)                     0.149             0.131          0.133            0.111
                                        (0.356)           (0.337)        (0.339)          (0.315)
OCC4 (—I, ifaaft. repair)                0198              0.0707         0.12!            0.349
                                        (0.399)           (0.256)        (0.326)          (0.356)
OCC5 (—I. if operator, LabOrer)          0.198             0.0707         0.194            0.115
                                        (0.398)           (0.256)        (0.396)          (0.319)
MANUF (—1.11 in manufacturing            0.235             0.0486         0.251            0.172
indusny)                                (0.424)           (0.215)        (0.434)          (0.378)
HOME (—1. if adividual or spouse        . 0.518            0.75!          0.552            0.58!
owns borne)                              (0.500)          (0.433)        (0.497)          (0.494)
TflJURE(numberofyearsonmain               6.75              9.16           7.07            5.00
j)                                       (7.75)            (9.15)         (7.67)          (6.83)
CHILD (own children under 18)            0.637             0.937          0.676           0.804
                                         (2.03)            (1.18)         (1.05)          (1.05)
XIDAGE< I (number of children less       0.0382            0.0337         0.0396           0.0507
than!)                                  (0.193)           (0.180)         (0.397)         (0.220)
KIDAGEI-2 (ounerofc1dIdrea               0.0826            0.101          0.0835           0.329
between ages I and 2                    (0.288)           (0.319)        (0.288)          (0.374)
X1DAGE3.5 (nutnbaofchildxtn              0.121             0.164          0.129            0.319
between ages 3 and 5)                   (0.366)           (0.426)         (0.371)         (0.40!)
FEMALE (—I. If female)                   0.470             0.339          0.457            0.348
                                        (0.499)           (0.473)        (0.498)          (0.477)
MARRIED (—1. If tnanied and spouse       0398              0.798          0.628            0.743
ptaaJt)                                 (0.490)           (0.40!)         (0.483)         (0.438)
PREVMAR (=1.1! previously married,       0.132             0.109          0.124            0.0878
but not currently marrIed)              (0.338)           (0.312)         (0.330)         (0.284)
DIVORCE(—!. if divorced or               0.0348            0.0309         0.0348          0.0543
aeparated between waves) and 9)         (0.183)           (0.173)         (0.183)         (0.227)
NEWCHILD (—I. if child born between     .0.0885            0.0790         0.0809           0.0946
wives 3 and 9)                           (0.295)          (0.282)         (0.282)         (0.304)
WED (—I. if got married between          0.0563           0.0371          0.0548           0.0709
waves 3 and 9)                          (0.231)           (0.189)         (0.228)         (0.257)
                                                TABLE 4.1 (contInued)
                                               Means In the SWP Data'


                                                 (1)                  (2)                (3)                 (4)
                                            Wage-Earuct,        Self-Employed          Remain           Trtsition to
                                               Wave 3             in Wave 3         Wage-Earnen       Enreprenemtbip
Health and Insmne Variable
EMPPLAN (—1.11 HI. is through                   0.636               0.263               0.67€               Dill
employer)                                      (0.481)             (0.441)             (0.467)             (0.496)

sn_u4' ( I, if spouse has a family              0.379               0.418               0.373               0.432
Hi. plan)                                      (0.485)             (0.493)             (0.484)             (0.496)
NOPLAN (—I, if no Hi.)                          0.104               0.179              0.0800               0.132
                                               (0.305)             (0.383)             (0.271)             (0.339)
PWMCOV (—number of pawns coverS                  1.68                1.51               1.68                1.57
Wiadlvldual'aplm)                               (1.64)              (1.68)             (1.64)              (1.68)

BED(—cornblneddaysinbeddur*ag                    2.19                2.55               2.05                2.25
last 4 months)                                  (8.83)              (10.1)             (8.27)              (7.45)
CHILDDIS ( number of children with              0.0248             0.0327              0.0249               0.0372
a disability)                                  (0.156)             (0.178)             (0.156)             (0.189)
000D}ILTH (—I. If self-reported bealth          0.69?               0.689               0.712               0.767
Is nallait or good)                            (0.459)             (0.463)             (0.453)             (0.423)
P1154 (- combined nights In hospital in         0.358               0.218               0.281               0.345
last 4 months)                                  (2.76)              (1.36)             (2.38)              (2.12)
N1S12(—combinednlghtsinbospitalin                1.46                1.20               1.34                1.0$
last 12 months)                                 (5.99)              (4.41)             (5.43)              (3.62)
DOC4 (— combined doctor visits in last           1.35               1.27                2.49                2.36
4 months)                                       (3.23)              (2.91)             (4.40)              (3.22)
D0C12 (— combined doctor visitsIn last           3.50               3.33                6.40                6.50
12 months)                                      (7.05)             (6.93)              (9.53)              (973)
(P4(—onmbioedexpcnsaialast4                      207                 151                 178                 192
momS)                                          (1190)               (643)               (994)               (856)
EXPI2 (— combined expenses In last 12           751                 649                 702                 588
months)                                        (2600)              (1940)              C2X)                (560
PREDD(P' (—predicted medical                    2265                2546                2259                2438
expenses ova the next 12 months)               (1750)              (1895)              (1568)              (2431)


N                                              19391                2.078              11,697               296

$ Means ale than from wave 3 of the 19*4 panel. The sample In cotnum (I) Is .11 IndivIduals who west wage-nn in
wave 3. The sample In column (2) Is all Individuals who were self-employed In wave 3. The colunm (3) sample Is
Individuals who ne wage-camel in wave 3 and tumalned wage-camera in waVe 9. The cot (4) sale Is Individuals
who ware w.gc-arrars in wave 3 ad self-employed In wave 9. flgurc In parentheses art standard deviation.
  Man onodidonal en the individual being antis with spouse present
  Sum of ined Income of IndIvidual and spouse pins the nS Income of the spouse.
4Method of cainjiadon explained In text. Due to missing Information, this variable could cot be consuucted for 7 pa of
the sample.
                                         TABLE 4.2
                      Linear Probabllfty Modc of R&th Insunnce SIstrn

         VARIABLE                                        VARIABLE (conCd)

SELF                0.0883                     OCC5                           0.04870
                    (0.00717)                                                (0.007805)
AGE                 0.01035                    MANUF                         .0.06238
                    (0.00137)                                                (0.005423)
AGE2                .0.0001273                 HOME                          .0.07029
                    (0.000017)                                               (0.005473)
EDUC                .0.008861                  TENURE                        .0.002553
                    (0.000906)                                               (0.3306)
BLACK                0.03278                   CHILD                          0.003307
                    (0.007235)                                               (0.01084)
SPOUSEWK            -0.04202                   KIDAGEI-2                      0.01032
                    (0.006436)                                               (0.007473)
IUDNUM               0.002559                  KIDAGE3-5                      .0.006236
                    (0.002545)                                                (0.006139)
METRO               .0.ó1236                   FEMALE                         -0.02634
                    (0.004754)                                                (0.005062)
UNION               -0.07652                   MARRIED                        4.001381
                    (0.005614)                                                (0.008300)
EARNINGSxIO4        -5.67                      PREVMAR                        0.02122
                    (0.565)                                                   (0.008255)
HOURS               -0.0000633                 CONSTANT                        0.1737
                    (0.00000940)                                              (0.02602)
FAMINCxIO4          -2.85
                    (0397)                     N                              21.469
                     0.02318                    •
R102                                               Dq.a'_dait variable equals one if the Individual was
                    (0.005856)                 covered by no health innnnce plant all in Wave 3 of the
REG3                 °()
                    (0.
                                               SIPP. and       oth&wise. SELF - 1 if the individual was
                                               self-employed, andwo    otherwise. Other variables art
                                               defined in Table 4.1. Numbers in parentheses axe standard
RE04                 0.06237                   ClOtS.
                    (0.006296)
0CC                 .0.02548
                    (0.006039)
0CC)                 0.05809
                    (0.007836)
OCCA                 t05094
                    (0.008120)
                                         TABLE 4.3
                                  Mans S the rsm D.te

EMPL&N (a I, if employer-ptovided insuxncc)              0.688
                                                        (0.463)
SPISN     (at• if spouse employet-pTovided insunoce)     0.355
                                                        (0.4783

EMPLAN x SPLAN                                           0.248
                                                        (0.432)
AGE                                                     36.3
                                                        (10.4)
AGE2                                                    1428
                                                        (832)
EDUC (yen, of education)                                 12.6
                                                        (2.40)
FEMALE Ni. if female)                                    0.449
                                                        (0.497)
BLACK (—1, ilbIrk)                                       0.3)4
                                                        (0.464)
MARRIED (a I. if cnarncd and spouse present)             0.752
                                                        (0.432)
HOME(—I. if bomeower)                                    0.613
                                                        (0.487)
KIDNUM (number of childrea under IS)                     1.12
                                                        (1.19)
KIDAGEO-2     (a I. if child aged 0-2)                   0.179
                                                        (0.383)
KIDAGE3-5 (I If child aged 3-5)                          0.193
                                                        (0.395)
REG2 (—I. If Notth Central)                              0.222
                                                        (0.420)
REG3 (I   if South)                                     0.446
                                                        (0497)
RE04 (—1,11 West)                                        0.151
                                                        (0.358)
REG5(—I, (Masks or Hawaii)                               0.00327
                                                        (0.057))
REG6 (—I. ifforelgucounuy)                               0.00392
                                                        (0.0625)
                                 TABLE 4,3 (contInued)
                                Mean, is the PSID Data

0CC (CI. if pmfessional)                                  0.286
                                                          (0.45 2)

0CC (1. if nles)                                          0.214
                                                          (0.4 10)

OCC4 (1. if blue-collar)                                  0343
                                                          (0.475)

UNION (-1. if union membership or contract)                0.201
                                                          (0.400)

MANUP (—I. if manufacturing)                               0.250
                                                          (0.433)

LN(EARN) (log of earned income in 1984)                    9.52
                                                          (0.839)
LNOIOUPS) (los of bows in 1984)                            7.54
                                                          (0.357)
FAMINC (family income in 1984)                            35.369
                                                         (Th,912)
SHOURS (spouse hours in 1984)                              1154
                                                          (1,048)
TENURE (months with current employer, 1984)               87.4
                                                         (87.6)
LIFEINS (= I. if employer life insurance)                  0.564
                                                          (0.496)
DENTAL (—1. ii emploverdetual plan)                        0,447
                                                          (0.497)

PENSION (—1.11 pension plan)                               0534
                                                          (0,499)
NIGHTS (nights in hospital, self and spouse, 1984)         8.72
                                                         (13.4)
NIGHTS x SPLAN                                             5.50
                                                         (11.5)
HLOST (hours of work lost. .elf and spouse, 1984)        139.1
                                                         (291.0)

HLOST x SPLAN                                             58.8
                                                         (l99
000DHLTH      (1,if good health)                           0.639
                                                          (0.480)
                              TABLE 43    Ccoatinued)
                              Mans In the PSID Data
000DKLTh x SPLAN                                              0.238
                                                             (0.426)

WORSENLTH (1. ifbeajth wont 1982-SI)                          0.0939
                                                             (0.292)

WORSE}LLTh SPLAN                                              0.0264
                                                             (0.160)



N                                                             4588

    Means are taken from the 1984 wave of the PSID. Figmes in parembeses nit   scandard
&vkns.
                                             Table 5.!
                Logft Analysis of Tr,nsttons (ruin Wage Earnings to Entreprtneunhlps
VARIABLE                         (1)             (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

EMPPIAN                        -0.6398         -0.6422
                               (0.1499)        (0.1901)

SN_AN                                           0.1506                                       0.3 296
                                               (0.2359)                                      (0.2422)

EMPPLANXSPLAN                                   0.!570
                                               (0.2805)
BED                                                                                          0.005376
                                                                                            (0.007821)

BEDXSPLAN                        —               —-               ---            ---         0.007334
                                 .—              —                ---            ---        (0.01839)

AGE                            0.09242         0.09169        0.1601           0.05286       0.05340
                              (0.04663)       (0.0469!)      (0.07632)        (0.06315)     (0.06330)

AGE'                          .0.001075       -0.001067       -0.002107       -0.0005175    -0,5274
                              (0.0005855)     (0.0005883)    (0.001005)       (0.0007663)   (0.0037681)
EDUC                           0.07900         0.08016         0.1482          0.03442       0.03594
                              (0.02912)       (0.02918)       (0.04595)       (0.03757)     (0.03771)
FEMALE                        -0.6843         -0.7039         -0.4179         -0.9672       -1.005
                              (0.1589)        (0.1601)       (0.2421)         (0.2254)      (0.2270)

BLACK                         -1.051          -1.059          -2.291          -0.5054       -0.5119
                              (0.3896)        (0.3897)        (1.012)         (04264)       (0.4265)
MARRIED                        0.6616          0.6552          0.7803          0.5080        0.4862
                              (0.2654)        (0.2663)        (0,4212)        (0,3426)      (0.3438)
PREy. MAR                      0.2532          0.2626          0.3235          0.1186        0.1255
                              (0.2829)        (0.2832)        (0.4422)        (0.3650)      (0.3651)
SPC USE WIC                    0.1696          0.09964         0.2263          0,09797       0.03669
                              (0.1781)        (0.1876)        (0.3156)        (0.2244)      (0.2351)
KID NUM                       -0.09373        -0.09671        -0.1549         .0.08097      .0.09024
                              (0.07629)       (0.07652)       (0.1245)        (0.1009)      (0.1017)
METRO                         -0.2223         .0.2279         -0.03)33        -Cr 3998      -('.4 7
                              (0.1367)        (0.13GB)        (0.2158)        (0.1785)      (0.1790)
UNION                         -0.7256         .0.7260         -0.3371         .0.8644       -6.8672
                              (0.2103)        (0.2104)        (0.4089)        (0.2468)      (0.2470)
LN(EARN)                      0.2246           0.2304          0.3926          0.04466       0.06217
                              (0.1298)        (0.1299)        (0.1858)        (0.1831)      (0.1831)

LN(HOUPS)                     .0.2019         -0.2106         .0.3096         .0.2672       -0.2838
                              (0.1819)        (0.2819)        (0.2401)        (0.3137)      (0.3127)
FAMO4Cz io                    -7.31          -11.7           -18.0             2.11         4.40
                             (17.9)          ('8.7)          (25.8)          (25.8)         (27.5)
REG2                           0.1379          0.2444          0.2790          0.07163       0.08506
                              (0.1858)        (0.1859)        (0.3068)        (0.2356)      (0.2360)
                                                Table 5.2 (continued)
                      Logit Analyses of Transitions from Wage Earnings to EotrtpnneonhiW
                                          (I)              (2)              (3)              (4)               (5)

REG3                                   0.2061           0.2)65           0.5066            0.02802           03532
                                      (0.1779)         (0.1783)         (0.2935)          (0.2269)          (02273)
REG4                                   0.3335           0.3415          0.6539            0.1537            0.1552
                                      (0.1894)         (0.1897)         (0.3068)          (0.2470)          (02473)
0CC                                    0.1209           0.1172           0.3863           .0.04114          .0.04893
                                      (0.1674)         (0.1676)         (0.2846)          (0.2119)          (0.2122)

OCC3                                   0.03274          0.03309          0.3806           -0.1940           0.2065
                                      (0.2441)         (0.2443)         (0.3500)          (0.3719)          (0.372!)
OCC4                                  0.2282            0.2237           0.9274           .0.2805           -0.2932
                                      (0.2262)         (0.2265)         (0.3669)          (0.3030)          (0.3031)

0CC                                   .0.2768          .0.2829          .0.1905           .03629            .0.3902
                                      (0.2469)         (0.2474)         (0.4129)          (0.3173)          (0.3182)

MANUP                                 .0.2803          .0.2848          .0.2663           .0.2967           -0.3020
                                      (0.258!)         (0.1682)         (0.3534)          (0.1948)          (0.1947)

HOUSE                                 .0.07522         .0.09024         .0.07979          .0.02731          .0.04233
                                      (0.1526)         (0.1537)         (0.238!)          (0.2023)          (0.2021)

TENURE                                .0.05297         .0.05225         .0.08423          .0.04496          .0.04426
                                      (0.01222)        (0.01213)        (0.02768)         (0.01376)         (0.01377)
DIVORCE                                0.1743           0.2756           0.1277            0.1923            0.1902
                                      (0.2750)         (0.275!)         (0.4250)          (0.3661)          (0.3661)
WED                                    0.5976           0.5999           0.6946            0.481)            0.4833
                                      (0.2576)         (0.2577)         (0.3842)          (0.3532)          (0.3534)
NEWCHILD                              .0.2020          .0.234!          .0.4706           4.06576           .0.06606
                                      (0.2142)         (0.2143)         (0.3546)          (0.2727)          (0.2723)

IUDAGE<1                       .       0.04592          0.02810          0)049             0.04746           0.01147
                                      (0.2823)         (0.2827)         (0.4542)          (0.3665)          (0.3684)

KIDAOEI.2                             0.33 10           0.3300          -0.02036            .5095            0.5122
                                      (0.2857)         (0.1854)         (0.3127)          (0.2325)          (0.2323)
KIDAOE3.5                             -0.07574          .0.07366          0.2267           -0.3030           .0.2957
                                      (0.1764)          (0A764)          (0.2607)          (0.2459)          (0.2460)
CONSTANT                                4.420            .6.406         . .9654             -3.275           .3.320
                                       (1.113)           (1.115)          (1.578)          (2.152)           (2.153)


LOGLIKELIHOOD                          -1296:6           .2295.6          -5045             .774.1           -7723

N                                       11.995           11.993            3.890            8.103             8.103



 to no column, the   left-band side variable I, the log of the odds of making a nnsition from wage.earning to self
enioync.     The results In columns (I) and (2) mit   for the cite simple. The column (3) result, mt for the saç!e   of
IndlyWusis who did not have an eeç,loyer.provided instance plan, and those in columns (4) and (5) n for individuals
who had an etnployer.ptovlded pta Figuns In pannthesa are standard cots. Vaflabln sit deAnS in TaMe 4.1.
                                                                              Table 5.2
                                                          Alternative Measursa at ExpectS Health Care Cost?
NUMCOV                       0.001346           P4134                 0.01485           EXP4                        DM000394        EXPI2                     0.0000131
                            (0.1020)                                 (0.01781)                                      (0.0000433)                              (0.0000269)
SPLAN                        0.5942             SPLAN                 0.3175            SPLAN                       0.3022          SPLAN                     0.3103
                            (0.4770)                                 (0.2374)                                       (0.2389)                                 (0.2446)
NUMCOV'SPLAN                -0.1009             NTS4'SPL.AN           0.08367           EXP4SPLAN                    0.0002075      EXPI2SPLAN                0.000048
                            (0.1640)                                 (0.04916)                                      (0.0001245)                              (0.0000721)

p                            0.406              p                     0.0461            p                           0.0465          p                         0.327

CIl1I..DDIS                  .0.3810            DOCI2                 0.003958          NEWC1IILD                   .0.2246         PREDEXP                   0.0000879
                             (0.2254)                                (0.01045)                                      (0.3293)                                  (0.000039)
SPLAN                         0.3406            SPLAN                 0.2244            SPLAN                        0.2717         SPLAN                     0.6394
                             (0.2381)                                (0.2686)                                       (0.2505)                                  (0i065)
CHTWDIS'SPL&IN                0.5169            DOCI2'SPLAN           0.01484           NEWCHILD'SPLAN               0.5745          PREDEXPSPLAN             -0.000094
                             (1.270)                                 (0.01555)                                      (0.5458)                                  (0.000166)

p                            0.413              p                     0.154             p                           0.323           p                         0.035

000DHLW                      0.1897             DOC4                  0.005406          P47512                      0.004837
                            (0.2241)                                 (0.02227)                                      (0.01 153)

SPLAN                         0.04991           SPLkN                 0.2804            SPLAN                        0.3229
                             (0.4719)                                (0.2595)                                       (0,2420)
GOODHLTH4SPLAN               0.39)1             DOC4'SPLAN            0.02168           WTSI2'SPLAN                  DM1105
                             (0.5060)                                (0.03484)                                      (0.03120)

p                            OAR                p                     0.323             p                            0.377


   These ate the coefficients irons a sesies of Ingit models in which the left-hand side variable Is the log of the odds of making a transition from wage taming to sell-
employment, and the other right-hand side variables are the some as in column (4)01 Table 5.1. flgures in parentheses are standard errors1 and p is the signilicassce
level of a Joint test of Use hypothesis that all three coefficients are zero. Variables are drOned in Table 4.1. The sample used to estimate the equation with PR EDEX P
has about 5 percent fewer observations than the rest of the equations because some of the observations lacked data on family characteristics that were required to geitcralc
the predicted espenditure amounts.
                                                                            Table 5.3
                                                         AlternatIve Manures of Expected IlSth Care Costs
                                                            (No Other Covarlata In Transition Equation)'
NUMCOV                      0.08125            NTS4                   0.01921            EXP4                     0.0000491       EXPI2                     0.000016
                           (0.05591)                                 (0.01830)                                   (0.0000438).                              (0.0000263)
SPLAN                       0.7001             SPLAN                  0.2186             SPLAN                    0.2105          SPL.AN                    0.2153
                           (0.3797)                                  (0.1973)                                    (0.1989)                                  (0.2038)
NUMCOV'SPLAN               .0.1891             NTS4'SPLAN             0.04650            EXP4'SPLAN               0.0001132       EXPI2'SPLAN               0.0000289
                           (0.1405)                                  (0.04801)                                   (0.0001207)                               (0.0000667)

p                           0.235              p                     (3.297             p                         0.291           p                         0,534

C1IILDDIS                  .0.6417             DOCI2                 0,006459            PIEWCIIILD               0.1390          BED                       0.00507
                           (0.7163)                                  (0.0011827)                                 (0.2953)                                  (0.007277)
SPLAN                       0,2283             SPLAN                  0.1415            SPLAN                     0,1726          SPLAN                     0.2262
                           (0.1969)                                  (0.2271)                                    (0.2109)                                  (0.2015)
CHILDDIS'SPLkN              0.6826             DOCI2SPLAN             0.009855          NEWCHILD'SPL              0.4576          BEDSPLAN                  0.005676
                           (1.253)                                   (0.01412)          AN                       (0.5353)                                  (0.01751)

p                           0.479              p                      0.298             p                         0.353           p                         0.522

000DHLTH                    0,4123             DOC4                   0.009114           NTSI2                    0.005904        PREDBXP                   0.0000876
                           (0.2113)                                  (0.01949)                                   (0.01171)                                 (0.0000324)

SPLAN                       0.01195            SPLAN                  0.1854            SPLAN                     0.2239          SPL.AN                    0.4826
                           (0,4519)                                  (0.2173)                                    (0.2008)                                  (0.4456)
GOODIILTh'SPLAN             0.2928             DOC4'SPLAN             0.01541            NTSI2'SPLAN              0.01018         PREDEXPSPLAN              -0.000112
                           (0.5006)                                  (0.03180)                                   (0.02874)                                 (0.000149)

p                           0.0393             p                     0.488               p                        0.576           p                         0.0909

  These us the coefficients from a aeties of logil models in which the left-hand side variable ia ihe log or the odds or making a transition from wage taming to self-
employment1 and the only other right-hand aide variable Ia a nsiant. Figures in parentheses are standard errors, and p Is the aignifleance level of a join; teal of the
hypothesis that all these coefficIents are zero. Variables are defined in Table 4.1, and the sample in Table 5.2.
                                                           Table 5.4
                                                  HaItlt lnsunnct Mandate
                          (1)                                            (2)                                     (3)
MAND84                  0.0195               MAND83                     0.0386          MAND82                 0.1128
                       (0.1364)                                        (0.1429)                               (0.1638)
SPLAN                   0.4154               SPLAN                      0.4146          SPLAN                  0.4133
                       (0.1727)                                        (0.1727)                               (0.1726)

P                       0.0544               p                          0.0529          p                      0.0432
M0S84                   0.0120               MOSS3                      0.0129          140582                 0.0145
                       (0.0139)                                        (0.0155)                               (0.0162)
SPLAN                   0.4140               SPLMJ                      0.4136          SPLAN                  0.4147
                       (0.1729)                                        (0.1721)                               (0.1727)
p                       0.0412               p                         0.0389           p                      0.0367
MANDS4                 .0.04844              MAJ'JD83                  .0.0550          MANDB2                 0.0938
                       (0.1651)                                        (0.1747)                               (0.1967)
SPLAN                   0.3517               SPL.AN                     0.3386          SPLAN                  0.4019
                       (0.1933)                                        (0.1905)                               (0.1844)
MAND84SPLAIJ            0.2078               MAND83SPLAN                0.2803          MAND82SPLAN            0.05733
                       (0.2769)                                        (0.2879)                               (0.3242)

p                       0.0913               p                         0.0729           p                     (0.096])
140584                 .0.002304             M0S83                     .0.003381        140382                 0.0016
                       (0.02021)                                       (0.02031)                              (0.0209)
SPL.A14                 0.3352               SPLAN                      0.3356          SPLAN                  0.3642
                       (0.1843)                                        (0.1823)                               (0.1793)
MOS84SPLAN              0.03845              MOS83SPLAN                 0.0426          MOS82SPLAN             0.034 10
                       (0.03008)                                       (0.0303)                               10.03089)

p                       0.0382               p                         0.0292           p                      0.0416

  These wt the coetticians from £ sale of Inca idds In which the le*•band side variable Is the log of she odds of making a
insisidon bum wage earning to se1fcmpIoymem. and the other righl4iand side variables n the same at In column (4) of Table S
MANDS4 - 211 In 1984 the Individuars state S..A that thrma employees be allowed in pwthasc health Insurance, and rert
otherwise; MANDS3 and MANDS2 are defined umlogously for 1983 and 1982. 140584 Is the number of months of connge
mandated by law in 1984; 140583 and 140582 ate defined analogously. Figure m pareathesa are standard axon, and pu the
signilianee level oft joint ted thai the tee coeffidenas ate equal to zero.
                                                     Table 5.5
                 Logit Ans1)C of Tnnsltlons from Wage Earning ioEtrepreoeunbip In tbe PSIIY


VARJABLE                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                     (4)
EM PLAN                  0.8335               -0.3787              .03594                     —
                                              (0.2355)                                        —-
                        (0.2002)                                   (0.2749)

SPI..AN                   —.                                       .006150               -0.3122
                          —                                        (0.2856)              (0.3323)

EMPLAN z SPLAN            —                     —                  .0.05491                   —-
                          —                     —                  (0.3602)                   —

NIGHTS                    —                     .—                    .—                 -0.01364
                          —                     —                     —                  (0.02083)
NIGHTS z SPLAN            —                     —                     —                   0.008682
                          .—                    —                     —                  (0.02022)
AGE                     -0.0394.4             -0.02623             -0.02588              -0.07854
                        (0.07135)             (0.07082)            (0.07%)               (0. 1059)

AGE'                     0.0007412             0.5633               0.555                 0.001190
                        (0.0003347)           (0.$79l)             (0.0008795)           (0.001311)
EDUC                     0.05556               0.07926              0.07951               0.03586
                        (0.04541)             (0.04599)            (0.04606)             (0.06652)
FEMALE                  .0.7948               4.7566               -0.7533               -0.3978
                        (0.2203)              (0.2232)             (0.2244)              (0.4115)
SLACK                   -0.7831               -0.7082              4.7010                .0.6804
                        (0.2531)              (0.2566)             (0.2373)              (0.3966)
MARRIED                 4.1062                -0.1160              -0.3002                0.1002
                        (0.2671)              (0.2703)             (0.2730)              (0.4204)
HOME                     0.04148               0.07436              0.07682              .0.1877
                        (0.2096)              (0.2100)             (0.2102)              (0.2888)
KIDNUM                   0.1521                0.1367               0.1341                0.2055
                        (0.09267)             (0.09334)            (0.09361)             (0.1337)
ICIDAGEO-2              -0.6988               -0.7145              -0.7167               .0.8065
                        (0.2943)              (0.02963)            (0.2964)              (0.3842)
KIDAGE3-5               -0.2504               -0.2315              -0.2335               4.01891
                        (0.2607)              (0.2620)             (0.2620)              (0.3424)
REG2                    -0.6149               .0.5743              4.5758                -0.7242
                       (0.2803)               (0.2120)             (0.2822)              (0.4141)
REG3                   4.1479                 -0.08292             .0.03724               0.05166
                       (0.2346)               (0.2390)             (0.2393)              (0.3298)
REG4                   -0.2541                4.17%                -0.1811                0.2289
                       (0.2771)               (0.2812)             (0.2813)              (0.3560)
RE-OS                  -10.29                 10.29                 10.28                -9.998
                                                 Table 5.5    (contInued)
                  Iogit Analyse of TrahIoes (root Wage Earning to Ectrtprtneunhip to the PSUY
VARIABLE                    (I)                      (2)                       (3)                        (4)

REG6                       0.5706                   0.5116                   0.5262                     -8.863
                          (1.102)                  (1.114)                  (1.114)                    (18.38)

0CC                       -0.03042                  0.0005292                0.6490                      0.3861
                          (0.3066)                 (0.3104)                 (0.3110)                    (0.5857)

0CC                        0.1199                   0.1343                   0.1352                      0.2111
                          (0.2955)                 (0.2982)                 (0.2991)                    (0.5859)

OCC4                      .0.1480                  -0.1660                  .0.1644                     .0L06721
                          (0.2947)                 (0.2960)                 (0.2970)                    (0.5936)
UNION                     .0.8920                  .04893                    .0A904                     -0.40(X)
                          (0.3637)                 (0.3933)                  (0.3733)                   (0.4348)
MANtlE                    .0.4760                  .0.4332                   .0.4367                    -0.2873
                          (0.2538)                 (0.2570)                  (0.2577)                   (0.3022)

LN(EARN)                   0.08466                  0.1771                    0.1778                     0.3629
                          (0.1358)                 (0.1402)                  (0.1403)                   (0.2617)

LN(HOURS)                  0.6030                   0.5811                   0.5772                      0.7817
                          (0.2743)                 (0.2704)                  (02703)                    (0.5229)
FAMINCx 10-'               0.006810                 0.007427                  0.00743!                   0.006-411
                          (0.003035)               (0.002933)                (0.002960)                 (0.002859)
SHOURS x 10-'              0.1078                   0.1111                    0.1292                     0.2913
                          (0.1024)                 (0.1028)                  (0.1099)                   (0.1514)

TENURE                    .0.006374                .0.004127                 .0.004134                  .0.004805
                          (0.001503)               (0.001514)                (0.001515)                 (0.001975)
LWEINS                                             -0.05898                  .0.05159                    0.1246
                            —                      (0.2260)                  (0.2266)                   (0.2832)

DENIAL                                             .0.5209                   43252                      .0.549!
                                                   (0.2384)                  (0.2386)                   (0.2602)

PENSION                                            -1.059                    .1.059                     .0.884!
                                                   (0.2334)                  (0.2333)                   (0.267!)
CONSTANT                  -7.566                   .8.796                    .8.784                     -1170
                          (2.526)                  (2.519)                   (2.518)                    (4.530)



LOGLDLIHOOD              -591.4                   -575.3                    .575.2                     .318.40
N                           4588                     1583                     4588                        3157

• In eath coha the left-haS side variable Is the log of the odds of making a tnnsition from wage-earning to sell-
cmploymt. The results In column (I). (2). and (3) sin for the aSre sample. The column (4)    results   are for the sample Of
Individuals who hat an cmploytr.ptovldcd lnsanncz plan. Variables are defined In Table 4.3
                                                    Table 5.6
                     Mternatlve Msures ot Expected Haith Can Costs to the PSIDS
                                              (I)                                  (2)
                                            CONTROLS                             NO CONTROLS

SPLAN                                       -0.5230                               .0.1632
                                            (0.5735)                              (0.5433)

000DHLTH                                     0.2953                                0.6282
                                            (0.3664)                              (0.3438)

SPLAJ4 x000DHLTH                             0.3723                                0.1543
                                            (0.6204)                              (0.6048)

p                                            0.51                                 0.07
SPLAN                                       -0.2383                               .0.01433
                                            (0.2950)                              (0.2535)
WORSENLIB                                    0.4069                                0.4571
                                            (0.4368)                              (0.4144)
SPLAN iWORSEI3LTH                           406546                                .0.03446
                                            (0.7787)                              (0.7472)

p                                            0.40                                 0.68
SPLAN                                       43366                                 .0.09181
                                            (0.3186)                              (0.2710)
HLOST                                       -0.0006795                            .0.0021068
                                            (O.9770)                              (0.009323)
SPLAN x HLOST                                0.0008763                             0.0008429
                                            (0.001228)                            (0.001158)

p                                            0.27                                  0.58

   Column (1) conizios 1hz coefficients from a series of regmessions in which the left-band side variable is the
log oldie odds of making a tnnsidon horn wage-caning to self-cmploymern.. and the other flgbl-bznd side
variables art the in a in colt (4)01 Table 5.5. The coin (2) results ate from equations with no
additional right-band aide variables other than a cooslnt.
