NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXATION AND ENDOGENOIJS
GROWI'H IN OPEN ECONOMIES

Nouriel Roubini
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti

Working Paper No. 4881

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge. MA 02138
October 1994

This paper was written while Nouriel Roubini was visiting the Research and Fiscal Affairs
Depariment& at the International Monetary Fund. We are grateful to Willem Buiter, Nick Bull,
Sheetal Chand, Enrique Mendoza and T.N. Srinivasan for extensive discussions, and to seminar
participants at Brown, Harvard, the International Monetary Fund. Universit Libre de Bruxelles

and Yale University for useful suggestions. Nouriel Roubini is grateful to the IMF for its
generous hospitality. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Finance
and Macroeconomics and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors
and not those of the International Monetary Fund or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
1994 by Nouriel Roubini and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #488 1
October 1994

TAXATION AND ENDOGENOUS
GROWTH N OPEN ECONOMIES

ABSTRACT
This paper examines the effects of taxation of human capital, physical capital and foreign

assets in a multi-sector model of endogenous growth. It is shown that in general the growth rate

is reduced by taxes on capital 4 labor (human capital) income. When the government faces
no borrowing constraints and is able to commi: to a given set of present and future taxes, it is
shown that the optimal tax plan involves high taxation of both capital.and labor in the short run.

This allows the government to accumulate sufficient assets to rmance spending without any
recourse to distortionary taxation in the long run. When restrictions to government borrowing

and lending are imposed, the model implies that human and physical capital should be taxed
similarly.

Nouriel Roubini
Department of Economics
Yale University
P0 Box 208268
New Haven,- cr 06520-8258
and NBER

Gian Maria Milesi-Fen-etti
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington. DC 20431

I INTRODUCTION
This paper studies the effects of taxation on economic performance, factor ailocations and capital

flow. 'nd derives implications for the optimal taxation of factors of production (human and physical
capital) in an open economy. In particular, it stresses the impact of factor income taxation on the private

sector's decisions to accumulate physical capital and improve labor efficiency through human capital

accumulation. It builds on three related strands of literature: the literature on endogenous economic

growth, the literature on the effects of international taxation on capital flows, and the literature on
dynamic optimal taxation. The positive analysis in this paper examines the effects of labor and capital
income taxation on long-run growth; the normative analysis addresses the question of the optimal path
of taxes on labor income, capital income and the income from foreign assets.
Following the seminal work of Romer (1986) the literature on economic growth has experienced

a revival. Theoretical studies have developed models in which the rate of growth of an economy is
determined endogenously, instead than by exogenous faätors such as preferences, population growth and

technical progress.' For example, Lucas (1988) considered human capital as an additional engine of
economic growth, together with physical capital. This literature suggests that distortions (such as non
lump-sum taxation) will affect the rate of erowth of income, consumption and capital accumulation in an
endogenous growth set-up, while they have only an effect on the kth of such variables in a neoclassical
exogenous growth model.

Traditionally, the normative analysis of optimal taxation of factor incomes was developed in
neoclassical models of exogenous growth. One of the most remarkable results of this literature was

obtained by Chamley (1985, 1986) and Judd (1985). These authors considered an infinite-horizon
exogenous growth models with a representative agent deriving utility from consumption of final goods
and leisure time, and showed that, in such models, the optimal tax rate on capital income is zero in the

long run. Given an exogenous stream of public expenditures, the optimal tax plan consists in taxing
capital income heavily in the short run, since the supply of capital is relatively inelastic; in the long run,
however, capital income tax rates discourage capital accumulation: expenditures should he financed only

with taxes on labor income since labor/leisure (i.e. the individual's time endowment) is the only factor
in fixed supply. This asymmetry between the optimal long run taxation of capital income (zero) and labor

income @ositive) is quite surprising; one should then consider whether the result is robust and under
which conditions it may or may not hold. In particular, it is important to assess whether the ChainleyJudd result hold in models of endogenous growth where both human and physical capital are engines of

Indeed, some of the factors detennining the long-run rate of growth are the same, but they are considered
endcigenous

instead of exogenous.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies
accumulation and growth.

2

-

In such a context, we study the role of the technology for human capital
accumulation; the nature

of the "leisure" activity; and international capital markets in determining the effects oftaxation on long-

run economic growth. We also determine the optimal taxation of human capita], physical capita] and
foreign assets. The key characteristics of our model are the following. First, we considera general set-up
where both physical
human capital can enter in the production of new human capital.2 We are
therefore able to analyze whether and how the direct inclusion of physical capitalinputs in the production

of human capita] affects the results about the effects of taxation of growth and the optima] long run
taxation of factor inco"mes. Second, we study the implications of alternative specifications ofleisure
production for the optimal factor taxation results. Our specification is quite general and includesas sub-

cases the conventional raw time" specification (leisure is the fraction of time that is spent away from

work and study), the "quality time' model (leisure is human capita] times the fraction of the time
endowment that is not spent working or studying), 'home production" (leisure is a non-market good
produced with human and physical capital) and the case of no leisure. Third, we develop an open
economy model that allows us to discuss the optimal taxation factor incomes (including the income from

foreign assets) in a context of international capital mobility.

Our main results, summarized in table I, are the following:
(1) The steady-state growth rate of the economy in models with no leisure is qualitatively similar

to that in models where the leisure activity is modeled as "quality time" or "home production". This is
because in the last two cases leisure is a non-market activity produced with constant returns to scale to
reproducible factors. Leisure can therefore be reinterpreted as a non-market
consumption good;
consequently, the model is substantially equivalent to one in which there is no leisure.
(2) Under the three specifications for leisure described above (no leisure, quality time and home
production), the human capital accumulation function has important implications for the dependence of

growth rates on factor income taxes. In particular, if human capital is produced with both human and
physical capital (with CRS in the two inputs), the steady state growth rate of the economy and the real

rateof interest depend on both labor and capital income tax rates. In this case, a zero long-run taxation
of both capital
labor income will be optimal. However, if human capital accumulation uses human

capital only (with CR5), the steady state growth rate of the economy will not depend on either factor
2

See Rebelo (1991) and Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1993) for similar specifications of the human
capital
accumulation equations. Our formulation includes, as subcases, the specification Ia Lucas (1990) where only
effective labor enters in the production of human capital.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

3

income tax rate.
(3) When human capital is produced only with human capital, long-nan growth does not depend

on tax rates but the optimal long nan taxation of labor and capital will depend on the model of leisure
considered.

If leisure is modeled as 'quality time' or home production', the growth rate of the

economy does not depend on factor taxes but the steady state physical to capital ratio depends on both

tax rates. Since tax rates on both factors create such an intertemporal distortion, the optimal long nan
tax on both human and physical capital will be zero in these cases. In the model without leisure, the tax

on physical capital affects the steady state physical to human capital ratio but the tax on human capital
doe,s not. In this sense, the tax on labor is lump-sum and it is therefore optimal to tax only labor in the
long run while the tax on physical capital is zero.

(4) Under a residence-based taxation system, the tax on net foreign assets can he derived
residually once the tax rates on domestic factor incomes are set. Specifically, the tax rate on labor affects

the equilibrium real after-tax rate of return on physical capital. Consequently, the tax rate on foreign

assets will depend on both the tax rate on capital and an labor income. The optimal long-run tax on
foreign assets is shown to be zero whenever the optimal tax on physical capital is zero.
(5) If the government has to balance its budget in every period because of borrowing and leading

restrictions, capital and labor income should be taxed at the same positive rate in the tong run whenever

it is optimal to have zero long run taxation of labor and capital income with an unconstrained
government.3

(6) When the leisure activity is modeled as 'raw time', the balanced growth rate of the economy

depends on both labor and capital income tax rates regardless of the way the human accumulation
technology is specified. This dependence of the growth rate on both tax rates implies the optimal long

run tax on both human and physical capital will be zero in the 'raw time' model.'
In summary, our results imply that the optimal long run tax on both capital

labor income is

zero (or symmetric if borrowing is not allowed) under very genera! conditions regarding the production

See Roubini and Sala-i-Martin (1992a, 1992b) for optimal taxation analyses in which the government behavior
is restricted to a balanced budget in every period.

In order to minimize the number of models and cases considered, in this version of the paper we do not
formally consider the case of leisure as 'raw time'. The positive and normative results about this case can be found

in Milesi Ferretti and Roubini (1994). It can also be observed that the case of leisure as raw time' with human
capital produced with human capital only correzponds to the model in Lucas (1990) While Lucas did not derive
the implications of big model for the optimal taxation of human capital, our results imply that the optimal long run
tax on capital
labor income is zero in the Lucas (1990) model.

Tc.xation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

4

of human capital and the specification of the leisure activity. The

only case in which the long i-un tax
on capital is zero while the one on labor is positive is that of a model without leisure and with human
capital produced only with human capital.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2 we discuss the existing literature on

taxation, growth and international capital markets. In section 3 we present our general setup, and in
Section 4 we solve for the competitive market equilibrium. In Section 5 we discuss the conditions under
which the steady-state growth rate of the economy and factor allocations depend on the tax rates on
capital and labor income. Section 6 presents the solution to the government's optimal taxationproblem.
Section 7 briefly discusses some policy implications, and Section 8 concludes.

2. A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE

The modern literature on the optimal taxation of factors of production is based on the seminal
work of Frank Ramsey (1927). Ramsey studied the problem face-I by a government that needs to raise

a given amount of revenue by using commodity taxation. The gtvernment would like to raise revenue
as "efficiently' as possible, but needs to take into account that the behavior of the private sector isgoing
to he influenced by the tax system in place. Formally, the problem is solved by determining the optimal

behavior of private agents for a given tax system, and then choosing the tax system that maximizes

private agents' welfare, subject to the constraints imposed by private agents' behavior and by the
government's revenue needs.
Building on Ramsey's work, Chamley (1985, 1986) and Judd (1985) showed that in neoclassical
models of exogenous growth the optimal long-run tax on capital is zero, while the optimal long-run tax

on labor income is positive; capital should be taxed heavily in the short run, when it is in relatively

inelastic supply. These results about the asymmetric long-run taxation of labor and capital may he
significantly modified in models in which both human and physical capital are engines ofendogenous

growth. In this regard, Lucas (1990) presented a model of endogenous growth and showed that it is
optimal not to tax capital income in the long run even when human capital accumulation is an additional

source of long-mn growth. He also showed that when the time devoted to human capital accumulation
is exogenous, the Chamley.Judcj result is obtained again — all !ong-run taxation should fall on labor
income. However, he does not derive the implications of his model for the optimal long run taxation of
labor income when the accumulation of human capital is endogenous.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies
Recently,

5

a number of authors have stafled to address this issue! Jones, Manuelli and Rossi

(1993a, l993b) extend the specification of Lucas (1990) by modeling human capital as a non-market good

and by assuming that a flow of final market goods, in addition to effective human capital, enters in the
production of human capital. They show that, if human capital is accumulated with constant returns to
its reproducible inputs Quman capital and market goods), both capital and labor income taxes should be
zero in the long run. Bull (1993a) argues that this result is obtained also in a two-sector model in which
human capital can be "produced" using physical capital, human capital and intermediate goods as inputs,

and/or accumulated through learning-by-doing in the final goods sector. Since government expenditure
is positive, the implementation of this tax plan requires high short-run taxation on both factors, in order
to accumulate government assets that will finance long-run government spending.
Our model contributes to this literature by studying the role of the technology for human capital

accumulation, the nature of "leisure" and international capital markets in determining the effects of
taxation on long-run economic growth.

Regarding the first issue, it is clear that the presence of human capital as a reproducible factor
modifies the traditional Chamley-Judd results. If human and physical capital were symmetric goods, both
perfectly substitutable with consumption and accumulated through savings, the impact of capita! and labor

taxation would of course be similar (Bull l993a and the first model in Jones, Manuelli and Rossi l993a).

In this case there is nothing peculiar about human capital: it is just a second capital good that is
reproducible with the same technology as physical capital. Assuming that human and physical capital are

perfectly symmetric is, however, restrictive. Human capital differs from physical capital in at least three

dimensions: (I) human capital is not substitutable with consumption; (2) it is a non-market good; and
(3) its accumulation depends on a production fttnction with inputs possibly different from those entering
in the production of final goods and physical capital.

Concerning point (I), while most growth models speci' physical capital as being perfectly
substitutable with consumption (final goods can either be consumed or accumulated in physical capital),

it is more realistic to assume that human capital cannot be consumed (we can consume cars instead of
using them to produce final goods but we cannot "consume our brain").

Concerning point (2), human capital accumulation should be thought as a non-market activity

A number of other contributions do not direetlyconsider the optimal taxation of factor incomes hut study the
effects of exogenous changes in tax rate on labor and capital income on the growth rate of the economy and the
welfare of the representative agect. These contributions include Rebelo (1990), King and Rebelo (1990), Scokey
and Rebe!o (1993) and Trostel (1993).

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

6

whose inputs are not subject to factor income taxation. Specifically, while the labor income
deriving from

the time spent in the production of final goods can be taxed, the time input (and implicit labor income)

used in production of human capital is usually not taxed. Similarly, any implicit income of physical
capital goods entering in the production of human capital cannot be taxed either (for example, a capital
good such as a computer used in the production of final goods earns an income that is taxable hut the
same computer used for increasing one's own human capital earns an implicit income that is not taxable).
Concerning point (3), the production technology for human capital accumulation may use different

inputs and/or have different capital intensity relative to the production technology for final goods. For
example, Lucas (1988, 1990) assumes that human capital is a non-market good whose accumulation has

only human capital (or effective labor, i.e. a time fraction of human capital)ic its input. While Lucas
assumes that physical capital inputs do not enter in the production of human capital, Rebelo (1991) and

Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1993) consider two-sector models where human capital is produced using
both human and physical capital, with factor intensities possibly different from those for theproduction
of final goods/physical capital. Alternatively, Jones, Manuelli and Rossi (1993a. l993b) consider models
where human capital is a non-market good that is produced with effective human capital and a fljj of
market goods (but no direct physical capital input).6

The second issue regards the role of leisure specification and its implications for the optimal

factor taxation. In all the recent models of optimal factor taxation (Lucas 1990, Jones, Manuelli and
Rossi l993a, l993b and Bull 1993a, 1993b), leisure is considered as a non-market good that requires the

use of 'raw time' only. An older literature, however, considered leisure as a more complex non-market

activity requiring the use of both human and physical capital inputs, in addition to raw time. For
example, in Becker (1965) and Heckman (1976) leisure is modeled as 'quality time" (defined as human

capital times the fraction of the time endowment that is not spent working or accumulating human
capital).' Extending this idea of leisure as being quality time, Greenwood and Hercowitz (199?) model
leisure as a form of 'home production' that uses effective labor and effective physical capital in its

6 This specification of the human capital accumulation goes back to Ben Porath (1967) and has hcen u.ced
recentiy by Trostel (1993) as well.
Suppose that u, and z, are respectively the fraction of the time endowment spent working and accumulating
human capital; then leisure is defined as L, = (I-u, -z,)H,. See Rebelo (1990) for such a lormulation ni leisure as
'effective labor' in an ecdogeaous growth model.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth In Open Economies

7

production.' The idea that leisure might be a physical capital intensive activity makes sense since most

forms of leisure require the use of capital goods (think of video-stereo entertainment, sporting equipment

and so on). Why should the specification of leisure matter? The answer is that when leisure consists of
time off work and education only, it cannot be 'increased" alongside consumption. If, however, it is an
activity that uses reproducible factors, such as human and physical capital, in addition to time, it can be
increased together with consumption; at the same time, the decisions co accumulate human and physical

capital will take into account their impact on the future enjoyment of leisure as well.
Finally, international capital markets are important because domestic investors will consider the

option of investing abroad (and vice versa for foreign investors). Consequently the rate of return that
domestic residents can obtain on foreign assets will affect their decision whether to invest in physical
capital domestically or buy foreign assets. Such a decision is clearly affected by the tax rates on domestic

and foreign capital income. More subtly, it may be influenced by the tax rate on human capital as well
should the latter affect the domestic rate of return on capital.
The literature on taxation and international capita] flows has been developed in a large number
of studies, such as Frenkel, Razin and Sadka (1990) and Ruin and Slentrod (1990). These studies have
stressed the importance of the principle governing taxation of foreign assets and liabilities held by agents

of different countries; residence versus source-based taxation of foreign assets will have very different
implications for the world allocation of savings and investment. A number of recent papers.consider the

positive and some normative effects of taxation on growth in open economy models of endogenous
growth. Rebelo (1992) surveys the literature on endogenous economic growth in open economies; Buiter

and Kletrer (1991) consider the effects of residence-based taxes on savings in a two-country OLG
endogenous growth model; Correia (1992) addresses the issue of optimal taxation of capital income in

an open economy while Ruin md Yuen (1993 a, b) consider a two-country model with human and
physical capita] and endogenous fertility choice. These contributions do not, however, address the issue

of the optimal relative taxation of physical j human capital in models of endogenous growth.
The literature on the effects of taxation on economic growth has examined a number of other

interesting issues that are not addressed in our model. If government expenditure is endogenous and
productive — for example, when it enters in the production function for final or capital goods — the long

Tanñ and lee (1993) go even further in blurring the distinction between consumption of final goods md
leisure by modelling consumption as an activity that always requires the use of time (in a fixed proportion
technology in their model). Benhabib, Rogerson and Wright (1991) distinguish 'home production' from leisure.
and model the latter as raw time.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

8

run optimal tax on capital might not be zero. This issue has been addressed by Barro (1990), Jones,

Manuelli and Rossi (1993a, 1993b), Judd (1990), Zhu (1991) and Corserti (1992).

If there are

externalities in the production of final goods, as in Romer (1987) or in the production of human capital,
as in Lucas (1988), the optimal tax plan might require subsidies to the activities with positive externalities

(see Yuen (1991)). When the rate of time preference is endogenous, Zee (1994) shows that the growth
effects

of a tax on capital income in a standard Ak model are ambiguous. Judd (1990), King (1990).

Chari, Christiano and Kehoe (1991a), Thu (1991) and Corsetti (1992) study optimal taxation in stochastic

settings. In the presence of rents generated by factors in fixed supply (such as labor in models without
leisure) it may be optimal to tax capital in the long run if there are limits on the taxation of rents (Jones,

Manuelli and Rossi 1993b). Finally, the effects of indirect taxation are examined, in Bull (1993a) and
Jones, Manuelli and Rossi (199Th) among others.

3. THE MODEL
We consider a two-sector open economy: a final goods sector that produces consumption goods

and physical capital, and an education sector that produces human capital.' The economy is small, and

takes the world real interest rate as given. Physical capital is perfectly mobile across countries, while
labor (human capital) is immobile.
3.1. Technology

Physical output is produced with a constant returns to scale (CRS) technology that uses human
capital H and physical capital K as inputs. The technology is assumed to take the Cobb-Douglas form:

(I)
where v (u) is the fraction of physical (human) capital devoted to the production of goods. the capital
stock is assunied to depreciate at the rate ô.
Human capital is also produced with a CRS technology that uses both human and physical capital
as inputs, as in Rebelo (1991). It depreciates at a rate 8, equal for simplicity to the rate of depreciation

of physical capitaL The production function is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas as well:

'See Rebelo (1991) and Mulligan and Sal.-i-Martin (1993) for similar two-sectormodel formulations.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth In Open Economies

P, = B(x,K,)' (z,H,) — 611,

9

(2)

where .r (z) is the fraction of physical uman) capital devoted to the accumulation of human capital. In

equations (1) and (2) we have implicitly assumed that the point-in-time technologiec are linear: if a
fraction vol the capital stock is employed in the productionof final goods, the effective capital is vK.
This assumption is not necessary for our results: the crucial assumption is that there are CRS in physical
and human capital, the reproducible factors.'°

3.2. The governmenr

The government needs to finance an exogenously given path of public expenditure, using domestic
bond issues, factor income taxation and taxation of foreign assets, under the residence principle. Without
loss of generality, we assume that the government borrows on]y domestically and that government bonds

are tax-exempt. The instantaneous budget constraint of the government is given by:

E,—rB+G,—7

(3)

where B, are government bonds, r, is their rate of interest and ] is government revenue out of taxation.
In every period, the resource constraint of the economy is given by the income-expenditure identity:
(4)

where I is Gross Domestic Product, C is private consumption, C is government expenditure, F is net
foreign assets and r is the world interest rate.

3.3. Private agents

The economy is inhabited by identical atomistic agents. They choose consumption, investment
and the allocation of their human and physical capital with the purpose of maximizing an intertemporal

utility function:
(Jra

Je"u(C,.L,)dt

(5)

where p is the rate of time preference and Lisa leisure activityN, that could include for example home

'° Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1993) discuss more in detail the role of the point-in-time lcchnologies.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open EconomIes

10

production. This maximization is subject to the constraint on human capital accumulation given by (2)
and an instantaneous budget constraint:

R,t(1 —r,'5vK.R,(1 —-r,M)u,H,-+r,B,÷r'(l -ic)Fy-C,—K, -fl,—P,-5K,

0

(6)

where Hr. 2?", r, r', r' and r" are the rates of return and the tax rates on capital income, labor income
and foreign assets, respectively. Equation (6) simply states that consumption and asset accumulation have
to be financed with net income from capital, labor and current asset holdings. Clearly total tax revenues
Tare equal to r1HrvK + r'R"uH + r"rF.

The leisure activity ("home production") uses time, human and physieal capital as inputs, with
a Cobb-Douglas technology:

L, "[(I

—v,—x,)K]'f(l — ii,

where each individual's time endowment has

For

—z,)ll,]'"

been normalized

(7)

to one.

simplicity, we assume that the instantaneous utility function takes a Constant Interteniporal

Elasticity of Substitution (CIES) form:

u(C,,L3

(CL'-'1

where 8 is the inverse of the intertemporal elasticity of substitution. This functional form has been shown

to be consistent with the existence of a balanced growth path by King, Plosser and Rebelo (1988).

This utility function is similar to the one used in Greenwood and Hercowita (1991). Aspecial
case of this occurs wheny = 0, so that leisure is "quality time", as in Becker (1965), Heckman (1976)
and Rebelo (1991).

3.4. Finns
Firms rent capital from households at the rate of interest Hr and hire labor at the wage rate K'.
They will hire labor and capital up to the point at which their marginal product equals their marginal cost:

!aA

.LfL
u,13

(9)

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open EconomIes

11

a
(10)
u,!!1

4. THE COMPETITIVE EQUILIBRIUM
The representative consumer takes the paths of iK,

iTM

and 9 as given and chooses the paths of

C, K, H, F, B, u, t, x, z to maximize (5) subject to (2) and (6). This case includes as its suheases three
models of leisure: the "borne production" model ( >0 and 0 C yC 1); the "quality time" model (tj >0
and y=O) and the "no leisure" model (ip=0)."
We can define non-human wealth W, = K, + B + F, and re-write (6) as follows:

r, W, -Jr, ÷6 Rf(i — 4r)v]K.Rp(1 — r7)u,H

+

(r'(l

—

r') r,]F,
—

—

C,

14

(II)

Next, we observe that since domestic bonds and foreign assets are perfect substitutes for the consumer,
they should yield the same after-tax rate of return:

r,=r'(l —4')

(12)

This also implies that the consumer's maximization problem can only determine aggregate holdings of

domestic and foreign bonds (B, + F,); the amount of domestic bonds being held is determined by the
supply from the government.
The first-order conditions with respect to C, W, K, H, v, x, ii and z respectively can he cpressed
as follows:
(13)

=Rt(l -rf)-6

(14)

XI

-it! =(1-)B

(15)

z,H,

For the raw time' model of leisure (L = J-u-z) see Milesi-Ferretti and Rouhini (l993)

Taxadon and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

—

12

=

(16)

C,

ñ

'? e'C,'L,'°"=pB$K
'
' z,H,

I —v—x

R,"(1 —r7)H,—

-

(1
e
I —u,—z,

lUZ C'

(17)

(18)

9)

C, LIM_pB( I -$)H,
Zr!!,

The remaining two FOCs are the constraints (2) and (6). Equation (13) states that the shadow price of
consumption (physical capital) must equal the marginal utility of consumption in every period. Equation
(14) is the FOC for capita] accumulation: the rate of change of the shadow
price of consumption must

equal the marginal product of capital net of tax, which must also equal the rate of return on government

bonds. Equation (15) is the corresponding FOC for human capital accumulation, relating the change in

the shadow price of human capita] to its marginal rate of return. Equation (16) and (18) describe the
optimal allocation of physical and human capital respectively between production of market goods and
"home production". Finally, conditions (17) and (19) describe the optimal allocation of physical and
human capital between the "education" sector and home production.
The transversality conditions are:

Iim_,_ X, K 0

(20)

lim_ z,H, = 0
From (12) and (14) it is straightforward to obtain:

r, =r" (I -) =R,'(l

-r)

6

(21)

That is, under residence-based taxation the interest rate on domestic bonds must equal the net after-tax

rate of return on capital and the after-tax rate of return on foreign assets. This result is clearly an
implication of the assumption that in the absence of uncertainty domestic bonds, domestic capital and
foreign assets are perfect substitutes.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

13

Using equations (9), (10) and (16)-(19) we can express the sectora] allocation of factors as a
function

of technology parameters and taxes:

1

lvi;
._iJsi
li_,qz,
t!._.IJJzh1
I—a
1—a y i_,.'1—u,—z,

(22)

According to (22), when the tax on labor income (capital income) rises (falls), the capital/labor ratio in

the sector producing goods rises with respect to the capital/labor ratio in the sector producing human
capita] and with respect to the capital/labor ratio in the home production sector. It is interesting to note
that changes in tax rates do j cause changes in the relative capital intensity between the education sector
and the home production sector, since both these sectors are not directly taxed.
This economy will exhibit a balanced growth path, along which consumption, physical capital and

human capital grow at the same rate, while factor allocations (u, v, x and z) remain constant.' gdifferentiating (13) and using the fact that factor allocations are constant along the balanced growth path,
we obtain:
1

C

O—,(l—8)

(pX)
X

(23)

where time subscripts have been omitted. Along the balanced growth path, the shadow prices of physical

and human capital must decline at the same rate. Equating (13) and (15) and using (9), (10), (17) and
(19) we can determine the physical to human capital ratios in the three sectors along the balanced growth
path:

gill

[D(1-rt(1-r1J
(1

(I

- v -x)K =
—u—z)H

[D2(1

-

(24)

-

where the terms D, are constants involving the technology parameters a, $, A and B, reported in the
Appendix. The ratio of "market" consumption to leisure can be determined in an analogous fashion, and

Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1993) and Bane and Sala-i-Martin (1994) give the necessary conditions for the
existence of a balanced growth path.

Taxation and_Endogenou,r Growth In Open Economies

14

is given by:

[D3 (I

- ?PX'O(I -

(25)

Clearly, higher factor income tax rates will tend to shift consumption from "markeC goods to "home
production".

Using (10), (13), (23) and (24) we obtain the balanced growth rate of the economy (equation 26)

and the steady state net real interest rate (equation 27):
=

9-(l

[D4(l -y' (1

r[D4(l -r0(l _7

-d-o)
(1.)Jfl7 -o

(26)

(27)

From equations (24), (25) and (26) it is clear that both tax rates on domestic factor incomes will in
general distort the allocation of factors between sectors and reduce the rate of groth of the economy.
When will the economy reach the balanced growth path? In a closed economy, the
economy has

to accumulate physical and human capital until it reaches the capital-labor ratio that is associated with
balanced growth.In an open economy, however, it is possible to augment (reduce) the domestic
capital

stock instantaneously by borrowing (lending) on international capital markets. This is what will happen,
and therefore the balanced groWTh path will be reached immediately. In other words, if tax rates do not
change

over time a small open economy will exhibit no transitional
dynamics.

5. TAXATION AND LONG-RUN GROWTH
We will now discuss the main results of the balanced growth solution of our model. In particular,
we analyze th conditions under which the balanced growth solutions of the model depend on the tax rates
on labor

(1, capital income (r') and income from net foreign assets (i').

First, note that the "quality time model of leisure (y

= 0), the "home production"

rnodcl

of

leisure (y > 0) and the model with no leisure ( = 0) do not qualitatively differ from each other since
the equilibrium after-tax real interest is identical in the three models (it does not depend cm either or
,j), Moreover, the growth rate in the "quality time" and "home production" models is equal and its ratio
relative to the growth rate in the "no leisure" model is a constant ((O/(9-t(l-8))]) that
depends only on

Taxation and Endogenous Growth In Open Economies

is

parameters of the utility ftinction U and i (see equation 26)."
This qualitative similarity of 'quality time' and 'home production' models of leisure with the
case of no leisure results from the fact that leisure is modeled as a non-market activity produced with
constant returns to scale to reproducible factors —either human capital only (when yO) or both human

and physical capital (when > 0). Therefore, leisure can be reinterpreted in these two cases as a nonmarket consumption good and the model is substantially equivalent to one in which there is no leisure.
Second, note that the assumption of perfect capital mobility and the hypothesis of residence-based

taxation imply that the after-tax return on all investments (domestic capital, domestic bonds and foreign
assets) are equal in e"ery period (see equation 21). In the absence of taxation of foreign asset income,

perfect capital mobility should lead to the equalization of domestic real rates of return with the world
interest rate and the equalization of domestic and world growth rates. In fact, assume that in the absence

of taxation of domestic capital and labor income, the domestic real interest rate is equal to the world rate

(r=r); this would be the case if the technology and preference parameters in the world economy were
equal to those in the domestic economy and if there were no distortionary taxes in the world economy.
This would also imply that, in the absence of domestic distortionary taxes on capital and labor, the home

growth rate of consumption and GNP would be equal to the world growth rate.Id
Consider now the effects of residence-based taxation, This form of taxation allows the after-tax

return earned by domestic residents to differ from the world interest rate: the net after-tax return on
domestic capital will be equal to the world real interest rate net of the tax on domestic residents' income
from foreign assets. This divergence between domestic and world interest rates under residence-based

taxation implies that domestic and world growth rates will also differ (see Rebelo 1991, 1992 on this
point).
Next, the solutidn (27) for the steady state net after-tax domestic real interest rate shows that, in

general, this real return will depend both on the tax on domestic capital income and on labor income.
Given the equality between this real return and the after-tax return on foreign assets, it follows thdt:

" A similar result was derived by Rebelo (1991) who compared the growth rates in a model with leisure as
uality time and in a model where an exogenous fraction of time is devoted to leisure.

'

Buiter and Kletier (1992) show that long ito differences between home and world GNP growth rates can
persist with perfect capital mobility if some goods are non-traded and are produced with non-traded goods only (this
is the case of human capital in their model). See also Rebelo ([992) for a discussion of nori-tradedness and growth
equalization.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies
Proposition

1

In the case of fi > 0, the residence razation principle

16

that.for any given tax on

labor and capita! income, there is a unique feasible value for the tax on foreign assets so that the returns

to domestic and foreign investments are equalized. Such a tax rate is equal to:

(28)

where r is defined in equation (27).

Proof See equations (12) and (21). 0

According to this proposition, once the tax rate on capital income and labor income are chosen,

the equilibrium after-tax real interest rate is determined; thcrefoe, there is only one value for the tax on
income from foreign assets such that the returns to domestic and foreign investments are equal.

Proposition 2 In the case of fi > 0, since the equilibrium real interest rate i.c a neMarive function q[thc
labor income nix, the equilibrium sax on foreign assets will be a positive function of the tax on labor
income.

Proof See equations (21) and (27).

0

Intuitively, since an increase in the tax on labor income reduces the after tax real interest rate r, a higher

tax on foreign asset income is requh-ed to maintain the parity between domestic and foreign returns.

Proposition 3

When physical capital does not enter in the production of human capital (3 = 0), the

steady state growth raze of the economy and the equilibrium rea( interest rate are independent of the tax

rates on capital j labor income regardless of how the leisure activity is modeled. In this case:
1

C O-(l-8) [B—p—6]

(29)

(30)

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

17

Proof See equations (26) and (27).

The intuition for the result is simple. If human capital is produced with human capital only, an
increase in the labor tax rate will reduce the return to current work effort but it will also reduce the return

to human capital accumulation (and the return to the leisure activity) by the same amount. Therefore,
the fraction of time spent working, studying and producing leisure will not be affected by a change in the

labor tax rate and the rate of growth of the economy and the real interest rate will be unaffected as well.
It is known that equation (30) represents the steady state growth rate of economies a Ia Lucas

(1988) where human "capital accumulation is CR5 in human capital only (F? = Bill) and there is no
leisure (, = 0) (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin 1994). Our analysis generalizes that result by showing that.

in the Lucas case of fi=O, a qualitatively similar steady state solution is obtained when we consider
economies where leisure is introduced and modeled as "quality time" or "home production". Specifically,
the growth rate will be independent of the technological parameters for the production of final goods and

physical capital ( and A) while the net real interest rate will be independent of preferences and equal to
the productivity level of human capital minus depreciation (B-i5).

Proposition 4 W7zen fi = 0, the steady state physical to human capital ratio in the production offinal
goods is irdepertdent of the tax rate on labor income but a negative fu'ictiort of the tax rate on capital
income:

[a(l -)]
uH

Proof See equation (24).

B

(31)

V

The explanation for the independence of the capital ratio from the labor tax is the same as the one

given in Proposition 3. A change in the capital income tax rate will instead reduce the return to physical
capital accumulation while not affecting the return to human capital accumulation; therefore, the physical

to human capital ratio in the production of final goods will fall.

Proposition 5

When $ = 0, the steady state physical to human capital ratio in the economy is

independent of the tar rate on labor income but a negative function of the tax raic on capital income in

Taxorion and Endogenotis Growth in Open Economies

18

the model with no leisure; in the models where leisure is "qua/ia'y tine" or home production - such a
capital ratio depends on both the tax on human ant/physical capitaL

Proof From (22), the equilibrium capital/labor ratio in the economy is given by
(32)

From Proposition I, we know that when $ = 0, the fraction z of time spent accumulating human capital

is independent of both tax rates. When > 0, we can use the equality between the first and the third
term in (22) to express v as a function of a and both tax rates. Using the economy's resource constraint

(4), we can establish that u, v and v/u are a function of both tax rates. Since from (23) we know that
vK/ulf depends only on r', it follows that K/il is a function of bath tax rates. When y = 0, v = I; the
resource constraint (4) establishes that a is a function of both tax rates. From equation (28) it follows that

K/H is also a function of both tax rates. Finally, when there is no leisure

=

I

- a:

sthce z is

independent of both tax rates (Proposition 1), so is a. In this case (32) establishes that K/H depends only
on the tax race on physical capital.

The explanation for the above proposition is the following. As discussed above, when there is
no leisure in the model, the tax on labor income does not affect the fraction of time spent working (a)

and studying (I-u)

as

long as fi = 0. Then, since v =

I

in this case, equation (31) shows that the

equilibrium physical to human capital ratio in the economy will also be independent of ? hut dependent

on/. In the specifications where leisure is modeled as "quality time" or "homeproduction", the tax on
labor income does not affect the fraction of time spent studying (z) (and therefore does not affectgrowth)

but it affects the allocation of time between work (a) and leisure activit,s (I - u - z). In particular, an
increase in the labor tax reduces the fraction of time spent working and increases the fraction of time
spent in the leisure activity. Therefore, the equilibrium human and physical capital in the economy will

be affected by the labor tax. The above proposition is important for the derivation of the optimal
taxation of factors. In fact, when $ = 0 and there is no leisure, the labor tax does not create any
intertemporal distortion: it does not affect either the growth rate of the economy nor the capital labor ratio

in the economy. Conversely, if leisure is modeled as "quality time" or "home production" the labor tax
does not affect growth but it creates an intertempora] distortion since the economy wide K/H is affected.

A tax on capital income is always distortionary when $ = 0 becausc it affec:s the physical to human

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

19

capital ratio regardless of whether there is leisure or not in the model.

Proposition 6 When $ = 0, the equilibrium tat on foreign asset income wi II not depend on the tax rates
on labor and capital income. In this case:
(33)

Proof See equation (27).
The

constant, B -

intuition for the proposition is dear. When = 0, the real after-tax
6,

interest

rate is a

that does not depend on either the tax rate on capital or labor income. Therefore, the

unique value of the tax on foreign asset income that equalizes returns to domestic and foreign investments

will be independent of the choice of the tax on capital and labor.

Proposition 7 When physical capital enters in the production of human capital ($ > 0) the steady crate

growth rate of the economy will negatively depend on the tax rare on both capital income and labor
income. Moreover, the steady state physical to human capital ratios in the final goods arid human capital

sectors will also depend on both factor tax rates.

Proof See equations (24) and (26).

Ij

The intuition for the proposition is easier to present for the case of no leisure, hut is the same

in the equivalent cases of leisure as 'quality time' or 'home production'. We showed above that when
= 0, the return to and the cost of human capital accumulation (i.e. the net of tax wage) are affected

in the same proportion by a change in labor taxes, leaving the time allocation decision unchanged. In
other terms, since the cost of human capital accumulation is effective!>' tax-deductible, labor income
taxation does not affect the incentive to accumulate human capital.'5 However, if physical capital is also

used in the production of new human capital @ > 0), the return to human capital is reduced more than
its cost. In particular, the cost of physical capital inputs used in the production of human capital is not

See Trostel (1993) for a detailed presentation of this argument.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

20

reduced by the labor income tax since these inputs
are not tax deduciible. More generally, as suggested

by Trostel (1993), if any other inputs in addition to human capita] enter in the
production of human
capital, its return will be reduced by more than its cost. Therefore human
capita] accumulation will be
reduced by an increase in the labor tax rate.

The above results imply that, for the three specifications of the leisure activity considered so far
(the "quality time", the "home production" and the "no leisure" models), the specification of the human
capital accumulation function has important implications for the dependence of growth rates on factor

income taxes. In particular, if human capital is produced with kQth human and physical capital (with
CRS in the two inputs)', the steady state growth late of the
economy depends on both factor tax rates.
However, if human capital accumulation uses human capital s2ily (with CRS), the steady state growth rate

of the economy will not depend on either factor income tax rate. Moreover, in this case the steady state
ratio between effective human and physical capital will depend on the tax on caphal income but not on

the labor income tax.

The result that the dependence of the growth rate on factor tax rates has to do with whether
physical capital enters in the production of human capital (i.e. on whether $ is positive or zero) holds
both when leisure does not enter the utility function and when it is produced with constant returns in
reproducible factors. \Vhat happens in the case in which leisure is not produced with constant returns
to reproducible factors 7 One such case — leisure modeled as a "raw time" activity — is
the one most

studied in the literature.'6 In this case "raw time" is a non-reproducible fatter that is constrained by
the agent's total time endowment, in Milesi•Feryeffl and Roubini (1994) we show that, if leisure is
modeled as "raw time" — or,
more generally, as an activity not produced with CRS in reproducible
factors -- the balanced growth rate of the economy will always depend
on the tax rates on capital and
labor income regardless of whether physical capital inputs enteror not in the production of human capita]

(i.e. regardless of whether ft is positive or zero).'7

" See

Charniey (1986), Lucas (1990), Jones, Nianuelli and Rossi (I99)a, 1993b) and Bull (1993a) for such a
specification of leisure in optimal taxation analyses.

ll

The intuition for the result is the following (see Milesi'Ferretd and Roubini, 1994 for
a forms] proof).

Regardless of the value of ft. when leisure is modeled as "raw time", an incrt.ase in human capital will increase the
productivity of time spent producing goods or accumuiating human capital but will not affect the marginal utility
of leisure. Therefore, the return to the accumulation of human capital will now depend on the time spent in leisure
activities. Consider now the effects of an increase in the labor tax: while the rclativc cost and return to working
venus accumulating human capital are unchanged by such a change in labor
taxes, the return to the leisure activity
is increased since the time spt in leisure is untaxed. The ensuing increase in timespent in leiiure zeduccs the lime
spent accumulating human capital and therefore its return. The reduction in the return zo invslmcnt in human

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open &onomies

21

As discussed above, residence-based taxation allows the after-tax return earned by domestic
residents to differ from the world interest rate. This divergence between domestic and world interest

rates under residence-based taxation implies that domestic and world growth rates will also differ.
Residence-based

taxation therefore implies that the long-run equilibrium and growth rate of an open

economy will be equal to that of a closed economy. The main difference relative to the closed economy

case is the absence of transitional dynamics in an open economy. Starting from an initial equilibrium
without international capital flows, the opening of international capital markets will imply that, given
the initial conditions (the initial stock of physical and human capital), the country will borrow or lend
from the rest of the world so as to instantaneously change the stock of domestic capital to the steady state

desired ratio of physical and human capital. In the presence of perfect capital mobility, the economy will

therefore jump to the long run allocation of resources and grow along the balanced growth path; while
in a closed economy the transition to the balanced growth path will take time.
6. OPTIMAL TAXATION ANALYSIS

So far, we have discussed the conditions under which the growth rate of the economy and the

capital ratios in the various sectors will depend on the tax rates on labor and capital income. We turn
now to the analysis of the conditions under which it will be optimal to have a zero long run taxation of
a factor of production.
6.1 Optima! Long-Run Taxation ofLabor and Capita!
While a formal analysis of optimal tax rates on the two factors require the solution of a 'restricted

Ramsey planner's problem" where the government chooses the path of tax rates with the purpose of
maximizing the representative agent's welfare, taking into account the optimizing behavior of this agent.

it is possible to get the intuition for the optimal taxation results by considering the link between growth

rates and tax rates." Without loss of generality, we shall assume that the revenue from taiation of
foreign assets initially held by private agents is rebated lump-sum to consumers: otherwise, it is always

optimal for the domestic government to "confiscate" initial foreign assets by setting the tax as high as
possible.

capital will then imply that the equilibrium real interest rite is reduced and therefore the rate of growth of the
economy is reduced in the steady state. Therefore, in the model with leisure as •raw time' the growth rate of the
economy will depend on the tax rates on both factors of production.

"

In Milesi-Ferretti and Roubini (1994) we solve such a 'restricted Ramsey pLanners problem" in a closed
economy and provide formal proof of the optimal taxation results presented below.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

22

The optimal taxation analysis implies the following five results:

1. When both human and physical capital enter in the production of human capital (ft > 0), the
optimal long run lax on both capital and labor income is zero when leisure is CR5 in reproducible

factors (p > 0) or when there is no leisure ('0).
2. The optimal long run tax on both capital and labor income is zero when leisure is modeled as

"raw time" regardless of how human capital is produced (i.e. for any value of ft).
3. When only human capital enters in the production of human capital (ft = 0), the optimal long

run tax ott both capital and labor income is zero when leisure is modeled as "quality time' or
Thome production".

4. When only human capital enters in the production of human capital (ft = 0), the optima! long
run tax on capital is zero while the one on labor income is positive in the mode] with no leisure.

5. The optimal long-run tax on foreign assets income will be zero regardless of the value of fi.
The intuition for the first result can be easily understood by considering the relation between the
growth rate of the economy and the tax rates. The analysis of Chainley suggests that any tax that distorts

a long run intertemporal decision should be set equal to zero. In an endogenous growth framework, any
tax distortion that reduces the long run growth rate of the economy will have large and permanent costs

(in terms of present discounted value of lost consumption and utility) and should therefore be set equal
to zero. Since the balanced growth rate of the economy is dependent on both tax rates in models without
leisure and in models where leisure is CR5 in reproducible factors when $ >0, ii follows that the optimal

tax on labor and capital income should he zero in these cases.
The basic principle that any tax the affects long run growth should be set to zero in the long run

is behind the second result regarding optimal taxation in the specifications of leisure as "raw time". In
particular, in the "raw time" model of leisure, the optimal long rim tax rate on capital and labor income

is zero regardless of whether capital inputs enter or not in the production of human capital (i.e..
regardless of the value of $) because in that model the long-run growth rate depends on both tax rates
regardless of the value of fi.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

23

While a dependence of the long run growth rate on a tax rate implies that such a tax rate should

be set equal zero in the long run, what can we say about the cases in which long-mn growth is
independent of the tax rate? Such independence of growth from tax rates is obtained, in our model, in
three models of leisure (when leisure CR5 in reproducible factors and when there is no leisure) whenever

= 0. Moreover, in the models with leisure as "home production0 and "quality time", the equilibrium
physical to human capital ratio in the economy is affected by both tax rates; conversely, in the model
without leisure the equilibrium physical to human capital ratio in the economy is affected by the tax on

capital but is not affected by the tax on labor. Therefore, a steady state tax on capital income distorts

the intertemporal choice of physical to human capital regardless of whether leisure brings utility. Not
so for the labor tax: a steady state tax on labor income distorts the physical to human capital ratio when
there is leisure but does not create any intertemporal distortion when there is no leisure in the model.

Since optimal taxation principles suggest that we should not distort interteinpoiai choices, it
follows that when the two tax rates do not affect the long term growth rate and only one of the two tax
rates affects the steady state capital ratio, the optimal long run tax plan will be the following: set to zero

the tax rate on the factor that distorts both the growth rate and the capital ratio; set to a positive value
the tax rate on the factor that does not distort the long run physical to human capital ratio. The third and

fourth results therefore follow: when fi = 0, the model specifications of the leisure activity as "quality
time", Thome production" imply that the optimal long run tax rate on both capital and labor income will
be equal to zero; in the specification without leisure the optimal long run tax rate on capital income will

be zero while the optimal long run tax rate on labor income will be positive.
Consider next the implications of the above optimal taxation analysis for the taxation of foreign
asset income. We showed above that, in the absence of taxation of domestic capital and labor Income,

the domestic real interest rate is equal to the world rate (r = () and the home growth rate of
consumption and GNP would be equal to the world growth rate. However, residence-based taxation will
lead to a diffetence between the after tax return earned by domestic residents and the world interest rate,

Similarly, the domestic growth rate will differ from the world rate.

What will then be the optimal long run tax on foreign asset income? If fi>0, the optimal tax
on capital and labor income is zero; therefore, the optimal tax on foreign asset income will be zero as

well and domestic growth will equal the world rate. Suppose now that fi = 0; if there is no leisure in
the model, the optimal long-run tax on capital income is zero while it is positive for labor income; the
domestic real interest rate will equal the world rate, It follows that the optimal long-run tax on foreign

asset income will be zero again. Finally, in the models with leisure and $=0, the optimal tax on both

Taxation and Eridogenous Growth in Open Economies

24

capital and labor income is zero; therefore, the optimal tax on foreign asset income will be zero
as well.

It then follows that the optimal long-run tax on foreign asset income is zero

regardless of the value of

0; in this sense the long run taxation of foreign asset income is equal to that of domestic
capital.
How do the above results about optimal taxation compare with those in the literarure on open
economy? Rebelo (1992) considers the relation between taxation and growth inopen economies but does

not consider the optimal taxation of incomes. As in our analysis, he finds that the assumption of perfect
capital mobility should lead to interest rate and growth rate equalization between the domestic
and

economy
the world; he also shows that only residence-based taxation will allow a wedge between domestic and

world Interest rates and growth rates. Correia (1992) considers the optimal
taxation of capital income

in a simple Ak one-sector model of endogenous growth where human capital and leisure are not
considered. She replicates the Chamley result on the zero optimal taxation of capital income; since she
assumes residence-based taxation with equal tax rate on domestic capital income and foreign asset income,

the optimal zero long-run taxation of capital income corresponds a zero tax cn foreign asset income as

well. Ruin and Yuen (1993) consider a two-sector, two-country model of endogenous growth with
endogenous fertility choice. Agent derive utility from consumption of goods and from the number of
their offsprings. The number of offsprings is determined taking into account that child-rearing requires
a fraction of the household time endowment. Human capital is increased with both physical and human

capital inputs. They formally prove that, under residence-based taxation, the optimal tax on capital
income and foreign asset income is positive in the short-run and zero in the long-run
of
(an application

the Chamley result in the open economy)."
6.2 Growth-Maximizing Tax Policies with a Balanced Budge:
Optimal taxation plans in dynamic growth models are generally of the following nature. Tax rates

on factors are positive in the short run (when factors are in semi-fixed supply) and lower (possibly zero)
in the long run. Given an exogenous path of government expenditures this optimal taxation plan consists

"They also argue, without a formal proof, that the optimal long-run tax on labor income should be positive.

The latter claim is puzzling. Their model, in fact, corresponds to a two-sector model with 0> 0 since both

physical and human capital enter in the production of human capital. Moreover, their model is equivalent to a
model where utility is obtained from leisure and leisure is produced with 'raw Ume: in fact, agents get utility from
children, and child-rearing requires 'raw time only. We know that a model with leisure being produced with raw
time implies a dependence of the long run growth on capital i4 labor income taxes regardless of fi; therefore the
optimal long run tax on labor should be zero. Moreover, even if children had been produced with 'quality time
rather than raw time, the assumption of 9> Cia their model would imply that the growth rate would still depend
on the tax on labor income and that tax should therefore be equal to zero in the long run.

Taxation and Endogenous GroMh in Open Economies

25

of taxing both factors in the short run, and financing spending in therun
long
through accumulated
budget surpluses. This implies that the government should be able to accumulate enough assets in the
short run to be able live off their return in the long run. Such an accumulation of assets by the
government is clearly not empirically realistic.

It is therefore interesting to consider the nature of an optimal taxation plan when the ability of
the government to borrow or lend is restricted. In the limiting case where no intertemporal borrowing

is allowed so that the government has to balance its budget in every period, we can study which tax
policies will be growth maximizing (i.e. welfare maximizing) in the long run. We will consider only the

steady state and assume that the government spending is a constant fraction of output. We assume that
the government has to run a balanced budget in every period; moreover we assume that the revenues from

foreigu asset are rebated in lump-sum form to private agents so that capital and labor income are the only

two sources of financing of government spending.X Then, the budget constraint of the government will
be:

g

(34)

.4..art÷(1_a)r2

where g is the steady state ratio of government spending to output. We can then consider which steady
state tax policies will maximize the growth rate by maximizing the growth solution (28) (for the general

case of$ > 0) subject to the above government budget constraint (34). The solution of this problem is:
(35)

The equation shows that the growth-maximizing capital and labor income tax rates are equal, i.e. a
common income tax onll factor incomes is optimal. The result is interesting because it suggests that,
as long as the growth rate of the economy is affected by both tax rates, the optimal long run tax policy

is to tax both factors at the same rate. As we argued above, if the behavior of the government is not
constrained (so that it an borrow and lend), labor and capital should be taxed at the

long

run rate

of zero. Similarly, if the government is constrained to run a budget balance in every period, the optimal

long run tax on labor and capital will still be the im for both factors and equal to the government
spending to output ratio that has to be financed in every period.

We make the assumption of a rebate of foreign asset income revenue in order to avoid having to solve
explicitly (or the equilibiium value of foreign assets. In practice, since the revenues from foreign asset income are
quite small, assuming that they sic rebated is of no qualitative consequence,

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

26

7. POLICY IMPLICATIONS

What are the policy implications of our results for the actual conduct of tax policy ? In recent
years, the question of the optimal degree of taxation of capitaJ income has been hotly debated in academic

and policy circles. For example, in many industrial countries the issue of capital gains taxation has
attracted a lot of attention. The results of Charnley (1985, 1986) andJudd (1985), derived in neoclassical

exogenous growth models, provided a theoretical rationale for the widely held view that the taxation of
capital income should be kept at a minimum, because such taxes can reduce capital accumulation. Our
analysis suggests that while the taxation of capital income is distonionary and can have negativegrowth

consequences when the growth rate of the economy is endogenous, a similar effect is caused by the
taxation of labor income when human capital is an additional engine of economic growth. Such an effect

of labor taxation is absent in exogenous growth models, where the labor factor cannot he accumulated
in the form of human capital.
In this sense, the analysis suggests that distortionary taxes have in general negative growth effects

and should be kept at a minimum in the long run. What are the short-run implications? Formally, in the
absence of constraints on the ability of the government to borrow and lend, the optimal taxation problem

yields a solution that involves initially high taxes on both human and physical capital. This allows the
government to accumulate a sufficient quantity of assets to finance government expenditure in the long

run without any further recourse to taxation. In practice, this is not a realistic solution, for a number of
reasons.

The first practital problem is that the government is unable to commit to a given
path 01 taxes
from now on to the foreseeable future. Therefore, this optimal taxation scheme will be subject to timeconsistency problems. - In particular, in every period the government will have an incentive to tax more
heavily existing capital, while refraining from taxing investment.2'
A second problem is that in practice government expenditure is not exogenous, and high short-run
rates of taxation may lead to more spending, rather than to the accumulation of assets to finance long-mn
expenditure.

A third problem is that in practice the ability of the government to borrow and lend is likely to
be restricted. In the limit case in which the government has to balance its budget in every period, the

'

Unlike other optimal taxation models, however, our model can allow us to determine a meaningful optimal

path of tuition even when tax decisions have to be taken sequentially. The reason is that the supply of taxable
physical capital is elastic even in the abort run, because capital can have alteniative uses in the home production
or the human capital sector. This implies that setting the capital income tax uo confiscatory levels is unfeasible.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

27

model suggests that physical and human capital should be taxed in a similar fashion. In this sense, the

important message of the paper is not that taxation of labor and capital income should be high in the short

run and zero in the long run; it is rather that human and physical capital should be taxed similarly if they

both contribute to accumulation and long-mn growth.
With regard to the taxation of foreign assets, endogenous growth models suggest that differential

taxation of domestic and foreign asset income is feasible only with a residence-based taxation scheme,
provided, of course, that foreign asset income can effectively be recorded and taxed. With source-based

taxation, return differentials would imply unlimited amounts of capital inflows or outflows. Under
residence-based taxation, the tax on net foreign asset income should be set at the level that equates
domestic and foreign post-tax returns on capital. If zero taxation of domestic capital is optimal and
feasible, zero taxation of foreign assets would also ensue.

In this paper we have not considered indirect taxes. The relative merits of indirect versus direct
taxation have been widely discussed in the literature; in the framework of neoclassical growth models,
it has been suggested that consumption taxation is superior to direct factor income taxation. However,
the results of Jones, Manuelli and Ros.si (1993b) and Bull (1993a) suggest that in the long run all taxes,

including a consumption tax, ought to be zero. The reason is that when growth is endogenous even a
distortionary consumption tax affects long-run growth. It would, however, be interesting to consider the

implications for indirect taxation of restrictions on the government's ability to borrow and lend.
Another interesting policy aspect that is captured with the 'home production' specification is the
notion that factors of production in the 'market" sector may be elastically supplied even in the short run.
In practice, the "home production" sector may be reinterpreted as the 'informal" sector of the economy,
where capital and labor income are not taxed, The analysis suggests that 'excessive' taxation of incomes
in the formal sector will lead agents to transfer capital and labor resources to the informal sector in order
to avoid taxation.
8. CONCLUDING REMARKS

In this paper we have considered the role of the human capital accumulation technology and of

the nature of 'leisure' activity in determining the optimal taxation of labor, capital and foreign assets in
a small, open economy. Traditional optimal taxation analyses in exogenous growth models stressed that

the tax rate on capital income should be zero in the long run, while the one on labor should be positive.

We have shown that in endogenous growth models this result is replicated only under restrictive
specifications of human capital accumulation and leisure production. Under more general specifications

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open EconomIes
of these processes, capital and labor income should be taxed

28

similarly. Another implication of this paper

is that the labor tax rate will affect the real after-tax rate of

return on domestic capital. Therefore, in the
presence of free capital mobility equalization of tax rates on domestic and foreign capital may not be
sufficient to prevent capital flight.

A general but unrealistic feature of the optima! taxation solution is the accumulation

of budget
surpluses in the short run to finance government expenditure without recourse to distortionary taxation
in the long run. This result is due to the fact that reproducible factors

are supplied relatively inelastkafly
in the short run but elastically in the long run. Future research should re-examine the issue of dynamic

optimal taxation subject to a realistic set of restrictions on government's behivior.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open Economies

29

APPENDIX

Al. VALUE OF PARAMETERS IN EQUATIONS (24)-(26)
The terms D, (equations (24), (25) and (26)) are given by:

D=

aA

(1-$)B

__I
(1-$)B

D=
2
D,=

--

__JsP1'
I-cr $
I—fl

aA

(I-fi)B

(1-y)i J
= (aA)[fi(l -$)]

TJ

—i' E l

aI

-al)

Ll_

1'-s1

1

[-3-J ITJ

na

Taxation and Endogenous Growth In Open Economies

30

flIBLIOGRAPHY

Bairn, Robert (1990), 'Government Spending in a Simple Model of Endogenous Growth', Journal of Political
Economy 98, part 2, October, 5103-5125,
Barro, Robert .1. (199!), 'Economic Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries', Quarterly Journal
of Economics
106, 407-43.

Barro, Robert). and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1994), Economic Growth, manuscript.
Becker, Gary S. (1965), A Theory of the Allocation of Time', Economic JournaJ 75,
September 493-517.
Berthabib, Jess, Richard Rogerson and Randall Wright (199!). "Homework in Macroeconomics: Housebold

Production and Aggregate Fluctuations", Journal ofPolitical Economy 99, December I 991.
Ben

Porath, Yoram (1967), 'The Production of Human Capital and the Life'Cycle of Earnings', Journal of
Political Economy 75, No.4 part I, August, 352-365.

Buiter, Willem and Kenneth Kletrer (1991), 'Persistent Differences in National Productivity Growth Rates with
a Common Technology and Free Capital Mobility: the Roles of Pubflc Debt, Capital Taxation and Policy

towards Human Capital Formation', Journal

ofthe Japanese and International Economies 5, December,

325-53.

Dull, Nicholas (l993a), 'When All the Optimal Dynamic Taxes Are Zero', Fedcral Reserve Board Working
Paper no. 137, July.

Bull, Nicholas (1993b), 'Technical Appendix to When All the Optimal Dynamic Taxes Are Zero'. Federal
Reserve Board Working Paper no. 138, July.

Chamley, Christophe (1985), 'Efficient Taxation in a Stylized Model of lntertempora] General Equilibrium',
International Economic Review 26, No.2, June, 451-468.
.1 amley, Christophe (1986), Optimal Taxation of Capital Income in General Equilibrium with Inlinite Lives',
Economesrica 54, May, 607-22.

Chari, V.V., Lawrence J. Christiano and Patrick!. Kehoe (l991a), Optinul Fiscal Policy in a Business
Cycle
Model', Fede'ral Reserve of Minneapolis Working Paper No.465, January.

Chari, V.V., Lawrence I. Christiano and Patrick I. Kehoe (1991b), 'Optimal Monetary and Fiscal Policy in a
Business Cycle Model', Journal ofMoney, O'edis and Banidng 23, August (part 2), 519-39.
Correia, Isabel (1992), 'Dynamic Optimal Taxation in Small Open Economies', mimeo, Bank of Portugal.

Corseni, Giancarlo (1992), 'Government Spending, Risk and Wealth Allocation in a Simple Model of
Endogenous Growth', Universith di Roma, mimeo.

Frenkel, Jacob, Assaf RaZin and Efraim Sadka (1990), International Taxation in an lnteernted World, Carnbridee:
MIT Press.

Taxation and Endogenou.s Growth In Open EconomIes

31

Greenwood, Jeremy and Zvi Hercowitz (1991), "The Allocation of Capital and Time over the Husiness Cycle",

Journal of Political Economy 99, December.
Grossman, Gene and Elhanan llelpman (1991), Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge: MIT

Press.

Beckman, James (1976), "A Life-Cycle Model of Earnings, Learning, and Consumption'. Journal of Political
Economy 84, August, SI 1-544.

Jones, Larry E. and Rodolfo E. Mariuelli (1990), "A Convex Model of Equilibrium Growth: Theory and Policy

Implications', Journal of Political Economy 98, October, 1008-38,

Jones, Larry E., Rodolfo E. Mrtuelli and Peter E. Rossi (1993a), 'Optimal Taxation in Models of Endogenous
Growth', Journal of Political Economy 101, June, 485-517.
Jones, Lan-yE., Rodolfo E. Manuel]i and Peter B. Rossi (1993b), 'On the Optimal Taxation of Capital Income',

NBER Working Paper no. 4525, November.

Judd, Kenneth L. (1985), 'Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight Model', Journal of Public
Economics 28, October, 59-83.

Judd, Kenneth L. (1987), 'The Welfare Cost of Factor Taxation in a Petfect Foresight Model', Journal of
Political Economy 95, No.4, 675-709.
judd, Kenneth L. (1990), 'Optimal Taxation in Dynamic Stochastic Economies', mimeo, Stanford University.
Kim, Se-Jilt (1992) Taxes, Growth and Welfare in an Endogenous Growth Model, Ph.D. Dissertation, University

of Chicago.

King, Robert G. (1991), 'Observable Implications of Dynamically Optimal Taxation', University of Rochester
Working Paper, August.
F

g, Robert, Charles Plosser and Sergio Rebelo (1988), 'Production, growth and Business Cycles: 1. The Basic
Neoclassical Model', Journal of Monetary Economics 21, 195-232.

King, Robert 0. and Sergio Rebelo (1990), 'Public Policy and Economics Growth: Developing Neoclassical
lmplications',fournal of Political Economy 98, No.5, part 2, October, S 126-S 150.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1988). 'On the Mechanics of Economic Development', Journal of Monetary Economics
22, 3-42.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. (1990), 'Supply-Side Economics: an Analytical Review', Oxford Economic Papers 42,
293-316.

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. and Nancy L. Stokey (1983), 'Optimai Monetary and Fiscal Policy in an Economy without
Capital", Journal of Monetary Economics 12, July. 55-93.

Taxation and Endogenous Growth In Open Economies

32

Milesi-Ferretti, Gian Maria and Nouriel Roubini (1994), 'Optimal Taxation of Human and
Physical Capital in
Models of Endogenous Growth', mimeo, International Monetary Fund and
Yale University, January.
Mulligan, Casey and Xavier Sa]a-i-Martin (1993), 'Transitional Dynamics in Two-Sector Models of
Endogenous

Growth', Quanerly Jcirnal of Economics CVIII, August, 739-73.
Ramsey, Frank P. (1927), 'A Contribution to the Theory of Optimal Taxation', Economic Journal 37,

March,

47-61.

Ruin, Assaf and al-Wa Yuen (1994), 'Convergence in Growth Rates: the Role of Capital Mobility and
International Taxation', in Canital Mobility: New Persoectives, ed. by L. Leiderman and A. Rain,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Ruin, Aaif and Joel Slemrod (1990) (eds.) Taxation in the Global Economy, The University of Chicago Press.
Rebelo, Sergio (1991), Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long-Run Growth', Journal of Political Economy 99,
June, 500-521.

Rebelo, Sergio (1992), 'Growth in Open Economies', Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy

36, July. 5-46.
Romer, Paul (1986), 'Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth', Journal of Political Economy 94, Ocioher,
1002-1037.

Roubini, Nouriel and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (l992a), 'Financial Repression and Economic Growth', Journal

of

Development Economics 39, July, 5-30.
Roubini, Nouriei and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992b), 'A Growth Model of Inflation, Tax Evasion and Financial
Repression', NEER Working Paper No.4062, May.

Stokey, Nancy L. and Sergio Rebelo (1993). 'Growth Effects of Flat-Rate Taxes', NDER Working Paper
no.4426, July.

anzi, Vito and Howell H. Zee (1993), 'Time Constraint in Consumption and Savings Behavior", Journal

of

Public Economics 50, 253-259.

Tro: •: Phillip (1993), "The Effect of Taxation on Human Capital', Journal

of Political Economy

101, April,

327-50.

Yuen, Oil-Wa (1990), 'Taxation, Human Capital Accumulation and Economic Growth', Working Paper.
Zee, Howell H. (1994), 'Endogenous Time Preference and Endogenous Growth', IMF Working Paper

no.

94/15, January.

Thu, Xiadong (1991), Optimal Fiscal PolIo' in a Stochastic Growth Model, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Chicago.

prod. requires
onlyhumancapital)

(Human capital

f(K, Y1)

u - z)I-1

r

f(r', ?')

)

)

rr0

r=r0

H

K
—
= g(,

)

H

— = g((,

K

w=f(,rM)

w=1(,)

w=fV,)

rr=r=0

H

— = g(C,

K

r=0

rr0

r=O

H

—=gV,)

K

w

[(1 -v-x)K]

L[(1uz)H]N

r=0

H

—=gV,)

K

W

L = (I
*

Home Production

r=0
r>0

H

0

}l)

=

Quahty 'lime

w = '2;'anced Growth Rate
(r) = Optimal long-run tax on physical (human) capital

(Iii

.ian capital
pru. requires both
human and physical
capital)

(/3>0)

HB(zH)"(xK)'3

.

(7K

j

—=gV)

f

0

K

=

(/3=0)

w

c

No Leisure

HBzH

4

HUMAN CAPITAL

LEISURE

TABLE I
Taxes, resource allocation and growth

= f(K

(1 u

7H)

- z)

r=r=0

H

K

—=

w=f(,)

r=0
r=0

—=g(,)
H

K

w

L=

Raw Time

