BER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC EDUCATION AND INCOME
DISTRIBUTION: A QUANTITATIVE
EVALUATION OF EDUCATION
FINANCE REFORM

Raquel Fernandez

Richard Rogrson

Working Paper No. 4883

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

We wish to thank R. Benabou, I. Portes and V. Rios-Rull for very helpful comments as well as

seminar participants at Carnegie-Mellon, lIES in Stockholm, University of Bergen, NYU,
Wisconsin, Philadelphia Federal Reserve, and conference participants at the NYU conference on

Human Capital, SEDC Annual Meetings, Barcelona Conference on Regionalism, Essex
Conference on Labor Markets, NEER-Minneapolis Federal Reserve Labor Conference, Canadian

Macroeconomic Study Group, Latin American Econometric Society Meetings and the
Northwestern Applied General Equilibrium Conference. We are grateful to the NSF for support
under grant SES-9122625. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Public Economics.

Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1994 by Raquel Fernandez and Richard Rogerson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4883
October 1994

PUBLIC EDUCATION AND INCOME
DISTRIBUTION: A QUANTITATWE
EVALUATION OF EDUCATION
FINANCE REFORM

ABSTRACT

Many states have or are considering implementing school finance reforms aimed at
lessening inequality in the provision of public education across communities. These reforms will

tend to have complicated aggregate effects on income distribution, intergenerational income

mobility, and welfare. In order to analyze the potential effects of such reforms, this paper
constructs a dynamic general equilibrium model of public education provision, calibrates it using

US data, and examines the quantitative effects of a major school finance reform. The policy
reform examined is a change from a system of pure local finance to one in which all funding is

done at the federal level and expenditures per student are equal across communities. We find
that this policy increases average income and total spending on education as a fraction of income.
Moreover, there are large welfare gains associated with this policy; steady-state welfare increases

by 3.2% of steady-state income.

Raquel Fernandez
Department of Economics
Boston University
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER

Richard Rogerson
Department of Economics
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER

1. Introduction
A distinguishing feature of public education in the US is the
significant role played by local property taxes and the resulting large

disparity in expenditures per student observed across school districts. A
series of State Supreme Court rulings and public concern over public education

have led many states to consider and/or to enact reforms with the aim of
reducing inequality of access to quality public education.
The effects of various reforms to the system of financing public
education are difficult to predict, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

Total resources devoted to education, property values, residence patterns and

aggregate welfare may all be affected. Moreover, given educations critical
role in determining individual income, reforms which alter total spending on
education and/or its pattern across communities should have aggregate effects

on income distribution, growth and intergenerational income mobility. This
paper takes a first step assessing the potential effects of education finance

reform. We construct a dynamic general equilibrium model of public education
provision in a multi—community setting, calibrate it using US data, and use
the calibrated model to evaluate the quantitative effects of a major

reform.1

We extend to a dynamic setting the model of Fernandez and Rogerson

(1992). This is a multi—community model in the tradition of those pioneered

by Westhoff (1977) and Epple. Romer and Filimon (1984, 1988). Although our
model is highly stylized, it incorporates four features which are central to

notable early attempt to analyze the quantitative effects of some
education reforms is Inman (1978). He estimates a lulti—community model using
data from the New York metropolitan area and examines the welfare effects of
several reforms. One difference between his work and ours is that we model
the income distribution dynamics resulting from changes in the quality of
education received by children. A second difference is that whereas his model
contains more features than does ours, our analysis is explicitly general
equilibrium.

—2—

an analysis of public education finance in the US. First, there is
substantial heterogeneity of income across households. Second, individuals

are mobile across communities. Third, public education is provided at the
community level and fourth, funding for public education is largely determined
at the local level.

The population structure is that of a two—period—lived overlapping
generations model in which there is a large number of households every period,

each consisting of one old and one young member. Households choose in which
community to reside. Each community has a local housing market and determines
a tax rate on local housing expenditures by majority vote. The proceeds are
used to provide public education for its residents. An old individual's
income is determined by the quality of education received when young and an
idiosyncratic shock.

The equilibrium inter—community population distribution and the tax rates
that result in a given period determine the quality of education obtained by
each child which, in conjunction with the realization of idiosyncratic income

shocks, then determines the equilibrium income distribution over households

for the following period. This process repeats itself. The equilibrium for
this model has the property that in each period individuals stratify

themselves into communities by income. higher income communities have higher
per student expenditures on education and higher gross—of—tax housing prices.
As a result, children born into higher incoiie households have higher expected

incomes than do children born into lower income households.

te calibrate the model described above to US data. The calibration uses
information on the (cross—sectional) elasticity of educational expenditures

—3—

per student with respect to community mean income, the elasticity of
(subsequent) earnings with respect to quality of education when young, price

elasticities of housing demand and supply, mean and median income, and
expenditure shares for housing and education.

In the model described above, public education is entirely funded at the

local level. The major policy reform we analyze is one in which local
financing of education is replaced with national (or state) financing and the

revenue is distributed equally per student across communities. Several states
have taken significant steps towards this kind of system.2
Our analysis highlights the tradeoffs that exist between a local and a
national finance system. The former permits individuals, Liven their income,
greater scope for sorting themselves into communities that more closely offer
their preferred bundles than does a national system which imposes uniform

spending. The latter system, on the other hand, by reducing heterogeneity in
education expenditures, can modify the income distribution in such a way to

attain higher average income. While the net welfare effect of the above
tradeoff cx ante is not signable in our framework, our calibration yields the
following results: relative to the case of pure local financing, we find that
a policy of national financing leads to higher average income in the steady

state, higher average spending on education, and higher welfare. The
magnitude of the welfare improvement measured in terms of steady—state income

state public education finance systems vary widely in the extent to
which state aid provisions attempt to lessen the inequality in spending across
districts with some state systems lying close to the extremes of either local
or national financing. Thus, a comparison of these two extreme possiblities
is a natural starting point in an attempt to gauge the potential significance
of education finance reforms that aim to lessen inequalities in local
spending.

-4-

is 3.2%, which is a large gain relative to that found for many policies. The
welfare implications of the transition path are also examined. We find that
for annual discount rates smaller than 8.2%, a social planner would choose to
implement the policy change.

Our work is related to two literatures. The first is a theoretical
literature that addresses various aspects of the interaction between

education, income distribution and political economy. Recent contributions to
this literature include papers by Fernandez and Rogerson (1991), Gloam and

Raiikumar (1992), oldrin (1992), Saint—Paul and Verdier (1994), and Perotti
(1993). These papers all consider education as being provided centrally.
Papers which model the local provision of education include Durlauf (1992),

Benabou (1992), Cooper (1992), Fernandez and Rogerson (1993) and Epple and

Romano (1993). A distinguishing feature of our current paper is its emphasis
on quantitative analysis.

The second related literature is a large empirical literature on the

determinants and consequences of expenditures on public education. One aim of
this literature is to examine the pattern of expenditures across communities

in relation to the cross—community variation of variables. Inman (1979) and
Bergstrom et al. (1982) survey this literature and Rothstein (1992) is a

recent contribution. There is also a literature on the relation between
spending on education and outcomes which is too extensive to survey here.

Coleman (1966) is an early contribution, Hanushek (1986) surveys the
literature, and Card and Krueger (1992) provide new evidence on the issue.

The outline of the paper follows. Section 2 describes the benchmark

model. Section 3 discusses the calibration of this model. Section 4 reports

—5—

the results of the calibration and of the policy reform carried out in the

calibrated model. Section 5 performs a sensitivity analysis and Section 6
concludes.

2.

The Model

The economy is populated by a sequence of two—period—lived overlapping

generations. A continuum of agents with total mass equal to one is born in
every time period. Each individual belongs to a household consisting of one
old person (the parent) and one young person (the child). All decisions are
made by old individuals, each of whom has identical preferences given by:

u(c,h) + Ew(y).

(1)

where c is consumption of a private good, h is consumption of housing
services, E is an expectations operator, and

is next period's income of the

household's young individual. The function u is assumed to be strictly
concave, increasing in each argument, twice continuously differentiable and

defines preferences over c and h that are homothetic.3 The function w is
increasing and concave.

Individual income is assumed to take one of I valuas: Yi' y2,

.

.y1,

with

.y1. An individual's income when old is determined by q—the quality
of education obtained when young—and an idiosyncratic shock.4 The

3Homothetic preferences are assumed since they simplify computation; they
are in no way essential.
4Thus, we abstract away from any possible peer effects (i.e. the
possibility that who you go to school with matters) and parental
characteristics other than income. Quantitative evidence on peer effects is
mixed. de Bartolome (1990) summarizes empirical findings and provides a
theoretical analysis of peer effects in a multi—community model as does
Benabou (1994). The importance of parental characteristics is the subject of
much controversy (see Card and Krueger (1992)).

—6—

prcability that an individual has income Yj when old given an education of

qu4ity q when young is equal to j(q).
Define v(q) by:
v(q) — Ew(y0) —

E(q)w(y1)

(2)

Preferences can then be defined over c,h and q:
u(c,h) +
We ssuzne

that v is

v(q).

(3)

increasing, concave and twice continuously differentiable.

Old individuals must choose a community in which to reside. There are
two communities. Each community j is characterized by a proportional tax

on nousing expenditures, a quality of education qj and a net—of—tax housing
pri'e Pj
in

Each community has its own

given by

Hj(pj).

housing

market, with supply of housing

Note that this function is allowed to differ across

communities, reflecting differences in land endowments and other factors. We
assume that

is increasing, continuous, and equal to zero when Pj is zero.

The gross—of—tax housing price in Cj is given by j_(l+tj)pj. We assume that
housing services are rented and, so as not to introduce further complications,

the owners of the housing services are assumed to live outside the two

communities

and simply consume their rental income. Proceeds from the tax are

used exclusively to finance local public education. We assume that the
quality of public education is equal to per pupil spending on education. All
residents of a given community receive the same quality of education;
education cannot be privately supplemented.5

5See Epple and Rocnano (1993) for a model that incorporates a private
education option.

—7—

We now describe the decisions and outcomes that correspond to each time

period. In each period the interaction among individuals and communities can
be described as a stage game of the following form.

In the first stage, all

(old) individuals simultaneously choose a community (C1, 1—1.2) in which to

reside. Thereafter, these individuals are assumed Co be unable to move.6 In
the second stage, communities choose tax rates through a process of majority

vote, after which individuals make their housing and consumption choices and
young individuals receive education in the community in which their parent has

chosen to reside. At the end of the period, uncertainty about next period's
income is resolved (note that this occurs before the residence decision of the
following period) .

Then time rolls forward and the two—stage game is repeated

with the previous period's young individuals becoming this period's old
individuals. We analyze the subgame—perfect equilibria of such a game.
Note that from an individual's perspective, a community Is completely

characterized by the pair (r,q). Thus, an individual with income y has an
indirect utility function V(w,q;y) defined by:

V(w,q;y) — Max u(c,h) +
c,h

v(q)

(4)

s.t. h+cy, cO, hO,

where

c has been chosen as nuxneraire.7 Since each individual can solve the

two—stage period game by backward induction, for any equilibrium outcome

assumption implies that each individual takC2 the composition of
the community as given when voting. This greatly simplifie. the strategic
interactions between communities.

7Note that we have implicitly assumed that education is the only
technology available by which a parent can contribute to her child's income.

—8—

each individual must reside in the community that yields her the
gr.-ater utility.

Define h(.y) to be the individual housing demand resulting from the
ma.imization problem in (4). By homotheticity h can be written as
Gi';en a set of residents of mass Nj and a tax rate tj in Cj, the variables qj
ant: Pj wuSt satisfy:

—

where

is mean income in Cj .

H(p)

(5.1)

—

(5.2)

The first equation requires that the housing

market clear. The second states that the quality of education qj equals the
per (old) person tax revenue of the community. It is straightforward to show
that for any positive value of t1 equation (5.1) has a unique solution for p.

Furthermore, p is decreasing in tj and

is increasing in tj.

The following assumption on preferences greatly facilitates
characterization of equilibrium in the two—stage game.9
Assumption 1.:

For all w,y v'(q)/(u(c,h)h(R,y)J is increasing in y.

Since v'/(uh) is the slope of an individual's indifference curve in q—
space, Assumption 1 guarantees that this slope is increasing in initial
income, i.e. that

81n what follows we assume that the optimization problem in (4) results
in interior solutions for c and h.

9Th1s assumption is a single—crossing condition. While its algebraic
expression depends on the particular model, it is used by the multi—community
literature to induce separation of individuals and thus allow equilibria to be
characterized (see, for example, ¶Jesthoff (1977), Fernandez and Rogerson
(1992, 1993) and Benabou (1994)),

—9—

S_ucch(l_-why) + uchhhy +

uh <

0

(6)

The power of this assumption to characterize equilibrium is seen in the
next two propositions which are common in the multicouununity literature.

Proposition 1: Given a set of residents, majority voting over tax
community results in the preferred tax

rate

rates

in a

of the resident with the median

income.

Proof: This follows immediately from the property of indifference curves
discussed previously. See Fernandez and Kogerson (1993) and Epple and Roceer
(1991) for detailed proofs in slightly different contexts.II

Proposition 2: If in equilibrium q is not equal to q and no community is
empty, then:
*

**

*

(1,q1)>>(w2,q2)
(ii) All individuals in C1 have income at least as great as any
individual in C2

where C1 is defined as the community with the higher value of q.

Proof:

(i.)

If

*

**

*
l<c2
and q1q2 then all individuals prefer to

which contradicts the assumption that no community

is

live in C1,

empty.

(ii) Follows directly from Assumption I regarding the slope of indifference
curves in (q,ir)

space

as a function of y.II

Proposition 2 implies that an equilibrium with q"q

will

be

characterized by the coexistence of a community with high income residents,

high gross—of—tax housing prices, and high quality education and

another

community with lower income residents, low gross—of—tax housing prices,
lower quality of education.

and a

—10—

Any equilibrium that displays property (ii) of Proposition 2 is said to
be a stratified equilibrium and is common to multi—community models.1°
Problems of existence and uniqueness of a stratified equilibrium are endemic
to multi—community models (see, for example, Westhoff (1977,1979) and Epple,

Ftlimon and Romer (1984) for a discussion). In all of the simulations
reported later in the paper, however, the specifications are such that a
unique stratified equilibrium exists.

Lastly, we turn to a characterization of the tax rates generated by

lajority voting. Using (5.1) and (5.2) one can write qj(t,,N) and
as the quality of education and tax inclusive housing price, respectively, in

C given

a tax rate t,

community mean income

and a community population of

N. The preferred tax rate for an individual with income y is determined by:

Max u(y—wh,h) +

v(q(t,p,N))

s.t. (5.1) and (5.2)

(7)

and where h solves (4), i.e. is the utility maximizing choice given w(tj,N)
and y.

Using the envelope theorem, the first order condition for this problem
implies:

uh(p4(l+t)p]_ v'q

(8)

10There may also exist equilibria which are not stratified. For example,
given identical housing supply functions there always exists an equilibrium in
which the two communities are identical. i.e. half of each income group
resides in each community, resulting in equal tax rates, prices, and quality
of education. In the analysis that follows, however, we only consider
stratified equilibria. See Westhoff (1979) and Fernandez and Rogerson (1992)
for a discussion in a slightly different context of how requiring stability of
equilibria can eliminate all non—stratified equilibria.

—11—

where p(t,,N) solves

(5.1) and (5.2). Note that p+(l+t)pt—d/dt>O.

In a stratified equilibrium C1 has both higher mean and higher median

income than C2. Two comparative statics exercises, therefore, are of
interest; how is the tax rate that solves (8), denoted by ,

affected

by (i)

a change in y and (ii) a change in M? Straightforward calculation yields:

3/8y

—

S/D > 0

(9)

and

+ (vqq + vq)
(1)

D

where D denotes the second derivative of the maximand in (7) with respect to

t. y the second order condition, D is non—positive at a maximum.

The first expression states that higher income individuals prefer higher
tax rates and necessarily, therefore, higher quality education. The second
expression says that an increase in mean income has an ambiguous effect on an
individual's preferred tax

rate.

Thus it is not possible to state whether in

equilibrium C1 must have a higher or lower tax rate than C2. As will be seen
in the next section, evidence on the relationship between community mean
income and spending on education suggests that the sign of ôt/8p is negative.

Thus far we have discussed extensively the properties of equilibrium of
the two—stage game for any period t without making reference to future

periods. It was possible to do so since the outcome in period t is

—12—

independent

of the future evolution of the state variable.11 Since our larger

game simply repeats this two—stage game every period, we need only keep track

of the state variable of this game—the income distribution of old agents—

which we write as —(),1,A2, •) where

is the fraction (or equivalently

mass) of old agents with income equal to Yj.

If
period t,

is the income distribution of old individuals at the beginning of

then

an equilibrium to the two—stage game in period t

generates

a

beginning—of—period income distribution for period t÷l, A÷i. We denote by
A(A)

the

set of values for At+i that correspond to subgame—perfect equilibria

of the two—stage game given At—i.

In

a later section of the paper we focus on

the properties of a stationary or steady state for the system i.e. a value

such that *A(A*)

3.

Calibration
The objective of this work is to quantify the effects of a major change

in the system of financing education. To do so it is necessary to specify
functional forms for the relationships introduced in the previous section and
assign parameter values. We first turn though to a brief description of the
computation of equilibrium.

3.1 Computation of Equilibrium

11This fact, which greatly simplifies the analysis, follows from the
assumption that an old individual cares about the young individual's income
rather than utility, thus severing the link between on. time period and the
next. This is a commonly used device to render this typ. of analysis
tractable. See, for example, Cooper (1992), Durlauf (1992) and Clomm and
Ravikumar (1992). See Krussel and Rios—Rull (1993) for an illustration of the
difficulties in relaxing this assumption.

—13—

We use numerical methods to solve for the equilibrium of our model.
Given a beginning—of—period income distribution, our algorithm finds all

stratified equilibria to the two—stage game played in each period. The key
fact used in this procedure is that all potential stratified equilibrium can

be parameterized by the fraction of the population that resides in C1. We
denote this fraction as p. Each value of p determines the income
distributions of the two communities since it partitions the income space into

higher income individuals that reside in C1 and lower income individuals that

reside in C2. Associated with each value of p is a highest income individual

in C2; call this value Yb2 Let Ybi be the lowest income of an individual in
Cl.

Define Wj(P) to be the utility of an individual with income Ybj residing
in Cj given that p partitions the residents of the two communities and that

each community chooses its tax rate via majority vote. An equilibrium can be

depicted as a crossing of the two

curves.12 We compute the Wj curves and

therefore find all the stratified equilibria. In all our simulations the
stratified equilibrium is unique.

Given an initial income distribution, repeated application of the above
procedure can be used to solve for the entire equilibrium sequence.

We look

for stable steady—state income distributions by examining the dynamic path
A that results from each of a large set of initial distributions.

for

In our

simulations we find a unique (stable) steady state and convergence always
occurs.

12Since the Ybi are discontinuous functions of p (given a discontinuous
income distributioni, the equilibrium need not require W1(p)—W2(p).

— 14—

3.2 Functional Forms
Three functional relationships need to be specified: preferences, housing

supply and the effect of the quality of education on subsequent earnings. For
preferences we assume:
a

a c +
u(ch) —

C

(1—aC )h

a

w(y)

—

7
a (yC —1)
q

O<a<l. Q,71 aq>o (11)

Th specification for u(ch) is a transformation of a constant elasticity of
substitution utility function. Note that Assumption 1 will be satisfied if
and only if

turns out to be strictly negative (given v'(q)>O). The choice

for u(y) displays constant relative risk aversion.
We assume identical constant elasticity housing supply functions for both
communities, i.e.
s

b

"jPj)

aPj

uSi

This specification yields the same price elasticity for both communities (i.e.
b).

The final relationship to be specified is that linking quality of

education to subsequent earnings. We assume that each individuals realized
income is a draw from a discrete approximation to a log—nornal distribution

whose mean depends on q. In particular, consider a log normal distribution of
income where log of income has mean m(q) and variance

and ra(q) is defined

by:

y0 +
m(q) —

B(l+q)
6

6

(13)

—15—

Given a vector (

.) where

Yj is contained in j'j41 for

i—l,2,...I—1, and y1)'1, we transforn the continuous distribution in (13) Co

a discrete distribution over the I income types (hence obtaining the 1(q)) by
integrating the above log normal distribution over the interval containing
A few comments should be noted concerning this choice. First, Z>O

implies that expected income is increasing in q. Second, we assume that

is

independent of q. Third, m(q) can be concave or convex in q, depending on
whether S is smaller or larger than one. Lastly, it should be noted that (13)
is a specification meant to hold only over the relevant region of q, since

otherwise some combinations of parameter values and q yield negative expected
income. 13

3.3 Parameter Values
We choose parameter values such that the steady—state equilibrium of the

model matches important observations for the US economy. In particular, we
require that the steady state match several aggregate expenditure shares,
elasticities, and properties of the income distribution for the US economy.

There are three commodities in the model: consumption, housing, and

education, and hence two independent expenditure shares. The ratio of annual
aggregate housing expenditures to aggregate expenditures on consumption (which
includes housing). H/TC, (averaged over 1960—1990) is 0.15, and the average

annual ratio of spending on public elementary and secondary education to
aggregate expenditures on consumption, E/TC, is 0.053.

13The term (1+q) is used rather than q as a normalization to avoid large
negative numbers.

—16-.

We match four elasticities: the price elasticities for housing demand and
supply

and

the elasticity of mean earnings with respect to the

quality of education mq' and the cross—sectional elasticity of community
public education expenditures with respect to community mean income

Quigley (1979) surveys the literature on urban housing markets. Based on
this survey we choose to match a price elasticity of housing demand (gross of
taxes) equal to —.7 and a price elasticity of housing supply equal to .5.

Estimates of the demand elasticity range as high as —.95, however, and the

range of estimates of the supply elasticity is large. Additionally, the
mapping between the (implicit) models underlying these elasticity estimates

and our model is not exact. Hence we also explore the effect of different
price elasticities for our results.1-4 Note that the functional form we have

chosen for the utility function does not imply a constant demand price

elasticity for housing. By homotheticity, however, the price elasticity of
demand for housing is independent of income so that we can use the model's
cross—sectional steady—state observations of housing prices and per capita

housing quantities to compute the (gross) price elasticity,15 We normalize
the parameter a in the housing supply function to equal 1.

A key difference between the two communities in our model is that in
equilibrium C1 has both higher mean income and quality of education than C2.
Therefore, from the steady—state equilibrium one can compute a cross—sectional

elasticity of (per—student) expenditures on education with respect to

14Additional empirical studies are surveyed in Olsen (1986).
demand elasticity less than one in absolute value corresponds to a
negative value of o, which is required to satisfy Assumption 1.

—17—

community mean income. Many empirical studies obtain estimates of this

elasticity

(see Inman (1979) and Bergstrom, Rubinfeld and Shapiro (1982) for

surveys). The range of estimates obtained in these studies is 0.24—1.35, with
the vast majority of the estimates lying in the narrower range of 0.4—0.8. We
choose parameter values so that

when evaluated at the steady—state

equilibrium. Note that a value greater than zero but smaller than one is
significant since it

implies

that, ceteris paribus, communities with higher

mean incomes spend more on education but tax

at

a lower rate.

To choose a value for the elasticity of mean earnings with respect to
education quality we rely on evidence presented by Card and Krueger (1992),

Wachtel (1976), and Johnson and Stafford (1973). Card and Krueger. using
several indicators of quality of schooling across states and time, estimate
that a decrease in the student to teacher ratio by ten students would increase
earnings by 4.2%. Over the period 1924—1964 the average axuiu.al ratio of

teachers wages to total costs for public elementary and secondary schools was
54% and the average annual student—teacher ratio over the same period was

28.0. The resulting estimate of the elasticity of earnings with respect to
education expenditures (quality) is 0.1774.16 Wachtel, in a study that
examines the returns to schooling using school district expenditure levels,

finds an elasticity of 0.2. Since college expenditures are included as a
separate variable in his regressions, it is reasonable to view this estimate

as being on the low side to the extent that higher secondary education

16Note that Card and Kruegers elasticity estimates combine two different
effects of quality on earnings: an increase in earnings holding years of
education constant, and an increase in wages due Co increased years of
education. While our model abstracts from the effect of quality on years of
education, we believe that the combined effect is the appropriate measure.

—18—

exnditures also increase the probability of attending a higher quality
colLege. Johnson and Stafford also find an elasticity estimate of 0.2. In

our benchmark ca1ibraton we choose mq°•1911 and explore the sensitivity of
our results to changes in this value in section 5. We compute the elasticity
by ising the cross—sectional variation in the steady—state values of q across
comaunities and equation (13) relating q to mean earnings.

The final piece of information we use in calibration is data on the

incuale distribution of families from the 1980 Census. We choose the i' to
mat.h the commonly used (in thousands) income intervals—y—(0,5.7.5,10.lS,2O.
25, 35,50)—and set the vector of yj's equal to (2.5,6.75,8.75,12.5.17.5.22.5,

30,.2.5,60). Two

additional

items of information that we match in the steady

stae of our model are the 1980 Census values of mean and median family income
values, equal to 21.4 and 17.9 respectively.17

Lastly, in our benchmark specification we set —0 which implies that v(q)
can be approximated by the expression:18

a [y0 +

v(q)

q

(14)

Although this choice of -y is somewhat arbitrary, this value lies within the
range of estimates for risk aversion obtained in the asset pricing literature

when preferences are defined over consumption sequences. In Section 5 we
consider alternative values for this parameter.

17When we compute median income in the model we assume that individuals
with income yj are uxiiforaly distributed over the interval
18The fit of this approximation depends on how closely the transformation
from a continuous to a discrete distribution preserves the mean of log income.

—19—

Thus the items of information described above (two expenditure shares,
four elasticities, mean and median income) and the chosen values of -y and a

can be used to determine the eight parameter values: 8. aq. b, 6, a B. y0
and a2.

3.4 Discussion
One

issue concerning the calibration procedure should be noted. Whereas

the model assumes that public education is entirely financed at the local
level, in the US state aid accounts for a substantial portion of expenditures

on education. It is possible, therefore, that the statistics that we match in
the calibration procedure are not invariant to the structure of educational

finances, and hence should not be used to calibrate a model with pure local

financing. The fact that financing provisions have changed significantly over
the last thirty years provides an opportunity to gauge the extent of this

problem. The aggregate expenditure shares for housing and (elementary and
secondary) education have been relatively constant over this period and we

know of no evidence to indicate significant changes in the price elasticity of

housing demand over time. Hence the concern raised by this issue for these
estimates is probably minor.

On the other hand, calibrating the model to match the cross—sectional
elasticity of expenditures on education per student with respect to community

mean income is potentially more problematic. Much of the empirical work in
this area effectively involves a regression of (log of) community education
expenditures par student on a number of variables including log of community

mean income and a variable designed to capture the effect of state aid on the

marginal price of education expenditures faced by the tax payer. The

—20--

coefficient on mean income is then interpreted as the elasticity of

expenditures with respect to mean income. While the empirical work attempts
to take into account the rules by which state aid is provided, the elasticity

estimated need not be invariant to these rules. This is perhaps less
problematic than may appear at first, however, since the estimates are derived
from studies of different states and many of the estimates are quite similar.

Nonetheless, in light of these concerns, Section S provides a sensitivity
analysis that allows us to address how changes in the values of the
elasticities used in the calibration affect our results.

4. Results
4.1 Properties of the Benchmark Model
In this section we report the parameter values generated by the

calibration described in the previous section and present some additional

properties of the steady state and of the dynamics of the systei. As noted
before, our computations yield a unique equilibrium for the one period game, a

unique stable steady state, and convergence to the steady state)9
Table I below reports the parameter values used in the calibration and
the steady—state values for several variables and Table 2 provides the steady—
state values of the community variables..

19Typically, convergence to the steady state is quite rapid (three or
four periods)

—21—

TABLE 1

—

Parameter Values
Preference Parameters a—.936 aq.O34 a—.6 i—,0001;

Housing

Supply Parameters:

a—i b—.5

Education—Earnings Relationship: 8—3.9 E—8 Yo3'01 Q2.".63
Steady—State Values
A— (.O2,.O6,.l0..21..18..13..15. .09,.05)
uiean incoine—21.56 EDediari incoe—l7.9l

—.6957. s.q•1911' Eq,•6l62
E/TC—.0545, H/TC—.1448

TAELE 2
Steady—State Equilibrium Values
Cl

C2

t

.287

.512

p

1.468

1.117

q

1.625

0.881

37.996

14.034

E/TC

.0447

.0670

H/TC

.1557

.1308

p

Yb

.314

22.5

—22—

Note that, as required for a stratified equilibrium, both quality and the

gross price of housing are higher in community one. The net—of—tax price

of

housing is also higher in C1. This is essential to produce stratification

since the tax rate in C1 is lower than that in C2 as required by qM<l (given
q1>q2 and p1>p2).

Spending per student is nearly twice as large in C1 as in C2. Although
there are many metropolitan areas in which this range of expenditures exists,
this ratio is somewhat on the extreme side of what is observed in the US data.

This is not surprising, however. Our model describes how expenditures would
vary across communities if all financing were done at the local level. The
fact that differences are not as large in the US data as they are in our
calibrated model simply indicates that state aid does (on average) decrease
differences in education expenditures across communities.
In the steady state all individuals with income greater than 22.5 live in

C1, all individuals with income less than 22.5 live in C2, and individuals

with income equal to 22.5 are split across the two communities. Since the
quality of education differs across communities, the children of wealthier
individuals will belong to a different income distribution when old than that

of the children of poorer individuals. In the steady state computed above,
these two income distributions are given by:

—23—

TABLE 3
Distribution of Income Generated by Commuxdty

Cl

C2

2.5

.02

.03

6.75

.05

.07

8. 75

.08

.10

12 5

.20

.22

17.5

18

• 18

22.5

14

.13

30.0

.17

• 14

42.5

.11

.08

60.0

.07

.04

m1—2333

£1220.76

Inc ocne

4.2 Policy Experiment
In this section we determine the effects of switching to a public

education system in which there is no local financing. Rather, per student
expenditures on education are the same regardless of the community of
residence and the total level of expenditure is determined at the state (or

national) level.20 Of courses the ann.r by which revenue is raised is also
important. We maintain the property tax as the tax

instrument

so as to keep

the local versus national question starkly focused.

20This is similar to the system of financing education of some European
cotmtries.

—24—

Formally, the stage game of section 2 is modified so that in the second
stage voting is over a single property tax

rate

and expenditur.s per student

are equal across communities.21 It should be clear that in a subgame—perfect
equilibrium of this game the price of housing must be equal across

communities: since all individuals face the same tax

rate

and

obtain

the same

quality of education independently of the community in which they live, no one

would choose to reside in the community with the higher housing price.
We use the functional forms and parameter values from the calibration
procedure described in the preceding section to determine the effects of the

change in policy. This is a classic policy analysis exercise in which the
fundamentals or primitives are held constant but individuals are allowed to
adjust their decision rules in response to the change in policy environment.

We compute the steady—state equilibrium for this economy. It remains
true that there is a unique equilibrium in each period, a unique stable steady
state, and that the economy converges to the

steady

state. Table 4 displays

some of the properties of the steady—state equilibrium.

TAZLE

4

Steady State Under National Financing
A

—

t—.386

p—l.327

q—1.180

E/TC—.0560, H/TC—.1450
mean income —

22.28, median income — 18.54

21Note that no additional sources of education finance are allowed, i.e.
no local supplements.

—25—

A comparison of the steady—state outcomes generated by the two systems

yields several expected results. Since the median voter and mean income of
the entire economy Lies between those of the individual communities, it is not

surprising that, for example, spending per student in the steady state of the
second system lies between the corresponding values for the two communities of
the first system, as do the tax rate and the price of housing. Two results
(not necessarily expected) are that average income and education expenditures
as a fraction of total consumption are both greater under national financing.

These will turn

Out to be

central to our welfare results.

Our analysis also allows us to trace out the transition path between the

two steady—states. Properties of the transition will be important to the
welfare calculation of Section 4.3. For completeness, Table 5 shows the
evolution of the tax rate, housing price, the quality of education, mean
income, and E/TC from period I (defined as the first period in which
individuals vote on a national tax rate given the income distribution, but not

the residence pattern, generated by the local finance steady state) to period
4

(the

first period in which the national finance steady state is attained)

TABLE 5.
Transition to National Finance Steady State
p

period

q

H

€/TC

1

.4000

1.2840

1.1642

21.5632

.0571

2

.3874

1.3236

1.1799

22.2184

.0561

3

.3858

1.3273

1.1801

22.2760

.0559

4

.3858

1.3274

1.1801

22.2765

.0559

—26--

As can be noted from Table 5, the transition to the steady State is

monotonic in all the relevant variables as of period 1. Compared to the local
steady—state equilibrium of period 0, however, the transition entails a jump
in E/TC as the median voter first chooses a large tax

rate

to increase

spending on education by a large amount and then, as the income distribution
shifts to the right and total income increases, the tax rate and E/TC are

chosen progressively smaller.22 We now turn to the question of the effect of
this policy change on welfare.

4.3 Welfare Effects
It is clearly desirable to have some measure of the welfare effects

associated with the change in the education financing system. We construct
the following welfare measure. For each economy we compute, for each period
t, the expected utility (EU) for a hypothetical individual whose income is a

random draw from that period's income distribution. Thus, if
fraction of the population with income Yj and
individual

with

income

is the

is the utility of an

then the expected utility in period t is given by:

EU_ Fi'i

(15)

Henceforth we define EU0 to be the value of EU in the steady state of the
local finance

system.

We first examine the value of EU in the local financing steady state vs.
the national

financing steady

the national system EU—. 3117.

state. Under the local system EU—.3l97; under
In order to translat. the difference in

22The income level of the median voter remaini unchanged throughout the
transition. This need not always be the case and would generically not be so
if a continuous income distribution were used.

—27—

utility

into a measure not affected by monotone transformations of the utility

function, we calculate the percent, t, by which the vector of income
(y1,y2,

.y9) would have to be reduced in the national financing system to

tender the hypothetical Individual indifferent between the two economies.
This calculation holds prices, tax

rates

and quality of education constant at

their original equilibrium levels. The magnitude of the required decrease in
income is 3.2%. This is a very large difference in welfare; welfare Costs of
alternative policies usually turn out to be a fraction of a percent of total
income.

We next examine the welfare effects along the transition path to the new

steady stare. Table 6 shows the value of EU from period 0—the steady—state
under local financing—through period 4 (at which point the economy is at ts
steady—state equilibrium under the national financing system).

TABLE 6

Welfare

Effects Along the Transition Path

Period
0

—.3197

0

1

—.3205

—.3

2

—.3124

2.9

3

—.3117

3.2

4

—.3117

3.2

Note that the third column gives, for each period t, the percentage

by

which the vector of income would have to be changed in order to equate that

periods EUt to EU0 (recall that prices, tax

rate

and quality of education at

—28—

kept at the equilibrium level attained in period t).23 Note that period 1
will have, ceteris paribus, a greater tendency to have a negative A associated
with it since any change in income distribution will not be realized until the
following period (i.e. the income distribution of this period is that from the

steady state under local finance).24
In order to end up with an overall welfare evaluation which includes the

transition path, we need to assign a discount rate and the associated length

of a period, r. If each period is interpreted to be the productive life of an
individual, 30 years seems a reasonable benchmark. The structure of our
model, however, is such that an individual spends th. same length of time

going to school when young as being productive when old. Thus another
reasonable alternative is a time period of 15 years. We explore the
implications of both possibilities. Instead of arbitrarily assigning an
annual discount factor, however, we ask at what rate must the future be
discounted in order for both systems (including the transition to the national

financing system) to yield the same total utility. More formally, we find the
5 such that

sO YS

A1

—

0

(16)

For r—30, this yields 9—.924 or an implicit annual interest rate r—8.2%. For
any discount factor greater than .924, therefore, under the welfare criteria
used it would be beneficial to switch to a national finance system.

23Note chat by our previous definition, A0—O.

24See Benabou (1992) for a somewhat different tension that exists between
long run and short run welfare.

—29—

Similarly,

for r—l5

the

implied annual interest rate required for indifference

is r—17.2%.

Note that the above welfare calculation did not take into account the
welfare of the owners of housing (who receive the rental income)

Total

producer surplus from the housing market is easily computed in the two
economies: Relative to its value in the steady state under local financing, it
first decreases by 1.7% in period 1. and then increases first by 2.89% in
period 2, and thereafter by 3.33% in each subsequent period (recall that the

comparison is always with period 0—the steady—state under local financing).
The

required for indifference in this case i higher (—.966 for f—30) but

in any case producer surplus is a small fraction of total steady—state income
(roughly 10%).

What is the source of the larga overall welfare gain? By definition, any
difference in welfare must be induced by changes in the Vj and/or changes in

the Ai. Thus, we must examine the change in utility derived from each income
level's new c,h, and q bundle as well as the overall change in the income
distribution.

Comparing across steady states, for the two financing systems studied
above, each of the

is greater under local financing. That is, for each

given income level, the steady state of the local financing system is

preferred to that of the national financing system. Since expected utility is
higher under national financing, it must be the case, therefore, that
favorable changes in the distribution of income (i.e. the At's) more than

offset the decrease in the Vj's. This points to a tradeoff that is central to
a comparison of a local and a national financing system. On the one hand, a

—30—

local system has the ability to make individuals better off by allowing them

greater scope to sort themselves into communities that more closely reflect
their preferences ziven their income than does a national system that forces

individuals to consume the same quantity of the publicly provided good. On
the other hand, a national system may yield a better income distribution (in
that higher output is generated) than a local system which generates greater

heterogeneity in education expenditures. We now turn to a more detailed
examination of these points.

Note first that the steady—state Income distribution under national
financing stochastically dominates that under local financing; in particular,
A1 through A4 are greater under local financing whereas A5—A9 are greater

under national financing. The income distribution under national financing is
characterized by a single parameter—the mean of the log normal distribution
(recall that the variance is constant). Thus, an explanation of the higher
level of mean income should provide insight into th. higher welfare achieved
under the national financing system.

Although equation 13 allows the mean of log income to be either concave

or convex in q, our finding of 6—3.9 implies substantial concavity. It
follows that holding total spending on education fixed, next period's mean
income is greatest if these funds are divided equally across all students.
Whereas equal division of funds is what occurs under national financing,

under local financing students in C2 receivs roughly half the per student

expenditures as students in C1. To obtain an idea of how much this concavity
matters, we calculate the income distribution that would result from
distributing total steady—state expenditures on education in the local system

—31—

equally across students. The mean of the resulting income distribution is
22.02. a gain of 2.1% over the mean of 21.56 that results from the pattern of
educational expenditures found in the steady state under local financing and
63.9% of the total increase in mean income found in the steady state of the

national system. Thus, there are large gains to be realized simply by
spreading resources equally across all students, the remainder of the gain in
mean income coming from the increased education expenditures induced by a
change in financing systems.

It may be thought that a substantial portion of the

welfare

increase is a

consequence of concavity of preferences over q since our calibration implies

that v(q) is concave. Holding total spending on education Constant,
therefore, the average value of v(q) is maximized by a constant q across

communities. A simple calculation, however, indicates that the

quantitative

magnitude of this effect is small, In particular, using the steady—state
equilibrium values under

local

financing yields v(p*q+(l_p*)q) exceeding

p*v(q)+(l_p*)v(q) by 0.0008, which is only about 10% of the difference in
steady—state expected utilities for the two financing systems.
We now turn to a closer e,camin.ation of the tradeoff between local and

national financing systems via the us. of two
4.4

illustrative

examples.

Two Examples

The previous discussion of welfare effects highlighted two opposing

factors central to a comparison of local and national financing systems. On
the one hand, local finance permits heterogeneous agents to obtain bundles

closer to their preferred ones. On the other hand, the equalization of
expenditures across students that occurs in a national system may

result

in

—32—

greater mean income. In our benchmark model the second effect is dominant.
Here we present two examples to show that this outcome is a result

of

the

particular parameter values generated by our calibration procedure and is not

inherent to the structure of the model. These examples may also

illustrate

help to

the nature of the tradeoff described above.

Table 7 displays parameter values (where different froii the benchmark

model) and some selected statistics for the steady—state allocations under

local financing for the two examples and for the benchmark. As the table
indicates, both examples are not acceptable from th. perspective of our

calibration procedure. Moat importantly, in Example 1,
in Example

examples

2,

is too low. Our

focus

is too high and

is on the predictions of these two

for steady—state welfare gains associated with a change from local

finance to national finance. These are reported on the last row of the table.

Expressed as before in terms of output, ,
for Examples 1
Table

and

the

gains ar. —6.2 and +.27 percent

2 respectively.

8 presents two additional pieces of information useful for

interpreting the above diffetences in welfare predictions. First it lists
preferred tax rates in the steady stat. under national financing by income
level for the benchmark model (BM) and the two examples. This provides some

indication of the extent to which individuals desire different bundles of
goods.25 Preferred tax rates exhibit the smallest range in Example
greatest

2 and the

range in Example I. The second piece of information provided is the

percent change in mean income (%ii) that would result if the resources devoted

25Note that this is a rough indication since both preferences and
technology differ in the three cases.

—33—

to education

in the local financing steady state were spread equally

across

all students (as in the discussion on page 30). This figure provides some
indication of the potential gains from equalizing expenditures. Note that
this number is largest in the benchmark model and smallest in Example 2.

Selected

6

TABLE 7
Features Under Local Financing

BM

Ex. I

—3.9

.5
.23

8

8

3.0

y0
a

.03

.05

21.56

18.16
.0852
3.12

E/TC .0545
.616
.19

3.2

A

Preferred

Tax

Rates

2.9
.20
21.79
.0556
.35
.03

—6.2

.27

Ex.1

Ex.2

.00
.08
.16
.32
.51
.68
.93

.53

1.31
1.81

2.1

1.0

.2

.32
.35
.39

.41
.44
.49

Sm

35

.30
.35
.36
.38
.40
.42
.44
.46
.48

.30

y7
y8
Y9

.15

—8

TABLE 8
Under National Financing and Sm

.22
Y2
y3
y4
y5

2.0

Ex. 2

An explanation of the contrasting results for welfare gains in the three

cases is as follows. Example
very

important

2 is

a case where spending on education is not

(as evidenced by the small value of jq).

neither of the two

factors

Consequently,

mentioned above is particularly significant and the

—34—

overall welfare gain is also small. Example 1 is a cas. where heterogeneity
is quite important. Thus, although there are sizable gains to be had simply
by smoothing expenditures across students, these are outweighed by the gains
associated with allowing individuals to sort themselves into different

communities. Relative to Example 1, the benchmark model reverses the relative
magnitudes of the two effects yielding a larg. overall welfare improvement.

5. Sensitivity Analysis and Alternative Comparisons
Our calibration exercise relies on several estimates obtained from

empirical work. Because the empirical studiss often suggest a range of
estimates rather than a single value, it is of interest to check the
sensitivity of our policy analysis to the use of a].t.rnative values in the

calibration exercise. Furthermore, it is also of interest to see what our
model implies for some statistics not used in our calibration exercise.

5.1 Sensitivity to Alternative Parameter Values
In all the exercises that follow, the model's parameters are
recalibrated, i.e. parameters are chosen so that th. model's steady—state

matches the appropriate set of statistics. To focus the discussion, we
consider only the effect of these alternatives on the steady—state welfare
calculation carried out in Section 4.3.

We begin with a brief discussion of three variations that we found to
have virtually no effect on the magnitude of th. steady—state welfare gain:

changes in the preference parameter

and in the two housing price

elasticities. Recall that 1 was set to 0 in the benchmark specification. The
results are very similar when 1

is

set to values of —l and —5. Similarly, we

—35—

found no significant effect of changing the values of the price elasticities

of housing used in the calibration. For the demand elasticity we used a value
of —.93 (which corresponds to the upper range of estimates) ,

and for the

supply elasticity we used values ranging from 1/3 to 3.

In contrast to the above, we found

that

variations in

and

q

have

a significant impact on the magnitude of the steady—state welfare gains

predicted by our model. Table 9 presents the results for several alternative
values of these two elasticities. (In each case the table shows the parameter
values that differ from those of the benchmark specification.) In the
interest of space we do not include any of the other summary statistics for
the steady—state equilibria, but note that in all cases these values are
similar to those for the benchmark model.

TABLE 9
Sensitivity Analysis

B

Y0

—l

.95

3.37

—2
—3
—5
—7

2.00
4.30
18.5
90.0

(q4

&

1.28
.92
.74
.51
.39

S
.12
.31

—4.5

3.135
3.052
2.985
2.950

B

7.70

Sq
.030

.032
.030
.032
.035

A
5.67
4.48
4.10
2.90
2.23

5q

2.95

.053

—3.8 12.25 3.105 .021

From the table we note that although changes in

1.60
5.69

result in a sizable

range of associated welfare gains, in all cases the welfare gain is
substantial. Furtheriiore, welfare gains significantly larger than those

reported in Section 4.3 are apparently plausible. As for the alternative
values for

mq

these are not chosen in accord with any ranges based on

—36—

empirical work (as indicated in Section 3, the range of estimates for this

value is in fact quite tight). Nonetheless, we think it informative to
indicate the sensitivity of our results to this value. For the range of
values displayed in the table, the steady—state welfare gain appears to be
rougbly linear in this elasticity.

5.2 Some Additional Comparisons
In addition to the previous sensitivity analysis, it is also of interest
to contrast the income distribution and the intergenerational mobility
generated by our model with that observed in reality as well as with some

alternative measures of the rate of return to education. Th, calibration
ensures that the mean and median income in the model's steady state are

approximately equal to their counterparts in the US data. The distribution of
income from the 1980 US Census is given by (.07,.06,.07,.l5.l5,.14,.l9,
.ll.,.06). As is well—known, the log normal distribution does a good job of
accounting for the observed income distribution except that it does not have

enough mass in the tails. Not surprisingly, therefore, comparing with the A
in Table 1, the saaa is true of the model's steady—state income distribution.

The intergenerational mobility implied by the steady—state equilibrium of
the mbdel are summarized by the numbers in Table 10 and contrasted with
averages obtained for the US by Zimmerman (1992) which are presented below in
parentheses.

-.37—

TABLE 10
Intergenerational Income Mobility
Parent's Income Quartile
lop
Top
Child's
Income
Quartile

Second

Third
Bottow

Second

Third

Bottom

.31.

.25

.22

.22

(.42)
.23

(.26)

(.20)

(.11)

.24

.25

.25

(.34)

(.24)

(.23)

(.21)
.26
(.33)
.27
(.35)

.24

.25

.26

(.16)

(.27)
.25
(.24)

(.31)

.22

(.09)

.27

(.26)

Note that our model produces a smaller probability of a child ending up in the
cop quarter given that the parent is in that quarter and likewise a smaller

probability of remaining in the bottom quarter given that the parent is in

that quarter. This is probably in large part due to the fact that we only
have two communities and use a log normal distribution to approximate the
income distribution generated by the quality of education in each community.

A

larger

number

of

communities would give wealthier parents access to a higher

q (and thus their children a greater probability of being likewise wealthy)
and the opposite would hold for poorer parents.26'27

An additional piec. of information that can be computed using the steady—
state allocations is the implicit rate of return to expenditures on education.
In the steady state, C1 spends an additional q1—q2 per student on education.

26Note that the equivalent to Table 10 under national financing would
have .25 for all its entries since parental income doe. not affect the child's
income under a national system. Henc. there is greater intergenerational
mobility between the bottom and the top quartiles under a national financing
system.
or e
in the calibration also make
27Higher values of either tm
q
model's predictions closer to Ziaiierman''numbers.

the

—38—

This leads to a gain in mean income of m1—a2. Assuming that a period lasts r
years, the implied annual rate of return r satisfi.s:

r

(l+r) —

m —m

12

q1—q2

For a time period of thirty years, using the appropriate steady—state values
yields r—.0422 whereas for r—15, r—.086.

There is a fairly large literature that attempts to determine the rate of
return to investment in human capital, in particular, the return to an

additional year of schooling (see, for example. Becker (1975)). Returns of
between 4 and 9 percent are at the lower half of the range found in this

literature, where the typical range is 5—15%. Although our calibration
procedure does not attempt Co match this rate of return, it is obviously
closely related to

aq'

which is defined as (log(m1)—log(m2)]/(log(q1)—

log(q2)]. Thus one possibility is to calibrate to a larger i'q yielding
higher implied annual rates of return (See Table 9).

6. Concluding Remarks

This paper develops a dynamic multi—community model and calibrates it to

US data. W. use th. calibrated model to evaluate the consequences of
reforming the public education finance system from a system of pure local
finance to one in which education is financed at the national level and
expenditures per student are equal across communities.

We analyze the effects of such a reform on allocations and welfare, both

across steady states and along the transition path. Our findings indicate a
substantial welfare gain associated with this change in policy. In our

—39—

benchmark model the steady—state welfare gain associated with the national
finance system is over 3% of total income.

Some simplifying features of the model should be kept in mind when

interpreting the above welfare gain, First, our analysis assumes that all
parents sand their children to public schools. While under the current system
of local finance in the US less than 10% of children attend private schools,
it

is

possible that a move to a national finance system would increase this

proportion and thereby diminish public support for public expenditure on

education. Second, we assume that the quality of education is only affected
by

spending

per student; in particular, we abstract from any peer effects and

assume that parental characteristics do not influence educational outcomes

other than through spending on education. Third, this welfare gain presumably
overstates the potential gain.s from reform facing a state whose educational

finance system is somewhere between the extremes of local and national

financing.28 Future work should focus on evaluating how the incorporation of
these factors in the model influences the evaluation of public education
finance systems.

281n the US, local spending accounts for roughly 45% of all spending on
public education. Potential benefits from r.forms d.p.nd on both th. fraction
of total expenditures accounted for by state aid and on the rules which govern
its allocation. A system whereby State aid simply matches local spending
dollar for dollar is obviously quite different from one in which aid is
primarily targeted to lower—income communities. Th. framework developed here
can also be used to analyze systems which involve a mix of local and state
financing.

References
Becker, G., Human Capital, University of Chicago Press, (1975).

Benabou, R., "Heterogeneity, Stratification, and Growth" mimso, MIT, 1992.
"Education, Poverty and Growth: The Local Connection,"
mimeo, MIT, 1994.

Bergstrom, T.C. , D.L. Rubinfeld, and P. Shapiro, "Micro—Based Estimates of
Demand Functions for Local School ExpendItures," Econometrica 50 (1982),
1183—1205.

Boidrin, M.,"Public Education and Capital Accumulation," Northwestern
University Working Paper, 1992.

Card, D. and A. Krueger, "Does School Quality Matter? Returns toEducation
and the Characteristics of Public Schools in the US,- Journal of Political
Economy 100 (1992), 1—40.
Coleman, J., et al, Equality of Educational Opportunity, Washington, D.C.
(1966).
Cooper, S. ,

"A

Positive

Theory of Income Redistribution," miaeo, Stanford

University, 1992.

de Bartolome, C., "Equilibrium and Inefficiency in a Community Model With
Peer Group Effects," Journal of Political Economy 98 (1990), 110—133.
Durlauf, S., "A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality", mimeo, Stanford,
1992.

Epple, D., Filimon, R., and T. Romer, "Community Development With Endogenous
Land Use Controls," Journal of Public Economics 35 (1988), 133—162.

—,

,
, "Equilibrium Among Local Jurisdictions: Toward an
Integrated Treatment of Voting and Residential ChoiCe," Journal of Public
Economics 24 (1984), 281—308.

Epple, D., and G. Platt, "Equilibrium Among Jurisdictions When Households
Differ by Preferences and Income," mimeo, 1990, Carnegie—Mellon University.
Epple, D. and R. Roaano, "Competition Between Private and Public Schools,
Vouchers and Peer Group Effects," aimeo, Carnegie—Mellon, 1993.
Epple, D. and T. Romer, "Mobility and Redistribution," Journal of Political
Economy 99 (1991), 828—858.
Fernandez and Rogerson, "On the Political Economy of Education Subsidies,"
mimeo, Boston University, 1991.
"Income Distribution, Communities and the Quality of Public
Education: A Policy Analysis," NBER Working Paper, 1992.

"Keeping People Out: Income Distribution, Zoning and the
Quality of Public Education." NBER Working Paper No. 4333, l993a.

"Existence of Equilibrium in a Multi—community Model," notes
in progress. 1993b.
"The Political Economy of Local Redistribution in the
Presence of Zoning," NEER Working Paper, 1993c.
Glomra, G. and 8. Ravikumar, "Public versus Private Investaent in Human
Capital: Endogenous Growth and Income Inequality," Journal of Political
Economy 100 (1992), 818—834.

Hamilton, 8., "Zoning and Property Taxation in a System of Local
Governments," Urban Studies 12 (1975). 205—211.

Hanushek. E., "The Economics of Schooling: Production and Efficiency in
Public Schools," Journal of Economic Literature 24 (1986), 1141—1177.
Ininan, R., "Optimal Fiscal Reform of Metropolitan Schools: Some Simulation
Results," American Economic Review 68 (1978), 107—122.
"The Fiscal Performance of Local Governaeats: An Interpretive
Review." in Current Issues in Urban Economics, edited by P. Mieszkowski and
M. Straszheim, (1979).

Johnson, G. and F. Stafford, "Social Returns to Quantity
Schooling," Journal of Human Resources 8 (1973), 139—55.

and Quality

of

Olsen, E.O., "The Demand and Supply of Housing: A Critical Survey of the
Empirical Literature," in Handbook of Regional and Urban Economics, ed. E.
Mills, (1986).
Perotti, R., "Political Equilibrium, Income Distribution and Growth," Review
of Economic Studies 60 (1993), 755—776.
Quigley, J., "What Have We Learned About Urban Housing Markets?," in Current
Issues in Urban Economics, edited by P. Mieszkowski and M. Straszheia,
(1979).

Rose—Ackerman, S., "8.yond Tiebout: Modeling the Political Economy of Local
Government," in Zodrow, G.R. ed., Local Provision of Public Services: The
Tiebout Model After Twenty—five Years, (Academic Press), (1983), 55—83.
"Market Models of Local Government: Exit, Voting and the Land
Market," Journal, of Urban Economy 6 (1979), 319—337.
P.othstein, P., "The Demand for Education With 'Power Equalizing' Aid,"
Journal of Public Economics 49 (1992), 135—162.

Saint—Paul, G. and T. Verdier, "Education, Democracy end Growth,"
forthcoming, Journal of Development Economics (1994).

Wachtel, P.. "The Effects on Earnings of School and College Investment
Expenditures," Review of Economics and Statistics 58 (1976), 326—31.
Westhoff, F., "Existence of Equilibria in Economies With a Local Public
Good," Journal of Economic Theory 14 (1977), 84—112.

Policy Infer.nc.z
Journal of Urban Econoiijcs

Zizmerian,

froii Coiiaunity Choice
6 (1979), 535—549.

Models: A Caution,

D., Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature, Aiierican
Economic Review 82 (1992), 409—429.

