NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES
pRECAUTIONARY SAVING
AND SOCIAL INSURANCE

It Glenn Hubbard
Jonathan Skinner
Stephen P. Zeldes
Working Paper No. 4884
NATIONALS BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

We are very grateful to Eric Engen. Robert Reider, and Charlie Ye for seemingly endless

computer programming, and to Keith Daliara, Leslie Jeng. David Kerko, Vasan Kesavan, Richard
McGrath, and Dan Zabinski for research assistance. We have benefitted from comments by
Henry Aaron, Anne Alstott, Douglas Bernheim, Michael Cragg, Eric Engen, Martin Feldstein.
Edward Green, Kevin Hassett, Janet Holtzblatt, Anil Kashyap, John Laitner, James Mirrlees.

Robert Moffitt, James Poterba, Elizabeth Powers, Edward Prescott, Robert Shiller, Harrison
White. David Wilcox, and seminar participants at Boston College, Carnegie-Mellon University,
University of Chicago, Columbia University, Dartmouth College, Harvard University, Johns
Hopkins University, London School of Economics, University of Maryland, University of
Minnesota, NBERI New York University, Nuffield College (Oxford), Ohio State University,
Princeton University, University College (London), the University of Toronto, the University of
Virginia, Yale University, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis, and the Macro Lunch Group at the University of Pennsylvania. This research was
supported by the Harry and Lynde Bradley Foundation and the National Science Foundation.

Hubbard acknowledges financial support from the Faculty ResearchFund of the Graduate School
of Business of Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and a grant from
the John M. Olin Foundation to the Center for the Study of the Economy and the State of the
University of Chicago; Skinner acknowledges financial support from the National Institute on
Aging; and Zeldes is grateful for financial assistance under an Alfred P. Sloan Fellowship. Major
computational work was conducted using the Cornell National Supercomputer Facility, and was
funded by the Cornell Theory Center and the National Science Foundation. This paper is part

of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by It Glenn Hubbard, Jonathan Skinner and Stephen P. Zeldes. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicitpermission
provided that full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4884
October 1994
PRECAUTIONARY SAVING
AND SOCIAL INSURANCE

ABSTRACT
Microdata studies of household saving often find a significant group in the population

with virtually no wealth, raising concerns about heterogeneity in motives for saving. In
particular, this heterogeneity has been interpreted as evidence against the life-cycle model of
saving. This paper argues that a life-cycle model can replicate observed patterns in household
wealth accumulation after accounting explicitly for precautionary saving and asset-based meanstested social insurance. We demonstrate theoretically that social insurance programs with means

tests based on assets discourage saving by households with low expected lifetime income. In
addition, we evaluate the model using a dynamic programming model with four statevariables.
Assuming common preference parameters across lifetime-income groups, we are able to replicate

the empirical pattern that low-income households are more likely than high-income households
to hold virtually no wealth. Low wealth accumulation can be explained as a utility-maximizing
response to asset-based means-tested welfare programs.

R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
609 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
Stephen P. Zeldes
Finance Department
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia. PA 19104
and NBER

Jonathan Skinner
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
114 Rouss Hall
Charlottesville, VA 22901
and NBER

I.

INTRODUCTION
In 1990, Grace Capetillo, a single mother receiving welfare

assistance, was charged by the Milwaukee County Department of

Social Services with fraud. Her crime: Her saving account balance
exceeded $1000, the allowable asset limit for welfare recipients

(Rose, 1990).' How do programs with asset restrictions, such as
Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC), Medicaid,
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), and food stamps, affect the

incentive to accumulate wealth? This paper addresses the interaction
of certain social insurance programs and saving, first in simple
theoretical models and later in a dynamic programming model with

multiple sources of uncertainty.2 We find that the interaction of a
social insurance "safety net" with uncertainty about earnings and outof-pocket medical expenses implies behavior that contrasts sharply

with simplified models that ignore uncertainty or social insurance

programs, or focus only on static incentive effects of these

programs. The prospect of bad realizations in future earnings or
out-of-pocket medical expenses can influence saving behavior even if

the individual never actually encounters the downturn or catastrophic

medical expense and never receives transfer payments. Hence the
impact of social insurance programs on saving behavior extends to

More recently, the Connecticut case of Cecilia Mercado and her daughter
Sandra Rosado attracted widespread media attention. Sandra saved $4900 from
part-time jobs during high school with the goal of going to college. When
officials learned of the accumulated assets, they urged Sandra to spend the
money quickly and ordered her mother to repay $9342 in AFDC benefits that
she had received while the money was in the bank (Hays, 1992).
2

Strictly speaking, by "social insuranceH we mean welfare programs as
opposed to such entitlement programs as Social Security or Medicare.

saving behavior of potential, as well as actual, recipients.
We use a model of consumption and saving subject to
uncertainty to address an empirical "puzzle" of wealth accumulation:
As we document below, many households accumulate little wealth

over their life cycle. For those with low lifetime earnings
(represented by educational attainment), wealth accumulation is

inconsistent with the orthodox life-cycle model; even prior to
retirement, during what are normally considered peak years of

wealth holding, many families hold little wealth. By contrast,
households with higher lifetime earnings exhibit saving behavior that
is broadly consistent with the orthodox life cycle model, in the sense
that nearly every households in this group has significant wealth
accumulation near retirement.

A number of authors have examined the effects of
uncertainty on optimal intertemporal consumption and saving

decisions.3 Deaton (1991) and Carroll (1992) examine the
implications for wealth accumulation in these precautionary saving

models, and argue that they imply too large an accumulation of

wealth. They reconcile the empirical finding that most households
accumulate little wealth with the predictions of the life-cycle model

' Studies of precautionary saving in response to earnings risk include
Cantor (1985), Skinner (1988), Zeldes (1989), Kimball (1990a,b), and
Caballero (1991), among others; for comprehensive reviews of the literature see
Deaton (1992) and Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b). Studies of
precautionary saving in response to lifetime uncertainty include Yaari (1965),
Davies (1981), Skinner (1985), Abel (1986), Hubbard and Judd (1987), Hurd
(1989), and Engen (1992). Kotlikoff (1988) suggested that uncertainty about
medical expenses could have a large impact on precautionary saving behavior.

2

by assuming that the rate of time preference for most people is high

relative to the real interest rate, so that in a certainty model families
would prefer to borrow against future income. Earnings uncertainty
(and in some cases borrowing constraints) leads individuals to
maintain a "buffer stock" or contingency fund against income
downturns, but the impatience keeps these buffer stocks small. This
approach offers one explanation of why so many families save little
throughout their life.
While the buffer stock model of wealth accumulation can

explain low levels of wealth, it encounters difficulty in explaining
saving behavior of those who do accumulate substantial assets. In
particular, the buffer stock explanation must assume that these

families have lower rates of time preference than families that do not

accumulate wealth. We take an alternative approach, assuming that
all individuals have the same preferences, and show that the
differences in wealth of different groups can be explained by the
interaction of uncertainty and social insurance programs with asset-

based means testing. We develop simple analytical models to
demonstrate the effects on optimal consumption of a social insurance
program whose eligibility depends on current wealth -- i.e., one that

involves asset-based means testing. While much work has been done
examining the effects on economic decisions (e.g., labor supply) of
earnings-based means tests, little has been done examining the

3

effects of asset-based means testing.4
Under uncertainty, asset-based means tested social insurance

programs depress saving for two distinct reasons. First, the
provision of support in the bad states of the world reduces the
uncertainty facing households, and therefore decreases precautionary

saving (this effect would be present even in the absence of the asset

test). Second, the restriction on asset holdings implies an implicit
tax of 100 percent on wealth in the event of an earnings downturn or
large medical expense. The possibility of facing this implicit tax
further reduces optimal saving.
We next show that the nonlinear budget constraint implied by
these programs leads to a nonmonotonic relationship between wealth

and consumption over certain ranges of wealth, so that an increase in
wealth can lead to a decline in consumption; in other words, the
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) out of wealth can actually be

Sherraden (1991) is the only analysis we could find examining asset-based
means tests in welfare programs. He argues that the main effects are to reduce
participating households' ability to obtain education or training or finance the
purchase of a home, which limits the ability of these households to improve
their social standing. He also argues that the opportunity to accumulate assets
has important effects beyond the consumption that it enables, by creating an
orientation towards the future and reducing the isolation of the poor from the
economy and society.
There is also some recent work on other types of asset-based means
testing. Feldstein (1992) has shown how college financial aid scholarship rules,
which depend negatively on existing family assets, create an implicit tax on
saving. He finds empirical evidence that such rules have a significant negative
impact on wealth accumulation for eligible families. Another example occurs
when parents expect to be supported by their children in old age; each
additional dollar of wealth accumulated by parents reduces the amount of
support given to them by their children (for a theoretical model, see, for
example, O'Connell and Zeldes, 1993).

4

negative over certain ranges. This result is in sharp contrast to
standard models in which consumption is always increasing in
wealth.

In general, the model cannot be solved analytically, so we
use the dynamic programming model developed in Hubbard,
Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b) in which households face uncertainty
about earnings, out-of-pocket medical expenses, and length of life.5

We separate the population into three education (as a proxy for
lifetime-income) groups and use the empirical parameters for
earnings and out-of-pocket medical expenditures processes for each

group estimated in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b). After
solving numerically for the optimal state-contingent consumption, we

draw randomly from the probability distribution of uncertain health

and earnings in each year and generate a time-series for several
thousand simulated families.

We find that the presence of means-tested social insurance
has a disproportionate impact on saving behavior of lower-lifetime-

income households. For ekample, suppose that we denote families

with total net wealth less than current income as "low wealth. Our
model predicts that, for households aged 50-59, raising the minimum

In that paper, we focus on aggregate saving rather than the distribution of
wealth. We find that precautionary saving is large in a realistically
parameterized life-cycle model; that is, the precautionary motive plays an
important role in determining aggregate saving. We also show that our model
better replicates empirical regularities in (1) aggregate wealth and the aggregate
saving rate, (2) cross-sectional differences in consumption-age profiles by
lifetime-income group, and (3) short-run time-series properties of consumption,
income, and wealth.

5

government-guaranteed level of consumption (which we call the

consumption "floor") from $1000 to $7000 increases the percentage

of families with low wealth by 22.9 percent for low-lifetime-income
households, but by only 4.4 percent among high-lifetime-income
households. That is, social insurance policies designed to maintain
consumption have the greatest negative effect on saving for lower
income groups. This is because the guaranteed consumption floor of
$7000 (identical for all education groups) represents a significantly
larger fraction of lifetime income for the population with low

lifetime income. We find the simulated distributions of wealth by
age match in many respects the actual distributions of wealth by age
documented in the United States.

The paper is organized as follows. In section II, we present
empirical evidence from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics

(PSID) on the distribution, by age and education, of U.S. household
wealth. Section III presents simple models of consumption in the
presence of social insurance and asset-based means testing. Section
IV describes our multiperiod dynamic programming model and the

empirical specification of the parameters of model. In section V, we
present the numerical results, and the simulated age-wealth patterns
are shown to mimic in certain important ways the empirical wealth

patterns discussed in section II. Section VI concludes the paper.

6

H.

THE DISTRIBUTION OF WEALTH BY AGE IN THE
UNITED STATES.
In traditional life-cycle models, asset accumulation by the

wealthy is essentially a scaled-up version of asset accumulation by

the poor. To see this, consider a life-cycle model under certainty
with time-separable homothetic (constant relative risk aversion)

preferences. Let two types of families each begin with zero assets,
have the same preferences, face the same interest rates and face age-

earnings profiles that are proportional to one another. Income in any

year for the first type of family ("high earnings") is a >

1

times as

great as it is for the other type ("low earnings"). Under these
assumptions, in every period consumption and accumulated assets of

the high-earnings type will be a times as great as those of the lowearnings type; the ratio of assets to income for the high-earnings
family will be identical to that of the low-earnings family.

Adding earnings uncertainty to the above model does not

necessarily change this result. If the probability distribution for all
future incomes is such that every possible realization of income for

the high-earnings type is a times as great as for the low-earnings
type (but the corresponding probabilities are identical), then for
given realizations of earnings (appropriately scaled by a) over the
life cycle, both consumption and assets will be a times as great (see

Bar-Ilan, 1991). In this case, the distribution of the ratio of
accumulated assets to income will be the same for the two types of
individuals.

Suppose that unobservable lifetime earnings are related to

7

educational attainment. The simple example above assumed that the
earnings of groups with high or low levels of educational attainment
are proportional to one another at every age and state of the world.
In reality, the age-earnings path for college-educated workers is
more steeply sloped, and the variance of log earnings differs across
education groups, issues we discuss in more detail in section IV.
Still, the implication of the traditional life-cycle model is that saving

behavior of the poor and the rich should differ only to the extent that
the distribution of earnings and the age-earnings profile differ across
lifetime-earnings groups.
As we show below, the actual pattern of wealth holdings for

many households is quite different from the simple prediction of the

life-cycle model. Empirically, the wealth accumulation patterns for
families with lower education levels are not scaled-down versions of

the wealth patterns of families with higher levels of education. The
cross-sectional age-wealth patterns for many lower-income families

does not exhibit the "hump-shaped" profiles of wealth accumulation

predicted by the life-cycle model. By contrast, wealth-age profiles
for college-educated families display, to a greater extent, the humpshaped wealth-age profile consistent with life-cycle predictions.

We examine wealth holdings using the full sample of the

1984 Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). We use the 1984
PSID population weights to make the sample representative of the

8

U.S. population.6 Measured wealth is equal to the sum of assets -including stocks, bonds, checking accounts, and other financial

assets; real estate equity; and vehicles -- minus liabilities that include
home mortgages and personal debts. This measure includes
Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) but excludes pension and

Social Security wealth. Wealth is generally positive, though a small

proportion of respondents reported negative wealth.7 To control
for differences in lifetime income, the sample was stratified into
three categories of education of the family head: less than twelvç

years (no high school degree), comprising 28 percent of the
weighted sample; between twelve and, fifteen years (with a high

school degree), comprising 52 percent; and sixteen years or more
years (college degree) comprising the remaining 20 percent.8

6 An alternative source would have been the Federal Reserve Board's 1983
Survey of Consumer Finances. The PSID survey was not as comprehensive as
the Survey of Consumer Finances because it did not oversample the wealthy.
According to Curtin, Juster, and Morgan (1989), however, the PSID was
surprisingly close in accuracy to the SCF except among the very wealthy.

Negative wealth was truncated at -$20,000 for three individuals. In a
number of cases, respondents did not reply to questions about wealth holdings
of specific assets. In these cases, the interviewer attempted to bracket the
amount of assets by asking sequential questions: e.g., are your stock holdings
$10,000 or more; if not, are they $1000 or more, etc. We estimated the assets
of those who fell within particular brackets to be equal to the average holdings
within the same bracket of those who provided exact answers. Note that
because the sample was linked to earnings data during 1983-87, we exclude
from the sample families who experienced major compositional changes during
this period.
S An alternative approach to using education as a proxy for lifetime income
would be to stratify by average earnings during the sample period. Such an
approach is probably less accurate than using education; current earnings may
(continued...)

9

Scatter diagrams of the wealth holdings by age for these

three groups, presented in Figures 1(a) - 1(c), emphasize the sharp
differences in wealth accumulation patterns. To adjust for
differences in population weighting, each observation is "jittered" by
placing dots (equal in number to the population weight) randomly

around the family's reported wealth.9 Quintile regressions that
estimate the 20th, 40th, 60th, and 80th percentiles of wealth holdings
as a cubic function of age are superimposed on each of the graphs.
Under the simple homothetic model above, wealth holdings

will be proportional to lifetime income. To evaluate this hypothesis,
we have adjusted the vertical axis in Figures 1(a) - 1(c) to correct

for differences in lifetime resources. To do this, we calculate a
simple measure of "permanent income": the constant annual real
flow of consumption that the average life-cycle household could
afford given the education-specific profile of after-tax earnings,
Social Security payments, and pensions between age 21 and 85

(assuming a real rate of interest of 3 percent).'° For those with the

8(. . .continued)

not be a good predictor of future earnings, nor is information on past earnings
always available for retirees.
For example, an observation with a weight of unity would yield a single
dot in the graph, while an observation with a weight of ten would result in ten
dots randomly arrayed around the sample observation. The graphs are
produced using the "jitter" option in STATA.
'°

Equivalently, this number may be viewed as "amortized' lifetime income,
since it has the same present value as actual earnings and retirement income.
The estimating equations used to calculate average earnings and retirement
income can be found in Appendix A of Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (l994b).

10

Figure Ia: Net Wealth by Age, 1984 PSID: No High School Degree

!tfl

($224,120]
12
10

w

2
0

Figure Ib: Net Wealth by Age, 1984 PSID: High School Degree
L528g.iB0]
12

10•

10

C

a

2
0
2b

30

4i 5b6b
Age

Figure Ic: Net Wealth by Age, 1984 PSID: College Degree
t5416,8o33
12

10•

14
2
0

2bth4bthth7bth9b
Age

Notes to Figures 1(a) - 1(c): Predicted 20th through 80th percentiles of the wealth
distribution, expressed as cubic polynomials in age, are also shown. The vertical axis
measures the ratio of reported individual net wealth to (education-specific) average
permanent income. Average permanent income for those without high school
degrees is $1 7,241, for high school graduates $22,244, and for college graduates
$32,062. The maximum (dollar) wealth level shown at the top of the vertical axis is
thirteen times permanent income.

lowest educational attainment, the level of "permanent income" is

$17,241, for high school graduates, $22,244, and for college

graduates, $32,062. Thus, lifetime earnings are approximately
twice as high for college graduates as for those with no high school

degree. Wealth is plotted as a multiple of this measure of permanent
income. A wealth corresponding to 3.0 among college graduates,

for example, is equivalent to $96,186 in net wealth. We truncate the
graphed wealth distribution at 13 times the benchmark income level

for each education group to promote legibility of the graphs (the

truncated values are shown, also jittered, along the top of the
respective graph).'1

Begiiming first with Figure 1(a), the cross-sectional evidence

indicates that, over the life cycle, many households without high
school degrees own very little wealth, even during the ten years

prior to retirement that would normally correspond to years in which

wealth is highest. The 40th percentile of net wealth for this group is

less than $20,000 at all age groups. High school graduates, in
Figure 1(b), accumulate a moderate amount of wealth. The wealth
accumulation pattern of college-educated households appears most

consistent with the life-cycle model; by ages 50 and beyond, very

few households hold less than $50,000 in net household wealth. Of
course, inferring life-cycle patterns from cross sectional data is
speculative, but Figures 1(a)-1(c) lend support to the notion that

"Thus, as marked in brackets on the vertical axis, the highest level of
wealth graphed for those without a high school degree is $244,120 (13 x
$17,241), while the highest level of wealth graphed for those with a college
degree is $416,803.
11

typical wealth accumulation patterns, differ substantially by lifetime
income.'2

Detailed wealth holdings by age and by education are shown

in Table 1, with all averages weighted by the PSID family weights.
Median household wealth is shown both inclusive of and exclusive of

housing equity, where housing equity is calculated as the market

value of the house less the outstanding mortgage balance. Median
income measures labor income, transfer income (including food

stamps), pension income, and Social Security benefits for the family

head and spouse. Simple ratios of median wealth or median nonhousing wealth to median income suggest sharp differences in asset
accumulation patterns across educational groups for older age

groups. For the lowest education group at ages 50-59, for example,
median nonhousing wealth is only about half of the median income.
By contrast, median nonhousing wealth is twice median income for
households headed by college graduates.

To examine the wealth distribution further, we calculate the
percentage of households with net total wealth less than one year's

income. This is an arbitrary but convenient measure of "low
wealth" households. Table 1 shows that, for younger households,
households with less net wealth than current income constitute he
vast majority of each education group, ranging from three-fourths
among college-educated households to nearly seven-eighths among

households without a high school degree. For older cohorts, the

differences in wealth holdings become more apparent. Virtually all

12

This result is consistent with the findings of Bernheim and Scholz (1993).

12

Table 1: Median Wealth and Income, By Age and Education, 1984

Age
< 30

30-39

40-49

50-59

60-69

70

+

No High School Degree
Median Wealth ($)

650

13,450

20,000

44,000

36,800

28,000

MedianNonhousing
Wealth ($)

605

3,000

5,500

11,500

7,500

7,800

10,800

17,000

19,954

20,792

8,860

5,936

Wealth C Income (%)

86.3

68.3

50.7

30.0

29.6

25.0

Nonhousing Wealth

86.1

79.9

75.2

49.8

40.7

39.7

132

161

155

217

211

198

Median Income ($)

C Income/2 (%)

Number of Households

High School Degree
Median Wealth ($)

6,855

28,300

62,600

90,300

88,506

92,500

Median Nonhousing
Wealth ($)

4,500

8,100

15,500

39,000

38,068

17,700

Median Income ($)

21,360

27,000

30,000

26,808

15,840

9,028

Wealth C Income (%)

81.6

51.4

27.3

15.8

13.7

7.4

Nonhousing Wealth

80.7

66.5

45.4

31.0

20.3

12.0

346

604

238

205

148

101

C lncome/2 (%)
Number ol Households

College Degree

11,000

54,700

113.000

179,000

157,000

115,500

Median Nonhousing
Wealth ($)

8,300

17,600

41,000

96,000

83,000

57,760

Median Income ($)

26,000

37,000

47,476

48,000

29,264

18,200

Wealth C Income (%)

74.9

38.4

22.9

4.6

0.4

0

Nonhousing Wealth

67.6

50.4

31.6

22.0

6.4

6.6

Median Wealth ($)

C

Income/2 (%)

Source:

Panel Study of Income Dynamics. 1984.

Note:

'Wealth 'C Income' reports the weigbted paceinp of the ample with re worth (SIudinj
housing equity) less than afier-ta mt ti of asset ircont. Similarly, 'Noithousing wealth C
Incomet2' reports the weighS perceruge of the sample with mrthousing wealth less than otthalf of income as deluS above. All fln are in 1984 dollars.

households aged above 50 and with a college degree hold wealth

greater than or equal to one year's income. For those without a high
school degree, at least 25 percent of every age group hold net wealth
• less than current income. An intermediate pattern holds for high

school graduates. The percentage of households with nonhousing
wealth below one-half of current income (a measure that abstracts
from illiquid home ownership) follows much the same pattern,

although there are a larger absolute number of households who hold

less than half of a year's income in nonhousing wealth.
To summarize, the empirical evidence suggests strongly that

wealth accumulation patterns differ by lifetime income. We briefly
consider four potential explanations for this differential pattern of
wealth accumulation.

First, with a bequest motive it is plausible that households
with higher lifetime income hold more assets, especially later in life,

because they plan to leave bequests. Those with lower lifetime
income are mOre likely to find the bequest motive inoperative since
they expect their children to do better economically (Peldstein, 1988;

Laitner, 1990). The absence of 'negative bequests" for currently
low-income households introduces a corner solution, and hence

skewness in the distribution of bequests. In addition, individuals
with higher levels of educational attainment may receive greater
inheritances to the extent that lifetime income is correlated across
generations.
The problem with this explanation is that for those with low

lifetime income, wealth accumulation is far below even that

13

predicted by traditional (certainty) life-cycle models. As we discuss
below, the life-cycle model predicts at least a modest degree of

wealth accumulation to provide for retirement. However, the fact
that median nonhousing wealth for the lowest education group is
only one-half of income for households prior to retirement (those
aged 50-59) suggests that the life-cycle model does not fhlly capture

the saving patterns of this group.
Second, wealth accumulation across education groups may

also differ because of differences in the shape of the earnings profile,

or in the degree to which Social Security, private pensions .u d
other transfers replace earnings in retirement (as mentioned above).

For example, since Social Security benefits equal a larger fraction of
average earnings for lower-income workers, such families would not

need to save as much relative to higher income workers to ensure
adequate consumption during retirement.

As we show below, this explanation alone cannot explain

more than a small fraction of the difference in wealth distributions.
While lower-income households benefit from the higher earnings

replacement rates in Social Security benefits, higher-income (in our

case, college graduate) families are more likely to receive private
pensior.s. College-educated households should, moreover, save less
relative to income in early years in a life-cycle model because of
their more steeply sloped earnings path.
The third possible explanation for the difference in the

wealth distribution is variation in rates of time preference by

education group. Lawrance (1991), for example, has estimated that

14

college-educated households have lower rates of time preference than

lower-income, non-college-educated households. Hence the
difference in wealth accumulation could just be the result of different

preferences. The lower-income households save little because of
their higher rate of time preference, while the higher-income
households (or those who are sufficiently patient to attend college)
save more.
The Lawrance estimates are based on (food) consumption

growth in the PSID during the 1970s and early 1980s. She found
that consumption of college-educated households grew faster than
that of non-college-educated households, leading her to conclude that
college-educated-households have lower rates of time preference.

However, Dynan (1993) has shown that this faster growth may have
been the consequence of the rapid rise of income for collegeeducated relative to non-college-educated households. Dynan finds
little difference across education groups in the estimated rate of time
preference once income changes have been accounted for)3 While

we view differences in rates of time preference as a potentially
important factor in wealth accumulation, it seems unlikely that
variation in preferences alone can explain the large cross-sectional
differences in wealth accumulation.'4

'

Fuchs (1982) attempted to discern differences in time preference rates by

direct survey methods, but he did not find any consistent patterns across
education groups.
There are some additional explanations which we have not fully explored.
The first is a more general (nonhomothetic) utility function, such as one that
(continued...)

15

The fourth possible explanation is that, in the presence of
significant uncertainty about earnings and medical expenditures,
lower-income households may rationally accumulate proportionately
less than higher-income households because of the existence of an

asset-based means-tested social insurance "safety net." This

approach follows two strands in the previous literature. Kotlikoff
(1988) used simulations to show that a Medicaid program reduced
precautionary saving against uncertain medical expenses, while Levin

(1990) focused on the impact of Medicaid on the demand for health

insurance depending on initial wealth or income.'5 Our work
builds on these two insights in a general dynamic programming

model of uncertainty, and we pursue it below.

III.

OPTIMAL CONSUMP'HON WITH TRANSFER
PROGRAMS
We begin this section by writing down our general

multiperiod model with multiple sources of uncertainty. We then
examine simplified versions including a two-period model under

14(

.continued)

includes a subsistence level of consumption or a varying interternporal elasticity
of substitution (Atkeson and Ogaki, 1991). Second, length of life and/or age of
retirement may differ across education groups. Third, attainable rates of return
may be higher for high education or income groups (Yitzhaki, 1987). For
further discussion, see Masson (1988).
Levin (1990) studied how uncertainty about medical expenses and the
Medicaid program affected the demand for health insurance rather than saving.
His empirical results provide evidence on the demand for insurance a (function
of the second derivative) rather than on precautionary saving (a function of the
third derivative).

16

certainty and under uncertainty. In these examples, we show how
the existence of a minimum level of consumption guaranteed by
(asset-based) means-tested social insurance programs affects the

optimal consumption choice. Later in the paper, we use numerical
methods to examine optimal consumption and wealth accumulation in
the general multiperiod model.

A. The Consumer's Optimization Problem
We assume that the household maximizes expected lifetime

utility, given all of the relevant constraints. At each age t, a level of
consumption is chosen which maximizes:

> D5U(C)/(l

(1)

+

subject to the transition equation:
A5 =

+ r)+ E5

TR5 —

M

—

C5

(2)

plus the additional constraints that:

A5

0,

vs.

(3)

Equation (1) indicates that consumption excluding medical

spending C is chosen to maximize expected lifetime utility (where E,
is the expectations operator conditional on information at time t),

discounted based on a rate of time preference c5. To account for

random date of death D, is a state variable that is equal to one if the
individual is alive and zero otherwise, and T is the maximum
possible length of life. The family begins period .c with assets from

the previous period plus accumulated interest, A (1 +r), where r is
17

the nonstochastic real after-tax rate of interest. It then receives
exogenous earnings E, pays out exogenous necessary medical

expenses M5, and receives government transfers TR. It is left with:

X = A1(1+ r) +

— M5 + TR3,

(4)

which, following Deaton (1991), we denote as "cash on hand."
Given X3, consumption is chosen, and what remains equals

end-of-period assets, A5. We assume that no utility is derived per se
from medical expenditures; the costs are required only to offset the

damage brought upon by poor health.'6 The borrowing and
terminal constraints in equation (3) prevent negative assets in any

period. '
Transfers received depend on financial assets, earnings, and

medical expenses:
TR= TR(E5, M5, A5_,(1 + r)).

(5)

This general form allows transfer programs to include earnings-based

and wealth-based means testing, as well as payments tied to medical

expenses. For simplicity, we consider the following

Kotlikoff (1988) considers alternative models of health expenditures.

" In the parameterizations of our model under uncertainty, the maximum
realization of medical expenses is always greater than the minimum possible
earnings realization; i.e., the minimum net earnings thaw in any period is
negative. In the case when C is set to zero, and the utility function is such that
U'(O) = oo, individuals choose never to borrow and the liquidity constraint is
never binding (see the related discussion in Zeldes, 1989b). Therefore, in the
uncertainty model, we are, in effect, preventing borrowing against the future
guaranteed consumption floor.

18

parameterilatiOn:

TR5= max [0, (C+ M)—(A1(1+ r) + Es)]

(6)

We define C as the minimum level of consumption guaranteed by the
government, and will refer to this as the consumption "floor."
Transfers equal this consumption floor C plus medical expenses

minus all available resources, if that amount is positive, and zero

otherwise. In other words, transfer payments, if made, guarantee a
minimum standard of living C after medical expenses are paid.

However, transfer payments are reduced one-for-one for every dollar

of either assets or current earnings. The transfer function captures,
in a simplified way, the penalty on saving behavior of asset-based
means-tested programs such as Medicaid, AFDC, and food stamps.
Because eligibility is conditional on having assets less than a given

level, such programs place an implicit tax rate of 100 percent on

wealth above that limit. While in the model we restrict social
insurance to those with no assets at all, in practice, asset limits range
between $1000 and $3000.18

'

The asset limit for AFDC is $1000 in almost all states (it is less than
$1000 in a few states). Excluded from the assets subject to this limit are
housing equity (up to a certain limit), automobile equity (up to $1500), and, in
some states, burial insurance and plot, farm machinery and livestock and
household furnishings. The limit for food stamps is $2000 for non-elderlyand
$3000 for elderly households, with somewhat more liberal exclusions, while for
551 the limits are $2000 for single households and $3000 for married couples,
again with somewhat less stringent exclusions on automobile equity and other
types of wealth. Eligibility for SSI or AFDC is usually a necessary
precondition to qualify for Medicaid. See Committee on Ways and Means
(1991). For simplicity, we assume that the wealth limit is zero over the entire

year.

19

Before we examine the effects of uncertainty and social

insurance programs on wealth accumulation in the general model, we
present some two-period models to provide intuition. Consider first
.a two-period certainty model, with all medical expenses as well as

initial assets set equal to zero. Suppose that E1 > C, so that the
household is not eligible for transfers in the first period, but that B2
C C, so it is at least potentially eligible for transfers in the second

period. To see the effect of the consumption floor, consider the
expression for second period consumption:

C2 =(E1 —Cj(1+r) +E2 ÷TR2

(7)

Substituting in the expression for transfers in (6) yields:
C2 = Max[C, (E1 - C1)(1+ r) +

(8)
E2}

Differentiating equation (7) or (8) with respect to C1 gives:
dC2
dC1

=

=

,
—(1

ifTR2>O
+ r),

9

otherwise.

Thus, consuming one less unit today yields (1 +r) extra units
tomorrow if the household is not participating in the transfer
program tomorrow (the usual intertemporal tradeoff), but zero extra

units if it is.
The indifference curves and budget constraints for two
different levels of initial resources E1 (including any initial assets)

20

are shown in Figure 2.19 For this example, we assume homothetic

utility and r=5=E2=O!° First consider the case of a lower-wealth
household with initial resources of E1. The budget constraint when
the consumption floor equals C is given by mnbE1. An interior
solution leads to a, where C1 =C2. Because of the nonconvexity of
the budget constraint, there exists another possible solution to the
problem: the household could consume all of income today so that
the guaranteed consumption level is received in the second period.

This possible solution is indicated by b. Since b is preferred to d

(U > Ut), the global optimum is b. Individuals with low initial
resources will save nothing and instead rely on the consumption

floor in the second period.

At the higher level of income, E, however, the budget line

is rsbE, and the interior solution a dominates the alternative of
b" since U > UTh Thus, individuals with somewhat higher initial
resources choose not to rely on the consumption floor and therefore
must save to finance future desired consumption.

The solution to this two-period model is as follows: For
levels of wealth (or earnings) that are low, but greater than C, the
slope of the consumption-wealth profile is one — all wealth is

consumed. At some critical level of wealth, consumption drops
sharply, so that at higher wealth, the consumption function reverts to

a straight line through the origin with a slope of 0.5; that is, half of

'We thank Eric Engen for pointing out this graphical interpretation.
20The maximization problem and solution are described in the Appendix.

21

Figure 2: Optimal Consumption with a Welfare 'Floor

C

2

50

/
m
—

/

C

cr C = E*1

Cl

the wealth is consumed in the first period, half in the second, just as
it would be in the absence of the transfer program.
This example thus has implications for the marginal

propensity to consume out of wealth. As shown in Figure 2, a low
level of initial resources E implies consumption c;. A rise in initial

resources to E, however, causes consumption to decline to Cr.
That is, over this range of wealth, the marginal propensity to
consume out of wealth can actually be negative as the household
switches from a regime of consuming all income to one in which it

saves for the future.2' This is in sharp contrast to standard models
in which consumption is always increasing in wealth.

One way to generalize this result is to expand the time

horizon to three or more periods . A second way to generalize the

There is a clear parallel here with the studies of labor supply with
nonconvex budget constraints by Burtless and Hausman (1978), Hausman
(1981), Moffitt (1986), and Moffitt and Rothschild (1987). As they noted, in a
static choice model of leisure and market goods, transfer programs often create
kinked budget constraints and can generate multiple local maxima.
22Assume that both second- and third-period earnings are less than the
consumption floor, but that first-period earnings exceed the floor. In this case,
there are three local optima. The individual can: (I) forego transfer payments
altogether and choose the traditional interior solution (so that the MPC out of
resources is 1/3), (ii) receive transfers only in the third period, so that an interior
Euler equation solution holds between first- and second-period consumption (so
or (iii) receive transfers in both the
that the MPC out of resources is
second and third periods (so that the MPC out of resources is unity). Finding
the global solution to this model involves choosing the one of these three
potential solutions that maximizes utility. For the details of this, see the
Appendix.
The result that the MPC depends on the effective horizon of the
consumer also appears in model with a borrowing constraint. However, the
important difference between the two models is the motivation for consuming
(continued...)

22

two-period model is to add uncertainty about second-period resources

E2. For now, think of E2 as earnings less out-of-pocket medical
expenses, so the uncertainty may be attributable to either source.
Suppose that there were a 50-percent chance of a "good" realization,
F28, and a 50-percent chance of a "bad" realization E. Continue to
assume that r = 6 = 0 and that utility is homothetic. Let E1 ÷ E, >
2C, so the individual could save enough to avoid the floor even in

the "worst case," if so desired. The maximization problem with
respect to C1 becomes:

max

,

U(C1)

+

— C1 + E28)(1 —Q28) + CQ28]

+

- C1 + ETh)(l-Q2b) +

CQ21J

(10)
+

where the first two expressions in brackets are consumption in the

good state, C2g. and consumption in the bad state, C, The indicator

values Q, and Q28

take on the value of one when income transfers

are received under the bad and good scenario, respectively. The first-

22( . .continued)

all of one's wealth. In the model with borrowing constraints, one saves nothing
because of high anticipated future earnings. In this model, one saves nothing
because of the low anticipated future earnings relative to the consumption floor.
Including more (and thus shorter) time periods leads to smoother
consumption-wealth functions. However, at least in the case of a continuous
time certainty model, one can show that the marginal propensity to consume
wealth may still be (smoothly) negative in the presence of means-tested social
insurance.

23

order condition is written:

U'(C1) =

.[U'(C2g)(1 —Q)+

U'(C,)(1 —Q)]

+

(11)

Under uncertainty, the first-order conditions indicate a

tradeoff between the marginal utility of consuming an extra dollar
today and the expected marginal benefit of saving the dollar for the

future. In future states of the world in which the household receives

a transfer, an extra dollar carried over from the previous period is
worthless to the household, because it leads to a one dollar reduction

in transfers, leaving future consumption unchanged at t. In the
Appendix, we describe the solution to this problem, and show that
there exist three local maxima, two of which are interior solutions

that satisfy the Euler equation. We also show that households with
higher initial resources are more likely to choose the solution that
involves much higher saving and a lower probability of receiving

transfers. Thus, optimal consumption can again decline as wealth

increases over some ranges. Finally, we show that the welfare
program affects the saving of those households who have some

probability of receiving transfers, even if, a post, they never
receive transfers.

Before proceeding, it is worth emphasizing that, if we
assume that the period utility function has a positive third derivative
(which induces precautionary saving in the presence of earnings
uncertainty), there are two distinct effects of introducing an asset-

based means-tested social insurance program. One effect comes

24

from the provision of the transfer, and would be present even if the
program involved no asset-based means testing. The government is

providing a transfer that raises income in the bad states of the world.
This serves to reduce the precautionary motive and causes
households (particularly low lifetime income households) to save

less. The second effect comes from the asset test itself. The
government effectively imposes a 100-percent tax on assets in the

event that the household receives a health-expense or earnings shock

large enough to make it eligible to receive the transfer. This tax
further reduces desired saving, again primarily for low-lifetime-

income households. In the model used in this paper, we consider the
joint effect of these channels on households' consumption.

IV.

PARAMETERIZATION AND SOLUTION OF THE

MULTIPERIOD MODEL
In this section, we begin by describing the utility function

and parameterization of the model. These are described more fully

in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b). We then examine the
empirical magnitude of the consumption "floor," and close with a
discussion of the numerical solution to the dynamic programming
problem.
When we estimate empirical parameters characterizing

uncertainty, our primary interest is in uninsured risk — that is, the
risk faced by households conditional on existing insurance coverage.

In the model, for example, the effect of uncertainty in lifespan on
saving is conditional on a preexisting pension and Social Security

25

payment that acts as a partial annuity. Similarly, our estimates of
uncertainty with respect to health expenses condition on preexisting

private insurance and Medicare, and are therefore based only on the
uninsured out-of-pocket risk.

A. Parameterization of the Model
The Utility Function. We assume that the period utility

function in (1) is isoelastic:

U(C) =

C'"
S

1

l-y

(12)

We assume a value for y of 3, which is consistent with many

empirical studies. The rate of time preference 6 is assumed to be 3
percent per annum for all education groups, and the real after-tax

rate of interest is assumed to be 3 percent per annum?
Lifespan Uncertainty. We use mortality probabilities based
on mortality data (from 1980) as a function of sex and age from the
National Center for Health Statistics and the Social Security

Administration (Faber, 1982). Calculating mortality probabilities for
a representative family is problematic, given the mixture of married

and single households. We use the mortality probabilities for

23The coefficient y serves multiple roles in this utility function: y is the
coefficient of relative risk aversion, (1/7) is the intertemporal elasticity of
substitution in consumption and (7+1) is the coefficient of relative prudence
(Kimball, 1990b). The third derivative of this utility function is positive, which
will generate precautionary saving in response to uncertainty regarding earnings
and out-of-pocket medical expenses.
24We review empirical estimates of -,' and present sensitivity analyses using

alternative values of and ô in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b).

26

women. These capture both the expectations of life for single
women, and the expectation of life for a currently married family in
which the husband dies first. The maximum possible age in the

model is set to 100; since we assume economic life begins at age 21,
there are a maximum of 80 periods in the model.
Earnings Process. Time-series patterns of earnings and
wages have been the subject of many studies (see e.g., Lillard and
Willis, 1978; MaCurdy, 1982; and Abowd and Card, 1989). Our

measures of earnings risk differ in two general respects. First, we
include unemployment insurance and subtract taxes in our measure

of "earnings"; these adjustments are likely to reduce earnings

variability.r Second, we separate our sample into three
educational categories.

Earnings during working years are uncertain and correlated

over time and follow

=ZJ3 ÷u.+vft
= pu1 +

(13)

where y14 is the log of earnings, 4 is a cubic polynomial in age and

year dummy variables (included to control for cohort productivity

growth) and /3 is a vector of coefficients. The error term u follows
an AR(I) process, where e1 is a white-noise innovation. The
variable Uft is a combination of i.i.d. transitory variation in earnings

Carroll (1992) also included transfer payments in his measure of earnings
for the same reason. In our model, means-tested transfers such as AFDC and
food stamps are excluded from the definition of earnings because they are
received only if assets are sufficiently low. Instead, they are included in the
consumption floor.

27

and measurement error. To simplify the dynamic programming

model, we assume that u is entirely measurement error and ignore it
in our parameterization of the model. Hence our measure of
earnings uncertainty is conservative because it excludes all transitory

variation in earnings. We assume in the model that the head of the
household retires at age 65, at which point the family receives Social
Security, pensions, and other non-asset income with certainty.
Estimates of the uncertainty parameters are summarized in

the top panel of Table 2! The results imply substantial persistence
in shocks to earnings, a result that is consistent with many of the

studies cited above. In addition, the log of labor income is more
variable for non-high-school graduates than it is for the two other
educational groups.

Out-of-Pocket Medical Expenses. We use data from a
merged sample of observations from the 1977 National Health Care
Expenditure Survey and the 1977 National Nursing Home Survey to
calculate a cross-sectional distribution of out-of-pocket medical

expenses. Our measure of medical costs includes expenses paid by
Medicaid, because Medicaid payments are determined endogenously
in our model as the difference between total medical costs arid

available financial resources of the family.
We assume a model of medical spending of the following

26When we estimate the uncertainty parameters in (13) (o, p, a), we
exclude households with very low earnings realizations. When we estimate the
mean age-earnings profile, we estimate the equations in levels rather than togs,
and include alt households. Details of the estimation approach are given in
Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b).

28

Table 2: Parameters for Uncertain Earnings and
Uncertain Medical Expenses for Dynamic Programming Model

No High
School

High

College +

School +

Earnings
AR(1) coefficient (p)

0.955

0.954

0.959

Variance of the innovation e

0.033

0.026

0.020

Variance of combined
measurement error and
transitory shock u

0.040

0.028

0.018

Out-of-Pocket Medical Expense&

$2023

$1974

$2149

AIt(l) coefficient(pJ

0.901

0.901

0.901

Vatiance of the innovationt

0.175

0.156

0.153

Total Medical Expenses
(including_Medicaid)

Nosa: Sec equation (12) for the time-series model of earnings and equation (13) 1cr the Sc-series uSe1 of
mit-of-pocket medical expenses.
'Based on 1977 cross section study of the National Health Care Expendilure Survey and the 1977 National
Nursing Home Survey. and data and estimation methods in Feenberg and Skinner (1992). 5cc HubbanI Skinner.

and Zeldes (l994b) for more detail.

form:
=
=

Gr

+

m/tit-I

liii +
+

t

(14)

where m is the log of medical expenses, w is the purely transitory

component, assumed to be entirely measurement error, lit follows an

AR(l) process (where e, is a white-noise innovation), and G1 is a

quadratic in age and an individual fixed effect. We estimate
separately for elderly individuals aged 65 years or over and the

nonelderly. The estimates are presented in the bottom part of Table
2. The merged cross-section data set enables us to estimate more
accurately the cross-sectional distribution of medical spending by

education group and by age, but not the time-series properties of
medical expenses. Instead, we use estimates of Pm from Feenberg
and Skinner (1992), who use a quadrivariate tobit procedure with a
panel of tax data from 1968 to 1973 to measure the time-series
pattern of declared medical spending (in excess of 3 percent of

adjusted gross income). There is surprisingly little difference in the
overall level of medical spending by education group, implying that

average medical expenses are a larger fraction of lifetime income for

low education groups. This is in part because of the much higher
Medicaid spending for the lower education groups.

Consumption Floor. Finally, the consumption floor is
defined as the level of consumption guaranteed by the government

above and beyond medical expenses. Measuring the means-tested
consumption floor is difficult, since potential payments from social

insurance programs differ dramatically according to the number of

29

children, marital status, age, and even the recipient's state or city.
Nevertheless, we make a first approximation by calculating separate
consumption floors for "representative" families both under age 65

and over 65. Details of the calculation are in Appendix A of
Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994b) and are largely based on
figures in Committee on Ways and Means (1991).
We include in our estimate of the floor only means-tested

transfer payments such as AFDC, food stamps, and Section 8
housing assistance for those under age 65, and SSI, food stamps, and

Section 8 housing assistance for those over age 65.'
Unemployment insurance is not included in these transfers because it

is not means-tested; instead, it is included in net earnings. Medicaid
is also not included as part of the floor because it is used exclusively
to pay for medical expenses.
We distinguish between entitlement and non-entitlement

programs. Under entitlement programs, everyone who is eligible
may sign up. Despite the fact that many who are eligible do not
take advantage of the program, the money is at leat potentially
available to them. Housing subsidies are not entitlements, since

there are often waiting lists. In such cases, we include the expected
value of benefits -- i.e., the probability of receiving the benefits

times the dollar amount, in our estimate of the floor.

27

We assume these benefits are valued by recipients at their dollar cost.

Moffitt (1989) estimates that food stamps can largely be valued as cash, and
Section 8 housing subsidies are unlikely to distort consumption behavior given
that the vouchers are generally for an amount less than market rent.

30

For the nonelderly, the median AFDC and food-stamp
transfers to a female-headed family in 1984 with two children and no
outside earnings or assets was $5764. The representative family is

assumed to include a single parent with children; if the father were

present in the household, or married to the mother, then benefits
would be reduced in some states of residence. We assume that
housing subsidies are received entirely from the Section 8 housing

program, which provides housing vouchers for existing rental

property. The mean housing subsidy paid is multiplied by 0.35 to
adjust for the fact that only 35 percent of the eligible population who

actually receive the Section 8 housing subsidy. Hence the net
(expected) housing subsidy is $1173. Summing AFDC and housing
subsidies yields a combined "safety net" for the non-elderly of
$6937.

For the elderly, a weighted average of single and married
families implies that combined 551 and food stamp annual payments

in 1984 were $5400, inclusive of median state supplements. Adding
Section 8 housing benefits for elderly families yields a net total

"safety net" of $6893. Because the measures for the elderly and
nonelderly are close to $7000, we adopt a common value for both

groups of $7000 for the consumption floor, C.
For a number of reasons, this estimate should be treated with
caution. Calculating the consumption floor for individuals in nursing
homes, for whom SSI is reduced to only $30 per month for spending
money, is difficult because it involves valuing the room and board

provided by the nursing home. The "safety net" for a couple with

31

receive
grown children in their fifties, before they are eligible to
SSI, is likely to be much less than the $7000 floor assumed above.
Furthermore, in using expected values of housing subsidies, we

ignore the more complicated problem of uncertainty about the value
of the consumption floor faced by potential recipients.
B. Numerical Solution of the Dynamic Model
Because we cannot solve the household's multiperiod
problem analytically, we use numerical stochastic dynamic programming techniques to approximate closely the solution. Using these
methods, we calculate explicit decision rules for optimal

consumption as well as the value function.
As noted above, earnings and medical expenditures are
assumed to follow first-order autoregressive processes around a

deterministic trend. The deviation from the trend is discretized into
9 discrete nodes, with a maximum and minimum equal to plus and
minus 2.5 standard deviations of the unconditional distribution.
Hence earnings and health deviations from trend are first-order
Markov processes, with the probability of realizing a given discrete•
outcome in period t + 1 a function of the current outcome in period t.
We divide the maximum feasible range for cash on hand (X) in each

period into 61 "nodes." The nodes are evenly spaced on the basis of
the log of cash on hand, in order to get finer intervals at lower
absolute levels of cash on hand, where nonlinearities in the
consumption function are most likely.

The dynamic program therefore has three state variables in

32

addition to age: cash on hand, earnings, and medical expenses?
The problem is solved by starting in the last possible period of life

(T) and solving backward. In period T, C,. equals X,. In periods
prior to T, we calculate optimal consumption for each possible
combination of nodes, using stored information about the subsequent

period's optimal consumption and value function. We do not
discretize consumption, but allow it to be a continuous variable.
Because of possible multiple local maxima, we use information about

both the value function and expected marginal utility in our search

for optimal consumption. Optimal consumption is calculated by
searching for levels of consumption that maximize the value function

and that (with the exception of corner solutions) equate the marginal
utility of consumption at t to the (appropriately discounted) expected

marginal utility of consumption in period t+1. Solving the
household's problem numerically involves extensive computation?
Once we determine the optimal consumption function for all

possible nodes, we simulate a history for each of a large number of

families (16,000). For each family, we use the following procedure.

In years after retirement, the earnings state variable is a trivial one,
leaving us with two state variables.
28

29

In total, optimal consumption is calculated at more than 230,000

individual wealth-health-earnings-age nodes. Each optimal consumption
calculation involves searching over a large number of consumption choices, and
the expected marginal utility and value function must be calculated for each of
these possible choices. All computer work was performed using the vectorizing
capabilities of the Cornell National Supercomputer Facility, a resource of the
Cornell Theory Center, funded by the National Science Foundation, the IBM
corporation, the state of New York, and members of the Corporate Research
Institute.

33

In any period, we begin with the level of assets from the previous

period and multiply by (1 +r). We draw random realizations for
earnings and medical expenses from the appropriate distributions.3°
We then add the realized earnings and subtract the realized medical
expenses, resulting in a value for cash on hand. Since realized cash
on hand will not generally be equal to one of the nodes for cash on
hand, we interpolate the optimal consumption function, using the two
nearest nodes for cash on hand, for the given levels of earnings and

medical expenses. This gives us the realized value for consumption.
Subtracting this consumption from cash on hand gives us end-of-

period assets. We then follow each family over time, recording the
realized levels of earnings, consumption, and assets for each period.

SIMULATED DISTRIBUTIONS OF AGE-WEALTH

V.

PROFILES
We begin by presenting the wealth accumulation pattern of a
model in which the mean values of medical expenditures and
earnings are anticipated with certainty, and lifespan is also certain.

In this certainty benchmark, consumption and wealth paths differ
across education groups, but are identical within each educational

group. We examine whether differences in the age profile of
medical expenses, earnings, and retirement income can explain the
observed (average) differences in wealth accumulation.

3°

We draw a starting value for earnings and medical expenses for period I
from a log-normal distribution with variance equal to the unconditional variance
of the distributions. Subsequent draws for medical expenses and for earnings
(through retirement) are drawn from the conditional distributions.

34

The earnings, health, consumption, and wealth profiles for
the lowest and highest education groups are shown in Figures 3(a)

and 3(b). Again, the graphs are scaled to adjust for differences in
lifetime income across education groups. Consider first the lowest

education group. The household's consumption is limited by
borrowing constraints until its mid-thirties. After that point, it
accumulates wealth, arriving at a level of wealth at retirement of
about five times peak earnings, and then gradually spends down

accumulated wealth. Next consider the highest education group.
The wealth-age path is very similar to that for the lowest education

group. That is, differences in the profile of earnings and retirement
income cannot explain the differences in mean wealth-income ratios

between the lowest and highest education groups. While households
with lower levels of income may experience higher replacement rates

from social security benefits (and hence less need to save for

retirement), they are also less likely to receive pension income. On
balance, pension plus Social Security income yield a similar fraction

of pre-retirement earnings for the two education groups, leading to
similar wealth-income profiles.

In order to analyze not just mean wealth profiles, but the
distribution of wealth for different groups (given our assumption of
homogenous preferences), we need to examine a model with

uncertainty. Therefore, we next examine the predictions of the
dynamic programming model subject to income, health, and lifespan

35

Figure 3a: Consumption and Wealth by Age
No High School Degree, Everything Certain

25-

120

20-

I

100

C- //

15

BO

60

10
I..'

5

0

ii

40
20

.1

ii

a 30

ii

30

a ii a

ii

a

11

Ag.

50

,

Figure 3b: Consumption end Wealth by Ag.
College Degree, Everything Certain

0

250

E.g
40-

I

ii

200

C- /1

30-

ISO

20

100

ID

50

0

,a

—
—

3i

30

II

10

It
Ago

II

SI • Ti

0
•7S

iJ

uncertainty,3' but with a minimal guaranteed consumption floor of

$1000. In this case, there is little difference in the wealth
accumulation patterns of the lowest and the highest lifetime-income

groups. Tabulations in Table 3 compare ;he fraction of families with
wealth less than income in the PSID (the first column) and the

simulated data (the second column). For the simulated data based on
a $1000 consumption floor, each educational group has virtually the

same small fraction of "low wealth" households. Furthermore, this
precautionary saving model dramatically underpredicts the proportion
of "low wealth" households, especially for those without college
degrees.32

Finally, we consider the most realistic specification: a social
insurance program that guarantees a $7000 consumption floor.33

Figures 4(a) and 4(b) depict the predicted wealth accumulation

patterns for the two educational categories. These wealth profiles
are taken from 16,000 households simulated for each education

"In this version of the model, accidental bequests arising from lifespan
uncertainty are effectively confiscated, since no other generation receives them.
Experiments in which the average (education-group-specific) bequest was given
to members of the next generation at the beginning of their working lives
yielded higher steady-state asset-income ratios. However, this approach
provides younger generations with an unrealistically large initial stock of assets.
An alternative approach would have younger generations face uncertain future
inheritances. This more general model is a topic for future research.
32

Similarly, Carroll and Sainwick (1992) have shown that wealth
accumulation in the conventional precautionary saving model is implausibly
high for individuals with low time preference rates.

Note that we are varying the minimum guaranteed level of consumption
(the consumption "floor"). In this paper, we do not consider changes in the
asset limit, which is assumed for simplicity to be zero in our model.

36

Table 3: Percentage of Families With Wealth C Income,
Actual and Simulated

Age

Education

Actual
(P511))

< 30

30-39

40-49

50-59

floor

Floor

86.3

43.7

80.9

College

74.9

90.8

93.5

No High School

68.3

8.0

50.2

College

38.4

49.8

66.2

No High School

50.7

3.7

34.1

College

22.9

11.0

25.8

No High School

30.0

1.6

24.5

4.6

0.5

4.9

29.6

2.3

19.9

0.4

0.5

3.0

25.0

0.5

25.2

0.0

0.0

1.3

No High School
College

70-80

Simulated
$7000
Consumption

No High School

College

60-69

Simulated
$1000
Consumption

No High School
College

Source: Data are from the 1984 PSII) and authors' calculations.

Figure 4a: Simulated Net Wealth by Age: No High School Degree

[$416,603]
12 10 -

80

Ui

e
0
80
C

I-I
to

0)

60

6-

40

4.

20

2

0-

___________________
20

30

40

sb

50

10

9'O

g'o

Age

Figure 4b: Simulated Net Wealth by Age: College Degree

[$224120] 12 10 a)

E

0a
C

I-I
-C

'-4
m
a)

80

86-

60

4

2-

40

0-

20

2b

3'O

4b

sb

sb
Age

7b obib

Notes to Figures 4(a) - 4(b): Predicted 20th through BOth percentiles of the wealth
distribution, expressed as cubic polynomials in age, are also shown. The vertical axis
measures the ratio of reported individual net wealth to (education-specific) average
permanent income. Average permanent income for those without high school
degrees is $17,241, and for college graduates $32,062. The maximum (dollar) wealth
level shown at the top of the vertical axis is thirteen times permanent income.
model described in the
Wealth data are simulated using the dynamic programming
text.

group and are drawn to the same scale, and with the same quintile
Consider first the graph
regressions, as the graphs in Figure

for college graduates, Figure 4(b). The quintile regressions for the
simulated age-wealth profiles match closely the actual wealth profiles

in Figure 1(c), for all of the quintiles Y Note in particular that in
both the actual data, and the data simulated by the model, there is
substantial wealth accumulation for the bottom quintile. For
example, simple tabulations show that the 20th-percentile level of

wealth among those aged 50-59 is 2.4 years of (permanent) income
in the PSID, and 2.8 years in the simulated data. In general, this
model with uncertainty about earnings, medical expenses, and length
of life does a good job at explaining the distribution of wealth for

this group.
Next consider the graph for those with no high school

degree, Figure 4(a). In the simulated data, wealth for the bottom
20th percentile of this group is bunched near zero for all ages, just
as it is in the actual PSID data in Figure 1(a). For example, the

Although we have calculated the entire lifetime wealth profile for each of
these households, we chose only one randomly selected wealth-age combination
per household to replicate a cross-sectional sample.

We have used cubic polynomials in age to summarize the quantile
distributions. These cubic approximations, however, may be inadequate in
summarizing wealth distributions for given age groups, which may be better
revealed using nonparametric approaches. These more detailed comparisons
(shown in the Appendix) suggest that at the ages of peak wealth, the simulation
model tends to overpredict wealth accumulation for the higher quantiles. For
example, the actual 60th-percentile level of net wealth (from the PSID) among
college-educated households at age 50-59 is $216,000, while the simulated 60thpercentile wealth level for the same age group is $278,000.

37

tabulated 20th-percentile level of wealth among those aged 50-59 is

very low: 0.25 years of (permanent) income in the PSID data and

0.35 years in the simulated data. That is, the model is capable of
explaining one of the key "puzzles" in the data -- unlike the highlifetime-income group, a significant fraction of the middle-aged lowlifetime-income group has virtually no wealth.

In the third column of Table 3, we present the fraction of
households with wealth less than income in the two education groups

for the higher value of the consumption floor. The entries generally
correspond closely to figures tabulated from the PSID. For
example, the simulated percentages of "low wealth" households at

age 50-59 are 24.5 percent and 4.9 percent for no-high-school and
college-educated households, respectively, compared with the

corresponding actual PSID tabulations of 30.0 and 4.6 percent. To
summarize, the simulation model replicates well the wide disparity
by lifetime-income group in the fraction of households with low
levels of wealth.

Finally, Table 4 documents the fraction of households
receiving means-tested transfers, based on 1984 data from the PSID,

by age and by education group. The tabulations from the PSID data,
in the first column, are contrasted with the simulated percentages
given a consumption floor of $1000 (the second column) and $7000

(the third column). Assuming a consumption floor of $1000 implies
that few households in either education group receive means-tested

transfers. By contrast, a $7000 consumption floor implies that a
much larger percentage of households with lower levels of

38

Table 4: Percentage of Families Receiving Transfer Payments:
Actual and Simulated

Age

Education

Actual
(from P8W)

Simulated
$1000
Consumption

Floor
C 30

No High School
College

30-39

No High School
College

40-49

No High School
College

50-59

No High School
College

60-69

No High School
College

70-80

No High School
College

Simulated
$7000
Consumption

floor

48.4

1.6

25.0

0.0

0.0

2.5

24.9

0.7

19.5

0.9

0.1

0.9

23.7

0.9

12.5

2.3

0.1

0.7

12.7

0.2

10.7

0.0

0.0

0.1

19.0

0.3

9.1

0.0

0.0

0.3

23.0

0.1

11.8

0.0

0.0

0.0

Note: "Positive transfers" means that the family received AFDC. SSI, or food stamps.

Source: Data are from the 1984 PSID and authors' calculations.

educational attainment receive transfers, with little effect on college-

educated households. For example, at ages 50-59, the actual
percentage of households without a high school degree receiving

transfers is 12.7. The simulated percentage is 10.7 with a $7000

floor, but only 0.2 percent with a $1000 floor. Few collegeeducated households receive transfers at any age. Overall, the
simulated model with a $7000 floor closely matches age- and
education-related patterns of income transfer receipts.

The dynamic programming model with a $7000 floor
generally predicts accurately differences in wealth accumulation

patterns across education groups. However, it performs poorly in

two respects. First, the model overpredicts the fraction of "low
wealth't college-educated households at younger ages (Table 3).

Because of the more steeply sloped earnings profile for collegeeducated households, the simulation model predicts that many of

these households will possess very little wealth prior to age 40. This
contrasts with the actual patterns from the PSID, perhaps because of

inter vivos transfers. Second, the simulated 60th and 80th percentile
age-wealth profile for households with low education levels are
considerably higher than the corresponding actual profile from the

PSID. For example, for ages 50-59, the 60th percentile of wealth in
the PSID is $59,000, compared to the 60th-percentile value in the
simulated data of $147,000.
With a conventional utility function and empirically

consistent parameters for earnings and health expenses, our
simulation model predicts a large impact on wealth accumulation of

39

means-tested welfare programs. We have presented evidence that
our model is consistent with important features of the empirical

distribution of wealth. Is there additional direct empirical evidence
that can shed light on whether differences in the structure of
government-provided assistance programs can predict empirical

differences in saving behavior as our model suggests?
A formal statistical test of how government social insurance
programs affect saving behavior is beyond the scope of this paper.
Nevertheless, we consider below two types of evidence that may

bear on the empirical issue of how social insurance affects wealth
accumulation: the first based on historical trends in social insurance
policy in the United States, and the second based on cross-sectional
differences in saving behavior, either by states or by income groups.

In our approach, all else equal, an expansion in the
magnitude of means-tested social insurance programs (measured by

an increase in ) should reduce wealth holdings of low-lifetimeincome households, while having little effect on wealth holdings of
high-lifetime-income households. The reason is that, on account of

the increase in C, low-lifetime-income
households face a greater likelihood of participating in the
government consumption-maintenance programs and reduce their
saving accordingly.
To examine this prediction, one would need to examine
differences in the distribution of assets by lifetime-income groups in

periods with "low" values of the consumption floor C and periods
with "high" values of the consumption floor. One might think that a

40

good natural experiment would be a comparison of the early 1960s

with a more recent period such as the 1980s. Detailed wealth data
are available in the 1962 Survey of Financial Characteristics of

Consumers and the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances. The size of
means-tested programs expanded substantially between 1962 and

1983, with expenditures more than one and one-half times their 1962

level by 1983. Real spending on means-tested in-kind transfers
(food stamps, housing subsidies, and Medicaid) rose even more
dramatically over the 1962-1983 period (see Burtless, 1986; and
Eliwood and Summers, 1986).

However, there are at least two problems with this as a

natural experiment. First, there are a large number of other factors
that have changed between the 1960s and the 198Os) Second, the
real benefits from AFDC and food stamps for a single mother with a

family of four rose by only 5.2 percent, from $6612 to $6957 (in
1984 dollars), between 1964 and 1984. The increase in total

"Factors other than the consumption floor were not constant over the 19621983 period. For example, average real out-of-pocket medical expenses for the
elderly has risen from $962 in 1966 to $1562 in 1984, which was also likely
accompanied by an increase in the variance of such out-of-pocket expenses.
(See U.S. Congress. Select Committee on Aging, House of Representatives,
"Emptying the Elderly's Pockethook - Growing Impact of Rising Health Care
Costs1" Comm. Pub.No. 101-76, page 25. Our calculation is expressed in
1984 dollars; we adjust from 1966 data using the CPI-U.) Increased out-ofpocket health expenses could. lead to greater saving while young in anticipation
of future medical expenses, but could also discourage saving by those with
greater potential eligibility for Medicaid. In addition, there may be greater
uncertainty about the growth rate of earnings across education groups.
especially given the divergence during the 1980s in earnings for those without
high school education relative to those with a college education (see Levy and
Murnane, 1992). Finally, the asset limits for the programs we examine were
changed significantly between 1962 and 1983 (see Powers, 1993).

41

expenditures arose from a rapid growth in enrollment rather than a
rapid increase in benefits conditional on receiving them.

Unfortunately, in its present form our model does not incorporate
the changes in family composition, eligibility requirements, or

welfare "stigma" that may account for the rapid rise in enrollment in
welfare programs and hence the greater likelihood of receiving
welfare payments.

Though not reported in detail here, we compared patterns of
wealth holdings using the 1962 Survey of Financial Characteristics

of Consumers (SFCC) and the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances
(SCF).37 To control for differences in educational attainment
between 1962 and 1983, we defined the low-lifetime-income group

to be the bottom quintile of educational attainment (in 1983, the
group who had not completed high school) and the high lifetimeincome group to be the top quartile of educational attainment (in

1983, college graduates). The data did not show large differences in
wealth between the two periods. For example, among households
with heads aged 46-60, median wealth fell from 3.8 percent of

household income in 1962 to 1.9 percent in 1983. For households
of the same age with high lifetime income, median wealth as a

percentage of income rose from 34.8 percent to 36.3 percent. In
sum, changes in median wealth accumulation between 1962 and 1983

" For a description of the 1962 Survey of Consumer Finances, see
Projector and Weiss (1963); for a description of the 1983 Survey of Consumer
Finances, see Avery and Kennickell (1987).

42

were not large.38

Preliminary cross-section evidence on how asset-based means

testing affects wealth accumulation is more supportive of our model.
Powers (1994) used data on female-headed households in the
National Longitudinal Survey of Women to exploit cross-sectional

(state-level) variation in AFDC policy to identify effects of asset

limits on wealth levels. In particular, Powers fmds that, for two
otherwise identical female-headed households who reside in different

states, a one-dollar differential in the AFDC asset limit is associated
with a 30-cent difference in assets.39 Moreover, the size of this
estimated effect is qualitatively robust to a number of alternative
specifications.
Another implication of our analysis is that low wealth

holdings by low-lifetime-income households are likely to be an
"absorbing state" because of asset-based means testing of welfare

programs. In Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994a), we compare
the persistence of wealth holdings for households in the 1984 and

1989 samples of the PSID. Simulated five-year transition
probabilities from our model with uninsured idiosyncratic risks and a
means-tested consumption floor of $7000 replicate very closely the

380ne potential problem with comparing the 1962 and the 1983 Surveys is
changes in the accuracy of wealth reporting. For example, Wolff (1987)
detailed substantial deviations between the aggregates in the 1962 SFCC and the
aggregate household balance sheets.
39powers includes lagged assets in her model with an estimated coefficient
not statistically significantly different from unity. Hence, one might interpret
her results as corroborating an important effect of asset limits on saving.

43.

observed transition probabilities in the PSID. Results of alternative
simulations with a high annual rate of time preference (10 percent)
and no consumption floor -- designed to mimic a "buffer stock"
approach -- greatly overpredicted the likelihood of a recovery from
low levels of wealth.

VI.

CONCLUSIONS AND DIRECTIONS FOR FUTURE
RESEARCH
Empirical studies using micro data often find a significant

group in the population with virtually no wealth, raising concerns
about heterogeneity in motives for saving. In particular, this
heterogeneity has been interpreted as evidence against the life-cycle

model of saving. This paper argues that a life-cycle model can
replicate observed patterns in household wealth accumulation once
one accounts for precautionary saving motives and social insurance

programs. This suggests that a properly specified life-cycle model
with precautionary saving and social insurance can be useful for
analyzing determinants of household saving and particularly for
assessing effects of certain social insurance programs on saving.
Our reconciliation of the generalized life-cycle model with
observed patterns of household wealth accumulation proceeds in two
steps. First, we show how social insurance programs with asset-

based means testing can discourage saving by households with low

expected lifetime incomes. The implicit tax bias against saving in
this context is significant relative to other areas of tax and
expenditure policy, since saving and wealth are subject to an implicit

44

tax rate of 100 percent in the event of a sufficiently large earnings
downturn or medical expense.
Second, we evaluate this model of saving and social
insurance using a large dynamic programming model with four state

variables. Assuming common preference parameters across
education groups, we are able to replicate along important
dimensions actual wealth accumulation patterns for both lower-and

higher-lifetime-income families. The results presented here
complement those presented in Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes
(1994b), in which we argue that a life-cycle model with
precautionary saving motives and social insurance can explain
aggregate wealth accumulation and observed co-movements of

changes in consumption and current income.
In particular, we find that the presence of asset-based means-

testing of welfare programs can imply that a significant fraction of
the group with lower lifetime income will not accumulate wealth.
The reason is that saving and wealth are subject to an implicit tax

rate of 100 percent in the event of a earnings downturn or medical
expense large enough to cause the household to seek welfare
support. This effect is much weaker for those with higher lifetime
income for two reasons. First, the consumption floor is a much
smaller fraction of their lifetime income and normal consumption

levels, and hence represents a less palatable support program.
Second, the uninsured risks of medical spending are a smaller

fraction of lifetime resources. These results suggest that observed
empirical behavior of lower income groups that might appear

45

inconsistent with the life-cycle model (Bernheini and Scholz, 1993),

may in fact be consistent with optimizing behavior.
We have made a number of simplifying assumptions in the
model that may affect the results we present here. First, we do not

control for family compositional changes. Children are likely to
increase levels of consumption at middle age, which can generate
low levels of wealth accumulation independent of means-tested social

insurance programs. For example, Blundell, Browning, and Meghir
(1994) suggest that household demographics are a significant
explanation of the hump-shaped consumption profile commonly

observed in cohort and cross-section data. However, their data also
suggest that the average number of children in a family peaks past

age 35. Hence, households anticipating future child-rearing expenses
(and college expenses) might actually save more while young, which
would explain why the empirical data indicates more saving at young

ages than that implied by our simulation model. Our model also

does not account for life-cycle changes at older ages, and in
particular the role of self-insurance against lifespan uncertainty by
married elderly couples and their children (see, e.g., Kotlikoff and

Spivak, 1981). Allowing for a richer demographic model of
consumption might therefore reduce the predicted level of overall
wealth accumulation because of greater demand for consumption
while middle-aged and less demand while retired.

Second, we ignore bequests in the model. Allowing for
bequests is likely to increase the overall level of wealth accumulation

in the simulation model (see for example, Hubbard, Skinner, and

46

Zeldes, 1994b), and may allow a better explanation of saving

behavior of the very wealthy. However, including bequests is
unlikely to affect our fundamental conclusions about the nature of

wealth accumulation at lower income levels. Most people who are
potentially eligible for means-tested welfare programs are unlikely to
be leaving substantial bequests.
•

To conclude, the economically significant role in saving
decisions by low-income households played by assct-based means

testing of many social insurance programs suggests its relevance for

public policy discussions of welfare and social insurance. A model
such as this can be particularly helpful in evaluating the effects of
welfare reform (such as changing the guaranteed level of
consumption or the size of the asset limit) on saving by both current

and potential future recipients. More broadly, deliberation of the
consequences of introducing asset-based means testing for Social
Security should also focus on the incentive effects emphasized here.

47

APPENDIX
Optimal Consumption in Two-Period and Three-Period Models

With Certain Earnings
The Lagrangian for the basic two-period problem outlined in
the text can be written: where Q2 is an indicator variable that equals

U(C)
2

+

1+5

X

+

[
lB1
L

+

E2

1+r

Cl

IC—Cl

2

CAl)

l(1—Q2)I 1+r 21 Q2
j
L
1÷rj

— C1),

unity when the individual is receiving a transfer, and zero otherwise,
X is the marginal utility of income, and jz1 is the shadow price of the
borrowing constraint in the first period. The first-order conditions

are:

u'(c1) —

X(1

—

Q2) —

1+5

U'(C2) —X
11

+ rj

=0

=0,

where U'(C) is the marginal utility with respect to period s
consumption.
Because of the nonlinearity of the budget constraint, there

exist two local maxima for the expression in (Al), one

48

corresponding to Q2 = 1, and the othe,r to Q = 0. Whether Q2 is

positive is clearly endogenous; to find the global maximum, we find

the two local maxima (corresponding to Q = 0 and Q = 1) and
then choose the larger.
Begin with Q2 = 0. Because we have assumed that E2 < C,

in order to not receive the transfer the household must have saved

resources from period 1; i.e., Q2 = 0 implies jt1 = 0. Thus, the
first-order conditions have the standard interior solution: U'(C1) =
U'(C2)( 1 + r)/( 1+6). When Q2 = 1, so that the household receives a

transfer in period 2, the first-order condition is U'(C1) = .t. The
household will consume all of its resources in the first period and
rely on the consumption floor in the second period.
Figure 2 in the text showed the budget constraints and

indifference curves for this two-period problem. Figure Al provides
a different view of the problem facing the consumer. On the
horizontal axis is first-period consumption, and on the vertical axis is

marginal utility of consumption. The downward sloping curve
measures the marginal utility of C1, which is continuous everywhere.

The other, initially upward sloping, curve FF' is equal to

U'(C2)(l-Q2)/(1 +6) + ,.4° The two intersections of these curves
correspond to the two local maxima described above. Point a again
corresponds to the interior solution (with Q = 0); at this point FF'

° The analytic derivation of FF' comes by substituting U'(C,)(l +r)/(l +6)
for X in the first line of equation (13). This optimality condition can then be
broken into two parts; U'(C1) and (minus) the remainder, which is denoted by
FF'; when the two components are equal, of course, the first-order condition is
satisfied.

49

Figure Al: Two Local Maximums for Optimal Two-Period Consumption
U

F

/

b

U'(C1)

Opportunity cost

C
E1-C

1

is upward-sloping, since as C1 rises, C2 falls, so that U'(C2) rises.

When C, is high enough that saving the remainder would cause C2 to
equal C, the "opportunity cost" of additional first-period

consumption drops to zero. At this point dC2/dC1 = 0, so any
additional saving is effectively completely confiscated due to the

consumption maintenance program, and it makes no sense for an

individual to save any additional dollars. Finally, at C1 = E1, the
borrowing constraint binds, so that U'(C,) is equal to the shadow

price ,.

The alternative solution is therefore b. Whether point b is

preferred to point a cannot be answered without knowing the shape

of the utility function over the entire range of consumption.

The solution to this model is shown in Figure A2(a). For
levels of wealth (or earnings) that are low, but greater than C, the
slope of the consumption-wealth profile is one -- all wealth is

consumed. Above E, the consumption function reverts to the
traditional interior solution with a slope of 0.5; that is, half of the
wealth is consumed in the first period, half in the second.
One way to generalize this result is to expand the time

horizon to three periods.4' Assume that both second- and thirdperiod earnings are less than the consumption floor, but that first-

period earnings exceed the floor. Formally, the three-period model
can be posed as follows. The Lagrangian can be expressed as:
with the obvious generalizations from the two-period model. The
condition for Q2 = 1 is similar to the two-period model, while the
condition for Q3 = 1 is somewhat more complicated since it relies

" It is straightforward but tedious to generalize to more than three periods.
50

Figure P.2(a): Consumption - Wealth Profile: Two-period model
45 0

Cl

MPC = 1

MPC= .5

E

= U(CJ,C2,C3)

+

x

+

{ [E1+]
- [C11-Q2)+ (-Q3)
1+r

E3(1-Q,)

- ___
(1-'-r)2

L

+ p1{E1 —C1)
+

z2{[(E1 —C1)(1+r) +E2](1 —Q2) + Q2C —C2)

also on past saving behavior:
=

1

= 0

,

if

,

otherwise

c2 >

+

E3C

1r

where X2 = ((E1-C1)(1 +r)+E2)(1-Q2) + QC is accumulated wealth
plus earnings plus transfer payments in period 2. Note then that
choosing C1 such that a transfer program in period 2 will occur (i.e.,

=

=

1)

1.

As will be shown below, under the assumptions of the model,

makes it more likely that the individual will also choose Q

once payments from the income transfer program are accepted in

period 2, payments will also be accepted in period 3.

51

The first order conditions can be written:
U1 — X(1 —Q2)(1 —Q3)

—
j.z1

- P'2 —-

X(1-Q)

In

2

p.(l +r)(1—Q2) = 0

=0.

U
(1+r)2

There are a number of possible strategies that involve either
receiving no income transfer payments, or receiving payments in one

or two periods. Consider the four possible combinations of Q2 and
Q3:
(1) Q2

= = 0 corresponds to the standard interior solution

without any transfer payments. The Euler equation is given by U1 =
(1 +r)U11

for i =

1,2. It is possible, but unlikely, that the

individual's borrowing constraint binds in the first period (jt > 0),
and impossible for the borrowilig constraint to bind in the second
period.42

(ii) Q2 = 1, Q3 = 0 is ruled out by assumption. If the

individual receives transfer payments in the second period, then he

or she will have no savings for the third period. Since B3 < C by
assumption, the individual will prefer C, leading to Q =

1

and a

contradiction.
(iii) Q2 = 0,

O=

1

occurs when an interior solution is

42 Since E3 c C by assumption, if the borrowing constraint is binding in
the second period, the household will save nothing for the third period and will
prefer C to E3, so that Q3 = 1.

52

chosen in the second period, but transfers are received in the third

period. In this case, the marginal conditions between the first and
second periods generate interior solutions; U1 =

U2( 1+

r), but U2 =

. That is, consumption in the first two years are chosen as if in a
two-period model, because it makes no sense to carry over a small
amount of saving to the final period.
(iv) Q2 = Q3 = 1 implies that the individual will consume

all of his or her initial wealth in the first period (jz > 0) and rely
on income transfers thereafter.
Finding the global solution to this model involves choosing

the one of these three potential solutions that maximizes utility.
Which of the three feasible solutions is. a global maximum depends

on the form of the utility function, thelevel of wealth, and the size
of the guaranteed consumption floor.

The solution to the model for the case that E2 =

= 0 is

presented in Figure A2(b). For lower levels of initial resources E1

< F, the MPC out of resources is 1.0 and all wealth is consumed
(i.e., case (iii) above). When wealth exceeds E but is less than E,
case (ii) is chosen; wealth is split evenly between period 1 and 2, so
the MPC of wealth is 1/2, and the consumption floor C is consumed

in the third period. Finally, for wealth greater than E, case (i) is
chosen; the individual chooses never to be on the floor and an
interior solution holds with the MPC out of wealth is equal to 1/3.

53

Figure A2(b): Consumption - Wealth Profile: Three-period model
450

Cl

/
II

E*

'F

I

I

'F

I

'F

E**

Wealth

Optimal Consumption in a Two-Period Model With Uncertain

Earnings
Figure A3 offers a graphical description of the effect of
uncertain second-period resources and social insurance on

consumption. On the horizontal axis is first-period consumption,

and on the vertical axis is the marginal utility of consumption. The
downward-sloping curve, equal to the left hand side of equation (11)
in the text, measures the marginal utility of C1, which is continuous

everywhere. The other, initially upward-sloping, curve labeled
"opportunity cost" is equal to the right-hand side of equation (11) in
the text.

The intersections of these curves represent local maxima.

Point d corresponds to the interior solution at which the household
saves enough to avoid welfare even in the worst earnings outcome

(Q = Q = 0).

At the point C, the amount of saving provides

exactly C in the bad state of the world in which E, is realized. This
is not an optimal choice, because the household could consume more

C1 today, and still receive C in the bad state of the world, owing to

the existence of the consumption floor. Hence, the "opportunity
cost" curve drops suddenly, as the value of On,, switches from zero

to one. That is, increasing consumption today by $1 causes a
reduction in next period's consumption only if the good outcome is
realized, so the opportunity cost of $1 consumed today is just the
marginal utility of second-period consumption C,4, weighted by the

probability that the good state occurs. Point e corresponds to the
interior solution at which the household receives the consumption

54

Figure A3: Marginal Utility and Optimal Consumption:
Uncertain Earnings
U.

Opportunity cost

t

Cl

floor in the bad state of the world, but not in the good state of the

world. At C, first-period consumption is sufficiently high that in
either state of the world, the family will be eligible for the
consumption floor. The opportunity cost curve drops to zero,
because increasing C1 today by a dollar does not reduce C2. Finally,

at pointf, the household is consuming all of its resources. The
optimal consumption choice corresponds to the global utility

maximum that corresponds either to point d, e, orf.
Figure A3 can be used to analyze how an increase in
resources E1 affects the relative value of points d, e, andf. Because
of an envelope condition, the increase in utility conditional on
choosing C1 at points d, e, andf equals (approximately) the shaded

areas to the right of and below points d, e, and f, respectively.

Clearly, the value of d, saving against both outcomes, rises by more
than e, saving against just the good outcome, and the value of e rises
by more thanf, making it more likely that the individual will save.
In other words, households with higher initial resources are more
likely to save for future contingencies, and hence less likely to rely

on the consumption floor. In this case of uncertainty about earnings
net of medical expenses, the wealth-consumption profile can again be
nonmonotonic.

55

Details by age of the distribution of wealth
The following graphs show the weighted 20th, 4Oth 60th,
and 80th percentiles of wealth (actual PSID and simulated by the

model) for each age. These therefore show unsmoothed data, as
opposed to figures 1 and 4 in the text which showed the fitted values
for the quintile regressions.

No High School Degree

450

thflabPSDvsAstS
co

co

co

400

•400

400

-400

30O

-300 300

•300

20O

'200 20O

•200

100

• 100

•tO0

50

0

•
___________

•

C
•

th

50

-

4th jatuJiia DY

100

50

.•

0

-o

th

sob

sob

thwAflabPsDnetfl
•
a- thSEtnSetS
450400-

-CO 400-

400

300-

300-

-300

200-

200'

-200

i°0

•100

100-

50-

0-

.ioo

2b

5O

th sob
Age

-0

50

0-

.50

.
th

A,

th

sob

References
Abel, Andrew. "Capital Accumulation and Uncertain Lifetimes with
Adverse Selection." Econometrica 54 (September, 1986):
1079-1098.

Abowd, John; and Card, David. "On the Covariance Structure of
Earnings and Hours Changes." Econometrica 57 (March
1989): 411-455.
Atkeson, Andrew, and Ogaki, Masao. "Wealth-Varying
Intertemporal Elasticities of Substitution: Evidence from
Panel and Aggregate Data." University of Rochester
Working Paper No. 303, November 1991.
Bar-Ilan, Avner. "On the Proportionality and Homogeneity of
Consumption and Income," Mimeograph, University of
British Columbia, September 1991.

Bernheiin, B. Douglas, and Scholz, John Karl. "Private Saving and
Public Policy." In James Poterba (ed.) Tax Policy and the
Economy, vol. 7. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1993.
Blundell, Richard, Browning, Martin, and Meghir, Costas.
"Consumer Demand and the Life-Cycle Allocation of
Household Expenditure." Review of Economic Studies 61
(1994): 57-80.

Burtless, Gary, and Hausman, Jerry A. "The Effect of Taxation on
Labor Supply: Evaluating the Gary Negative Income Tax'
Experent." Journal of Political Economy 86 (December
1978): 1103-1130.

Burtless, Gary. "Public Spending on the Poor: Trends, Prospects,
and Economic Limits." In Sheldon H. Danziger and Daniel
H. Weinberg, eds., Fighting Poverty: What Works and
What Doesn't. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986.

56

Caballero, Ricardo J. "Earnings Uncertainty and Aggregate Wealth
Accumulation." American Economic Review 81 (September
1991): 859-871.
Cantor, Richard. "The Consumption Function and the Precautionary
Demand for Savings." Economics Letters 17 (1985): 207210.
Carroll, Christopher D., "The Buffer Stock Theory of Saving: Some
Macroeconomic Evidence." Brookings Pagers on Economic
Activity (1992:2): 61-135.

Carroll, Christopher D., and Samwick, Andrew. "The Nature and
Magnitude of Precautionary Wealth." Mimeograph, Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 1992.
Committee on Ways and Means. Overview of Entitlements
Programs: 1991 Green Book. U.S. House of
Representatives, May 7, 1991.

Curtin, Richard T., Juster, F. Thomas, and Morgan, James N.
"Survey Estimates of Wealth: An Assessment of Quality." In
R. E. Lipsey and H. S. Tice (eds.) The Measurement of
Saving. Investment, and Wealth. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1989, 473-552.
Davies, James. "Uncertain Lifetime, Consumption and Dissaving in
Retirement." Journal of Political Economy 89 (June 1981):
56 1-578.

Deaton, Angus. "Saving and Liquidity Constraints." Econometrica
59 (September 1991): 1221-1248.
Deaton, Angus. Understanding Consumption. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1992.

57

Dynan, Karen. "The Rate of Time Preference and Shocks to Wealth:
Evidence from Panel Data." Econdmic Activity Section
Working Paper No. 134, Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, July 1993.

Ellwood, David T., and Summers, Lawrence H. "Poverty in
America: Is Welfare the Answer or the Problem?" In
Sheldon H. Danziger and Daniel H. Weinberg, eds.,
Fighting Poverty: What Works and What Doesn't.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1986.
Engen, Eric. "Precautionary Saving and the Structure of Taxation.
Mimeograph, U.C.L.A, 1992.

Faber, J.F. Life Tables for the United States: 1900-2050. U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security
Administration, Actuarial Study No. 87, September 1982.
Feenberg, Daniel, and Skinner, Jonathan. "The Risk and Duration of
Catastrophic Health Care Expenditures." NBER Working
Paper No. 4147, August 1992; forthcoming, Review of
Economics and Statistics.
Feldstein, Martin. "The Effects of Fiscal Policies When Incomes
Are Uncertain: A Contradiction to Ricardian Equivalence."
American Economic Review 78 (March 1988): 14-23.

Feldstein, Martin. "College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4032 (March 1992).
Fuchs, Victor. "Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory
Study." In V.R. Fuchs, ed; Economic Asoects of Health.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982, pp. 93-120.

Hausman, Jerry A. "Labor Supply." In H. Aaron and J. Pechman,
eds. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior. Washington
D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1981.

58

Hays, Constance L. "Girl's Plan to Save for College Runs Afoul of
Welfare Rules." The New York Times (May 15, 1992), p.1.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Judd, Kenneth L. "Social Security and
Individual Welfare: Precautionary Saving, Liquidity
Constraints, and the Payroll Tax." American Economic
Review 77 (September 1987): 630-646.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, Skinner, Jonathan, and Zeldes, Stephen P.
"Expanding the Life-Cycle Model: Precautionary Saving and
Public Policy." American Economic Review 84 (May 1994a)
174-179.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Skinner, Jonathan, and Zeldes, Stephen P. "The
Importance of Precautionary Motives in Explaining
Individual and Aggregate Saving." Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy, 1994b, forthcoming.
Hurd, Michael D. "Mortality Risk and Bequests." Econometrica 57
(July 1989): 779-8 14.

Kimball, Miles S. "Precautionary Saving and the Marginal
Propensity to Consume." Working Paper No. 3403,
National Bureau of Economic Research, July 1990a.
Kimball, Miles S. "Precautionary Saving in the Small and in the
Large." Econometrica 58 (January 1990b): 53-73.
Kotlikoff, Laurence J. "Health Expenditures and Precautionary
Savings." In L.J. Kotlikoff, What Determines Savings?
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1988.

Kotlikoff, Laurence J., and Spivak, Avia. "The Family as an
Incomplete Annuities Market," Journal of Political Economy
89 (April 1981): 372-391
Laitner, John. "Random Earnings Differences, Lifetime Liquidity
Constraints, and Altruistic Intergenerational Transfers,"
Mimeograph, University of Michigan, 1990.

59

Lawrance, Emily. "Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference:
Evidence from Panel Data," Journal of Political Economy 99
(February 1991): 54-77.

Levin, Laurence. "On the Demand for Health Insurance and
Precautionary Savin:.t Among the Elderly." Mimeograph,
Santa Clara University, August 1990.

Levy, Frank, and Mumane, Richard. "U.S. Earnings Levels and
Earnings Inequality: A Review of Recent Trends and
Proposed Explanations." Journal of Economic Literature 30
(September 1992) : 323-381.
Lillard, Lee A., and Willis, Robert J. "Dynamic Aspect of Earnings
Ability." Econometrica 46 (September 1978): 985-1012.
MaCurdy, Thomas E. "The Use of Time Series Processes to Model
the Error Structure of Earnings in a Longitudinal Data
Analysis." Journal of Econometrics 18 (1982): 83-114.
Masson, Andre. "Permanent Income, Age, and the Distribution of
Wealth," Annales D'Economie et de Statisticiue No. 9
(1988): 227-256.
Moffitt, Robert. "Estimating the Value of an In-Kind Transfer: The
Case of Food Stamps," Econometrica 57 (March 1989):
385-409.
Moffitt, Robert. "The Econometrics of Piecewise-Linear Budget
Constraints," Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 4
(July 1986): 317-328.

Moffitt, Robert, and Rothschild, Michael. "Variable Earnings and
Nonlinear Taxation.' The Journal of Human Resources 22
(Summer 1987): 405-421.
O'Connell, Stephen A., and Zeldes, Stephen P. "Dynamic Efficiency
in the Gifts Economy," Journal of Monetary Economics 31
(1993): 363-379.

60

Powers, Elizabeth T. uDoes Means Testing Discourage Saving?:
Evidence from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Women." Mimeograph, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland,
March 1994.
Rose, Robert L. "For Welfare Parents, Scriinping is Legal, But
Saving is Out," The Wall Street Journal (February 6, 1990):
pp. 1,11.

Sherraden, Michael. Assets and the Poor: A New American
Welfare Policy. Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.,
1991.

Skinner, Jonathan. "Variable Lifespan and the Intertemporal
Elasticity of Consumption." Review of Economics and
Statistics 67 (November 1985): 616-623.
Skinner, Jonathan. "Risky Income, Life Cycle Consumption, and
Precautionary Savings." Journal of Monetary Economics 22
(1988): 237-255.
Wolff, Edward N. "Estimate Of Household Wealth Inequality In The
U.S., 1962-1983." Review of Income and Wealth 33 (1987):
231-256.

Ya.s, Menahem E. "Uncertain Lifetime, Life

Insurance,

and the

Theory of the Consumer." Review of Economic Studies 32
(April 1965): 137-158.
Shiomo. "The Relation Between Return and Income,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 52 (February 1987): 77-96.

Yitzhaki,

Zeldes, Stephen P. "Optimal Consumption with Stochastic Income:
Deviations from Certainty Equivalence." Ouarterlv Journal
of Economics 104 (May 1989): 275-298.

61

