NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FISCAL POLICIES, CAPITAL
FORMATION. AND CAPITALISM

Martin Feldstein

Working Paper No. 4885

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

These remarks were presented at the annual meeting of the European Economics Association in

Maasuicht, The Netherlands. on September 4, 1994. This paper is part of NBER's research
program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authorand not those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit pennission provided that full credit. including
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4885
October 1994
FISCAL POLICIES. CAPITAL
FORMATION, AND CAPITALISM

ABSTRACF
This lecture examines the effects of tax policy and social security retirement benefits on
capital accumulation and economic welfare.
The paper begins by examining how capital income taxes reduce the real return to savers
and then discusses the welfare loss of capital income taxation relative to the alternatives of taxing

consumption and labor income. The analysis shows that capital income taxes impose a very
substantial dead weight toss even if they do not alter private saving. The first section of the
paper also discusses the theory and empirical literature on the effect of capital income taxes on
national saving.
The second part of the lecture deals with social security retirement benefits. In 1994. the

aged members of the U.S. population will receive cash and medical benefits that cost the
government $530 billion or $16,000 per person over age 65. The likely impact of these benefits
on private saving and the empirical evidence on this subject are then reviewed. The second part
of the paper concludes by discussing the welfare loss of unfunded social security benefits and
the possibilities for alternative arrangements.
A final section discusses the implications of international capital flows for this analysis.
As capital flows become more important, particularly in Europe, the response of government
policy may. be to compete for foreign capital inflows and to tax domestic savers more heavily.
This would lead to a smaller total volume of capital.

The sharp decline in the net national saving rate -- from more than 8 percent of GOP in
the United States in the 1970s to only 4.5 percent in the 1980s and from more than 14 percent
of GOP in Europe in the 1970s to 9.9 percent in the 1980s -- may not only create lower real
incomes and slower growth but may weaken capitalism itself. In the United States, a decade of
slow growth has increased protectionist tendencies in international irade and led to a new interest

in industhal policies that expand the role of the government in guiding the direction of
technology and of private investment. In these ways, the government policies that discourage
saving might make the Schumpeterian vision of a shift from private capitalism to a governmentdominated economy more likely.
Martin Feldstein
National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138

Fiscal Policies, Capital Formation, and Capitalism
The 1994 Joseph Schumpeter Lecture of the European Economic Association.
Martin Feldstein'

I am pleased to be here and honored by your invitation to deliver this year's Joseph
Schumpeter Lecture. I am delighted to be doing so as my old friend Roger Guesnerie assumes
the Presidency of the European Economic Association.
Joseph Schumpeter was a remarkable scholar and thinker whose life and work spanned
Europe and the United States. Although he died nearly half a century ago, he continues to have

a substantial --

indeed

an increasing -- impact on economists and economic thinking. Our

profession's growing interest in the process of technical change has recently led to a reawakened

interest in Schumpeter's 1911 book, The Theory of Economic Development. Business cycle
theorists are again examining the ideas about the relation between innovation waves and business

cycles that Schumpeter presented in The l'heorv of Economic Development and then developed

more hilly in his specialized book Business Cycles (1939).
Joseph Schumpeter's professional life began in Vienna and ended at Harvard University.

Since Schumpeter was the first incumbent of the chair that I now hold at Harvard (the George
F. Baker professorship), I feel a special affinity for Schumpeter and a particular pleasure in your

invitation to deliver this lecture in his honor

'George F. Baker Professor of Ec•,nomics, Harvard University. and President of the
National Bureau of Economic Research. These remarks were presented at the annual
meeting of the European Economics A;sociation in Maastricht, The Netherlands, on
September 4, 1994.

Schumpeter worried about the fragility of capitalism, a subject that was the focus of his
justly famous book, Socialism. Capitalism and Democracy (1942, 1950). If he were alive today,

I think he would he relieved that some of the risks that he feared most -- high rates of inflation
and the spread of world communism -- have not undermined our capitalist system during the half

century since he wrote. Moreover, the experience in frontier industries like biotechnology in
the 1980s and 1990s and computer electronics during the 1960s and 1970s has shown that the
individual entrepreneur and the small firm continue to be important and have not, as Schumpeter

feared, become outmoded because of the success of large industrial companies.
But if Schumpeter were alive today, I think he might worry that the viability of capitalism

is now threatened by the very low rate of capital formation in the United States and the sharply

declining rate of capital formation in Europe. In recent years. the overall net national saving
rate of the United States -- including the saving of households, businesses and governments -has

fallen to less than 2.2 percent of GDP. For the decade of the 1980s as a whole, that net

national saving rate was only 4.5 percent, down from saving rates of 10.0 percent and 8.2
percent in the 1960s and 1970s. For the European OECD countries as a group, net saving fell
from 14.1 percent of GDP in the 1970s to 9.9 percent in the 1980s.2
The low and declining rate of capital formation and its relation to taxes and government

2Private saving rates (i.e., rates that exclude government saving and deficits) have
alsc tallen sharply. For the United States, the net private saving rate fell from 9.3 percent in
the 1960s and 1970s to 7.7 percent in he 1980s and 6.3 percent during 1990 and 1991.
Among the European OECD countries, the net private saving rates were approximately 11
percent in the 1960s and 1970s, fell below 10 percent in the 1980s and to less than 9 percent
in the early 1990s. The sharp decline of the private saving rate in the United States forces us
to reject the "nothing affects the saving rate" view that had been argued by Denison (1958)
and David and Scadding (1974) on the basis of the apparent stability of the saving rate over
previous decades.
2

spending are the subject of my remarks today.3

I believe that the saving rate in the United States is too low and that our tax and spending
policies, particularly our social insurance spending, are the primary reason why it is so low.

I will begin my remarks by discussing capital income taxes and will then turn to social security
retirement programs. Although budget deficits continue to be a major cause of the low national

saving rate in the United States and in many European countries, I will not discuss that
important subject here. My focus will instead be on the impact of fiscal policies on private
saving.

I will also not be discussing the relation between the rate of saving and the rate of
economic growth.

Some of the recent research on

the theory of endogenous growth (e.g.,

Rorner (1987) and Barro (1974)) suggests that a higher rate of saving might permanently raise
the rate of economic growth. In contrast, the traditional neoclassical growth theory implies that
a

rise in the saving rate raises the equilibrium level of income, but not the equilibrium growth

rate. But even in the traditional neoclassical theory, economic growth is higher during the very

the desirability of
Long period of transition to the higher equilibrium level of income. Although

a higher national saving rate would clearly be greater if it permanently raised the rate of
economic growth, I will not make such an assumption. Nor will I assume that there are any
externalities associated with a higher saving rate.4

The analysis that follows therefore does not argue that fiscal policies should be used to

of the

3Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980) and Sandmo (1985) provide excellent surveys
analytic issues and evidence about the effect of taxes on saving and portfolioinvestments.

4Although Schumpeter emphasized the role of technical change as a determinant of
economic growth, he recognized that capital accumulation raises productivity and saw capital
as a necessary factor in the process of technical change itself (Schumpeter. 1911).
3

raise saving above the level that would prevail in the absence of government intervention.
Instead, it shows that the existing government policies reduce saving and imply large deadweight

losses. A shift in tax and transfer polices could raise the saving rate and reduce the deadweight
loss of the tax system by getting the rate of saving closer to the rate that would have prevailed

in the absence of any distorting effects of taxes or transfers.5

Although the ftcus of my remarks is the United States, much of what 1 ay is clearly
relevant to any economy. At the end of my remarks I will comment on some of the possible
implications vi the U.S. experience in the context of the future development of the European
Union and on the broader relation of these issues to the viability of capitalism itself.

1.

Capital Income Taxes

Before discussing the effect of capital income taxes on capital accumulation and on the

overall deadweight burden of the tax system, it is useful to focus on the ways in which capital

income taxes in general, and the U.S. system of income taxes in particular, reduce the rate of
rewrn to savers.
The combination of the corporate income tax and personal taxes on interest, dividends
and capital gains puts a substantial wedge between the pretax marginal product of capital and

5Although the basic tax structures generally discourage private saving, governments
also enact niles to encourage saving and thus to offset some of the adverse effects of existing
tax structures. Poterba (1994) contains useful essays on saving incentives used in the G-7
countries. See also OECD (1994) for a survey of the recent tax policies in the OECD that
affect savings.
4

the net return received by individual savers.6 As a very rough approximation, the combination

of a 34 percent federal corporate tax rate and a 40 percent federal personal tax rate on higher
income individuals implies a 60 percent combined net tax rate. A 12 percent real pretax rate
of return becomes a net return of only 4.8 percent. At a return of 12 percent, a dotlar of saving

today buys more than $17 of consumption 25 years from now (at today's prices). When that
annual rate of return is reduced to 4.8 percent, today's dollar of saving only buys about $3.20
of consumption 25 years from now.
This calculation understates the tax effect because it ignores the fact that inflation distorts

the measurement of capital income and raises the effective tax rate on the return to saving)
Consider, for example, the effect of inflation on the taxation of interest income. In the absence

of inflation, the rate of interest on a long-term bond might be four percent. An individual with
a 25 percent marginal tax rate would pay one percent of the four percent in taxes and have a real

net yield of three percent. If an inflation rate of six percent raises the nominal interest rate to
10 percent, the 25 percent tax would rise to 2.5 percentage points, leaving a net of tax return

of 7.5 percent and a net of tax real return of only 1.5 percent. Thus the combination oF 6
percent inflation and a 25 percent statutory tax rate would produce an effective tax rate of 62.5

percent. For higher statutory rates or higher rates of inflation the effective tax rate can exceed

100 percent. But even a four percent inflation rate turns a 25 percent statutory rate into a 50

6schumpeter (1950, page 389) advocated eliminating this distortion by ending the
double taxation of taxation at the corporate and individual levels (by not taxing corporate
profits from which dividends are paid) and by permitting a deduction of saving when
calculating the base for the personal income tax. He proposed making up the lost revenue
with a national sales tax.

7Fetdstein (1983c) brings together a number of papers that I have written on the
interaction of inflation and taxes.
5

percent effective tax rate and a 40 percent statutory rate into an 80 percent effective tax rate.

Inflation also distorts the taxation of capital gains since taxes are levied on the nominal
rise in asset values. An investor who bought a representative portfolio of U.S. common stocks

in 1970 and sold it a decade later would have paid tax on a 43 percent nominal increase in value
even though the real value of the portfolio had declined.

Finally, intlation distorts the measurement of profits at the corporate level in a variety

of ways. The deduction of nominal interest payments reduces the effective tax rate on real
profits (because companies are not required to reflect in income the reduction in the real value

of their debt). In practice, however, this is more than outweighed for most companies by the

way in which inflation causes depreciation to be understated and inventory profits to be
overstated. On balance, the high rates of inflation in the United States in the 1970s raised the
effective tax rate on corporate income substantially (Feldstein and Summers, 1979).

A major benefit ol' the substantial decline in inflation that has occurred in most of the
OECD countries during the past decade and a half has therefore been to reduce the effective tax

rate on capital income. Reducing the inflation rate from six percent to three percent can have
a substantial effect on the real after tax reward to savers and therefore on the rate of saving and
investment.

The relevance of this analysis to the debate about the neutrality of money is very clear.
The interaction between inflation and the tax system means that the rate of monetary expansion

has very substantial real effects on the economy. Although the neutrality of money and of the
rate of growth of the money stock might be defended as a theoretical proposition in an economy

without taxes, there can be no doubt about the non-neutrality of changes in money growth rates

6

in any actual economy with capital income taxes.

1.1

The Welfare Loss of Capital Income Taxation
The gap between the pretax marginal product of capital and the net aftertax return that

sa'crs earn measures the difference between the rate at which the economy transforms current
consumption into future consumption and the relative value that consumers place on current and

future consumption.

This difference between the marginal rate of transformation and the

consumers' marginal rate of substitution measures the welfare loss on the marginal dollar of
reduced capital accumulation.

I frequently

hear the argument that this gap does not matter because private saving does

not appear to respond to

taxes or to the real net rate of return. That argument is simply

wrong. There can be a very substantial dead weight loss even if private saving is completely

unchanged. What matters is not the distortion in savings, but the distortion in consumption.
The rate of interest determines the price of future consumption in terms of present consumption.
A tax on capital income causes a deadweight loss to the extent that a compensated change in that
tax causes a chang.e in the timing of consumption.

Saving is not an argument of the individual's utility function. Saving should be thought

of as the current expenditure on future consumption, i.e., its the product of the price of future

consumption and the volume of future consumption. A tax on capital income that does not

8See, for example, the recent OECD study on taxation and household saving (OECD,
1994).
7

change current private saving at at! has a very substantial effect on future consumption.
Consider

for example a 50 percent tax rate that reduces

the

saver's return from 12

percent to 6 percent. For a saver with a 25 year planning horizon (e.g.. saving at age 55 to
spend between ages 75 and 85), the tax raises the price of a dollar of future consumption from
about 6 cents of foregone current consumption to about 23 cents. If current saving is unchanged.
future consumption with the tax is reduced to only about one fourth of what it wo.uld have been

without the tax. The deadweight loss in this case is likely to be very substantial.
In practice, of course, what matters is a comparison of the deadweight loss of a capital
income tax and of the tax that would replace it. That comparison depends on the magnitude of

the households' responses to the alternative taxes. Since individuals' labor supply is affected
by taxation, the net welfare effect of shifting to a consumption tax (that excludes saving from
the tax base) or a labor income tax (that excludes investment income from the tax base) depends

on the sensitivities of saving and of labor supply to tax rates.
Although there is substantial controversy about both elasticities --and surprisingly little

attention to the important cross-elasticity that measures the effect of the capital income tax on
labor supply -- essentially all of the evidence is consistent with the conclusion that shifting to
a consumption tax or a labor income tax would reduce the overall deadweight loss of taxation.
In particular, even with the very pessimistic assumption that saving would not respond at all to
a shift from an income tax to a consumption tax, shifting to a consumption tax would reduce the

total deadweight loss for any plausible labor supply response. (Feldstein. 1978).

1.2

The Effect of CaDital Income Taxes on National Saving

8

While there is little doubt that shifting from an ordinary income tax to a consumption tax

or a labor income tax would reduce the deadweight loss of the tax system, the magnitude of the

rise in personal saving that would result is surprisingly uncertain. Moreover, although a
consumption tax and a labor income tax that produce the same present value of taxes from an
individual taxpayer define exactly the same lifetime budget constraint for the individual, and

therefore imply the same optimal consumption at each date, they would have very different
implications for the time path of private saving.

A compensated shift from an income tax to a consumption tax (i.e., a shift that leaves
the taxpayer's lifetime utility unchanged) might increase current saving, while a similar shift to

a labor income tax might reduce saving. This paradox is easy to resolve.9 Think for a moment

about a two period life cycle model in which individuals work, consume and save in the first
period and then retire, consume and dissave in the second period. A traditional income tax is

a combination of a labor income tax that collects revenue during the first period when the
individual is working and a capital income tax that collects revenue in the second period when
the individual receives interest and dividends on previous saving. A shift to a labor income tax

therefore shifts the entire tax collection to the first period of life. Such a change could cause

the individual to save less during the first period as well as consuming less. National saving
would unambiguously increase (because the individual consumes less) but personal saving would

decline. Consumption in retirement would rise despite the earlier decline in saving because the

net return on that saving is higher than under a traditional income tax and no tax is payable
during retirement.

9This discussion follows Feldstein (1983c, chapter 1).
9

In contrast. a compensated shift from an income tax to a consumption tax would increase

the tax during the second period of life (since the principal aswell as the interest would be
subject to tax as it is consumed) and would reduce the tax during the first period of life (since

savings are excluded from the tax base.) The individual would have to save more during the

first period than under an income tax just to maintain the same level of consumption in
retirement.

The actual response of personal saving would of course reflect the individual utility

functions and the change in the net rate of return implied by the tax change. What is
unambiguous is that national saving would rise by the same amount under either a consumption

tax or a labor income tax with the same present value of revenue.
But the reduced consumer saving in response to a shift to a labor income tax is more than

an interesting paradox. It is also a warning that the favorable change in national saving that

could result from replacing the existing capital income tax would be achieved only if the
government maintained government spending unchanged and allowed the additional tax revenue

to be reflected in an increased budget surplus.
The two very different responses of personal saving that can be predicted for shifts from

an income tax to two alternative taxes that imply exactly the same net return to saving is an
example of the difficulty of tiying to measure the way that saving responds to changes in tax
rates and tax mies. There have in fact been a large number of studies using aggregate time
series data that have tried to measure the effect of variations in the tax rate on aggregate savings

10

or consumption.'° Most of these studies have found that a higher net return either raises the
saving rate or has no effect at all. There is however little agreement about the magnitude of the

response and even about whether there is any response at all. I believe that this ambiguity is
inevitable.

There are too many problems with this type of aggregate analysis for it to yield
convincing estimates. The key variable -- the real after-tax rate of return -- cannot be observed

and is very difficult to estimate. How should expected inflation be measured? What assets
shou!J individuals be assumed to hold? How should the income and substitution effects of

special tax incentives like Individual Retirement Accounts be reflected in the aggregate
measures? How should borrowing be treated since the interest rates faced by borrowers are

often substantially different from the interest rates faced by savers? More generally, can the

Iinding decisions of employer pensions

simply be aggregated with household saving

decisionsP If not, how should they be modeled and how should that be integrated with the
behavior of individuals?

The experience in the United States during the past dozen years shows some of the
additional difficulties of time series analysis of saving behavior. Real net of tax interest rates
rose substantially, increasing the incentive to save. But households and pension funds also

enjoyed a dramatic rise in the stock market, encouraging many individuals to increase their

lUSee for example Blinder (1975), Boskin (978), Evans (1983), Hall (1987). Makin
(1987). Mankiw (1987) and Wright (1969). Smith (1989) provides a useful summary of this
and related literature.
"Employer contributions to pension funds are treated by the national income
accounts as a form of personal (household) saving. The accumulation of interest and dividend
income inside pension accounts is also classified in the same way.

I'

consumption and making it unnecessary for many firms to make contributions to their pension

funds. The very high races of inflation in the late 1970s and early l980s had the effect of
eroding the real value of many mortgages, leaving households substantially richer than they had

expected to be. The sharp fall in personal income tax rates in 1981 and 1986 also left many
people feeling that (hey were permanently richer. Banks and other lenders expanded greatly the
number of people to whom credit cards were offered and banks developed the home equity loan
that allows individuals to borrow conveniently (and in a tax deductible way) against the collateral

in their homes at interest rates that are substantially lower than had previously been available

for consumer credit. It is difficult to imagine how all of this could be properly accounted for
in a time series regression in order to estimate the net effect of the change in real after tax
interest rates.

Cross-section estimates based on microeconomic data do not seem any more promising.

Since all households lace the same menu of interest rates at each point in time, a cross-section

saving regression would relate saving rates to individual tax rates, in fact, however, individuals

in higher tax brackets invest their financial assets in very different forms than lower income
individuals. (Feldstein, l983c, chapter 10). Ma result, the households with the highest marginal
tax rates may also have the highest after tax real rates of return.
I believe that the most persuasive evidence on the link between tax rules and saving has

been provided by the studies of individual retirement accounts and similar plans in the United
States and Canada) These various saving vehicles give consumption tax treatment to saving

'2These special accounts include the Individual Retirement Accounts and 401k plans
in the United States and the Registered Retirement Accounts in Canada. The principal
authors of these studies include Venti and Wise (see for example their 1990, 1991, 1992. and
12

placed in special accounts. The amount of saving eligible for this treatment at different income

levels has varied over time, providing a source of variation that could be exploited for
identification and estimation. The general finding with data from a variety of sources and time

periods has been that these tax favored forms of saving do substantially increase household
saving.
An increase in household saving does not necessarily mean an increase in national saving

since the government loses tax revenue and, more fundamentally, since we are considering the

experience with uncompensated tax changes. Despite this ambiguity in theory, the evidence
indicates that individual retirement accounts cause a net reduction in consumption and therefore

a net increase in national saving. The increase in personal saving more than offsets the decline

in tax revenue. Moreover, this traditional analysis of the balance between revenue toss and
increased personal saving understates the favorable effect of personal saving incentives on
national saving because it fails to take into account the impact of the increased personal saving
on corporate income and corporate taxes. When individual retirement accounts or other saving
incentives induce individuals to save more, some of that saving increases the capital stock of the

corporate sector. The future profits that flow from that increased corporate capital are subject
to the corporate income tax (see Feldstein, 1992).
The evidence on the favorable effect of individual retirement accounts and similar saving
incentives suggests that other tax reforms that raise the net return on saving might also increase

1994), Feenberg and Skinner (1989), Summers and Carroll (1987), and Poterba, Venti and
Wise (1992). There have of course been studies that disagree with these conclusions (e.g.,
Gale and Scholz (1994) and Eñgen, Gale and Scholz (1994)) but my reading of the evidence
leaves little doubt about the conclusions that 1 summarize in the text.
13

the current saving rate. This presumption is reinforced by the fact that the majority of American
households do essentially no saving and therefore have essentially no fmancial assets. (in 1988.
the most recent year for which I have data, the median financial assets (excluding mortgage debt)

of all American households headed by someone between 55 and 64 years old was only $10,000

or the equivalent of about four months' income of a median income family.) This is important

because, for households with no net assets or saving, a rise in the net rate of return has a
positive substitution effect on saving but no offsetting income effect. A tax change that raises
the net rate of return can either raise saving or leave it unchanged but cannot induce an increase

in consumption and decline in saving (Feldstein and Tsiang, 1968). More generally, among net

debtors and young individuals for whom the present value of future income exceeds current
assets, the income and substitution effects are mutually reinforcing (Summers, 1981).

In short, a shift from the current income tax to a consumption tax or a labor income tax
would increase national saving and reduce the deadweight loss of the overall tax system.°

2.

Social Security Retirement Benefits

I turn now from the tax system to the other major aspect of fiscal policy that affects
household saving and national capital accumulation: the government provision of social security

retirement benefits.

In 1994, the United States will pay social security retirement benefits of about $320

billion.

In addition, government health care benefits to older Americans provided by the

'For a

detailed discussion of some of the practical issues in creating a national
consumption tax, see U.S. Treasury (1977) and Bradford (1986).
14

Medicare and Medicaid programs will exceed $210 billion. Together this amounts tO 7.9

percent of GDP and about $16,000 per person over age 65.
Social security wealth, i.e., the present actuarial value of the cash retirement benefits

(i.e., excluding health benefits) for which current workers and retirees are eligible, is now about
516 trillion or nearly two and a half times U.S. gross domestic product. It exceeds total private

financial wealth and is equal to two-thirds of total private net worth in tangible and financial
assets.

For an individual who has had average earnings over his working life and who retires
with a dependent spouse at age 65, the social security retirement benefits replace approximately

63 percent of immediate preretirement income. Since most retirees do not have to pay income
tax on these benefits, this is equivalent to replacing more than 80 percent of net pretax income

for these average earners. Remarkably, the first year of benefits for the average retiree now

exceeds the typical retiree's total financial assets at the time of retirement. After retirement,
benefits are indexed to consumer prices to maintain their real value.

2. 1

Social Security and Private Saving
These very generous social security benefits provide an important alternative to private

saving for retirement. For any rational individual who would otherwise save for retirement, the

simplest life cycle model suggests that an actuarially fair system of social security retirement
benefits would displace an equal amount of private retirement accumulation. (The assumption
that the social security system is actuarially fair is a reasonable approximation at the level of the

individual because capital income taxes reduce the net return that individuals receive on private

15

savings to approximately the implicit rate of return that they earn on their social security tax
contributions.) Moreover, in such an actuarially fair system, this is equivalent to saying that
each dollar of social security taxes would reduce saving by a dollar.

This very simple analysis ignores the impact of social security on the expected age of
retirement. Since the annual amount of social security benefits that an individual receives after
age 65 in the United States is decreased if their earnings after 65 rise beyond a certain level,'4

the effect of social security is to induce earlier retirement than would otherwise occur.
Individuals who are induced by social security to anticipate earlier retirement will want greater
wealth at that retirement age than those who would not expect to retire until much later, if at all.

The impact of the social security program on saving depends on the balance between this
induced retirement effect leading to additional saving and the traditional wealth replacement
effect (Feldstein, 1974). This induced retirement effect may well have been an important factor
at an early stage in the history of social security but, now that fewer than 16 percent of men and

9 percent of women over age 65 are working, the wealth replacement effect is likely to
dominate. Nevertheless, the existence of both effects means that the net impact of social
security benefits on saving must be determined empirically.

For some economists, a second reason for doubting that households substitute social
security benefits for private saving is the so-called Ricardian equivalence theory. If each couple

plans to make a bequest to their children based on equating the marginal utility of their own

"For individuals over age 65, earning above a certain threshold leads to a loss of 33
cents of benefits per additional dollar of earnings. When combined with regular federal and
state Income taxes, this implies an effective marginal tax rate over 65 percent so that less
than one-third of marginal earnings are available for incremental spending.
16

consumption and the marginal utility to themselves of their children's consumption, retirees
would use the social security benetits that they receive to compensate their children for the social

security taxes that they must pay. If the benefits are used in this way, they would have no effect

on saving (Barro, 1974)15

There is a large literature both defending and rejecting this ingenious theory. My own
view is that the critical flaw in the Ricardian equivalence argument is the assumption that each
couple has an operational bequest motive based on equating marginal utilities of consumption
in both generations. This seems contrary not only to common observation, but also to economic

logic. Since rising real incomes mean that most children will be better off than their parents,

parents are likely to want to receive a transfer from their children rather than to make one.
Experience shows, however, that it is easier to give than to receive. If children do not want to
make a transfer to their parents, the parents' intergenerational utility maximization will end up
with a corner solution in which there is no private intergenerational transfer. The social security

pror.sm allows parents to achieve more of what they want in transferring assets 1mm their
children to themselves. There is no reason therefore for the parentsto offset the transfer.

More important as a caveat on the strict one-for-one substitution of social security
benefits for private saving than either induced retirement or desired bequests is the fact that not

everyone is fully rational in making decisions about retirement saving. Some individuals might
do no saving at all even in the absence of social security, expecting instead to depend on some

combination of relatives, public welfare and luck to pay their bills if they have to stop working

'5This is not quite right if retirement behavior is affected. The combination of
Ricardian equivalence "neutrality" and the effect on saving of induced retirement would be
an increase in saving by each generation.
17

before they die. Indeed it is the existence of this short-sightedness that provides the basic
rationale for social security retirement programs.

There is now a substantial body of econometric research attempting to estimate the
magnitude of social security's impact on saving.16 None of these studies is perfect. Like every

subject in economics, there is a variety of different results. Some of the evidence is more

persuasive than others, reflecting differences in the quality of the data, the behavioral
specification of the estimated model, and the econometric method.
The studies that use cross-section data on individual households to relate private financial

asset accumulation to anticipated social security benefits generally find that each dollar of social
security wealth reduces private financial asset accumulation by a substantial amount although less

than the one-for-one substitution that would be implied by the simplest life cycle model.
Although there is a wide range of estimates, my reading of the evidence suggests that each dollar

of social security wealth in the United States displaces about 50 cents of private wealth
accumulation. Since aggregate social security wealth is somewhat larger than aggregate private

finanñal wealth, a 50 percent displacement effect implies that social security wealth in the
United States reduces private financial assets by more than one third of what it would otherwise
be.

A time series analysis of the effect of social security wealth on aggregate consumption
suggests that each dollar of social security wealth raises personal consumption spending (and

therefore depresses personal saving) by about 2.5 cents. The $16 trillion of social security

16This research includes Feldstein (1974 and 1983), Feldstein and PeUechio (1979),

Kotlikoff (1979), Barro and MacDondald (1979), Blinder, Gordon and Wise (1983),
Diamond and Hausman (1984), and Samwiclc (1994).
18

wealth would therefore reduce personal saving in 1994 by about $400 billion. Comparing this

to the actual level of private saving (about $300 billion in 1994) implies that social security
wealth cuts private saving to less than 50 percent of what it would otherwise be.
These estimates of the saving displacement can be compared to the $380 billion of taxes

collected by the social security payroll tax. An additional $160 billion of payroll taxes was

collected for the Medicare program of health care for the aged. The estimated saving
displacement is thus approximately equal to the taxes collected to finance the retirement program

and to about 75 percent of the total payroll taxes collected for the retirement and health
programs of the aged.

These calculations support the conclusion that the primary reason that most Americans
accumulate little or no financial wealth is that they confidently anticipate receiving social security

benefits that will allow them to maintain their preretirement level of consumption after they stop
working. in effect, they act as if the taxes that they and their employers pay are a substitute for

savig.
Given the magnitude of the social security benefits and the corresponding replacement

rates, I find nothing surprising about this conclusion. The surprising thing to me is that
Europeans continue to save despite the generosity of social security retirement programs in
Europe.

One possible explanation of this difference, suggested to me some years ago by a
European economist, is that members of the European public have less confidence than their

American counterparts in the long-term financial promises of governments. The common
experience of many generations in Europe before the current one was that inflation or war or

19

both destroyed the value of government bonds. The governments themselves were destroyed in
the major countries of Europe and social programs had to be created anew by the new

governments. Private saving retained its value
or equities.

if it was invested in real estate, family businesses

Since those Europeans who are now in their fifties or older experienced the

destruction and financial chaos of the Second World War, it would not be surprising if they

instinctively preferred to be cautious about providing for their own old age. It would also not
be surprising if that caution also got transferred from older parents who had experienced the

consequences of war and of government collapse to their children, thus affecting the saving

behavior of' those who are now too young to have experienced the effects of World War Ii
directly.

Nothing similar has happened in the United States. Indeed, the promise of social security

benefits has become more secure in recent years. In the 1940s and 1950s it was not uncommon

for some conservative politicians to attack social security and for the popular press to predict

that it would not meet its long-term obligations. Both experience and political rhetoric have

changed since then. Benefits were indexed in the early 1970s and the promise to provide
indexed benefits was kept during the rapid inflation period of the late seventies and early eighties

when the growth of social security benefits far outstripped the rise in wages. An actuarial
projection that the social security program might lack the funds to meet its benefits in the future

led to a bipartisan legislative agreement in 1982 that raised taxes enough to accumulate a fund

that will keep growing into the next century. That the most conservative American president
in at least 50 years supported a tax increase to protect future social security benefits could hardly

have gone unnoticed by the American public. These events in the late 1970s and early 1980s

20

may well have contributed to the decline in the U.S. saving rate by increasing the public's
confidence in the real value of future social security benefits.

2.2

The Welfare Loss of Unfunded Social Security Benefits
ft was Paul Samuelson (1958) who first taught us that

an

unfunded social security

program provides a positive rate of return equal to the rate of growth of its tax base. Because

there are more workers in the current generation than there were in the previous generation and
because the current workers earn higher wage rates than the workers of the previous generation.

an unchanged social security payroll tax rate produces greater benefits per retiree than those
retirees paid in taxes when they were working. That difference between the taxes paid by the
workers and the benefits that they receive as retirees defines an implicit rate of return on those

tax contributions.

Samuelson relerred to this as a biological rate of return because he considered an
economy with no technical change in which all of the return came from the increase in the
population: In a brilliant but mischievous article, he showed that an unfunded social security
program could raise welfare. I say mischievous because the economy that Samuelson considered

had no capital stock and indeed no nonperishable goods. A social security system, or a system

of fiat money, was therefore the only way in which individuals could provide for their old age.

In an actual economy, as I have emphasized, the unfunded social security program

displaces private saving and real capital accumulation. The implication of the Samuelson
analysis for such an economy is that using the tax revenues to provide unfunded pay-as-you-go

benefits is equivalent to earning a rate of return equal to the rate of growth of the wage base.

21

Over the past several decades, the real growth of aggregate wages in the United States averaged
about

3 percent per year. In contrast, the real pretax rate of return on investment in plant and

equipment has been approximately 12 percent (Feldstein, Poterba, and Dicks-Mireaux, 1983.)
The 9 percent difference between these two rates of return is an indication of the annual
welfare loss of using resources in this way. If the social security program reduces private saving

by $400 billion (about six percent of GDP), the 9 percent difference between the marginal
product of capital and the implied yield on the pay-as-you-go transfer program represents an
annual dead-weight loss of $36 billion on this incremental decline of the capital stock.

Although the stream of annual welfare losses must be balanced against the gain to the
initial generation of retirees who received a transfer without having to pay into the program at
all.17 for realistic

parameter values the initial transfer is relatively unimportant in assessing the

present value of the welfare loss of the unfunded social security program. The present value of
the

annual welfare losses far outweighs the gain to those who receive a transfer without having

to contribute.

To see this, note that the annual welfare losses grow from the initial level at the rate of

growth of the wage base. If the appropriate rate for discounting future losses is the marginal
product of capital, the present value of those losses equals the value of the initial transfer and

there is no net present value welfare loss.' But if the appropriate discount rate is less than the

" In practice, such a "one time" gain occurs every time the program is expanded by
raising the tax rate.
tSConsider an unfunded social security program that begins with an initial tax of T
dollars that is transferred to the then current retirees. If the marginal product of capital is r
and the real growth rate of aggregate wages is g (the sum of the growth rates of the labor force and of
productiviiy per worker), the annual welfare loss in year t is (r-g)T e' and the present value of this stream of
welfare losses is

(r-g)T c" dt = (r-g)T/ Cd - g) where d is the appropriate discount rate. If r — ci, the present

22

marginal product of capital, the present value of the annual losses exceeds the value of the initial

transfer, implying a present value deadweight loss.

The appropriate discount rate for calculating the present value of the annual welfare

losses should reflect households' marginal rate of substitution between current and future
consumption. In an economy in which taxes do not put a wedge between the marginal product

of capital and the net return to savers, the appropriate discount rate would be the marginal
product of capital. In such an economy, there would be no first-order present-value deadweight

loss from the savings distortion caused by an unfunded social security program.'9

In the actual economy, however, capital income taxes put a substantial wedge between

the marginal product of capital and the net return to which households equate their common
marginal rate of substitution between present and future consumption. The distortion caused by

capital income taxes implies that an unfunded social security program has a first-order welfare

loss. The reason ibr this is clear. The capital income tax creates a wedge that makes an
incremental dollar of investment worth more than an incremental dollar of consumption.

It might be argued that although individuals' marginal rate of substitution may be
appropriate for aggregating welfare losses and other changes in consumption within a generation,

they are not appropriate for comparisons across generations. If so, an ethically appropriate
"social time preference" discount rate must be derived directly from consideration of the rate
of growth of per capita consumption and the elasticity of the marginal utility function (Feldstein,

1977). With real per capita consumption growing at less than two percent a year, even a
value of the losses equals the initial transfer and there is no net welfare loss.

"There would be a second-order loss to the extent that reducing the aggregate rate of
investment increased the marginal product of capital
23

relatively high marginal utility function elasticity of two would imply a social time preference
rate of less than four percent. (Feldstein. 1964 and 1965).
Regardless

of which way one obtains the appropriate discount rate, it is clear that the

discount rate is very much less than the marginal product of capital. Since the annual welfare
loss is proportional to the difference between the capitaL productivity and the wage growth rate,
and this annual loss grows over time at the wage growth rate, the present - value of the

deadweight loss per initial dollar of tax is the ratio of the difference between the capital
productivity and the wage growth raw to the difference between the discount rate and the wage

growth rate.2° To put rough numbers on these, a capital productivity of 12 percent. an
aggregate wage growth rate of 3 percent and a discount rate of 4 percent would imply a present

value deadweight loss of nine dollars per dollar of initial year transfer. After subtracting the

value of the transfer itself, the net dead weight loss is therefore eight times the initial year
transfer!' It follows also that, in any subsequent year, the present value of the net dead weighi

loss is also eight times the value of that year's transfer. For the U.S. economy, the net dead
weight loss caused by the social security displacement of current and future private saving is,

as of 1994. about $3 trillion.

2.3

The Optimal Structure of Social Security Retirement Benefits

This is derived explicitly in footnote 18 above. Note that if the discount rate is less
than the rate of growth of aggregate wages, the present value of future losses increases with
time and the discounted present value sum of these future losses does not exist,

21 The value of the initial transfer to those who pay no tax is relatively unimportant
in assessing the welfare loss of the unfunded social security program because the appropriate
discount rate is very close to the rate at which the annual dead weight loss grows.
24

There are many alternatives to a U.S.-style mandatory universal unfunded program of
social security retirement benefits that could reduce this large deadweight loss. These options
include systems that are mandatory but funded, including both government funded systems like
that of Singapore and mandatory private participation systems like that of Chile. Closely related

is the possibility of allowing individuals to avoid the mandatory tax if they participate in an
approved private retirement program. A final possibility is to provide means tested benefits only

to those who do not provide adequately for their old age.

Although these alternatives exist, the U.S. government and most other OECD
governments still use a mandatory unfunded program for most if not all individuals in the labor

force. It is worthwhile therefore to ask what the optimal level of benefits and taxes should be
in such an unfunded program.

The justification for any mandatory social security retirement program is that some or

all individuals do not have the foresight to provide adequately for their own retirement. The
universal provision of benefits protects these short-sighted individuals but also forces the nation
to accept a lower rate of return than would have been earned on the saving that the other more

far-sighted individuals would otherwise have done.22 The optimal level of benefits balances
the protection to the short-sighted against the loss of national return caused by the depressed

level o1 capital accumulation. Alternatively, lithe labor force cannot be divided into the shortsighted and the rational but instead each of us is a bit short-sighted, the optimal level of social

security benefits balances the gain from providing a higher level of retirement consumption

22The individual savers would only have received the after-tax rate of return but the
nation as a whole would have received Ihe pretax rate of return. It is this pretax rate of
return that is relevant for designing the optimal level of social security benefits.
25

against the loss from the reduction in capital accumulation.

I have explored this question with the help of a simple formal model (Feldstein, 1985)
anti concluded that the deadweight loss caused by reduced saving makes the optimal level of
benefits very much less than the existing level. For example, if everyone suffers an equal degree

of short-sightedness (in the sense that everyone discounts future utility by some common factor

merely becatse of its futurity) and therefore saves less for retirement than would be optimal, it

takes very considerable short-sightedness to justify any mandatory unfunded social security
program at all.

The inefficiency of the traditional unfunded social security program implies that
alternative methods of financing retirement consumption could achieve the current degree of
protection with far less deadweight loss.

3.

International Capital Flows

My comments until now have implicitly assumed that all of the saving that occurs in a

country is invested in that same country. Many of my conclusions would remain qualitatively
correct even if this assumption is not correct and savings flow across national borders with the

same ease that they flow within each country. But the results would be quantitatively different
to the extent that there are capital income taxes that are levied on investments (corporate taxes
and property taxes) and not just on savers.

For the United States, the assumption that all saving remains at home and that additional
investment in plant and equipment can only be financed by domestic saving is much closer to
the truth than the alternative assumption of a borderless global capital market. The United States

26

has the lowest saving rate in the OECD and also has had the lowest rate of domestic investment.

During the 1980s, the decline in private saving and the rise in the budget deficit did lead to a
temporary rise in the capital inflow from the rest of the world. At its peak, this inflow reached

3.5 percent of GDP. But despite the persistence of the low domestic saving rate, the capital

inflow from the rest of the world has been shrinking and is now down to about 1.5 percent of

GDP.

The U.S. experience is quite consistent with the general relation between domestic
savings and domestic investment that Charles Horioka and I found more than 15 years ago and
that has been verified in a large number of studies for different time periods and countries since
then.23

That research indicates that about 85 percent of each incremental dollar of a sustained

increase in domestic saving remains in the country of origin and only about 15 percent is
invested abroad.
These statistical studies are also consistent with what we know about investors' portfolios.

In the United States and in Japan more than 90 percent of the institutional portfolios are invested
in domestic securities (French and Poterba. 1991). Much of the apparent gross capital flows that

we observe in daily markets are actually pan of offsetting transactions or are hedged in such a

way that no cross-border capital flows actually occur.

In my judgement, these high savings retention coefficients no longer reflect legal
restrictions on international capital mobility. Although some such

restrictions remain, the

primary reason why capital tends to remain in the country of origin is the preferences of the

23 Mussa and Goldstein (1993) and Obstfeldt (1993) contain very useful recent
analytic surveys of that research.
27

owners of that capital and, at least as important in practice, of their agents who are responsible

for managing institutional pools of capital. The combination of risk aversion, ignorance and
prudence causes capital to remain where the initial saving occurs.24

The tendency of capital to remain in the country in which saving occurs may change in
the future. Although there is no clear evidence that the savings retention coefficient was lower
in the past decade than in earlier years, the growing sophistication of institutional investors may

over time lead to much more crossborder portfolio investing. Such an evolution would have
implications not only. for the welfare analysis that I have presented but also for the incentives
that countries have to encourage domestic saving.
When domestic saving is invested abroad in a way that expands the foreign capital stock,

foreign governments collect corporate income taxes that would otherwise have been collected

by the domestic government.25 If the funds that are saved domestically become part of the
global investment pool where they earn a return net of foreign corporate taxes, the domestic

government has less reason to encourage domestic saving. Moreover, the level of domestic
investment and therefore the domestic marginal product of labor wotild be independent of the
domestic saving rate if funds flow in freely from the rest of the world. This gives the domestic
government an incentive to compete for foreign funds on which the nation earns the full pretax

rate of remrn

24

See

Feldstein (1994c)for a discussion of why capital is mobile but does not move
and of some of the implications of the de facto domestic stickiness of national saving for tax
policy.
23

For a discussion of the impact of foreign direct investment on domestic investment
and of the implications of foreign leverage for domestic national income, see Feldstein

(194a, 1994b).
28

The combination of these incentives might lead to higher taxes on domestic savers and
to increased fiscal incentives for inbound foreign direct investment. Of course, as each country

raises taxes on its domestic savers, the global saving rate would be depressed.

4.

Lookine Ahead
The capital market within Europe is already more effectively integrated tjian the global

capital

market. Even for the 1980s. the

saving retention coefficient

estimated for just the

European members of the OECD was smaller than the coefficient for the OECD as a whole
(Feldstein and Bacchetta, 199fl26 The relative stability in more recent years of the exchange
rates among France. Germany, Belgium. the Netherlands and Austria may have increased the
degree of capital market integration among these countries.

If the future brings greater currency stability within Europe (or among a broader subset
of countries) and even lower barriers to cross border portfolio investments (e.g.. reduced
restrictions on mutual thnds and pensions), there may well be a greater volume of cross border

portfolio investments that are not hedged and that lead to actual net cross border capital flows.
European governments may accommodate this by shifting taxation from direct taxes at the level

of the individual to taxation of all domestic portfolio income at source, regardless of the country
of the owner of the capital. Alternatively, the European governments may coordinate tax policy

and financial reporting to reduce tax-motivated cross border investments in order to raise the

26

The widely observed movement of individual portfolio investments across
European borders to evade tax should not however be interpreted as true cross border capital
movements. Much of the tax-motivated investment flows are hedged by the receiving
institutions in a way that offsets the initial cross border flows (Feldstein, 1994c).

29

effective tax rate on the savings of their own citizens. The former strategy would probably lead

to a higher overall saving rate for Europe while the latter would exacerbate the last decade's
decline in saving
The coming decade may also see a very different attitude of the European public to social

security retirement benefits and to national debt. As more years pass with the governments
meeting their financial obligations, the uncertainty of future social security payments arid of

future debt servicing will diminish. Confidencewould also be increased if countries do take
steps

to lower their deficit and debt levels in line with the convergence conditions specified in

the Maastricht treaty. Although such improved performance

would clearly be welcome, the

resulting increase in the public's confidence in government fiscal promises might be retlecied
in further declines in the European private saving rates.

I may of course exaggerate the risk that saving will continue to decline in Europe and
that it will not recover from the recent low level in the United States. But there is no denying

the dramatic declines in the saving rates that have taken place on both sides of the Atlantic
during the past decade and a half. There is no indication that that decline is reversing itself.

A continued low rate of saving in Europe and the United States would mean low
investment, a substantial deadweight loss and a lower rate of growth for a sustained period of

time. There is also a danger that a lack of private capital and the resulting decreased rate of
economic growth would lead to a weakening of capitalism itself. With less private saving, there
could be a demand for greater infusions of government ftrnds into private industry. In the United

States, we have seen that a decade of slow growth has increased protectionist tendencies in
international trade and has led to a new interest in so-called industrial policies that expand the

30

role of the government in guiding the direction of technology and of private investment. In these
ways, the Schumpeterian vision of a shift from private capitalism to a government dominated

economy might become more likely.
If people fear a continued low rate of income growth, they may look more and more to

governments for solutions.

Instead of correcting the tax and transfer problems that have

contributed to the low rate of capital fonnation and growth, the natural tendency of the political
process may be to emphasize policies that appear to have favorable short-term effects hut that
ignore the longer term consequences. It is of course just such political myopia that has created
the anti-saving policies that I have discussed today.

Cambridge, MA
August 1994

31

REFERENCES

Atkinson, AS. and J. Stiglitz, 1980, Lecmres on Public Economics, New York: MacMillan.

Barro, R.. 1974, 'Are Government Bonds New Wealth?", Journal of Political Economy.
Barro, R., 1994, "Recent Research on Economic Growth," Research Summary, NBER Reporter.

Barro, R. and G. MacDonald., 1979, "Social Security and Conswner Spending in an
International
Cross Section," Journal of Public Economics.

Blinder, A,, 1975, "Distribution Effects and the Aggregate Consumption Function," Journal of
Political Economy.
Blinder, A., R. Gordon and D. Wise, 1983, "Life Cycle Savings and Bequests: Cross Sectional
Estimates of the
Life Cycle Model," in F. Modigliani (edj, The Determinants of National
Savings and Wealth. New York: MacMillian.

Boskin, M., 1978, "Taxation, Saving and the Rate of Interest," Journal of Political Economy.

Bradford, D., 1986, Untangling the Income Tax, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
David, P. and 1. Scadding, 1974. "Private Savings: IJltrarationality, Aggregation and Denisons
Law," Journal of
Political Economy.

Dean, A., et al., 1990, "Saving Trends and Behaviour in OECD Countries," OECD Economic
Studies.

Denison, E.. 1958. "A Note on Private Saving," Review of Economics and Statistics.
Diamond. P. and J. Hausman, 1984, "Individual Savings and Retirement Behavior." Journal of
Public Economics.
Engen. E., W. Gale and J. Scholz, 1994, "Do Saving Incentives Work?", Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity.

Evans, 0., 1983, 'Tax Policy. The Interest Elasticity of Saving, and Capital Accumulation,"
American Economic

Review.

Feenberg, D. and J. Skinner, 1989, "Sources of IRA Saving," Tax Policy and the Economy.
Feldstein, M., 1964, 'The Social Time Preference Discount Rate in Cost-Benefit Analysis," The
Economic Journal.
32

Feldstein, M.. 1965, 'The Derivation of Social Time Preference Rates," Kykios.
Feldstein,

M., 1974,

Social Security, Induced Retirement and Aggregate Capital

Accumulation, Journal of
Political Economy.

Feldstein, M., 1977, 'Does the U.S. Save Too Little?" American Economic Review.

Feldstein. M.. 1978, "The Welfare Cost of Capital income Taxation," Journal of Political
Economy

-

Feldstein, M., 1983a, "Social Security Benefits and the Accumulation of Preretirement Wealth,"
of National Saving and Wealth, Proceedings of a 1980 international
The Determinants
Economic Association Conference, Franco Modigliani (ed). New York:
MacMillian.

Feldstein, M., 1983h, lnllation, Tax Rules and Capital Formation. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Feldstein, M.. 1983c. Capital Taxation, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Feldstein, M.. 1985. "The Optimal Level of Social Security Benefits," Ouarterlv Journal o
Economics.
Feldscein, M., 1992, "The Effects of Tax Based incentives on National Saving and Government
Revenue." NBER WP 4021.

Feldstein, NI.. forthcoming, "The Effects of Outbound Foreign Direct Investment on the
in The Effects of International Taxation on Multinational
Domestic Capital Stock,'
Corporations, M. Feldstein, 1. Hines, and R.G. Hubbard (eds.)
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Feldstein, NI.. 1994b, "Taxes. Leverage and the National Return of Foreign Direct Investment,"
NBER
WP 4689.
Feldstein, M., 1994c, "Tax Policy and international Capital Flows1" The 1994 Bernhard Harms
Prize
Lecture, Welwirtshaftsliches Archiv (forthcoming) and NBER WP 4851.
Feldstein, M. and P. Bacchetta, 1992, "National Saving and International Investment," National
Savin, and Economic Perfonnance, Douglas Bernheim and John Shoven (eds.). Chicago:
33

University of Chicago Press.

Feldstein, M. and C. Horioka, 1980, "Domestic Savings and International Capital Flows," The
1979 W. A. Mackintosh Lecture at Queen's University, Economic Journal.
Feldstein, M. and A. Pellechio, 1979, "Social Security and Household Wealth Accumulation:
Microeconometric Evidence," Review of Economics and Statistics.
New

Feldstein. M.. J. Poterba and L. Dicks-Mireaux, 1983, "The Effective Tax Rate and the Pretax
Journal of Public Economics.
Rate of Return,"

Feldstein, M. and L. Summers, 1979, "Inflation and the Taxation
Corporate Sector," National Tax Journal.

of Capital Income in the

Feldstein, M. and S.C. Tsiang. 1968, "The Interest Rate, Taxation and the Personal Savings
Journal of Economics.
Incentive," quarterly
French, K. and J. Poterba,
Investments," Journal of the

1990, "Japanese and U.S. Cross-Border Common Stock
Jananese and International Economies.

Gale, W. and J. Scholz, 1994, "IRAs and Household Saving," American Economic Review.

Hall, R., 1987, "Real Interest and Consumption," Journal of Political Economy.

Kotlikoff, L.. 1979, "Testing the Theory of Social Security and Life Cycle Accumulation,"
American Economic Review.
Makin, J., 1987, "Saving, Pension Contributions and Real Interest Rates," American Enterprise
Institute.

Maniciw, N.G.. 1987, "Consumer Spending and the After-tax Real Interest Rate," in M.
Feldstein, The Effects of
Taxation on Capital Accumulation, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Mussa M. and M. Goldstein, 1993, 'The Integration of World Capital Markets," Chan2in2
Capital Markets: 1mph
cations
for Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City.

Obstfeldt, M., 1993, "Internation2l Capital Mobility in the 1990's," NBER WP 4534.

OEC,D. 1994. Working Party Nu. 2 on Tax Analysis and Tax Statistics, "The Taxation of
Household Saving,"
unpublished paper.

34

Poterba, J. and S. Vend and D. Wise, 1992, "401(k) Plans and Tax Deferred Saving, in D.
Wise (ed.) Topics in
the Economics of A2ing, Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Poterba, J., 1994, (Cd.), Public Policies and Household Saving, Chicago: Chicago
University
Press.
Romer, P., 1987. 'Crazy Explanations for the Productivity Slowdown,' NBER Macroeconomics
Annual.

Samuelson, P.. 1958. "An Exact Consumption Loan Model of interest With or Without the
SociaJ Contrivance of Money," Journal of Political Economy.
Samwick, A., 1994, "The Limited Offset Between Pension Wealth and Other Private Wealth:
implications of
Buffer-Stock Saving," unpublished paper.
Sandmo, A.. 1983, 'The Effects of Taxation on Savings and Risk-Taking," in A. Auerbach and
M. Feldstcin,
Handbook of Public Economics, vol. 1.
Schumpeter. J.A., 1911, The Theory of Economic DeveloDment.

Schumpeter, iA., 1939, Business Cycles.
Schumpeter, J.A., 1942, 1950, Socialism, CaDitalism and Democracy.

Smith, R.. 1989, "Factors Affecting Saving. Policy Tools and Tax Reform: A Review,"
International Monetary

Fund, Fiscal Affairs Department.

Summers, L., 1981, "Capital Taxation and Accumulation in a Life Cycle Growth Model,"
American Economic

Review.

Summers, L., and C. Carroll, 1987, "Why is the U.S. Saving Rate So Low?" Brookings Papers
on Economic
Activity.

Venti, S. and D. Wise, 1990. "Have WAs Increased U.S. Saving?" Evidence from the Consumer Expenditure
Surveys," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Vend, S. and D. Wise, 1991, "Government Policy and Personal Retirement Saving," NBER Tax
Policy and the
Economy.

Vend, S. and D. Wise, 1992, "Government Policy and Personal Retirement Saving," Tax Policy
and the Economy.

Venti, S. and D. Wise, 1994, "RRSPs and Saving in Canada," Public Policies that Affect
Private Saving, NBER-

OECD Conference, Paris.
35

Wright. C.. 1969, "Saving and the Rate of Interest." in Mi. Bailey (ed.) The Taxation of
Income from Capital,
Washington: Brookings Institution.

36

