                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DEBT AND SENIORiTY: AN ANALYSIS
                          OF THE ROLE OF HARD CLAIMS
                         IN CONSTRAINING MANAGEMENT




                                       Oliver Hart
                                       John Moore




                                 Working Paper No. 4886




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  October 1994




This paper is part of NBER's research program in Corporate Finance. Any opinions expressed
are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Oliver Hart and John Moore. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                 NBER Working Paper #4886
                                                                                 October 1994


                         DEBT AND SENIORiTY: AN ANALYSIS
                           OP THE ROLE OF HARD CLAIMS
                          IN CONSTRAINING MANAGEMENT


                                        ABSTRACT


       We argue that long-term debt has a role in controlling management's ability to finance

future investments. A company with high (widely-held) debt will find it hard to raise capital.

since new security holders will have low priority relative to existing creditors. Conversely for

a company with low debt We show there is an optimal debt-equity ratio and mix of senior and

junior debt if management undertakes unprofitable as well as profitable investments. We derive

conditions under which equity and a single class of senior long-term debt work as well as more

complex conuacts for controlling investment behavior.



Oliver Hart                                        John Moore
Department of Economics                            London School of Economics
Littauer Center 220                                Houghton Street
Harvard University                                 London WC2A 2AE
Cambridge, MA 02138                                UNITED KINGDOM
and NBER
        Since the time of Modigliani and Miller's famous irrelevance theorem,

economists have devoted much effort to relaxing the theorem's assumptions in

order to understand the real-world trade—offs between debt, equity and other

corporate financial instruments. In particular, literatures have developed

that    explain the issuance of debt by public companies      as an attempt to reduce

taxes    (see,   e.g. •   Franco Modigliani and Kerton Miller (1963) and Miller

(1977)); as a      signalling device (see, e.g., Hayne    Leland and David Pyle

(1977) and Stephen Ross (1977)); as a way of completing markets (see, e.g.,

Joseph Stiglitz (1974) and Franklin Allen and Douglas GaLe (1988)); and as an

attempt to raise funds without diluting the value of equity (see Stewart

Myers and Nicholas Majluf (1984))}



         While each of these approaches has provided important insights, none

has    been entirely successful in explaining the choice of financial structure.

In particular, these approaches cannot explain the types of debt claims

observed in practice. As one of us has argued elsewhere. (see Oliver Hart

(1993)). under the maintained hypothesis of most of the literature that

management is not self—interested, the first—best can be achieved by making

all of a firm's debt soft; that is, all debt should be Junior (management

should be given the right to issue unlimited amounts of additional debt

senior to existing debt) and postponable (all debt should be in the form of

payment—in—kind (P1K) bonds, which givc' ta.nagement the right to postpone debt

payments at management's direction). The reason is that, by issuing such

soft claims, the firm can take advantage of all the tax and market completion

benefits of debt without incurring any bankruptcy or financial distress



                                               1
costs. Efficient investment choices can be ensured by putting management on

an incentive scheme that rewards it according to the firm's total (net)

market value, rather than just the value of equity. Such an incentive scheme

also avoids conflicts of interest between shareholders and creditors (of the

type stresed by Michael Jensen and William Heckling (i976)).2



       In reality, firms issue considerable amounts of "hard" (senior.

nonpostponable) debt.3 That is, we do not appear to live in the tdelized

world described above. Presumably, the reason is that managers are

self—interested in practice (in this paper, we do not distinguish between

management and    the   board   of directors). Among other   things, managers have

goals, such as the pursuit of power and perquisites, that are not shared by

investors. "Hard' debt then has an important role to play in curbing

managerial excess.4 First, nonpostponable, short—term debt forces managers

to disgorge funds that they might otherwise use to make unprofitable but

empire—building investments, and to trigger liquidation in states of the

world where the firm's assets are more valuable elsewhere, Second, senior

long—term debt prevents managers from financing unprofitable investments by

borrowing against future earnings. Hard debt may be put in place either by

the company's founders before the company goes public, or by management

itself in response to a hostile takeover bid.




        The role of short—term debt in forcing management to disgorge free

cash flow has been stressed by Jensen (1986), although he does not analyze

it   formally.5   in addition, Jensen emphasizes the benefits of debt, but
has little to     say   about the costs. The role of long—term debt in

constraining self—interested management from raising new capital has not been


                                             2
    analyzed at all1 as far as we know. The purpose of this paper is to provide

-   an   analysis of     the costs and benefits of debt, with a particular emphasis on

    long—term    debt.


             We consider a public company, consisting of assets in place and        new

    investment opportunities (along the lines of Myers (1977);          in   Myers' work,
    however,    management is    not self—interested). The company's security structure
    is   chosen at date 0. an investment decision is made by management at date 1,

    and funds are paid out to investors at date 2 (there is symmetric information

    throughout). We assume that management's empire—building tendencies are

    sufficiently strong that it will always undertake the new investment            if it
    can, even if the investment has negative net present value. In order to
    focus on the role of long—term debt, we assume that the firm's going concern
    vat'se   exceeds its    liquidation value, and that   the   company's date 1 earnings
    are    insufficient to finance the investment internally. Under these

    assumptions, we show that the optimal level of short—term debt is            zero.
    However, (senior) long—term debt is important in constraining management's

    ability to raise new funds. The trade—off for investors is the following.

    If the company has little or no long—term debt, management will find it easy

     to finance some negative net present value projects by borrowing against

     (that is, diluting) future earnings from assets in place. That is, there

    will be overinvestment. On the other hand, if the company has a large amount

     of senior long—term debt, management will be unable to finance some positive

     net present value projects because earnings from assets in place are

     over—mortgaged (there is debt—overhang in the sense of Myers (1977)). That

     is,   there will be underinvestment.




                                                 3
      We use this trade—off to determine the company's optimal debt—equity

ratio and to derive a number of comparative statics results concerning the

relationship between the debt—equity ratio and the mean and ex ante variance

of the return on assets in place and on new investments.6 In fact, it turns

out that it is sometimes optimal for the company to issue a more

sophisticated set of claims than just senior debt and equity; in particular,

to Issue classes of debt of different seniorities, with covenants allowing

(limited) dilution of each class. This is observed in practice and is

analyzed In the paper. Finally, we show that our theory is consistent with

the two most striking facts about. corporate I inance (see Myers (i990)):

profitability and financial leverage are negatively correlated, and increases

in leverage raise market value.




      It is useful to note some aspects of our theory of debt that

distinguish it from other agency theories in the literature. First, in most

of the literature, debt is equivalent to an incentive contract with

management of the form: "If you (the manager) do not pay Dt dollars to

security—holders at date t, then the company goes bankrupt, i.e. you lose

your Job." Given this, It is uncleir wtç an incentive contract of this form

would not be employed directly. In contrast, in our model, debt is not

equivalent to a contingent firing. Rather, debt regulates the manager's

ability to raise capital, making this sensitive to new information available

to the market at date 1 when investment decisions are taken. since we

Suppose this information to be observable but not verifiable, there is no

standard Incentive scheme that duplicates the optimal debt contract.



      Second, much of the literature derives the optimal debt—equity ratio



                                           4
under the assumption that the company can issue only standard debt and equity

claims. In contrast. Section III considers the case where the company can

issue arbitrary claims (in some cases we show that the extra degree of

freedom will not be used). Thus the paper can be seen as a contribution to

the emerging literature on optimal security design (see the recent survey by

Harris and Raviv (1992)).



      The paper is organized as follows. In Section 1, we lay out the basic

model, and obtain a sufficient condition for the optimal level of short—term

debt to be zero. Section II contains a number of results about the optimal

level of long—term debt. In Section Itt, w consider more general security

structures. Finally, Section IV concludes.




1. The Model



      We use the following model, first laid out by Myers (1977).



      Consider a firm consisting of assets in place and new investment

opportunities, which exists at three given dates (see Figure 1).




                               FIGURE 1 NEAR HERE




At date 0 the firm's financial structure is chosen. At date 1 the assets in

 place yield a return of y1 and a new investment opportunity costing I




                                        S
appears. At this    time,    the firm can be liquidated, yielding L (in addition

to the y1 already realized). We take both investment and liquidation to be

zero—one decisions.    If the firm is not liquidated, at date 2 the assets in

place yield a further return y2 and the new investment opportunity ——       if   it

was taken at date I ——      yields   r. At this date the firm is wound up. and

receipts are allocated to security holders.



      The firm is run by a single manager. This manager decides whether to

take the new investment opportunity. The variables y1, y2, i, r, L are

typically uncertain as of date 0; however, their probability distribution is

coranon knowledge. All uncertainty about y1, y2, i, r and L is resolved at

date 1, and there is symmetric information throughout. However, y1, y2, i, r

and L, although observable, are not verifiable. In other words, these

variables cannot be the basis of an enforceable, contingent contract.7

Assume also, for simplicity, a zero interest rate, and that investors are

risk neutral.                                                                -




      Although   y1, y2, i, r, L are not verifiable, we suppose that the total

amount paid out to security—holders is verifiable. Thus securities can be

 issued at date 0 with claims conditional on the amount that is paid out.

However, we do not allow claims to be issued on the return from the

 investment, r. searateiy from the return from the assets in place, y2; that

 is, we rule out project financing.8 Until Section iIi,we shall confine

 attention to the case where the firm issues short—term debt due at date 1,

 long-term   debt due at date 2,     and equity; and for the time being we shall

 suppose that both kinds of     debt are senior, in the sense that any new claims
 Issued by the firm at date 1 are entitled to payment only if date 0



                                             6
debt—holders have been fully paid off. In Section llJ,we will investigate the

role of more sophisticated securities.



      We also assume that it is prohibitively costly for the firm to

renegotiate with creditors at date 1. Thus if the firm defaults on its

short—term debt at date 1. then this triggers bankruptcy, which, in turn,

leads to liquidation; i.e. • L is realized.9 (We discuss the no—renegotiation

assumption further in Section IV.




              As emphasized earlier,          we are   interested   in a situation

where management may carry out some investment projects for power or

empire—building reasons even though they are unprofitable.1° To simplify, we

consider the (admittedly) extreme case where the empire—building motive is so

strong that no feasible financial incentive payment can persuade the manager

not to invest at date 1.11 At the same time we suppose that the manager's

empire—building tendencies are limited c a single, indivisibleproject.

That is, once the project is financed, the manager        has no further uses for
company funds, I.e. he (or sheicannot or does not wish to employ such funds

to make additional investments or to pay for perks or higher salaries (one

 interpretation is that perks and   salaries   are adequately controlled by other
                                         12
mechanisms, e.g., incentive schemes).



         Given these assumptions about empire—building behavior, the only way to

 stop the manager from investing in the project is to prevent the necessary

 funds   from being made available at date 1. We also suppose that the manager

 never liquidates the firm voluntarily at date 1, since this involves a loss

 of power. In contrast, at date 2 there are no investment opportunities and



                                          7
so the manager is willing     to   pay out all accumulated funds (one

interpretation is that the manager retires and the firm is wound up at date

2).




      The financial     structure of   the   firm   is chosen at date 0 so as to

maximize the aggregate expected return of the security holders; i.e. to

maximize the f1rins date 0 market value. This may seem an odd assumption

given that financial structure decisions are typically made by management (or

the board of directors), and we have supposed management to be

self—interested. The assumption can be Justified in two ways. First, the

financial structure choice may be made, prior to a public offering at date 0.

by an original owner, who wishes to maximize his total receipts in the

subsequent offering (he is about to retire). Second, one can imagine that

the firm is initially all equity, and the threat of a hostile takeover at

date 0 forces management to choose a new financial structure which maximizes

date 0 market value (the hostile bidder is present now. but may not be around

at date 1. so management must bond itself now to act well in the future).'3



      Define d1 to be the amount owed at date 1, and d2 to be the amount owed

at date 2 ——   i.e.,   c11 and d2 are the face values of short—term and long—ten

debt respectively. (Of course, at date 0 these debt claims will typically

trade for less thin their face value because of the risk of default.) In

general1 the instruments d1 and d have distinct roles in curbing the

manager's empire building tendencies. Since the role of short—term debt is

relatively well understood, in this paper we concentrate on the role of

l.ong—term debt. To this end, we now present an assumption which implies that

it is optimal to set d1 =     0.



                                              8
(Al)                       y1 < I and y2 t L with probability 1.




         (Al) says that the manager can never finance the investment out of date

1 earnings (there is no free cash flow) and that it is never efficient to

liquidate the firm at date 1. (Al) may be plausible for the case of a growth

company that, at least initially, requires an injection of new capital to

prosper.



         To   understand why (*1) implies that            the optimal d1 is zero, consider

the    situation facing the manager at date I. Given the manager's
enipire—bulding     tendencies,      his first choice is to invest (if he can raise the
funds).       His second choice is to maintain the firm as a going concern (if               he
can't    invest, but can pay off his date I debts). His third choice is to

close the firm down (he does this only if he is forced to default at date I

and go bankrupt).



         Now the firm's total revenues if the manager invests are y1 + y2 +

of     which d1 +     is   mortgaged to the old (senior) creditors. (Recall that

all uncertainty i resolved at date 1.) Hence the most the firm can borrow

at date 1 Is y1 +           +r   —
                                     d1
                                          —
                                              d2.   It follows that the manager will invest

if and only if




 (1)                       y1 + y2 + r — d1 — d2           t I.




                                                      9
If (1)        is satisfied, the total return to date 0 claim—holders1 Ii, is




                           H
(2)
                                  y1y2+r—i,


of which date 0 creditors receive di +                    and shareholders receive the rest.
                                                    *12




        Notice for future reference the two sources               of       inefficiency hen.
Sometimes the manager          will   invest even though r < 1, because y1 +
                                                                                       y2 is big
relative to di +               Othertimes he wisi, be unable to invest even though r >
                     d2.
i,    because y +
                     y2 is small relative to di +


         if   (1) is not, satisfied, the manager will be able to maintain the

firm as a going concern as long as




(3)                        either y1      *11 or y1 +       y t d1     +
                                                                            da.




In the first case, the manager pays the date 1 debt out of current earnings.

while, in the second case, he pays it by borrowing out of future                     earnings. If
(3)      but not (1)       is satjsfi the total return to date 0 claim—holders is




                                               10
(4)                         R = y1+y2.




        Finally, if neither (1)      nor (3) is satisfied, the firm is

liqr   'dated at date 1 and




(5)                         R = y1+L.



         It   should now be clear why d1 0        optimal that   is,   why d1 n 0

maximizes the expected value of K. Only the sum d1 +             matters in (1)        and
                                                            d2
the second half of (3).          ifowever, a low d is good in increasing the chance

that the first half of (3)         is satisfied, i.e. minimizing the likelihood of

 liquidation (liquidation is undesirable since, given y2 t        L.   (4)   and (5)

 imply that K is higher when the firm survives than when it is liquidated).



         We have therefore established




 Proposition 1



          Assume (Al). Then the date C market value of the firm is maximized by
                       14
 setting d1       0.




          In the next section, we analyse the optimal level      of long—term debt.




                                             11
 II. Long Term Debt




       For the remainder   of   the paper we assume that    (Al)   holds, and so, by

Proposition I, the optimal d1 is zero. Thus liquidation never occurs at date

1 and L is irrelevant.




       Denote by F(y1,y2,i,r) the probability distribution of y, y2, i and r,

as of date 0. The return from the existing assets,




                                 +
                           (y1
                       J



is   fixed, and so in evaluating the effects of different levels of d2 we can

locus on the net social return from the new investment, t —            i.    From (1). we

lakow that the investment goes ahead if and only if         y + y2 +    r   —   i   t   and
so   an optimal d2 solves:




 (6)                  maximize            J Cr — fl dF(y1•y2,i,r).

                                      Y1+Y2+r—id2




         The basic tradeoff is       the following. The   benefit of a high d2 is that
t'e    returns from the assets       in place are mortgaged, which stops management




                                             12
from using them to subsidize bad investment projects. The cost of a high

is   debt overhang: given that    new   investors' claim are junior to the debt d2,
good projects cannot be undertaken if returns from existing assets are
ovraortgaged. An         optimal d2 strikes   the right balance   between   these two

conflicting objectives.


        There are four cases in which it       is   possible to obtain the first—best;
these are grouped in Proposition 2.




Proposition 2



(1) If r is greater than i with probability 1, then the first—best can be

achieved by setting d2 equal to C (all equity).



 (2) If r is less than I with probability 1, then the first—best canbe

achieved by setting d2 large enough.



 (3) If      +        equals some constant    with probability I, then the first—best
                 y2
 can be achieved by setting d2 equal to y.



 (4) If i and y1 ai-e deterministic, and r m g(y2) where g(.) is a strictly

 increasing function, then the first—best can be           achieved by setting d2 equal
 to y1 +   g'(i).


        Part (I) of Proposition 2 is immediate. Since there is no danger of the



                                              13
manager making an        unprofitable investment, it is best to give him the
flexibility      to raise as much money as he can at date 1, by having no debt.

The investment then always goes ahead, as required in the first—best. Part

(2) is the opposite extreme, where no investment is ever profitable. The

effect of a large aaount of senior (nondilutable) debt d2 is that the manager

is never able to raise further funds at t=i, and so the investment never goes

ahead.




         Part (3) reveals quite a lot about the economics of the model. The

difficulty faced by those designing the security structure at date 0 is that the

uncertain returns y1 +
                                y2 from existing assets cannot be disentangled from
the uncertain returns r —            i from new investment. As a result, there is a
danger    that the manager will be able to finance the new investment at date 1
by borrowing      against y2. However, the danger can be avoided if the total
return y1 +
                 y2 from existing assets is fixed, because this return can be
mortgaged away at date 0 by issuing senior, nondilutable debt. The manager

then invests if and only if r is greater than i. One point to observe here

is that the debt y1 +
                                y2   is riskiess: however, this does not mean that it

does not play an Important role in preventing the manager from making

unprofitable investments,




     Part (4) is also revealing. If r s g(y2), and i and y1 are

deterministic then it is again possible in effect to disentangle the returns

from the existing assets and returns from the new investment. Given d2 =
+ g 1(j) the       manager invests if and only if y2 +           r exceeds i + g(i)   ——

         since   r a             if and only if   r
                       g(y2),                          is greater than i.




                                                  14
      In general the first-best cannot be achieved. Some insight into the

second—best can be obtained by differentiating (6).            If F is a continuous

distribution, we can express the first—order condition for an interior

opt icum as




0')                          Etr—iy1+y2+r—i=d2] =        0.




That is, d2 is set at a level such that th           marginal investment project just
breaks even.




       We consider next some comparative static properties. Proposition 3

below shows how d changes with the means of y1, y2, i and r.            Part (Z) of

the Proposition uses the following condition.




Condition C The left hand side of ( 7 ), E(r—ijy1+y2+r—i=d21, is

               continuously differentiable on an interval [.a2i. Moreover,

               whenever C 7 ) holds, it is also the case that




(8)                          0    C                                <   1.
                                        E(r—iIy1+y2+r—i=d2I




       Denote r —   I   by X and y1 +
                                        y2   by Y.     (8) says that E(XIX+Yd21

 increases with d2, but by less than the amount d2 increases. Note that the




                                               Is
left hand inequality in Condition C is simply the second order condition for

      in ( 6 ),     which will hold (albeit weakly) if (r —.            i) and   (y + y2 +   r   —

are    affiliated (that is, in a loose sense, positively correlated; see Paul

Milgrom and Robert Weber (1982). Theorem 5). The right hand inequality will

hold if, in addition, (y1 +
                                    y2) and (y1 + y2
                                                     +     r   —   i)   are affiliated.




Proposition 3



       Suppose d2 is an optimum debt level.



        (1) If a dollar is added to every realization of y1, or added to every

realization of y2, then d2 +         1   is a new   optimum debt level.



        (2)   Assume that    Condition   C holds, and   that d2     is an interior optimum           in

            which case it is unique). If a small amount is added
              (in                                                                     to   every
realization of i, or subtracted from every realization of r, then                     the optimum
debt    level strictly increases.



        Proposition      3   is proved in the Appendix. The intuition is
straightforward,         An increase in y1 gives the manager wore cash with which to

invest at date 1. and so at the margin his ability to borrow should be

constrained, the debt level should rise. Equally, an increase in the mean of

y2 implies that the manager can borrow more at date 1 against the return from

the existing assets, and so, again, the debt level should rise. An increase

in the mean of t, or a decrease in the mean of             r, implies that investments


                                               16
are less likely to be profitable, and        therefore       the manager   should   be

constrained with higher debt.



        Notice that part (1) of the Proposition says that d2 in fact moves

dollar—for-dollar with increases in y1 or y2. This follows directly from an

inspection of program C 6 1:      if a dollar is added to every realization of y1
(or y2) and a dollar is added to d2, then             the   set of states in which

investment goes ahead is unchanged         (and the     return from investment, r —      I,   is

also unchanged).



        There are no comparably general results for how the optimal d2 changes

with the variances of y1, y2, i and         r.    However, it is easy to compute the

optimal d2, and therefore to see the variance effects, in two examples.

These examples also illustrate the mean effects from Proposition 3. For

simplicity, in both examples we assume that y1 and I are deterministic (with

yl <   ii.


Example 1




       y2 and   r   are independently and   normally        distributed with means Mv Mr

au     variances    o, 03Th Then by standard          distribution   theory the LHS of(7)

 is simply



                                       2
                       Mr -                                  —
                                                                 — Mr +    ii;
                                  { :Iz —

                                                 17
and hence   the optimal debt level d2 is



                                                   2
(9)                      c12 =     + 1.12
                                             —
                                                   2r
                                                   2        —        16




Example 2



        and r are independently and         uniformly       distributed on

(MrSr•Mrr) respectively. Assume that                    —        < . <
                                                   Mr       5r             + 5r   (otherwise, by

Propositions 2(1) and 2(2), the optimal d2 would be either zero or infinity).

Also, to simplify the example, we assume that                    <         -

                                                                     s2.


      There are two cases to consider; (a) the case where on average new

investment is profitable (tz >    i);   and      (b) where it is unprofitable             <




      In case (a), the optimal debt level d2 is indicated in Figure 2 ——

where the support of y1 +
                             y2 is the horizontal of the rectangle, and the
support of r —   j   is the vertical (note that, since 5rc s. the rectangle is

wider than it is tall). Notice that conditional on (y1 +       + (r — 1) =
                                                           y2)             d2
——  . e. conditional on lying along the 135° line intersecting the rectangular

support ——   the expectation of r —     i   is zero, as required by (7).




                                 FIGURE 2 NEAR HflE




                                              18
From the figure it is clear that the optimal debt level must satisfy

   —
        (y1
                 +
                     :22
                           -
                               s)    =   —r      —       — I);   that Is,




(10)
                                d2
                                             +
                                                 2—2—              + 6r   +   "              >




            In   case (b), a similar line of reasoning leads to




(11)                            d2 =     y   +       +      —
                                                                   — 5r +     "         'r   <   i)




       In   both ExampLes 1 and 2, d2 rises with y1, rises with the mean of y2, falls

with i, and rises with the mean of r ——                          all   as per Proposition 3. ALso, if

 new Investment Is on average profitable (i.e., !'                            > i), then d2 falls with

 the variance of y2, and rises with the variance of r.                             However, if new

 investment is on average unprofitable (ji                         C   1), these variance effects are

 r;ersed: d2 rises with the variance of y2. and falls with the variance of r.



            To understand the variance effects better, note that, in problem (6)

       is set so that the market's assessment of future total return at date i

 screens the quality of new investment appropriately. If y and i are

 constant (as in Examples 1 and 2), the first—order condition (7)                                 says that

 the conditional ecpectation of r, E[rI.r=PJ, must equal I when P =
                                                                                                      d2
                                                                                                           +   I   —

            Now as. the variance of y2, o-, rises relative to the variance of r,
 y1.



                                                             19
 the fact that y2 + r =        + I —        reveals less Information about r — & (we
                          da           y1
 are looking at this from date 0, when r and I are uncertain). In the limit

 as    4 or      40, the LHS of (7 ) becomes simply Mr —1, and the optimum

will not be interior. In the case where new investment is on average

 profitable (Mr > Ii• it is best to give the manager maximum freedom to

 finance new investment; i.e. to set d2 =          0.   In the case where new investment

 is on average unprofitable (M C i). it is best to give the manager no

 freedom to finance new investment; i.e. to set d2 =          . Put simply, if the
 manager's ability to raise fresh capital at date 1 is almost entirely

 determined by the realized returns from existing assets, then there Is little

 point in using a security structure to screen out the bad new investments.

One may as well rely on prior (date 0) information ——            i.e.   whether or not new

 investments are on average profitable.




       Since the above intuition for the variance effects does not hinge on

 the particular distributional assumptions of Examples I or 2, we suspect that

 it may be possible to establish a general result about the effects of

 increasing variance. We do not have such a result to report at this time,
 however.




III. eneral I.ong—Term Security Structures




      In this sectjo we explore the possibility that more sophisticated

 long—term security structures than sips. debt may be optimai. We start by

 laying out a quite general class of security structures, and give an example



                                              20
showing how the extra degrees of freedom help. The kind of securities we

introduce may at first sight seem rather foreign; but wego on to show that

they can be approximated by a conventional class of debt contracts based on

seniority. The section ends by consideTng under what circumstances one

would not need the additional flexibility offered by our general security

structure, and could instead merely rely on simple debt and equity (as in

Section II).




     Recall that although y1, y2. i, r are not verifiable, the total amount

paid out to security-holders at date 2, denoted by F, is verifiable. Thus

securities can be issued at date 0 with claims conditional on P. The most

general long—term security structure consists of contingent debt, along the

following lines. The firm issues a single class of securities at date 0 with

an (enforceable) promise that if P dollars are distributed at date 2, this

class will collectively receive 0(P) of them, where 0 s 0(P)    P.    (The "0'

in 0(P) denotes the old, or original, date 0 security holders.) In addition,

management Is given permission to issue any new securities it likes at date

i. That is, management can earmark the residual amount N(P) E P —     0(P)   for

new investors at date I in the attempt to finance new investment. (The "N"

 th N(P) denotes the new investors at date 1.) Note that a choice of 0(P)

close to or far away from P at date 0 constrains the firm more or less in its

 investment choice at date



       General long—term securities like 0(P) are not, to our knowledge,

 observed. However, we show shortly that, under two mild assumptions, any

 choice of 0(P) Is equivalent to a packoe of 'standard" securities,

 consisting of equity and various seniorities of debt. Thus for the moment we
stick with the general specification 0(P). We continue to assume (Al)
                                     18
throughout this section.




         Given N(.) (or equivalently DC.)). consider the position of management

at date 1 once (y1, y2. i, r) are reaiized. Since y1 Is less than 1, the

manager can invest only if he can raise I —
                                                                   y   from the market. If he does

Invest, P         r +            and !o the most he can offer the market at date 2 is P —
                        y2,
OCr +          = NCr     +           It follows that the manager will be able to finance
         y2)                 y2).
the Investment if and only if N(r +
                                                    y2)
                                                              t   I — y.

        As in ( 6   )    • an    optimal security structure at date 0 is represented by a

function       N(P),    which solves:




(12)                   Maximize            J Cr —   i)   dFCy1.y2.i.r)
                         N(. )


                                      N(r+y2)ti-y1


                       subject to




(H)                    0 S   (p)    s p.




         So far we have allowed the slope of NC?) to be almost arbitrary. With
a   minor modification in            the manager's set of available actions, however, we

can restrict N to have a slope                between     :.ro      and one. Assume that the manager
can commit himself at date 1 to lower the return both of the investment

project and of the assets in place. e.g. by selling off some fraction of the




                                                         22
assets at an artificially low price or by hiring extra workers. Suppose that

NC?) > N(P') for some P C Pt Then tir tirm's date 0 market value can only

increase if NC?t) is raised to equal 14(P). The reason is that the low value

of    N(P)       cannot be effective in deterring management from investing, since if

      +    r     P and N(P) C      i — y1   S   N(P).    the manager will raise the (I —
                                                                                             y1)
dollars necessary to invest by committing himself to lower total return from

      to P. Thus if N(Pt) is raised to N(P), the same investment decisions

occur but total return is generally higher since the manager is not

encouraged          to engage in wastage. An       extension of this argument shows that

date       0   market value can only increase if NC?) is replaced by sup(N(P)IPThP}

for       each P. This yields a monotonically increasing function NC?).


               A similar argument shows that the         slope of N   can be set less than or

equal to one, if the manager can always                  raise more   funds than he needs for

the investment project and save the rest at the going rate of thterest.19



               From now on. therefore, when we solve for the optimal security

structure we impose the extra constraint that N has slope between 0 and 1:




(14)                  0        N(Pt) — N(P)        P     —   P               for all   P S




           Is    all the flexibility afforded by this general security structure

useful?           Example 3,    which generalizes Proposition 2(4) to the case         of
uncertain I. shows that indeed it is.




                                                    23
Example 3



     Suppose y1 E 0, andrE g(y2), where g(.) isa strictly increasing

function. Then one can obtain first—best by putting NO') = N, the (unique)

solution to




                             N +   gt(N)   = P.




(It is straightforward to confirm that (13) and (14) hold.) For a given r

(and hence y2 =    gt(r)),   the manager can raise up to NCr +
                                                                           y2) to finance the
investment. But by construction1 N(r +
                                                  y2)
                                                        =   r.   Moreover, since y1 =   O   the

manager needs to raise the full cost i to make the investment                    which means

he will be in a position to invest if and only if r t                i   (i.e. the first—best

is implemented).




     Our next task is to show that our general security structure NC?) can be

represented by a "standard package of securities, comprising equity and

noncontingent debt of various seniorities.



     A standard package of debt and equity consists of n classes of debt and

a single class of equity. The Jth class of debt, j =                 I         n, is

characterized by an amount          collectively owed to class J at date 2 and a

maximum additional amount           of indebtedness to class j that the firm can




                                             24
take on at date 1 (i.e. a covenant in the initial debt contract allows the

firm   to   issue new debt at date 1 until the total amount owed class j is Di +

al)). The     classes are ranked by seniority with 1 being the most senior (in

the sense that it must be paid off first) and n the most junior. The firm

can create an (n+i)th class of debt of any size at date 1, which is junior to
                                                              n+i
all existing debt, but senior to equity; in effect, A



       This description of debt is consistent with what we observe in

practice. Firms do issue securities of different seniorities —— the typical

order being secured debt, then various priority claims, then unsecured debt,

then subordinated debt, and finally equity. Horeover, firms retain the right

to issue further securities of comparable or higher seniority, but within

prespecified limits. For secured debt, these limits will be determined by

the amount of collateral still available; and also possibly by a negative

plef.,e clause, which prohibits the issuance of any new debt with a superior

claim to existing unsecured debt or which requires that unsecured creditors

be raised to equal status with subsequent claims. For unsecured debt, the

freedom to issue further debt is often constrained by covenants specifying

upper limits on the ratio of debt to net worth or to tangible assets. zo



        Let us now consider. the shape of          function   P4(1') for the above

package of standard debt and equity. Suppose at date I the firm issues all

 the additional debt AD1             ADn AD"1 that it is permitted to under the

date 0 covenants.      I-low much will these various new issues fetch? Suppose it

 is known at date I that the firm's date 2 pay—out will be P. For 0 S P 5

 + AD1, only the most senior class of creditors receive any payment, and the

 slope of Nfl') =   tOt/(D1   +   ADh;   the point is that, in this region, at date 2



                                              25
class I creditors. For D1 +

=   AD2/(02   1.   AD2).
                                         <p             +   l
every dollar of P is divided in the proportions ftD1:D' between new and old

                                                                 +    +

                           here, at date 2 class 1 creditors (old and new) are fully
                                                                                     the   slope of NC?)



paid, and every dollar of the residual, P —                 Di —          is   divided      in the
proportions AD2:D2         between new and old class 2 creditors; more junior

creditors     receive nothing. And so on ...            See Figure     3.




                                     FIGURE 3 NEAR HEBE




       It follows from Figure 3 that a standard debt/equity package yields a
particular function NC?) that satisfies (13) and (14). It is also clear
from Figure 3 that the converse holds, at least approximately: given any
function NC?) satisfying         (13) and (14)      ,   we can find a          standard debt/equity
package   that approximately implements it. Simply approximate the curve NC?)

by a piecewise linear graph whose slope always lies between 0 and I. Such a

piecewise linear graph is a representation of some standard debt/equity

security package.




       The leading example of a standard package is the case of simple

debt/equity, which we examined in Section II. Namely, there is a single class

of debt that cannot be diluted: n =           I,   D' >     0,   and AD1 =      0.    To marry up with
Section II, et 31           d2. Then NC?) reduces to Max (Nd 0). That is, for P
S
    d2, all of P must be given to senior debt—holders and there is none for new
investors. On the other hand, for P >
                                                   d2, the firm can issue Junior debt and
give P—d2 to new investors.




                                               26
       In Section II, we proceeded on the assumption that nothing more

sophisticated    than simple   debt/equity need be considered in many instances.

It   is time to justify that    assumption.   Obviously, the four special cases
given in Proposition 2 are examples where simple debt/equity is optimal.
since in each case we are able to obtain the first best.                  Another   case in
which we can be sure that simple debt/equity is optimal is where i and y1 are
deterministic:




Proposition 4



       If I arid y1 are deterministic, then simple debt/equity is optimal.




Proof New investment occurs iff N(P) t         I   —
                                                       y1;   i.e.. in view of (14 ).      iff P
t some critical value PC, say. It follows that the optimum can be sustained

by a simple debt/equity structure with             =   3c —   (i   —
                                                                       y1).
                                                                                         Q.E.D.




       Note that Proposition 4 justifies our restriction to simple debt/equity

 in Examples i and 2 in Section II.



       The following lemma presents a general sufficient condition under which

 simple debt/equity is optimal when i and/or                 are stochastic. We assume

 that the distribution function F(y1,y2,i.r) satisfies:




                                              27
Condition F F(y11y2,i,r) is continuously distributed, and the Joint density

function of P =    (r   +
                            y2) and N = (1
                                             —
                                                 y1)
                                                       ——   f(P,N)    say ——   is   strictly

positive everywhere in the set T             ((P,N)IP S     P S 1';   0   N    S P}, where ! and

  are respectively the minimum and maximum possible value of r +
                                                                                        y2.




Note that in choosing an optimal security structure N(P). given the

constraint ( 13   ),    set   T is the only relevant part of the support of

F(.y21i.r). For (P,N) E T, we define the following conditional

expectation:




                            K(P.N)    = E(r—Lr+y2=P & i—y1=N).




Key   Lemma Assume Condition F holds. A 'ig—term security structure
comprising simple debt d2 and equity is optimal If the fàilowing condition
holds:


Condition K For any pair (P',Nfl E            T,


       K(P,N')     0        Implies    x(P.N) (        )0       if 0 S     N—N
                                                                                    (    ] P—fl;

       K(P,N) S    0        implies    K(P.N) (
                                                   <
                                                       )0       if 0 s N—N (             ) fl—P.




                                              28
       To help shed light on condition K. it is useful to rewrite K(P,N) as

E(r—iIy1+y2+r—i=P—N & i—y1=tfl; viz. •    the expected return from the new

investment project, conditional on the total net profit equalling P — N                  and
the   amount of new financing equalling N.      If this conditional expectation is

(strictly) increasing in (P—N) and (weakly) increasing in N ——           i.e.   •   if   the

project?s profit rises with both the total net profit and the external

financing requirement ——      then condition K will hold. 2   i




      The lemma is proved in the Appendix. A rough intuition is as follows.

K(P,N(P)) is the expected value of a marginal date 1 investment given a total

date 2 payout of P.      Condition IC implies that there is a cutoff value of F,

say P • such      that the expected value of a marginal date 1 investment is
negative   (resp. positivel if P <    P. (resp. P >   I"J.    Other things equal,

then, one would like to lower NO') for P 'C     P,    and raise NO') for P )        P.
But we have to contend with the constraints (13 ) and (14 ).             It should be

clear that a simple security structure comprising debt d2 =          P   — PUP') and

equity does a good job of balancing these goals (since N'(P) =           0 for P <        P.
and N'(P) =   I   for? )   F').


       The result follows from the lemma.




                                           29
Proposition S



    Assume Condition F holds. A long—term security structure comprising

simple debt d2 and equity is optimal if



             (1) 1 is deterministic:

     and (2) y1 is distributed independently of         and r;

     and (3) ELrIr+y2 = F] is strictly increasing in P. for        s P S




Proof    Conditions (1) and (2) of the Proposition jointly imply that K(P.N) is

independent of N. And together with Can'ition (3), they imply that IC(P,N) is

strictly increasing in P. hence Condition IC is satisfied. Now apply the

lemma.

                                                                             0. E. D.




        Note that Condition (3) of Proposition 5 is very natural, and will hold

(at least weakly) if r and r+y2 are affiliated. The intuition behind the

result is that, when i is fixed, new investment should not occur for low

values of r÷y2 ——    since   this signifies low r, on average; whereas the

investment shouldgo ahead for high values of r÷y2. A simple debt/equity

security structure implements this quite well.



        Our final result concerns the opposite case to Proposition S.




                                           30
Proposition 6


       Assume Condition F holds. If



                         (1) r is deterministic

                and      (2)   y2 is independent of       and I

                and      (3) E(iji—y1N)      is strictly increasing in N,      for     S H    s F,




then it is optimal at date 0 to issue two classes of debt: a negligible
amount    of   senior debt, with an     option   to borrow a finite amount      of   additional

debt of the same seniority at date 1 (d1               0. Ad >    0);   and a large amount     of
a second class of debt with no option to borrow any more (d2                    w,
                                                                                     Ad2
                                                                                             0).



        In   a sense the optimal security structure in Proposition 6 is the

obverse of simple debt/equity: the manager              can raise   the first Ad1 of any       F,
 but   no more (NO') =     mm
                                 {P,Ad1}).
                                              The intuition is that, given a fixed r,
 low/high values of i represent good/bad investment opportunities and                      should
 be    encouraged/discouraged. To this end, the manager is               given an "overdraft

 facility"     of Ad1.


         We do not give a       formal proof of Proposition 6, since it         is similar to
 the    proofs of the lemma and Proposition 5 ——          with Condition K replaced by:
 K(P,N)      independent of P and strictly decreasing in N, for (P,N) E T.




                                                  31
IV. Conclusions and Extensions



       In this paper, we have explored the role of long—term debt in

 preventing self—Interested management from financing unprofitable

 investments. We have shown that in those cases where simple debt and equity

 are optimal: the higher is the average profitability of a firm's new

 investment project, the lower will be the level of long—term debt; and the

 higher is the average profitability of a fira's existing assets (assets in

 place), the higher will be the level of long—term debt. We have also shown

 that, in general, it is optimal for a firm to issue classes of debt of

 different seniorities, with covenants a'.J1ing (limited) dilution of each

 class. Finally, we have derived sufficient conditions for the additional

 flexibility afforded by different classes not to be useful; that is, for

 simple debt and equity to be optimal.




       It should be noted that some of our predictions are novel. For example.

 a theory which trades off the tax benefits of debt against the bankruptcy

 costs of debt would not distinguish between assets in place and new

 investments, and would predict a positive correlation between profitability

 and the debt level. In contrast, our theory explains the observed strong

 negative correlation between profitability and leverage (see Carl Kester

  (1986) and Myers (1990)), as long as high profitability is associated with new

 projects; this is Myers' (1990) first "striking fact." Note that we can

 also explain Myers second striking fact. Consider a company that for some
  reason — perhaps historical — has (relatively) little debt, and suppose the

 company faces the threat of a hostile takeover. Then, according to our theory,

  the managers may engage in a debt—equity swap —   that   is, borrow and use the

 proceeds to pay a dividend or buy back equity —    in   order to commit themselves

 not to undertake future (bad) investments (thereby persuading shareholders

                                         32
not to tender to the raider). Under these conditions, increases in leverage

and increases in market value will move together.24




         &s noted in the Introduction, however, perhaps a more important

difference between our theory and most others in the literature is that other

theories cannot explain the fact that firms issue hard (senior.

nonpostponable) debt claims, whereas our theory can explain this.



         An important assumption that we have made is that a firm cannot

renegotiate with its claim—holders at date I when a new investment project

becomes available. Note that, if renegotiation were costless, there would be

no disadvantage in having high debt since if the new project had positive net

present value the creditors would always be prepared to renegotiate their

claims so as to allow the project to go ahead. Thus in a world of costless

renegotiation, it would be optimal to have infinite (or very high) debt, in

effect forcing the firm to return to the capital market ——     or,   to put it

another way, to seek permission from its creditors ——    for   every new
investment.




         Such an extreme outcome is unrealistic, and there are strong

theoretical reasons why. Because investors are wealth—constrained and risk

averse, a major cdrporation will typically be financed by a sizable number of

small investors, rather than just a small number of very large ones. But

this means that free-rider and hold—out problems are likely to make

renegotiation difficult. In particular, if the debt level is too high to

allo..
           positive NP'! project to take place, then while it is in the

collective interest of creditors to forgive a portion of the debt, it is in



                                         33
any small creditor's interest to refuse to forgive his share since the chance

that his decision will affect the outcome is very small.25 Thus in many cases

one would expect the renegotiation process to break down and investment not

to occur; moreover the evidence of Gilson et.al. (1990) suggests that
                                                       26
renegotiation frequently does fail in practice.



      One possible way round the free—rider problem is to include a provision

in the initial debt contract that the aggregate debt level can be reduced as

long as a majority of creditors approvt' n.e. the majority's wishes are

binding   on   the   minority). It   turns out that   the Trust Indenture Act of 1939
makes such a provision illegal in the U.S. for public debt. However, even if

it were legal, there are strong theoretical reasons for thinking that it

would not solve the problem. For majority rule to work welt, individual

investors must keep abreast of the firm's progress and have very good

information about a firm's investment prospects.. This is a very demanding

requirement in a complex world where most of investors' time is quite

properly allocated to other activities. In other words, our assumption that

the profitability of new investment is public information should not be taken

literally ——     it   is meant to apply to the most sophisticated arbitrageur.

rather than to the average investor. Thus to make the firm's investment

decision depend on a majority vote of average investors would be rather like

running the firm by a not very well informed committee ——          a procedure whose
record of success historically has been less than outstanding.27



      For these reasons, our assumption that renegotiation is impossible does

not seem an unreasonable theoretical simplification for companies with

widely—held debt.




                                             34
          There are a number of possible extensions of the analysis. An obvious

one is to increase the number      of    periods. This raises at least two new ——

and far from straightforward —— issues.            First, in a multiperiod model,

management     faces   the choice of raising capital for investment today or

waiting to invest until      tomorrow.     in order to decide WhiCh   choice   is

preferred, one needs to know how management trades off different sizes of

empires at different moments in time. In other words, the multiperiod

extension requires the specification of an interteaporal managerial utility

function, whereas the two period model required only the assumption that

management prefers more investment to less.



          A second complication is that the interpretation of seniority becomes

less clear—cut. To give an example: in what sense does a senior debt claim

tssued at date 1 with a promise to pay one dollar at date 4 have priority

over   a Junior debt claim issued       at date Z which promises to pay one dollar at

date   3? The answer is that it depends on whether the firm goes bankrupt. if
it does, the first claim is senior, but if It does not the second claim may
be senior because it is paid off first. in other words, the notion of

seniority     that we have analysed must be enlarged to encompass seniority in an

Intertemporal sense.



          Finally, our analysis has     completely   ignored the role of shareholder

voting and takeovers In a firm's choice of financial structure. Yet voting

and takeovers are important restraining forces on management. In future work

It   is   desirable to develop a framework which permits a study of the interplay

beti.ieen debt and the market for corporate control as constraints on

managerial behaviour.


                                              35
                                   FOOTNOTES




*Department of Economics, Harvard University. Cambridge, MA 02138, and

Department of Economics, London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London,

WC2 2AE, England.   This is a major revision of a previous paper, °A Theory of

Corporate Financial Structure Based on the Seniority of Claims." We are

particularly grateful to Ian Jewitt for simplifying the proof of the Key Lemma

in Section III. We would also like to thank Rabindran Abraham, Abhijit

BanerJee, Dick Brealey, Lucien Bebchuk, Stu Myers, Fausto Panunzi, David Webb,

two anonymous referees and an Associate Editor, Paul Milgrom, for helpful

comments. They are, of course, not responsible for the views expressed here.

Finally, we acknowledge financial support from the National Science

Foundation, the LSE Suntory—Toyota International Centre for Economics and

Related Disciplines, the Olin Foundation, and the Center for Energy Policy

Research at MiT.




                                     Fl
1flhlton Harris and Artur Raviv (1991) survey these theories. A more recent

literature has viewed debt as a way of shifting control rights from corporate

insidersto security—holders in certain (bankruptcy) states of the world (see

Philippe Aghion and Patrick Dalton (1992) and Oliver Hart and John Moore

(1989, 1994)). Control—based theories seem more applicable to smallish,

entrepreneurial firms than to public companies (the focus of this paper); in

the latter, managers or directors rarely have voting control even when the

company is solvent.




2For details, see Hart (1993). A related point has been made by Philip

Dybvig and Jaime Zender (1991).




3Clifford Smith and Jerold Warner (1979) found that in a random sample of

eighty—seven public issues of debt registered with the Securities and

Exchange Commission between January 1974 and December 1975, more than 907. of

the bonds contained restrictions on the issuing of additional debt. Although

the strength of such debt covenants declined during the 1980s, it is still

very common for nw public debt issues to contain some restrictions on new

debt. See Kenneth Lehn and Annette Poulsen (1991).




4See Sanford Grossman and Oliver Hart (1982).
5Some formal analysis is provided by kane Stulz (1990) and Cuozhong Xie

(1990).


6The trade—off between overinvestment and underinvestment has also been

analyzed recently by Elazar Berkovitch and E. Han Kim (1990). Stulz (1990).
                                                                 StuI.z and Xle
Xie (1990). and Robert Gertner and David Scharfsteln (1991).

consider models in which high short—term debt is good in   that it forces

management to pay out funds, but bad because it leads to inefficient

piecemeal liquidation in the event of default (with, in Stulz's case, a loss

of investment opportunities); Stulz and Xle do not consider the role of

 long—term debt in preventing the firm from raising new capital.    Berkovitch

 and Kim and Gertner and Scharfstein do consider the role of long—term debt,

 but assume that managers act on behalf of shareholders; that is, management

 is (implicitly) assumed not to be self—interested. As we have noted, if

 management is not sell—interested, the first—best can be achieved by putting

 management on an appropriate incentive scheme and making all of the firm's

 debt junior and postponable.




 7For exaulpie, a statement in the corporate charter stipulating that

 management should invest if and only if r     I is unenforceable since a

 disinterested judge or jury would not know whether r t    I.   A statement that

  management must pay out all earnings at date 1 (that is, all of y1, whatever

  y1 may be) is urienforceabie for similar reasons,




                                          P3
If project financing     were possible,     the      new Investment.could be financed as

a   stand—alone entity, whose merit could 'ic ssessed by the market at date 1;

and debt     levels could be set very    high    to prevent the manager   using funds

from    the existing assets to subsidize investment. There are several reasons
for ruling out project financing. First, it may be             that I   represents an
incremental investment —— e.g., maintaining or improving the existing assets
——   and   the final return y2 +   r   is simply the overall return from the (single)
project. Second, it may be that the same management team looks after both
the old assets and the new project, and can use transfer pricing to
reallocate profits between them; hence the market can keep track only of
total profits. Finally,      even if project—specific financing is feasible,            It
is not at all clear that    managers       will want to finance a project that is

not    part of their empire since they will not enjoy the private benefits of

control (on this, see Shan Li (1993)).




9We ignore more sophisticated bankruptcy systems that try to preserve the

firm's going-concern value; examples are US Chapter ii or.the procedure

discussed in Philippe Aghion et.al. (i992).




t0ThIs is In the spirit of the early managerial literature of William Baumol

(1959). Robin Man-is (1964) and Oliver Williamson (1964). as well as of the

later work of Jensen (1986). For empirical support, see Gordon Donaldson

(1984).




                                                F4
     suppose that   the   manager has no (or little) initial wealth and so cannot

be charged up front for empire—building benefits.




       distinguishes our model from a "pure free cash flow model" of the

Jensen (1986) variety. In a pure free cash flow model, the manager always

has further uses of company funds and so will squander each dollar of

investor returns that is not mortgaged to creditors. Thus in a free cash

flow model the value of equity is zero. in contrast, in our model, as the

reader will shortly see, the value of equity can be positive.



Note that this is not a critical difference between the two analyses since

our main results would still hold under the more extreme Jensen assumptions.

A more important difference between the models is that ours explicitly

considers the costs as well as the benefits of short and long—term debt.




t3Both of these scenarios are of course special. We believe that the thrust

of our analysis applies also to the case where management chooses financial

structure to maximize its own welfare. In the present three date model, this

leads to the trivial outcome of no debt (management clearly prefers not to be

wider pressure from creditors). However, in a model with more periods

management may issue (senior) debt vol' ,r arily, since this may be the only

way to raise funds from investors concerned that their claims may be diluted

if management undertakes bad investments in the future. On this, see Jeffrey

Zweibej (1993).




                                          F5
14Notice that we are ruling out the possibility of negative debt. For

example, a negative d1 ——       in   effect a prearranged boost to y1 ——           allows   the

manager to make an investment without the need to go to the market at date 1,

even when y c I.      This may be helpful if the profitable investments are

small ones. A negative d1 may be hard to implement, however. It may be

impossible to arrange for dispersed creditors to pay in money                 at date i;    and

if the   manager is given the money at date 0               he may use it to make an

unprofitable date 0    investment.




t5Strictly speaking, we ought to truncate the distributions of
                                                                               y   and   r so
that   they are nonnegative. See our 1990 Working Paper for further details.


16Example 1 is easily generalised to allow for correlation between y2 and r.
If   their correlation coefficient          is   p, then the optimal
                                                                        d2 is given by

                                              a
                                             C2 +
                      = y1+           —
                                                 a
                                                     +




Note that the denominator r2 +      it t,sitive from the second order
condition. Thus, provided the numerator    +
                                             '°'tr is positive —— which                     it

will be unless              <   p      (—                 —— the comparative statics results
                                            c2/cr)
reported in the text continue to hold.




                                                     F6
17One can think of even more general securities.                  One possibility is that 0(P)

could be conditioned on the amount of money raised at date I. However, our

preliminary investigations suggest that the extra degree of freedom would not

help.




Another possibility is that 0(F) could be sensitive to the market value of

securities. The difficulty with this is that there is a tricky bootstraps

effect: market values are affected by the manager's actions, which are in

turn constrained by the form of 0(P).




l8 is straightforward to confirm that Proposition I continues to apply, even

when more sophisticated long—term securities are admitted. That is• there is

no role for short—term securities ——            like   short—term debt d1 ——      which promise
to pay out at date 1.




t9The argument is as follows. Suppose P C P and N(P) —
                                                                           N(P)    >          p,
Then the firm's date 0 market value will not change if NC?) is raised to
         —      + P. The reason is that if

— P
                                                  y2+ r Pand N(P) ci —
                                                                                       y   S N(Pt)
        + P ,   the manager can raise       —          +   (P — P   ) dollars from the

market, invest I in the project and save the remaining Ø) —
                                                                             F).       This
yields a total date 2 return of             out of which the manager can repay new
security—holders up to N(P) t           —       + (p —      F).     Again this argwment Can
be extended to show that date 0
                                        market value will be unchanged if P4(P) is
replaced by sup((N(p) —      ?   +
                                     PflPP}           This yields a function 11(P) whose
slope is less than or equal to one.




                                                 F?
20For a discussion of covenants used in practice, see Sitith and Warner    (1979)

and Lain and Poulsen (1991). For an example of a bond prospectus (Potomac

Electric Power Co.) with essentially the toni of our standard debt/equity

package, see Brealey and Myers (1988). pp 591—599.




21We are grateful to a referee for pointing this out.




Note that there Is no inconsistency between Proposition 5 and Example 3. If

I is deterministic and y1 =   0, r S g(y2), then there is indeterminacy in the
optimal security structure.




23ikjasured profitability reflects the profitability of assets in place.

However, if the profitabilities of assets in place and new investments are

positively correlated, then measured profitability may serve as a proxy for

the profitability of new investments.




24For details, see Hart (1993).    Other bonding theories, such as those in

Grossman and Hart (1982) and Jensen (i9*so), can also explain this

observation. -   -




25See, for example. Gertner and Scharfstein (1991).




                                         F8
261n a study of the companies listed on the New York and American Stock

Exchanges that were in severe financial distress during 1978-1987, Gilson

et.al. (1990) found that workouts failed more often than 50 percent of the

time, and were more likely to fail the larger the number of creditors. See

also Gilson (1991).




27To put it another way, to the extent that (dispersed) creditors are poorly

informed, any debt forgiveness is likely to be insensitive to the ex post

realizations of y1, y2, r and i; that is, debt forgiveness will be

approximately a fixed amount d'. But then the same outcome could be achieved

by setting the original debt level equal to d2 —   d';   i.e.1 debt forgiveness

serves no useful role.




                                      F9
                                        Appendix




     In this Appendix, we prove Proposition 3 and the Key Lemma.




Proof of ProposItion 3



     Part (I) follows immediately from an inspection of program ( 6 ).



     If    a small c > 0 is added to every realization of I, the left hand side

of ( 1    ) becomes




                                   =      —c +
         E(r—i—c1y1+y2+r_l_c=d2I                 E(r—iy1+y2+r—i=d2e-c)


              <                           =      0   by the right hand inequality in
                  E(r—11y1+y2+r—i=d21
                                                     Condition C and by ( 7 ).




Hence, from the left hand inequality in Condition C, it follows that the new

debt lever strictly exceeds d2. An identical argument can be used for the

case where c > 0 is subtracted from every realization of r.

                                                                                 Q.E.D.




                                           Al
Proof of Key Lemma



       Let C be the class of admissible security structures N satisfying (13)

and   (14).   and let V(N) denote the integral in (12). Note that C is convex:

AN + (i—A)H E C for any N.M E C and             any 0   s X s 1.    If N is an optimal

security structure, then OV(AN÷(1—A)H)/aA t 0 at A =                 1.   Carrying out the

differentiation.



                     P

(Al)                        (N(P)   -   H(P)1 K(P,N(P)) f(P,N(P)) dP                   0.
                     J
                     p=P




where,   by Condition r, the Joint density f(P.N(P))                > 0 for P ' P           P.




       Let P = inf   (PIP      P          K(P,N(P)) > 0}. Condition K implies that

K(P,N(P))      0 for all P s P C F., and          K(P,N(p))        0 for all P C P               P.




       Suppose N(P) is not a simple debt/equity security structure in the

relevant domain (viz., p p                P).    Then construct a security structure H

compi-islng simple debt d2 and equity, where



                                          F' —   N(Pfl.


(We know that this d2 tO, since N satisfies (13).) That
                                                                               is,    M(P') =         PUP').
In the light of the fact that N satisfies ( 13              )   and (14   ),   M(P)     N(P) for




                                                  AZ
all P P < P, and MC?) t P4(P) for all P < P             P. Thus the left hand Side

of (A.l) is at most zero.




      Moreover, since N * H, there must be some open interval S C (P,PJ, not

containing P, such that,       for   all P E S. both (1) 14(P) * 14(P). and (ii) 14(r)
— 14(P)   z   —   P.   From Condition K, (ii) implies K(P,14(P)) * 0 for all P E S.

But this means that the left hand side of (A.l) is in fact strictly
                                                                             negative;

a contradiction. Hence a simple debt/equity security structure is optimal.

                                                                                Q.E.D.




                                            A3
                                    REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe, and Bolton, Patrick. "An Incomplete Contracts Approach to

      Financial Contracting." Review of Economic Studies, July 1992,

      59(3), pp. 473—94.

Aghion, Philippe; Hart, Oliver; and Moore, John. "The Economics of Bankruptcy

     Reform." Journal of Law. Economics and Organization, October

      1992, 8(3), pp. 523—46.

Allen, Franklin, and Gale, Douglas. "0pctra1 Security Design." Review of

      Financial Studies, Fall 1988, (3), pp. 229—63.

Baunol, William. Business Behavior and Growth. New York: Macmillan Company,

      1959.

Berkovitch, Elazar, and Kim, E. Han. "Financial Contracting and Leverage

      Induced Over— and Under—Investment Incentives." Journal of

      Finance, July 1990, 453), pp. 765—94.

Brealey, Richard, and Myers, Stewart. PrinciDles of Corporate Finance.

      New York: McGraw Hill, Third Edition, 1988.

Donaldson, Gordon, Managjnp CorpQrate Wealth. New York: Praeger, 1984.

Dybvig, Philip, and lender, Jaime. "Capital Structure and Dividend

      Irrelevance with Asymmetric Information." Review of Financial

      Studies, 1991, (l), pp. 201—19.

Gertner, Robert, and Scharfstein, David. "A Theory of Workouts and the

      Effects of Reorganization Law." Journal of Finance, September

      1991, 46(4), pp. 1189—1222.

Gilson, Stuart; John Kose; and lang, Larry. "Troubled Debt Restructurings: An

      Empirical Study of Private Reorganization of Firms in Default."

     Journal of Financial Economics, October 1990, Zk(2), pp. 315—53.




                                       9.1
Gilson, Stuart.    'Managing Default: Some Evidence on How Firms Choose Between

        Workouts and chapter 11." Journal of Aoulied CQrporate Finance,

        Summer 1991, 4, pp. 62—70.

Grossman, Stanford, and Hart, Oliver. "Corporate Financial Structure and

        Managerial Incentives," in J. J. McCall, ed. ,   The Economics of

        Information and Uncertainty. Chicacn, IL: University of Chicago

        Press, 1982, pp. 107—40.

Harris, Milton, and Raviv, Artur. "The Theory of Capital Structure." Journal

        of Finance, March 1991, 46(1), pp. 297—355.

_____     "Financial   contracting Theory," in J. J. Laffont, ed. • Advances in

        Economic Theory: Sixth World ConRress, Vol. II. Cambridge:

        cambridge University Press, 1992, pp. 64—150.

Hart, OLiver. "Theories of Optimal Capital Structure: A Managerial Discretion

        Perspective," in Margaret Blair, ed. , The Deal Decade: What

        Takeovers and Leveraged Buyouts Mean for Corporate Governance.

        Washington. DC: The Brookings Institution, 1993, pp. 19—53.

_____    and Moore, John. "Default and Renegotiation: A Dynamic Model of

        Debt." University of Edinburgh Discussion Paper, University of

        Edinburgh, August 1989.

_____     "A Theory of Corporate Financial Structure Based on the Seniority of

        Claims." Department of Economics MIT Working Paper No. 560,

        Cambridge, MA, 1990.

_____     "A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human   Capital."
        Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming in November 1994.




                                         R2
Jensen, Michael. "Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and

        Takeovers.' American Economic Review, May 1986, Th(2), pp. 323—

        29.


_____     and Meckling, William.   "Theory   of the Firm: Managerial

        Behavior, Agency Costs and Ownershis     structure."   Journal of

        Financial Economics, October 1976, 3(4), pp. 305—60.

Kester, Carl. "Capital and Ownership Structure: A Comparison of United States

        and Japanese Manufacturing Corporations." Financial Management,

        Spring 1986, pp. 5—16.

Lehn, Kenneth and Poulsen, Annette. "Contractual Resolution of Bondholder—

        Shareholder Conflicts in Leveraged Buyouts." Journal of Law         and

        Economics, October 1992, 34(2), pp. 645—74.

Leland, Hayne, and Pyle, David. "Informational Asymmetries. Financial

        Structure, and Financial Intermediation," Journal of Finance, May

        1977, 32(2), pp. 371—87.

Li, Shan.      "Essays on Corporate Governance and Finance." Ph.D. dissertation,

        MIT,   1993.

Marris,    Robin. The Economic Theory of ManaEerial Cayitalism. Illinois: Free

        Press of Clencoe, 1964.

Milr,rom, Paul, and Weber, Robert. "A Theory of Auctions and Competitive

        Biddingi' Econometrica, September 1982, Q(5), pp. 1089—112.

Miller, Mercon. 'Debt and Taxes." Journal of Finance, May 1977, 1Z(2), pp.

        261—75.

Modigliani,     Franco, and Miller, Merton. "Corporate Income Taxes and the Cost

        of Capital: & Correction." American Economic Review. June 1963,

                  pp. 433—43.



                                         R3
Myers, Stewart. "Determinants of Corporate Borrowing." Journal of Financial

         Economics, November 1977, 5(2), pp. 147—75.

_____      "Still   Searching for Optimal Capital Structure," in IL Kopcke and E.

         Rosengren, eds. • Are the Distinctions Between Debt and Equity

         Disappearing?, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series

         No. 33, Boston, 1990.

          and Majiuf, Nicholas. "Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions

         When Firms Have Information That Investors Do Not Rave." Journal

         of Financial Economics, June 1984, 11(2), pp. 187—221.

Ross, Stephen. "The Determination of Financial Structure: The Incentive

         Signalling Approach." Bell Journal 0f Pr.onnnlrc,     Spring   1977,

         8(1), pp. 2 3—40

Smith,    CLifford,   and Warner, Jerold. "On Financial Contracting: An Analysis

         of Bond Covenants." Journal of Financial Economics, June 1979,

         7(2), pp. 117—61.

Sciglita, Joseph. "On the Irrelevance of Corporate Financial Policy."

         American Economic Review, December 1974, (6), pp. 851—66.

Stulz. René. "Managerial Discretion and Optimal Financing Policies." JournaL

         of Financial Economics, July 1990, Z(l), pp. 3—27.

Williamson, Oliver. The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial

         Obiectives iii a Theory of the Firm. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:

         Prentice Hall, 1964.

Kie, Cuozhong. "Essays on the Theory of the Firm." Ph.D. dissertation, MIT,

         1990

ZtiheL, Jeffrey H.          "A Control. Theory of T'namic Capital Structure.'1 Mimeo,

         Stanford University Graduate School of Business, 1993.




                                              R4
                            F JGURE




  t=O                  t1                          trZ

   I                    I
                                                    I.
Old assets   Old assets yield return y1      Old assets yield.
In place                                     return
             Decision whether to make new
             investment of size I            New investment
                                             yields return r
             Decision whether to liquIdate   (if undertaken)
             and realize L




                        Figure 1
                     (j,4jj + Cr-i) =




t( Sc-




         Figure 2-
                                  w&)




                     g4 ht4 &3?




                '
               ).tb)t
                                    1'
     )ky.•
        + at     +
               4ltt b)'



flgure .3
