NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXPLAINING INVESThNT DYNAMICS
IN U.S. MANUFACTURING: A
GENERALIZED (S,s) APPROACH

Ricarde I. Caballero

Eduait M.R.A. Engel

Working Paper No. 4887

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

We are grateful to Olivier Blanchard, Whitney Newey, James Stock, and seminar participants at
Brown, CEPR-Champoussin, Econometric Society Meeting in Caracas, Harvard, IMPA (Rio).
NBER EFCC, Princeton, Rochester, U. Catálica (Ing. Sist.), U. de Chile (Centro de Economfa
Aplicada) and Yale for their comments. Ricardo Caballero thanks the National Science and
Sloan Foundations, and Eduardo Engel FONDECYT (Chile), Grant 92/901, for financial support.

This paper is part of NBER's research program in Economic fluctuations. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
1994 by Ricardo J. Caballero and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit, including notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4887
October 1994
EXPLAINING INVESTMENT DYNAMICS
IN U.S. MANUFACI'URJNG: A
GENERALIZED (S,s) APPROACH

ABSTRACT

In this paper we derive a model of aggregate investment that builds from the lumpy
microeconomic behavior of films facing stochastic fixed adjustment costs.

Instead of the

standard (S,s) bands, firms' optimal adjustment policies are probabilistic, with a probability of

adjusting (adjustment hazard) that grows smoothly with firms' disequilibria. Depending upon

the specification of the distribution of fixed adjustment costs, the adjustment hazards approach
encompasses models ranging from the very non-linear (S,s) model to the linear partial adjustment

model. Except for the latter extreme, the processes for aggregate investment obtained from
adding up the actions of firms subject to aggregate and idiosyncratic shocks, is highly non-linear.
Estimating the aggregate model by maximum likelihood, we find clear evidence supporting nonlinear models over linear ones for postwar sectoral U.S. manufacturing equipment and structures

investment. For a given sequence of aggregate shocks, the nonlinear model estimated generates

brisker expansions and - to a lesser extent - sharper contractions than its linear counterpart.
These features fit well the observed positive skewness and large kurtosis of U.S. manufacturing
sectoral investment/capital ratios.

Ricardo J. Caballero
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
E52-252g
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER

Eduardo M,R.A. Engel

P0 Box 3445
Santiago
CHILE
and NBER

1 INTRODUCTION
Characterizing the dynamic behavior of aggregate investment has not been easy. Vanables that should be significant, such as cost of capital and q, seldom are; variables that
should not appear in investment equations, such as cash flows and income, often do. Moreover, estimates are typically unstable, differing across samples, estimation procedures, and
researchers.2 Not everything is so dismal, however, for recent work has improved the state

of affairs, mainly by refining the measurement and instrumenting of cost of capital,3 and
by incorporating credit constraints into the analysis.4
Common to the new and old literatures is a limited treatment of dynamics. This is
somewhat surprising, for there seems to be consensus on adjustment costs playing an im'ortant role in determining aggregate investment dynamics. Indeed, investment functions
— rather than stock demands — are interesting and well defined objects only if frictions in
stock adjustments are significant. In spite of this consensus, adjustment costs arid investmeat dynamics have been mostly treated as a nuisance to deai with when trying to estimate
the effect of cost of capital (or other relevant variables) on capital accumulation. A clear
example of this tradition can be found in Hall And Jorgenson's (1967) seminal paper, where
an elegant frictionless demand for capital theory is transformed into an investment theory
by means of a few axi hoc lags, which then turn out to play a crucial role in estimation. The
same criticism applies to most q models. The elegance of q-theory derives from two lea.
tunes: First, barring measurement issues, q is a sufficient statistic for all information about
future demand and productivity conditions affecting the firm. And second, the mapping
from q to investment depends exclusively on the adjustment cost function. Although the
first of these features is regularly stressed, the latter is often disregarded and researchers
limit their study to linear or log-linear relations between q and investment. Of course, by
now we know how to justify these specifications, both the lags and the linear q-models; the
empirical workhorse is the quadratic adjustment costs model which, besides "validating"
these specifications, delivers simple smooth and linear dynamics.5
Quadratic adjustment costs may be a useful approximation when investment is just a
2See Chininko (1994) for a survey of the empirical investment Literature. See Clark (1979), Berna.nke
(1983), arid Blanchard, Rhee, Summers (1993) for "horse races?

See e.g.
See

Auerbach and Ha.ssett (1992), Clark (1993).
e.g. Fazzani, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Hubbard and Kashyap (1992) Bernanke, Gertler and

Gilchrist (1993).
3See Rothschild (1971) for a compelling discussion of the relevance of more general adjustment costs, in
particular non-convexities, for investment dynamics.

part of a more general model, but they are difficult to justily when studying investment
in isolation. It is even more difficult to give any structural interpretation to the resulting
estimates, for their implications are at odds with the basic microeconomic investment facts.
At the plant level, leaving aside minor upgrades and repairs, investment is intermittent
and lumpy rather titan smooth. This is starkly documented in Doms and Dunne (1993).
They use the Longitudinal Research Datafile to study the investment behavior of 12,000
continuing (and large) U.S. manufacturing establishments for the seventeen year period
from 1972-1988, and find that (i) more then half of the establishments exhibit capital
growth between 40 and 60 percent in a single year, and (ii) between 25 and 40 percent of a
plant's gross investment over the seventeen year period is concentrated in a single year.6
In this paper we focus our attention entirely on the dynamic aspects of aggregate investment. In doing so we impose the constraint that the theory must be consistent with
the basic lumpy and intermittent nature of microeconornic data. These constraints yield
several methodological advantages. Among these, they facilitate a meaningful structural
interpretation of our findings, therefore inheriting the standard advantages of structural
parameters.7 The results in this paper, however, go beyond methodological considerations
and show that modeling inaction at the microeconomic level makes a difference at theaggregate level. We characterize the aggregate nonlinearities implied by the model and study
their role in shaping aggregate investment dynamics.
At the Inicroeconornic level, there has been extensive development of models of lumpy

and intermittent adjustment (the (S,s) literature).9 Here we extend these models so the
adjustment trigger barriers vary randomly across firms and for a firm over time. This
modification is a first step toward introducing the realistic and empirically important feature that units do not always wait for the same stock disequilihrium to adjust, and that
adjustments are not always of the same size across firms and for the same firm over time.
Recently, there have also been developments of empirical models of aggregate dynamics
6Since plants entry is excluded from their sample, these statistics are likely to represent lower bounds on
the degree of lumpiness in plants' investment patterns.
See Bertola and Caballero (1990) for a similar motivation. Another important advantage of paying
attention to microeconomic aspects of adjustment when modeling aggregate a4justment, is that this facilitates integrating microeconomjc and macroeconomic data for aggregate purposes, see Caballero and Eagel
(1993b), Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger (1993), and Eberly (1994).
See Harrison, Selike and Taylor (1983) for a technical discussion of impulse control problems. For a good
survey of the economics literature — although with an emphasis on models where investment is infrequent
but not lumpy — see Dixit and Pindycit (1994). A model more closely related to a special case of ours is
Grossman and Laroque's (1990) model of consumer durable purchases.

2

with heterogeneous microeconomic units adjusting intermittently? Econometric implemen-

tation of these models, however, has required observing (or estimating separately in a first
stage) a measure of the aggregate driving force. In the current context, this amounts to

constructing a cost of capital measure. But undoubtedly many of the problems of the
empirical investment literature are due to the difficulties of constructing a proper measure

of the cost of capital, a variable that despite the current efforts is likely to be plagued by

simultaneity and omitted variables problems.'° In this paper we implement a nonlinear
time series procedure thaLdoes not require the first stage; it only requires infàrmation
on the investment series itself and on the generating process of the driving force (but not
;ts realization). Somewhat analogously with the standard procedure of estimating convex

adjustment costs parameters from the first (or higher) order serial correlation of investment, we learn about more complex and realistic lumpy adjustment cost functions from the
structure of aggregate investment lags and their changes over time.

We estimate nonlinear dynamic panel data thodels for two-digit U.S. manufacturing
investment/capital ratios for the period 1948-1992. We find clear and widespread evidence
in favor of our generalized (S,s) model over simple linear models. Perhaps the most reveal-

ing result occurs when a generalized (S,s) model with parameters constrained to be equal

across all sectors (3 parameters), outperforms a linear model with unrtstricted(across

sec-

tors) AR(2) processes (42 parameters). Our structural interpretation of these non-linearities

indicates that the fraction of firms' capital subject to fixed costs is large, and that these
costs are also large. Although important for both, these features are. more pronounced for

structures than equipment.

One of the main mechanisms by which aggregate dynamics generated by (S,s) type
models differs from their linear counterpart, is that the number of active firms changes
'Blinder (1981), Bar-han and Blinder (1992) and Lam (1992) look at data on inventories (the first
one) and consumer durables (the other two) under the organizing principles of (S,s) models. Bertola and
Caballero (1990) and Caballero (1993) provide a structural empirical framework and estimate (S s) models
for consumer durable goods. Bertola and Caballero (1994) implement empirically an irreversible investment
model where microeconomic investment is intermittent but not lumpy. Caballero and Engel (1992a, 1993b,
1993c) estimate aggregate models of employment and price adjustments when microeconomic units follow
more general (probabilistic) microeconomic.adjustment rules but, contrary to the current paper, they do
not derive these rules from a microeconomic optimization problem.
'°For a discussion of some of these biases see Shapiro (1986) and Blanchard's (1986) comment on that
paper. Also see Cummigs, Bassett and Hubbard (1994) for an argument relying on measurement error
and noise to focus estimation on periods where shocks are known to be large. They find that esttmated

adjustment costs are much smaller in these periods than in non-tax credit reform periods. Part of their
finding may be due to the nonlinearities we describe in this paper.

3

over the cycle — a point emphasized by l3ar-Ilan and Blinder (1992). Doms and Dunne's
(1993) confirm the importance of this mechanism; they show that the number of plants going

through their primary investment spikes, rather than the average size of these spikes, tracks
closely aggregate manufacturing investment over time. For a given sequence of aggregate
shocks, the nonlinear model estimated in this paper generates brisker expansions and — to
a lesser extent — sharper contractions than its linear counterpart. These features fit well
the observed positive skewness and large kurtosis of U.S. sectoral investment/capital ratios.
The next section presents the basic model. Section 3 describes the econometric method.
Our main empirical results are presented and discussed in section 4. Section .5 extends the

basic model to allow for flexible as well as fixed capital. Conclusions are presented in
Section 6.

2

THE BASIC MODEL

2.1 Overview
We model a sector composed of a large but fixed number of monopollstically competitive
firms. Each firm faces an isoelastic demand for its differentiated product, which isproduced

with a Cobb. Douglas constant returns technology on labor and capital. Both demand and
technology are affected by multiplicative shocks described by a joint geometric random
walk process. These shocks have firm specific and sectoral (aggregate) components which
we specify later. We work in discrete time.
The sector faces infinitely elastic supplies of labor and capitaL We choose the price of

the latter as nurneraire and let the wage (in terms of capital) follow a geometric random
walk process, possibly correlated with demand and technology shocks. Firms can adjust
their labor input at will but suffer a loss when resizing their stock of capital. We assume
that this loss is an increasing function of the firm's scale of operation;11 it can be interpreted

either as an index of the degree of specificity of firms' capital, or as a secondary market
imperfection if machines or structures are replaced, or as a reorganization cost associated
with putting new capital to work.
For a given scale of operation, the extent of the loss due to adjustment varies over time
as firms may, for example, find better or worse matches or uses for their old machines, or
''The precise meaning of scaJe of opeiation" depends on the specific interpretation of the adjustment

cost.

4

may lace reorganizations of different degree of difficulty. For simplicity, but at the cost
of realism, we model the proportional loss factor as a random variable independent across
firms and time, and we assume its realization is known by the firm when it decides whether
or not to resize its current stock of capital.
As in standard (S,s) models, the resulting rnicroecononiic policy is one of inaction
interspersed with periods of large investment or disinvestment. As in standard search
models, at each point in time the firm decides whether to "accept" the currently offered
adjustment cost (proportional loss factor) or to postpone adjustment and draw a new
adjustment cost next period. The interaction between these two mechanisms implies that,
more realistically than in standard (S,s) models, the size of adjustments varies both across
firms and over Little for the same firm. During a given time period, firms with identical
shortages or excesses ol capital act differently; over time, the same firm reacts differently
to similar disequilibria in its stock ol capital.
Intuitively, the largest adjustment cost for which a firm does not adjust its stock of
capital decreases with the extent of its capital stock imbalance. If the distribution of
adjustment costs is non.degenerate, this implies that the probability that a firm adjusts
given the firm's disequilibrium — a concept we describe as the firm's adjustment hazard—
increases smoothly and monotonically with the firm's disequilibrium in its stock of capital.'2

Since the adjustment cost factors are independent across firms, and we assume that the
number of firms is large, the adjustment hazard described above characterizes the sectoral

investment at each point in time. Given firms' capital imbalances at the beginning of a
period, the fraction of units resizing their stock of capital is determined by the adjustment
hazard. Sectoral investment is the sum of the products of the adjustment hazard and the
size of the investment undertaken by those firms that decide to adjust. Equivalently, it is
the sum of the expected investment by firms, conditional on their capital stock imbalances.

Except for the degenerate case where the adjustment hazard is constant (partial adjustment model), sectoral investment depends critically on the number of firms at each
position in the space of capital imbalances, thereby motivating our focus on the cross seetiorzai density of disequilibria. The dynamics of sectoral investment are then determined
This should be contrasted with standard (S,s) models, where the probability of a firm adjusting jumps
from zero to one at the trigger points, and also with standard linear partial adjustment models, where
this probability is independent of the size of the firm's disequilibrium. Later we argue that these polar
extremes correspond to two degenerate cases: the standard (S.:) model to the case where the distrubutaon
of adjustment costs collapses to a mass point, the partial a4justinent model to the case where the distribution
of adjustment costs degenerates in the opposite direction (infinite variance keeping the location parameter
fixed)

5

by the evolution of the cross sectional density of disequilibria. The path of this density
is driven by the interaction of sectoral, firm specific, and adjustment cost shocks with the
history of shocks and actions contained in previous cross sectional densities of disequilibria.

2.2 The firm
When the firm is not investing, its flow ol profits is:
(1)

l1(K,9)= K00—(r+8)K,

where K is the firm's stock of capital; B is a shock to the profit function which combines
citmand, productivity and wage shocks;13 r and 6 are the discount and depreciation rates;
and 3 (cr(;)— lfl/(1 +a(i— 1)) with a the elasticity of production with respect to capital
and rj the elasticity of demand faced by the monopolist. As is standard, q > 1 for the
monopolist solution to be interior; which implies that /3 < 1, since we assume that a < 1.
It is useful to replace B in the profit function by a variable with more economic content.
We do this by defining the frictionless stock of capital of the firm, K, as the solution of
the maximization of(l) with respect to capital, so that:
B=
where e

(r + 6)//i. Substituting this expression into (1), and defining the disequilibrium

variable

z

In K/K,

allows us to rewrite the profit function as:
(2)

=

Il(z, IC')

(e°'

—

/ie) K.

Figure 1 illustrates, and equation (2) implicitly defines, profits per unit of frictionkss cap-

ital, r(z).
At times of adjustment, the firm incurs in an adjustment cost proportional to foregone

profits due to reorganization.'4 Assuming this cost corresponds to the opportunity cost
13

For convenience, we have written the profit Function net of flow payment on capital, (r+6)K. Since there
are neither borrowing constraints nor bankruptcy options, the solution to the firm's problem is unchanged
by replacing flow payments for a lump sum payment at the time of purchase.
''See e.g. Cooper and Baitiwanger (1993).

6

ALJ6$

Thu lV 4 c4):3S

Figure 1
N

D
CD

D

Ii•)

0

ZD
r)
0

0
Cu

0
C

00

—3.0 —2.6

—2.2

—1.8

—1.4

—1.0

z

—0.6

—0.2

0.2

0.6

to

of installed capital during reorganization, a derivation similar to the one that led to (2)
implies that:

Adjustment Cost = K9 =
where w is the realization of a positive random variable and z denotes the capital imbalance

immediately before adjustment.'5 Realizations ofL, are generated by a common distribution
function, G(&.4, and are independent across firms and over time.'6

Given the increasing returns nature of the adjustment cost technology, the optimal
policy is obviously not one of continuous and small investments but rather one of periods
of inaction followed by occasional lumpy investment. Therefore, the firm's problem can
be characterized in terms of two regimes: action and inaction. Finding a solution to the
firm's problem means finding the function separating these two regions in (i.a,z).space, and
characterizing the actions ta1en by the firm when crossing from the inactive to the active
region. We turn to this next.

The value of a firm with disequilibrium z, frictionless stock of capital K, and (current)
adjustment cost parameter c4i, V(z, K,'), is the maximum of the value of the firm if it
does not adjust. V(z, K), and the value if it does adjust, V(c, K) — ufe'K; where c is
the optimally determined return point (see below). In short:
(3)

V(z, !q,w1) = max{ V(zt, Kfl, V(c, K;) —

K;}.

The evolution of the value of a firm that does not adjust in the current period is described
by:

(4)
Since

V(zf, 1c7) = w(zL)I7 + (1 +

the profit and adjustment costs functions are homogeneous of degree one with respect

to K, given z, so are the value functions V(z, K) and V(z,K,w). This allows us to
reduce the number of state variables by restating the problem in terms of the value per unit

of frictionless capital. Let v(z) V(z,K)/K and tf(z,w) V(z,K,co)/K. Dividing
'Of course many other specifications of lumpy adjustment costs are possible. For example, these could
be proportional to the frictionless or new capital rather than the old one. The former specification would
simplify the problem since it would make the upgrading and downgrading decisions symmetric; the latter
specification, on the other hand, would complicate the problem somewhat since the return points from
upgrading and downgrading would be different. None of the modifications would change anything fundamental in what Follows, however.
'6We take this as a first step toward a more realistic formulation where at the individual level adjustment
costs exhibit some persistence and, at any point in time, the distribution of adjustment costs depends on
aggregate conditions.

7

both sides of equations (3) and (4) by K and noting that

=

(1 —

yields

(5)
(6)

v(z,wg) = max{v(z), v(c) —wgee},
v(zt) = r(zt) + 'E [v_(ze+i,we+i)e_82t+1]

with
(1 — 5)/(1 + r). Before going further, we use figure 2 to illustrate the basic setup
developed up to now. This figure shows how v(z), v(c) — we', and tC(z,w) determine

the trigger points, given a particular realization of the adjustment cost. The solid line
illustrates the value of a firm that does not adjust in the current period. The concave
dashed line represents the value of a firm that decides to adjust, given a realization of w.
The maximum between both lines describes u(z,w), and the inaction range — for a given
— corresponds to the interval between the intersection of the two lines.
It follows directly from maximization of the value of a firm that decides to adjust,
v(c) — JeePz, with respect to the return point c, that the maximum of v(z) and v(z,w) is
obtained at z = c and that this return point is independent of the initial disequilibrium.
We let 11(z) denote the largest adjustment cost factor for which the firm finds it ad.
vantageous to adjust given a capital imbalance z. Ftom the value matching condition that
equates the two terms on the right hand side of equation (5), it follows that:
11(z)

(7)

= r'c'(v(c) — v(z)).

It should be apparent from the formulae and figure 2 that once v(z) is known, the
solution to the firm's problem is easily obtained. The Bellman equation for this function
can be obtained by substituting equation (5) into (6):
(8)

v(z1) = ,r(z1) +

'E1 [e' max{v(zj+I), v(c) — wL+iedzt+1 }j

where E1 denotes the expectation, based on information available at time t, with respect to

Azg1 and

Using the definition of 11(z) and calculating the expectation with respect

8

Thu _ 4 *0111 S3

Figure 2
(0

0

I

I

I

I

N
Co

d

-

0
0

_

WA

(1)

ow
ph
00
C

S.

C

'4-

(0

2d
o 14n

1-

0
CU

UI

0
0

hi

0

—1.6

I

I

I

-1.2

—0.8

—0.4

—0.0

z

0.4

0.8

12

to aH leads to:
v(z) = w(z) + E [a-Az {v(z + z) +

(9)

G(w)dw}].

where G(c.) denotes the cumulative distribution function of the adjustment cost factor, and
the expectation is taken over Az. The first term inside the expectation can be interpreted

as tomorrow's value of the firm for those realizations of the adjustment cost factor and
shocks to z that lead to no investment, weighted by the probability of no adjustment for
I;:e corresponding Az; the second term corresponds to the probability weighted value of
those situations where the firm adjusts its stock of capital.

The value function when not adjusting, v(z), can be found by solving the functional
equation that results from replacing 11(z) from (7) in (9), and using the first order condition

v'(c) = 0. Alternatively, we can replace v(z) and v(c) from (9) in (7), in order to directly
find a functional equation for the policy function (2(z). After a few algebraic steps, the

latter strate' yields:
11(z)

=

E

( D(z+z)

U

(1

—

fl(ctSz)

G(w)) — (c-z) A

(1 — G(w))}] +

1e{,r(c) - ir(z)}.
The optimal policy 11(z) is the solution to this functional equation subject to the first order

condition with respect to c:
1l'(c) = 0,

which is obtained from differentiating (7) with respect to z, evaluating the resulting cxpression at z = c, using the fact that 11(c) = 0, and imposing the first order condition

v'(c) =

0.

Figure 3a illustrates the function 11(z) for an example where the distribution of adjustruent costs is exponential: dQ(w) = (l/A)e""' dw. As follows from equation (7), if the
firm's disequilibrium is close enough to z = c, it will adjust for arbitrarily small adjustment
costs. From then on, 11(z) increases with respect to Iz— ci, more sharply to the left (capital
shortages) than to the right (excess of capital). This asymmetry has several sources: First,

since depreciation is strictly positive (and possibly net productivity and demand growth
is on average positive), shortages are less likely to reverse by themselves than excesses,
thus there is less value in delaying upgrading than downgrading. Second, by makingthe
9

Figure 3a

a
N

a
1'

N

0
0
N
0

Ca
N
0j

a

t

a
0

cj

0

—I

2

1

3

4

z

Figure 3b
'4

N

n

a

N
6.oo

0.04

0.09

0.12

0.18

'I

0.20

024

0.20

0.32

adjustment cost an increasing function of old capital (for a given disequilibrium) we have
made the total adjustment cost asymmetric: for given K and w, it is more costly to adjust
from the right than from the left of c because old capital is larger in the fonner than in the
tatter case.7 Third, the profit function is asymmetric; it decreases faster to the right of
= c than to the left of its maximum (see figure 1). In our example, the first two sources
of asymmetry outweigh the last one.
Figure 3b depicts the inverse of the function 11(z). We label the segments of the curve be-

tow and above c, L(w) and 11(w), respectively. These functions correspond to the maximum
shortage and excess of capital tolerated by the firm for any given realization of the adjust-

ment cost factor w. That is, for any fixed w, they describe a standard (L,c,U) policy.'8
The area enclosed by the two curves corresponds to the combinations of disequilibria and
adjustment cost factors for which the firm chooses not to adjust.
The shape and location of the function 11(z) and its inverse, (L(w),c,U(w)), depend
on the entire distribution of adjustment cost factors, G(w). A given realization of the
adjustment cost factor will not generate the same inaction range for different distribution
functions G(w). In particular, a low value of w is more likely to lead to action when it
comes from a distribution of adjustment cost factors with a high rather than a low average
value. We discuss the relation between G(w) and inicroeconomic adjustment in more detail
in the next section, when we characterize aggregate investment and its connection with the
underlying distribution of adjustment cost factors.

2.3 Sectoral investment
2.3.1 The adjustment hazard and cross sectional distribution
Let z z — c denote a firm's imbalance with respect to its target point rather than its
frictionless stock of capital. Also let K, 1j4, Kt(z) and I(z) denote the aggregate (sectoral)
stock of capital and gross investment, and the stock of capital and gross investment held
by finns with disequilibrium x at time t (before adjustment).
Those firms with deviation z whose current adjustment cost is small enough to make
adjusting profitable (i.e. for which w C fl(r + c)) adjust. Since adjustment costs arei.i.d.
ITTbIS irreversible investment" feature of the adjustment cost function seems realistic, lending further
support to our choice of adjustment cost specification.
'An (L,c,U) policy corresponds to a two-sided (S,s) model. The notation L, U and c stands for lower
bound, upper bound, and "center," respectively. See Harrison ci al. (1983).

10

and the number of firms is large, the fraction of firms with deviation z that adjusts is
approximately equal to:
(10)

A(z) = G(fl(x + c)),

where G(w) denotes the cumulative distribution function for the adjustment cost factor
a. For example, if G(w) is a Gamma distribution with mean pçó and variance p4?, the
adjustment hazard is:

A(z) =

fl(r+c)

1

øPr(p)Jo

A firm with capital stock £ has a probability A(x) of adjusting its stock of capital and, if it
dues so, its contribution to aggregate investment is equal to (e_t_ 1)Kr(x). Thus aggregate
investment is given by:

=

—

I)A(z)Kj(z)f(z,t)dx,

where Kt(z) denotes the average stock of capital of firms with imbalance r and J(r, t) the
cross sectional density of disequilibria just before adjustments take place.
Assuming that the average capital stock of firms with disequilibrium z is approximately
independent of x, we have that:'9
p4

(11)

Equation (11)

=

-

J(e_t — i)A(z)f(x,t)dz.

is the fundamental aggregate investment/capital ratio expression; it shows

how, conditional on the cross-section of disequilibria, current investment is determined

by the adjustment hazard

function.

Figure

4a shows

the adjustment hazard

function

for

the three different gamma distributions of adjustment cost factors depicted in figure 4b.

These

distributions have the same median but different variances: the solid line corresponds

to p = 1 (exponential distribution) and = 0.1, the long dashes correspond to a high
variance distribution, while the short dashes describes a low variance distribution. Figure
4a shows that as the variance increases the hazard shifts from an (S,s) policy, to a smoothly
increasing hazard, and eventually approaches a constant probability of adjustment/partial
adjustment model.2° The connection between these results and the height of the density of
'°This independence assumption can be motivated by the fact that z is a stationary variable while K
K is not). Provided firms have been in the industry for a long time, knowing a firm's r

IS Dot (because

conveyl no information about its level of capital.
20Stnctly speaking1 we obtain the partial adjustment model only if c' — I
11

—r for most relevant r1s.

Figure 4a: Adjustment hazards
0
S

I

I

a

0

I
I
I

I
I
I

0
C
C
C

I
I

I.-

/

'S

Ic

C
C

'I
I

I

ci
C

0
V.

I
I
I
I
I
I

•0'

I

I

I

I
I
I

-

-- lows

0

— Nghr

C

1.0

—as

—0.8

—0.4

—02

—0.0

0.2

0.8

0.4

0.8

1.0

z

Figure 4b: Adjustment costs
C

I

q

pI

II

C

ci

'

I'

pP

il

ci
N

o'

pP
a

— — SI

p

—— lows
—

.00

0.04

0.08

0.12

0.18

'a

020

024

0.28

0.32

the adjustment cost around zero is apparent. If the density around zero is small, there is
a range where the firm almost never adjusts since adjustment costs are almost never small
enough to justify it; the standard (5,3) — or (L,c,tJ) — case is an extreme version of
this. Conversely, when the density around zero is large — as is frequently the case when
the variance grows keeping the median constant — the decision of adjustment is largely
motivated by the adjustment cost draw rather than by the firm's disequilibrium. The limit
of this, when adjustment becomes independent of the disequilibrium, corresponds to the
partial adjustment model.-

2.3.2 Sectoral equilibrium and cross sectional dynamics
Shocks to wages, demand, and productivity drive the dynamics of frictionless capital. We
decompose these shocks into sectorai shocks, Vg, and firm specific (idiosyncratic) shocks,
7/s —
— rd_s

v*+(,

which implies that when the firm does not adjust, the disequilibrium measure z evolves

according to:
Ax = —t'1 + In (I — 6)—

—(6 + Vt) — It.

We assume that these shocks are exogenous to the firm and the sector.21
Between two consecutive periods, the cross section distribution of disequilibria changes

as a result of firms' adjustments, depreciation, sectoral shocks, and idiosyncratic shocks.
Since we are working in discrete time, it is important to describe the timing of events within
each period. We denote the cross section density at the end of period t — 1 by f(z,t —
Depreciation and the aggregate shock corresponding to period t follow, resulting in the

density J(z, t). Adjustments, as determined by the hazard function A(z) come next, and
period t concludes with the idiosyncratic shocks. The final density is f(z, t), and the cycle
starts again. Recalling that a positive shock leads to a decrease in z, we can summarize

'The former assumption needs no explanation while the latter requires additional restrictions in the
underlying monopolistic competitive model in order to eliminate the sectoral price from the demand curve
faced by the firm. This requires precise offsetting of the income and substitution effect, induced by sectoral
price changes. An example of such a model can be found in Caballero and Engel (1993a). In any event, we
view the lack of a full (or more general) equilibrium setup as a limitation of the current approach.

12

this chain of events as follows:

(12)

J(x,t) =

f(z+6+vj,t.-.

(13)

f(r,t)

[J A(Y)f(vt)dv] g(—x) + f(1

=

1),
— A(x + Eflf(X

+ €,t)g€(—)dc,

where g() is the probability density for the idiosyncratic shocks. The integro-difference
equation describing the evolution of the cross sectional distribution from one period to the
next follows directly from equations (12) and (13):
14)

f(x,t) =

[fA()f(Y+o+vt_ l)dy]5d_z)
+ J(i — A(x + €flf(x +

5 + VI,L —

1)g(—)dc

Combining equations (11), (12) and (14) we can fully characterize aggregate investment, for
any given sequence of aggregate shocks {t't} and initial cross section distribution f(r,O).
We turn to estimation issues next.

3

ECONOMETRICS

3.1 Overview
The econometric problem consists of estimating the parameters of: (a) firms' profit func.

tions, (b) the initial distribution of disequilibria, (c) the distribution of adjustment costs,
(d) the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks, and (e) the process generating aggregate shocks.

The data available are sectoral (aggregate) investment data.

We assume that the stochastic nature of the problem (the "error term") is due to
aggregate shocks. If these shocks were known exactly, the fit for the "true" parameters

would be perfect.22 The aggregate shocks may either be totally unobserved, in which
case we have to posit some underlying time series process captured by a subvector of 8, the

vector of all parameters in the model; or they may be related to observables via an auxiliary

economic model or long run relation (both of which include residual error terms). Even
though the approach we describe next can be generalized in a straightforward manner, and
we do so later in the paper, to simplify the exposition here we consider the case where the
"Conditional on a.lso knowing the initial cross sectional distribution. We assume there is no measurement
error in yp which was the only source of error allowed for in previous analyses (see footnote 9). Unfortunately,
integrating both approaches is computationally too burdensome.
13

aggregate shock is unobserved and 1.14.
The observed investment data may now be viewed as a highly nonlinear transformation

of the unobserved aggregate shocks. Denoting I/K by g, we have that:
l/t =

(15)

where T denotes the number of time periods considered.

Whatever estimation criterion we use,23 it will require that, for a given set of parazneters,

we compute the set of aggregate shocks that correspond to the observed sectoral investment

data (arid some functions of these shocks). This amounts to finding the inverse functions
of those described in (15):24
(16)

Vj

= v1(v1,...,v1._.1,y;e);

t = 1,... ,T.

The effect of previous shocks on Vt S summarized in the cross-section density after adjustment in period t — 1 takes place, so that:

(Ii)

Vt

= vt(f(.,t —

1),y1);

t=

The recursive nature of this problem is clear. The aggregate shock at time t cannot be

calculated without knowing all the preceding shocks. Yet the effect of preceding shocks is
summarized in the cross sectional density of firms' deviations before the current shock, as
can be seen from replacing /(z,t) by f(z,t — 1) in (11) and using (12):
(18)

=

J(e_t+vt

—

1)A(z —6— v)f(r,t — l)dx.

It follows that the computational problem of calculating the Vt defined in (16) corresponds
to the following recursive problem:25

.

Find v1 by solving (18) with f(x,t — 1) replaced by the initial density (determined

"Without loss of generality as far as the methodology we descibe next is concerned, we consider maximum
likelitsood estimation.
'4And making sure that this inverse is uniquely determined, which we do shortly.
'5To ensure uniqueness when solving (18), we show thai the right hand side of this equation is an increasing
function of ii (or any density f(r, t — 1). This is equivalent to showing that #(u)A(—u) is increasing in is,
where in our case flu) = e" — I, but more generally, flu) could be any increasing function with 4(0) = 0.
A straightforward calculation shows that a sufficient condition for 4(u)A(—s) to be increasing in it tS that
A(s) be decreasing (A'(u) < 0) for negative values of is and increasing (A'(s) > 0) for positive values of is.
All the a4justment hazards used in the estimation section satisfy this condition.
14

by the subvector of 0 that characterizes this distribution).

• Determine f(z, 1) by using equation (14).

• Find v2 by solving (IS) with f(x,t —1) replaced by f(z,1).
• Determine f(x,2) by using equation (14).

• Find v3 by solving (IS) with f(z,2) in the place of f(x,t — I).

This problem entails a highly nonlinear but structured relation between the data and
aggregate shocks. At each point in time, given the distribution of disequilibria, there is a
nonlinear relation between the current aggregate shock, Vg, and the observation, y. The
:.rrent shock also enters nonlinearly in the equation determining the cross sectional distribution of disequilibria relevant for next period's investment decisions; thus, establishing a
nonlinear relation between observations and Lagged aggregate shocks.
For given parameters, the sequence of aggregate shocks and the derivatives of aggregate

investment with respect to these shocks (the inverse Jacobian), which are the inputs to
the likelihood function, can in principle be obtained from the combination of a routine
to solve the nonlinear static equation relating current shocks to current observations, and
a stochastic Markov chain designed to track down the evolution of the cross sectional
distribution. In practice, however, this approach is computationally burdensome for any
Markov chain grid line enough to prevent a host of numerical problems from arising.
Obviously, computational considerations are particularly importantwhen the time series
considered are long or when multiple time series are analyzed simultaneously, as we do later
in the paper. In order to cope with this problem, in the estimation section we first consider

a family of hazard functions which is general enough to test the basic implications of our
model and, at the same time, simple enough so that an accurate approximation method
that reduces the estimation time by several orders of magnitude can be designed. Next we
consider a more general family of hazard functions, which provides good approximations
for adjustment hazards obtained via value iteration for a wide range of parameter values.

This family is used to estimate structural parameters.

15

3.2 A simple family of hazards
Estimating a structural model is computationaly burdensome. Thus, it seems sensible to
start by estimating faster approximations which may shed light on the potential success of
the proper structural model.
The algorithm for computing the aggregate shocks described above is considerably faster

if we work with a (sufficiently rich) family of adjustment hazards, characterized by a small
number of parameters, for which the cross-section densities remain within the family. What

makes finding such a lamily of densities difficult is that the cross section distributions
undergo three very different transformations from one period to the next, two of which
are non-trivial. At the beginning of the new period, the aggregate shock shifts the cross
section; this is followed by firms' adjustments (the hazard shock); and the period concludes
with the convolution of the distribution resulting from the previous transformations with
the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks.
The family of cross sectional densities we use is the family of mixture of normal densities.
It is easy to see that this family is closed under aggregate shocks and idiosyncratic shocks,

as long as we assume that the latter are also normal. To ensure that the cross section
remains within this family after the hazard shock, we assume that the adjustment hazard
is an inverted normal:

A(r) = 1 —

(19)

A0 0 and A2 > Q26
We will show that tracking the evolution of the cross sectional distribution reduces to
keeping track of the mean, variance, and weights of a finite number of Normals. These
parameters can be obtained from a simple recursive structure. Ftsrthermore, the static
where

nonlinear equation relating the contemporaneous aggregate shock to the current observation
and cross sectional density is also much easier to solve, since evaluating the right hand side
of (18) for different values of Vt is considerably faster.
in what follows we describe the basic issues and procedure with a simple univariate example. We focus on a maximum likelihood procedure and assume that the aggregate shock

is unobservable and distributed Normal with mean p,, and standard deviation a,. None
of these assumptions is important for the substantive issues discussed below. With minor
modifications, the procedure can be adapted to more robust (but less efficient) estimation
is straightforward to a4d a linear term, —Air, to the exponent.

16

procedures (e.g. GMM), to other distributional assumptions about aggregate shocks, to
partial observability of the aggregate shock, and to a multivariate context (which we do
later). We assume that idiosyncratic shocks are normal with zero mean and variance e?
and, for simplicity, proceed conditionally on the initial cross section density; at the end of
this section we discuss how we deal with initial conditions.

The basic algorithm is conceptually simple. A change of variable calculation relating
to (in,. .. ,VT) shows that minus the log-likelihood is equal to:
(v1,... ,

v)

(20)

+ in (

— l(OIyi,.. ,YT) = const + Em

(Vt

which is to be minimized over 0, with y and Vt defined in (15) and (16). The first term
cisptures the rich dynamics of the model under consideration. Conditional on the cross
section density before the aggregate shock, current investment is a non-linear, increasing
function of the current aggregate shock. The exact shape of this non-linearity depends on
the cross sectional density at the time of the shock. Thus 8y/8vg not only varies with
ug,

but also over time. This should be contrasted with a partial adjustment model or an

ARIMA model, where Oy/Ov does not depend on the current shock and remains constant
over time.
Next we show that assuming that the cross section density is a convex combination
of normal densities, and the hazard an inverted normal, simplifies the calculation of the
likelihood.
Let us begin by considering the simplest possible case, where the cross section den.

sity at time t is normal with mean u and variance cr2. A simple but tedious calculation,
based upon (18), shows that finding the current shock (for the parameter vector 0 under
consideration) is equivalent to solving for V in:
(21)

Vt = eC(ttd — 1 —

where

(22)

T

=

(23)

c(v)

=

(24)

d(v)

=

7.2

A0 +

17

— p)2

The corresponding derivative needed in the first term of the log-likelihood is equal to:

=

+

— 2A3(v

—

4)j [e*") — — ii

Once Vt is found by solving (21), equation (14) can be used to show that the cross section

density after the t-th period's aggregate, hazard and idiosyncratic shocks will be a convex
combination of two normal densities, one of them with mean = (p — vt)/(l + 2A3a3) and
variance r2 + a?, and the other with zero mean and variance a?. The former corresponds
to those firms that did not adjust, the latter to those that adjusted their capital stock. The
fraction of firms in the group that does not adjust is equal to:

a

2a

In the more general case, where f(z,t) =

4_i
a

Ebakfk(z,t) is a convex combination of

normal densities, Vt Is obtained by solving an equation analogous to (21) with a linear
combination of terms like the one on the right hand side of that equation:

=

(6 + V —

z)A(r —5— vt)fk(x,t)dx.

The evolution of the cross-section density can be tracked by considering a linear combination

of expressions like those considered above. For example, in the case where f(x, 1) is equal
to the convex combination of N normal densities and A(z) is given by (19), f(x,t + 1)is
a convex combination of N + I normal densities. Each of these corresponds to a specific

cohort, grouped according to the last time they adjusted. The "older" distributions are
more spread out than the "younger" ones and have lost mass monotonically due to the
adjustment of their members. in order to keep the number of normal densities considered
manageable, we reduce the number of densities tracked down at each point in time by one,
by merging the two older cohorts.
Finally, we need to determine the initial cross sectional density. The ergodic density
is, in a precise sense, the best guess for this density (see Caballero and Engel, l992b). We
disregard the first T0 observations when calculating the likelihood, thus allowing for the
possible distortions introduced by this approximation to wash away.
We approximate the ergodic density by a convex combination of normal densities as

18

follows. Let f denote the density of idiosyncratic shocks,37 and ff the density that results
from those firms that do not adjust after f, is subject to one set of aggregate, hazard, and
idiosyncratic shocks.25 Let f denote the density that results after applying an aggregate,
hazard, and idiosyncratic shock to f, and so on. Standard Markov chain arguments show
that the ergodic density has the form:

fs(z)=Ebkf(z),
100
where the Øk's correspond to the stationary distribution of the Markov chain describing the
number of periods since a firm last adjusted. Since the k' decrease at a geometric rate,
relatively small number of densities usually provides a good approximation. Figure 5
depicts the corresponding weighted densities and the resulting ergodic density. The largest

density corresponds to the density of idiosyncratic shocks, the density that follows to the

left is the density of those that do not adjust after a sequence of aggregate, idiosyncratic
and hazard shocks, and so on.

3.3 A general family of hazards
Experimentation with a variety of distributions of adjustment costs shows that the family
of continuous, piecewise inverted normal hazards approximates well the hazard functions

obtained via value iteration. Three pieces suffice for most practical purposes, with the
middle piece corresponding to a hazard that is identically equal to zero. A representative
member of this four.pararneter family of adjustment hazards is of the form:

— e_(t_tP if z < z,
(25)

A(z)=

0

if x

> z.

In this case we track the evolution of the cross section density and solve the non.linear
equations that provide the vt's by working with a flexible discretization in x-space. We
describe this discretization procedure next.
Assume the cross section at the beginning of period — 1 is a collection of mass points:

(xi, wi), I = I,... ,n, where z denotes where the i-th mass point is located and w the
vaiiance
3TUere idiosyncratic shocks axe as faced by an individual firm. Thu, the corresponding
details.
to e + Ør• See Caballero and Engel (1992b) for
28The size of the aggregate shock is equal to the mean of this process.

19

is equal

50,016

0.0

0.0t2
0.0!
0.008
0.006

0.004
0.002

-ii

•1

-0.5

0

0.5

-1

.0.5

o

0.5

o.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

o.oLs

0.01

0.005

0

.1.5

corresponding weight (E1 w

=

1). The aggregate shock

Ug

is obtained by solving the

discrete counterpart of equation (18). Having found v1, the evolution of the cross section
proceeds as follows: After the aggregate shock hits, the resulting collection of mass points
is characterized by (x — Vg, w1). Next follows the hazard shock, which increases the number

of mass points by one, since a mass point at zero arises. The idiosyncratic shock follows,
leading to a continuous distribution. This distribution is discretized by evaluating the cross

section density on a grid whose width and location are determined by the current mean
and variance.29 The grid has n points so that the cycle described above begins again.

Even though this methodology is considerably slower than the one described in the
preceding subsection, it provides a practical way of approximating a rich family of hazard

functions, thereby making structural estimation possible. Given a distribution of adjustment costs, the corresponding "exact" hazard is obtained via value iteration. We then
.pproximate this hazard by the "closest" hazard within the family described by (25). We
use this hazard in the iterative procedure described above, which calculates the sequence
of aggregate shocks corresponding to particular parameter values.

4

EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE: U.S. INVESTMENT

4.1 Overview and Data
Our data are constructed from annual gross investment and capital series for 21 two-digit
manufacturing industries from 1947 to 1992.30 All series are in 1987 dollars, and the stock of
capital correspond to the series used by the Bureau of Labor Statistics for their productivity
stud.ies3' Since capital stocks are end-of-year, our measures of the investment/capital ratio
used in estimation start in 1948. We report separate results for equipment and structures
panels; each has 945 observations.

We begin this section by estimating simple adjustment hazard functions for sectoral
(aggregate) U.S. manufacturing equipment and structures investment, without imposing
the tight theoretical restrictions of the microeconom.ic model developed in section 2. From
this semi-structural approach, we learn that there is clear trace in aggregate data of microe-

conomic adjustment hazard functions that are increasing rather than constant with respect

°ln the estimation section we use 33 equally spaced point, between p — 40 and p + 4e, where p and e
denote the mean and standard deviation of the density being approximated.
30We have 21 rather than 20 sector because Motor Vehicles is separated from flansportation equipment.
31TMs is one of the three capital stock series reported by the Bureau of Economic Activity.
20

to firms' disequilibria. We then proceed to estimate structural models, and find that the
average adjustment cost (in terms of annual revenues) is about 16 percent for equipment
and 59 percent for structures, and that the standard deviation of these costs is 6 and 8
percent, respectively. Our estimate of the standard deviation of idiosyncratic (within each
sector) shocks ranges from 5 to 12 percent and is quite stable across investment categories
and estimation methods (structural and semi-structural).

4.2 Results: Semi-structural hazard
Using the panels described above, we estimate the following "inverted-normal" hazard:
(26)

A(r) = 1 —

which has the potential to capture the increasing nature of the adjustment hazards depicted

in section 3, and converges to the partial adjustment model as A2 approaches zero (together

c'ith the approximation (r — I)

—z). We restrict the hazard to be the same across

sectors within each panel, but allow for different means, variances and first order correlations
of sectoral shocks. We also allow for a general variance-covariance matrix across sectors'
innovations.

For each category (equipment and structures), we solve at each point in time 21 static
nonlinear equations (one for each sector) to find the (sectoral) aggregate shocks; with these
on hand, we use 2] dynamic equations to generate new sectoral cross sectional distributions. After repeating these steps for all observations, we compute the serial correlation
coefficients, the corresponding sectoraJ innovations, the variance-covariance matrix of sectoral innovations, and the derivatives of aggregate investment with respect to the current
shock. Using these results, we maximize the multivariate likelihood over Ao, A2 and •32

We constrain the initial distributions of disequilibria to be the sectoral ergodic distributions corresponding to the parameters being estimated. In order to reduce the effect of
the approximation introduced by this criterion, we exclude the first 3 shocks of each sector
from the joint likelihood. Finally, at each point in time we keep track of 20 distributions
for each sector and merge the distributions of those that have spent more than 20 years

without adjusting?
'31e

we concentrate out the vajjance-covarjance matrix and seriaj correlation coefficient..
33Remember that eacb distribution repr.ents a cohort ot the firms that have not adjusted for the last I,
20 (or more) periods.
2, 3

21

Table I displays the results. The two major subdivisions correspond to equipment
and structures. Within each of these, the first column shows the estimates for a partial
adjustment model, the second column reports the results for the inverted-normal hazard
in equation (26), and the third column shows the estimates obtained with unconstrained
(across sectors) second-order autoregressions for every series?t
For equipment, the first column shows a coefficient A which is significantly different

horn zero and implies a partial adjustment coefficient of 0.44° The mean first order
serial correlation of the sectoral shocks is 0.19, with a range between —0.03 and 0.47. The
second column contains the main results of this section. These clearly indicate the rele.
vance of considering non-constant hazards: The likelihood function exhibits a substantial
improvement when A2 is allowed to be positive,37 while the linear term, A0, becomes indis-

tinguishable from zero (as implied by our model, see equations (7) and (l0))? At the same
time, the average serial correlation of sectoral shocks is (on average) reduced (it ranges front
—0.13 to 0.23). Comparing these results with those in the third column, reveals that the
iikelihood obtained with unconstrained second-order autoregressions leads to a likelihood
that is substantially lower than that of the constrained (across sectors) non-linear model.
If we take the setup we used in the section describing the microeconomic model literally, then we shoutd not allow for first order correlations in the increasing hazard model.
Interestingly, if we re-estimate the increasing hazard model setting the 21 first order serial correlation coefficients to zero, the likelihood is still substantially better than in the
partial adjustment model with unconstrained serial correlation (2,438 versus 2,405) and in
the non-structural second order-autoregressions model (2,438 versus 2,434). Two nonlinear
parameter (A2 and at), common across sectors, do better than 21 and 42 free sectoral serial
correlation coefficients.
31

contemporaneous correlation between innovations, as in the preceding columns:
35The partial adjustment coefficient is equaJ to 1 —

'6The likelihood has a second maximum which is slightly better than the one reported here (likelihood
improvement of 2.7) but whidi corresponds to an implausible partial adjustment coefficient close to one and
very large unexplained serial correlation of aggregate shocks. Since the third column has a substantially

better likelihood than either one of these maxima, and the underlying model may be interpreted as that
of a partial adjustment with adjustment parameter equal to one and AR(2) innovations, we concentrate on
the structurally meaningful estimates in the case of the first column.
"Since u is not identified in column 1, we cannot formally use the standard x3 test to assess the
improvement in the fit as we allow for A2 > 0. This is the nuisance" parameter problem discussed in, e.g..
Hansen (1993). This is a second order problem in our case, however, where the likelihood differences are
large.
"Strictly speaking, calling A0 the "linear' term is appropriate only in conjunction with the approximation
—x in equation (II). Since our main conclusions do not depend on this caveat, we disregard it

(C' — 1)

in what follows.

22

Table 1: Semi-structural results
Parameters

A0

A2

Structures
lncr. 1hz. AR(2) P.A.M. Incr. Haz. AR(2)

Equipment
P.A.M.
0.582

0.000

(0.125)

(0.031)

—

1.035

—

—

—

(0.098)

0.000
(0.203)

—

0.644

—

0.501

(0.318)

C

—

0.116

(0.198)

—

—

(0.036)

0.051

—

(0.019)

1

0.19

0.04

0.75

0.07

—0.10

0.63

a2

—

—

—0.14

—

—

—0.07

2404.8

2444.2

2434.4

2551.7

2643.0

2588.6

Likelihood

_'_61

—1
Note: stands for estimates obtained with the approximation
ii ÷ 6 — x
equation (11). The autoregressive model for the sectoral residuals is:
= const. + a11v1g...1 + a2v_2 +

23

ii

The results for structures are qualitatively similar to those for equipment. The first
column shows a coefficient Ao which is significantly different from zero and implies a partial

adjustment coefficient of 0.39. The mean first order serial correlation coefficient is 0.07, with
a range between —0.12 and 0.27. The second column indicates the relevance of considering

non-constant hazards: The likelihood function exhibits a substantial improvement when
A2 is allowed to be positive, while the linear term, A0, again becomes indistinguishable
from zero. The first order correlations of sectoral shocks remain on average dose to zero
(they range from —0.30 to G;07). Finally, the third column shows that unconstrained (across
sectors) second-order autoregressions lead to a worse fit than the simplest increasing hazard

model .
4.3 Results: Structural estimation
Rather than estimating the adjustment hazard directly, in this section we estimate the
;arameters of the adjustment costs function and obtain the hazard from the solution to the
dynamic optimization problem presented in section 2. We do not estimate all the structural
parameters, however. We assume an interest rate, share of capital, and markup of 6, 30
and 20 percent, respectively;40 as well as depreciation rates for equipment and structures

of 10 and 5 percent per year, respectively.
Adjustment costs are drawn from a Gamma distribution:

=
which has mean

F(p) fSl q—le—hlI# dq,

= $ and a coefficient of variation cv, =

We

estimate z,, cv,

and a - As before, we allow for a general variajice-covariance matrix for sectoral innovations,
and sectoral first order serial correlation coefficients. The initial cross section distribution
is taken to be the ergodic one but, as before, we exclude the first three observations of each
series in the likelihood in order to reduce any systematic effect of this approximation.4'
The results are reported in Table 2. For equipment, adjustment costs are on average
394•3 before, even if the 21 first order serial correlation coefficients axe set to zero in the increasing hazard
model, the likelihood is substantially larger than in the partial adjustment model with unconstrained serial
correlation (2,634 versus 2,552), and in the non-structural second-order autoregrasions model (2,634 versus
2,559). Once again, two nonlinear parameters, common across sectors, do better than 21 and 42 free sectoral
serial correlation coefficients.

"These parameters imply $ = 0.6.
"We approximate the ergodic density by the density that results after 30 iterations, beginning with a
point mass at zero.
24

Table 2: Structural results
Parameters Equipment Structures

,

cv,
0•
•

0.165
(0.016)

0.587
(0.080)

0.342
(0.082)

0.143

(0.027)

0.108
(0.060)

0.074
(0.013)

Pt
apI

0.131

—0.005

(0.118)

(0.095)

Likelihood

2446.6

2649.2

3.68

4.525

\+

12.64

20.96

C

—0A72

—0.850

z

0.398

0.693

A

16.5 percent of annual revenues (net of labor payments) and their coefficient of variation is

0.34, which implies a standard deviation of L6 percent. Average serial correlation is small
and the likelihood is slightly larger than that obtained with the semi-structural invertednormal hazard of the previous section.42 Indeed, our semi-structural representation of the
structural hazard takes the form given in equation (25). The rows of the lower panel in
Table 2 report the implicit value of the parameters of this representation.

For structures, adjustment costs are on average 58.7 percent of annual revenues (net
of labor payments) and their coefficient of variation is 0.143, which implies a standard
deviation of 8.4 percent. Average serial correlation is negligible, and the likelihood is larger
3For consistency with the microeconomic model, it is important that the serial correlation coefficients be
reasonably close to zero.

25

than that obtained with the semi-structural inverted normal distribution of the previous
section.43 As with equipment, estimating the semi-structural hazard in (25) without the
constraints imposed by the microeconomic dynamic optimization problem does not raise
the likelihood significantly.

Figure 6 shows the implied adjustment hazards (panel a) for equipment (solid ilne) and
structures (dashed line), and the corresponding estimated distribution of adjustment costs
(panel b). The hazards, which are depicted in the space of percentage deviations from
the target levels, imply a substantial range where no adjustment occurs; they ar sharply
increasing thereafter. Clearly, there is more inaction for structures than for equipment.
This difference is larger than can be inferred directly from the figure, since the depreciation
and idiosyncratic uncertainty are smaller for structures than for equipment, thereby making

large disequilibria less likely for structures than for equipment (for a given hazard). Our
model's explanation for this difference in inaction is found in the bottom panel, where the
distributions of adjustment costs are illustrated: adjustment costs are on average much
larger for structures than for equipment investment.

4.4 What is special of increasing hazard models?
Perhaps the main distinctive feature of the model we have estimated, compared with its
linear counterparts, is that not only average investment by those that are investing but
also the number of firms that choose to invest at any point in time fluctuates over the
business cycle. That this is realistic is confirmed by the evidence in Doms and Dunne
(1993), who use the Longitudinal Research Datafile to study the investment behavior of
12,000 continuing U.S. manufacturing establishments for the seventeen year period from

1972-1988. Among many interesting facts, they show that the number of plants going
through their primary investment spikes (i.e., the single year with the largest investment
for the establishment), rather than the average size of these spikes, tracks closely aggregate
manufacturing investment over time. In terms of our model, this flexibility in the number
of firms investing implies that, contrary to the case of the linear model, the extent of the
response of aggregate investment to aggregate shocks fluctuates over the business cycle.
Figure 7 depicts the paths of the derivatives of aggregate investment with respect to ag-

gregate shocks for equipment and structures, evaluated at vg. It is apparent that this "index
'3There(ore substantially larger than (or the linear partial adjustment and second-oder autoregression
models.

26

Figure Ga: Adjustment Hazards

I-x
t1

v—i C% disequilibria]

Figure 6b: Disb9butons of adjustment costs
N
0
C

0
00
I',
C
C

d
0
I—c
'V

30

Oi

02

0.4

0.3
(A)

0.5

0.6

0.7

Figure 7a: Equipment-*idex of responsiveness

0
N

0
0

a
0
C
C
C
55

80

85

75

10

80

85

90

95

90

95

tins
Figure

3: St-uctjree-indsx of

60

65

responsiveness

a
0
C
U,

C
C

0
a
a
I',

It
0

a
55

75

70

tine

80

85

Table 3: Skewness and kurtosis for innovations
Model

Structures
Equipment
Kurtosis Skewness Kurtosis

Skewness

Part. Adj.

0.36

(< 0.01)

1.18

0.74

(c 0.01) (<0.01)

1.75

(< 0.01)

0.35

0.85

0.81

1.72

(< 0.01)

(<0.01)

(< 0.01)

(< 0.01)

AR(2)

Structural

—0.10

0.65

0.07

0.33

(> 0.20)

(< 0.01)

(> 0.20)

(> 0.07)

• Shown in parenthesis: p-values obtained via bootstrap.

of responsiveness" fluctuates widely over the sample. Moreover, it is strongly procyclica.l:
ftc correlation with aggregate shocks is 0.79 for equipment and 0.72 for structures.

Our model implies a complex nonlinear process for investment. To a first approximation, however, the contemporaneous response of investment to aggregate shocks can be
characterized in simpler terms. The procyclicailty of the index of responsiveness described
above implies that for any given sequence of shocks, the increasing hazard model has sharper

(non-linear) cyclical leatures. In particular, it will generate fatter tails, especially so during
expansions (the asymmetry is due to the strong drift induced by depreciation). Figure 8
shows the mean difference (normalized by average f/K) between actual investment and
the predictions of the linear model; the latter supplied with the sequence of shocks inferred
from the non-Linear model. The largest absoate values of this series occurs during periods
ol large departure between investment and its mean.44
An alternative way to reach a similar conclusion with respect to the role of nonlinearities,

is to look directly at the departures of I/K and shocks generated by each model front
normality. Figure 9 shows the histogram of standardized sectoral I/K.45 It is apparent
that 1/K is not normal; its skewness and (excess) kurtosis coefficients are 0.61 and 0.74
for equipment and 0.76 and 0.87 for structures. Obviously, linear models with nonnal
"If we normailie by actuaj rather than average 1/K, the difference during recessions is accentuated.
"Standascjized within each sector.

27

Figure Qp: Equipment-mean-difference

&

95

— W%-PAMbt%3

—— a-Ok

Figure ff: Structures-mean-difference

0
0
0
9
0

95

tine

0
— WK-flM3ItQR3
——

C
¶1

Figure qe Histogram of Equipment tIC (standardized)

C
'V

C
C

0

C0

0'V
aN

0
—2

—1

0

1

2

3

4

Figure qb: Histogram of Stuctzree VK (standardized)

0'V

0
0C

C0
U..

0

0'C
C

N

0
—2

—1

0

I

2

3

4

errors cannot account for these departures. The innovations generated by the best partial
adjustment model and best second-order autoregression models also depart from normal,

as can be seen in table 3: Their skewness and kurtosis coefficients are 0.36 and 1.18 for
equipment and 0.74 and 1.75 for structures in the partial adjustment case, and 0.35 and
0.85 for equipment, and 0.81 and 1.72 for structures in the Alt(2) case. All these numbers
are significantly different from zero (the normal case) at the 0.01 level. The last two rows
show that the increasing hazard model generates innovations that are closer to normal than
its linear counterparts. The estimated skewness and kurtosis coefficients are con&iderably
smaller, and three out of four of the coefficients do not depart significantly (at the 0.05
level) from their values under the normality assumption. The non-linear modet does not
need to introduce nearly as much skewness and kurtosis in aggregate shocks to account for
investment behavior.

5 SMALL CHANGES
The models estimated in the preceeding section (see Figure 6) imply that firms always

adjust their capital by large amounts (at least 30%). Strictly interpreted, this implication
is unrealistic at the microeconomic level, for in addition to large projects, plants often
experience small adjustments.46

in this section we extend the model developed earlier and incorporate the possibility
of small adjustments. We consider two kinds of capital, one which is costly to adjust and
another which can be adjusted costlessly. We estimate the extended model and conclude
that, even though now most adjustments at the firm level are small, the occasional lumpy
nature of adjustments continues playing a central role for understanding aggregate dynamics. We conclude that it is not excluding the possibility of small adjustments, but allowing
for lumpy investment, that drives the results in the preceeding sections.

5.1 Model Extension
The model of Section 2 is extended to allow for two kinds of capital, one with adjustment
costs ("fixed") and the other without ("flexible").47 The former is denoted by K and the

latter by k. Firms' technology is Cobb-Douglas with constant returns, now with three
inputs instead of two. The elasticity of production with respect to both kinds of capital is
"See

Doms and Duuine (1993).
'Fixity and flexibility only refer to the presence or absence of adjustment costs.

28

1. Thus, the model of section 2 corresponds to
or and o(l — r), respectively, with 0 r
the particular case where r = 1.
It is easy to show that a firm with a stock of fixed capital equal to K and a deviation
from its frictionless optimal stock of fixed capital of z maximizes its profits by choosing:
(27)

k=

with
(28

—

ro(q—1)

1+ra(—1

Thus, when the firm's desired stock of fixed capital increases (i.e., tsr c 0) and the
current adjustment cost is too high to make adjustment profitable, the firm will adjust its
flexible capital, k, even if it does not adjust its fixed capital. In every period the firm adjusts

its flexible capital in the direction determined by the current change in desired frictionless
capital — the magnitude of this change is larger when fixed capital is also adjusted.
Expressing k as a function of K, and using the expression for $ in (28), equation (1) and
the arguments that follow in section 2.2 apply directly to the more general case considered
here. Thus the shape of the firm's optimal policy is the same as before: conditional on the
current draw of adjustment cost factor, the firm follows an (S,s) rule for adjusting its fixed

capital. Its flexible capital adjusts according to (27).

5.2 Sectoral Investment
Even though calculations are somewhat more cumbersome, aggregate equations are obtained following analogous steps to those of section 2.3. The evolution of the cross-section
of firms' disequilibria is identical to what we :aw in that section. The extension of the model
only requires modifying the expressions relating how a given cross-section of disequilibria.
translates into aggregate investment. We sketch the steps required to do this next.
Let:

=

[1; T]

with c denoting the disequilibrium immediately after firms adjust their stock of fixed capital.

Let J( and i denote aggregate investment during period tin fixed and flexible capital,
respectively, and let i and KI denote total investment and total capital stock, respectively.
Then:

29

1K

=
=

_____

)J(e_t_1)A(z)J(x,oaxi

C +_) [(J — J_i)+ Jtf(e

—

l)A(z)J(z,t)dx],

where:

= vJe0tf(z,t)dx,

(29)

with f(x, t) and J(z, t) defined in section 2.3.2.
Adding both expressions above we obtain yt = IT/KI. With this expression at hand,
the modifications needed in section 3 when deriving the non.linear equations that must be

solved to find the aggregate (sectoral) shocks, v, are straightforward.

5.3 Results
We

estimate structural models for equipment and structures separately, as in section

4•3•48.49 Table 4 presents the results.50

The parameter measuring the share of both kinds of capitai, r, is significantly different

from I (the value implicit in section 4), but large enough so the fixed capital continues
playing a key role, especially so for structures. The remaining structural parameters (mean

and coefficient of variation of the Gamma distribution characterizing adjustment costs,
and the standard deviation of idiosyncratic shocks) take similar values to those obtained
earlier. The first order correlations are larger than in the preceeding section, specially for
equipments. This may be due to assuming that flexible capital involves no adjustment costs;

if the corresponding adjustment costs are smaller than for fixed capital, but non-negligible,

then a first order correlation term may be expected.
More than the structural interpretation, what is important to stress here is that even
though over 90 percent of yearly investment is smaller than 20 percent, the nonlinearities
at the microeconomic and aggregate level are fully accounted for by the large adjustments.
8Thus in each case there are two kinds of capital: with and without adjustment costs.
'0The interest rate, (total) share of capital (a), and markup are fixed at the same values as before.
SOWe include an additive constant (common across sectors) which partly capture investment that is
totally unrelated to our model; the estimated values are 0.045 for equipment and 0.020 for structure.
mentioned earlier, given the non-linear nature oF the model, it is computationally infeasible to combine
unobserved, stochastic aggregate shocks with measurement error.

30

Table 4: Extended model: results
Parameters

tau

p4.,

cv,

Equipment

Structures

0.563

0.829

(0.103)

(0.098)

0.184

0.522

(0.011)

(0.099)

0.235

0.172

(0.029)

(0.101)

•

(L038

0.055

(0.006)

(0.010)

°.

0.283

0.069

(0.111)

(0.087)

Likelihood

2451.3

2660.4

cc

j3

31

And these are the ones that explain the improved aggregate fit of the models presented in
this paper over standard linear ones.

6

FINAL REMARKS

paper we derived and estimated a model of sectoral investment that builds from
the realistic observation that lumpy adjustments play an important role in firms' investment
behavior. but that allows for the empirically appealing feature that adjustments do not need
to be of the sante size across adjusting firms and for a firm over time.
Using a non-linear time series procedure, we estimated the distributions of fixed ad.
justment costs laced by firms that maximizes the likelihood of aggregate (sectoral) data.
In this

Restricting these distributions to the gamma-family, we found that their means and standard deviations are 16.5 and 5.6 percent of a years' revenue (net of labor payments) for
equipment, and 58.7 and 8.4 percent for structures. More importantly, the adjustment
hazards implied by these findings are clearly non-linear: they leave a significative range of
:urnplete inaction, and increase sharply thereafter.

At the aggregate level, the estimated hazards imply brisk cyclical features. These nonlinearities noticeably improve the aggregate performance of investment equations.
The empirical methodology developed in this paper should serve as a useful complement to microeconomic studies of investment, as well as in many other applications where

intermittent microeconomic adjustment is suspected.

32

References
[1] Bar-Han, Avner, and Alan S. Blinder. "Consumer Durables: Evidence on the Optimality of Doing Nothing." Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 24, 253—272, 1992.
[2]

Bernanke, Benjamin S., "The Determinants of Investment: Another Look," American
Economic Review 73, 71—75, 1983.

[3j Bertola,

Giuseppe, and Ricardo J. Caballero, "Kinked Adjustment Costs, and Aggregate Dynamics," in NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1990 0J. Blanchard and S.
Fischer, eds. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 1990.

[4] Bertola, Giuseppe, and Ricardo J. Caballero "Irreversibility and Aggregate Invest.
nient," Review of Economic Studies 61, 1994, p. 223-246.

[5) Blanchard, Olivier J., "Investment, Output, and the Cost of Capital: A Comment,"
Brvokings Papers of Economic Activity, 153—158, 1986.

[6) BLinder, Alan S, "Retail Inventory Behavior and Business Fluctuations," Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1!, 443—505, 1981.

[7] Caballero, Ricardo J. "Durable Goods; An Explanation for their Slow Adjustment."
Journal of Political Economy 101, 351—3M, 1993.

181 Caballero, lUcardo J., and Eduardo M.ILA. Engel. "Beyond the Partial Adjustment
Model." American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings 82, 360—364, 1992a.

[9] Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, "Price Rigidities, Asymmetries,
and Output Fluctuations," NBER WP 4091, 1992b.
[10) Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, "Heterogeneity and Output Fluctuations in a Dynamic Menu-Cost Economy," Review of Economic Studies, 60, 95—119,
1993a.

[II] Caballero, Ricardo J., and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, "Microeconomic Adjustment Haz-

ards and Aggregate Dynamics," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108-2, 697—711,
1993b.

[12] Caballero, Ricardo J, and Eduardo M.R.A. Engel, "Microeconoinic Rigidities and
Aggregate Price Dynamics," European Economic Review, 37(4), 697—711, iune 1993c.
33

[13] Caballero, Ricardo J., Eduardo M.R.A. Engel and John Haltiwanger, "Aggregate Employment Dynamics: building from microeconomic evidence," mimeo MIT, 1993.
[14] Chirinko, Robert S., "Business Fixed Investment Spending: A Critical Survey of Modelling Strategies, Empirical Results, and Policy Implications," Journal of Economic

Literuturr, 31

(4),

1875—1911, 1993.

[15] Clark, Peter K., "Tax Incentives and Equipment Investment," Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1, 317—339, 1993.

[16] Cooper, Russeti and John Haltiwanger, "The Aggregate Implications of Machine Replacement: Theory and Evidence," American Economic Review 83-3, 360—382, 1993.

[I?) Cummins, Jason C. Kevin H. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard, "A Reconsideration of
Investment Behavior Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments," Mimeo Columbia,
February

1994.

118] Dixit, Avina.sh, and Robert S. Pindyck, Investment

Under Uncertainty,

Princeton

University Press, 1994.

[19] Doms, M. and T. Dunne, "An Investigation into Capital and Labor Adjustment at the
Plant

Level," rnimeo,

Center for Economic

Studies, Census Bureau, 1993.

[20] berly, .LC., "Adjustment of Consumers' Durables Stocks: Evidence from Automobile
Purchases," Journal of Political Economy 102-3, June 1994, p. 403-436.

[21] Grossman, Sanford J., and Guy Laroque, "Asset Pricing and Optimal Portfolio Choice
in the Presence of Illiquid Durable Consumption Goods," Econometrica, 58(1), 25—Si,
1990.

[22) hall, Robert E. and Dale Jorgenson, "Tax Policy and Investment Behavior," American
Economic Review, 57, 391—414, 1967.

[23] Hansen, Bruce E., "Inference When a Nuisance Parameter is Not Identified Under the
Null Hypothesis," mimeo, Rochester, June 1993.

[24] Harrison, I. Michael, Thomas M. Seilke and Allison J.

Taylor,

"Impulse Control of

Brownian Motion," Mathematics of Operations Research, 8, 454—466, 1983.

[25] Lam, Sam-Pok, "Permanent Income, Liquidity, and Adjustment of Automobile Stocks:
Evidence from Panel Data," Quarterly Journal of Economics,106, 203.230, 1991.
34

[26J Rothschild, Michael, "On the Costs of Adjustment," Quarterly Journal of Economics,
75, 605—622, 1971.

[27J Shapiro, Matthew D., "Investment, Output, and the Cost of Capital," Bruokings Papers of Economic Activity, 1986-1, 111—152, 1986.

35

