                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERThS




                              ENVIRONMENTAL TAXATION
                             AND THE "DOUBLE DIVIDEND:"
                                  A READER'S GUIDE




                                    Lawrence H. Goulder




                                   Working Paper No. 4896



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1994


This paper was prepared for the International Institute of Public Financç 50th Congress. 'Public
Finance, Environment, and Natural Resources," which was held August 22-25. 1994 in
Cambridge, Mass. I am grateful to Lans Bovenberg, Bill Hogan, Robert Kolin, Jenny Ligthart,
Robert McMilian, Ian Parry, Jim Poterba, Robert Repetto, Ronnie Schob, Jon Strand, and Jim
Sweeney for helpful discussions, and to Jesse David and Steven Weinberg for excellent research
assistance. Financial support from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SBR 9310362),
Resources for the Future, and the IBM Corporation is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Lawrence H. Goulder. All rights reserved. Short sections of tat, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4896
                                                                              October 1994


                              ENVIRONMENTAL TAXATION
                             AND THE "DOUBLE DIVIDEND:"
                                  A READER'S UWDE

                                         ABSTRACT

       In recent years there has been great interest in the possibility of substituting
environmentally motivated or "green" taxes for ordinazy income taxes. Some have suggested that
such revenue-neutral reforms might offer a "double dividend:" not only (1) improve the
environment but also (2) reduce certain costs of the tax system. This paper articulates different
notions of "double dividend" and examines the theoretical and empirical evidence for each. In
addition it draws connections between the double dividend issue and principles of optimal
environmental taxation in a second-best setting.
       A weak double dividend claim is that returning tax revenues through cuts in distortionary
taxes leads to cost savings relative to the case where revenues are returned lump sum. This claim
is easily defended on theoretical grounds and (thankfully) receives wide support from numerical
simulations. The stronger versions contend that revenue-neutral swaps of environmental taxes
for ordinary distortionary taxes involve zero or negative gross costs. Theoretical analyses and
numerical results tend to cast doubt on the strong double dividend claim. At the same time, the
theoretical case against the strong form is not air-tight, and the numerical evidence is mixed.
       In simple models, the conditions under which the strong double dividend claim is rejected
(upheld) are closely related to the conditions under which the second-best optimal environmental
tax is less than (greater than) the marginal environmental damages.
       The difficuhy of establishing the strong double dividend claim heightens the importance
of attending to and evaluating the (environmental) benefits from environmental taxes.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
I. Introduction
         Economists have long favored the use of taxes as instruments of environmental protection. To

many economic analysts, in situations involving serious externalities taxes axe the most effective
mechanism for 'getting the prices light" -- that is. for helping prices closely approximate marginal social
costs. The notion that taxes can improve welfaxe outcomes by internalizing externalities traces back at
least as far as Pigou (1938) and is a central tenet of environmental economics.

         Real-world economies obtain public revenues rot only through environmental (corrective) taxes

but also through distortionary taxes such as income, payroll, and sales taxes. What constitutes getting the

prices right (or merely closer to right) is more complicated in a second-best setting where both types of

taxes are present than in a world with environmental taxes alone. This is the case for at least two reasons,

First, taxes interact. In particular, the gross' costs of newly imposed environmental taxes are regulated
by pm-existing distortionary taxes! Second, the presence of other taxes introduces the possibility of
"swapping" an envirunmental tax for an existing tax. Consider a tax reform in which an environmental
tax is introduced and its revenues are used to finance reductions in the income tax. The overall gross cost

of this revenue-neutral package depends not only on the (gross) costs of the environmental tax itself but

also on the efficiency benefits (avoided efficiency costs) associated with the reduction in income tax
rates?
         These issues have come to life in recent analyses and policy debases surrounding the carbon tax


     'I emphasize "gross" to make clear that the discussion here concerns only the cost (or non-environmental) side of
the ledger. Clearly environmental taxes generally yield both benefits (from imroved environmental quality) and costs
(or abatement costs). Overall efficiency reflects both sides of the ledger, that is. net benefits The present discussion
focuses on the cost side. Later on, the paper will connect this discussion to considerations of environmental benefits,

    'Partial equilibrium analysis suggests that the incremental gross efficiency cost of a new tax in a given market is
higher, the larger are pre-existing taxes in that market. This follows from the basic notion in public economics that the
costs of a given tax tend to rise with the square of the overall tax rate. However, as emphasized later in this paper, tax
interactions extend across markets: pre-existing taxes in other markets significantly affect the costs of a new tax in a
given market.

    This idea was advanced several decades ago by Tullock (1961) and Kneese and Bower (196S), and somewhat more
 recently by Nichols (1984). Terkla (1984) appears to have been the ftrst to perform a numerical assessment of the
 efficiency benefits associated with devoting environmental tax revenues to cuts in existing taxes,
option. Initial work on carbon taxes tended to ignore other distortionary taxes. In most of the initial

studies it was assumed that the revenues 1mm this tax would be returned to the economy in a lump-sum

fashion.4 Subsequent analyses pointed out, however, that the revenues could be used to finance reductions

in ordinary, distortionary taxes. Several analysts have indicated that this could significantly reduce the

costs6 of the carbon tax. indeed, some have suggested that these costs could be zero or negative when

opportunities to "recycle" the revenues through cuts in distortionary taxes are taken into account.

However, some recent theoretical and empiuical work points out an effect that works in the opposite

direction, revealing ways that existing distortionary taxes may interact with the carbon tax and thereby

enlarge the carbon tax's costs. While recognizing that recycling the revenues can reduce the costs of a

carbon tax, this work shows that for any given method of recycling, pie-existing taxes augment the costs.

Much of this work indicates that this tax interaction effect is larger than the revenue-recycling effect, so

that, overall, a revenue-neutral carbon tax is likely toinvolve positive costs in a second-best setting.

         The term "double dividend" relates directly to these discussions. Pearce (1991) noted that swam

of environmental taxes for distortionary taxes may produce a double dividend by not only (I) discouraging

environmentally damaging activities but also (2) reducing the distortionary cost of the tax system. l'he

double dividend concept is relevant to many important ideas 'in second-best environmental taxation,

Unfortunately, the term is used in different ways: the dividend represented by (2) above, in particular.

can have very different interpretations. This has led to some confusion. TIlls paper will distinguish the

different notions of "double dividend" and analyze the theoretical and empitical support for each, The

main motivation here is not to develop a taxonomy but rather to clarify key issues relevant to the



      For example, in its Model Comparison Project undertaken in 1990-2, the OECD commissioned six models to
investigate the costs of reducing CO, emissions thxtugh carbon taxes. In this investigation, costs were evaluated
assuming lump-ruin replacement of revenues. Only two of the six models were capable of assuming alternative forms
 of revenue-replacement. On this see OECD (1992),

    'For general discussions, see, for example. Pearce (1991), Poterba (1991), Oates (1991), Pezzey (1992). and Repetto
eta!. (1992). For numerical assessments, see Shackleton ci al. (1992) and Gains and Weyant (1994) for results from
several models; see also Section IV's references to the models discussed in that section.

    6For the rest of this paper, "costs" refers to the gross costs (that is, abstracting from environmental benefits) unless
otherwise indicated.

                                                             2
formulation of environmental policy in second-best economies. The discussion is intended to help
delineate the circumstances under which the substitution of 'green or environmentally motivated taxes

for typical existing taxes is likely to be an efficiency-improving venture.

        Before launching into the specifics of the double dividend issue, it may be useful to view this

issue in a broader context There is widespread agreement as to the ability of environmental taxes to

confer the first dividend above (environmental improvement), although the magnitude of this dividend

usually is highly uncertain. On the other hand, there is much debate          as to what kind of additional
(second) dividend, if any, might be offered by environmental taxes. The preoccupation with the possibility

of a second dividend, in my view, reflects the uncertainties about the magniwdes of the first, Muéh of

the debate about the second dividend is in terms of whether environmental taxes can be introduced in a

way that is costless. The no-cost idea is highly attractive to policymakers who axe interested in "green

tax swap" but are frustrated by the uncertainties as to the values ofthe environmental benefits that would
result from such swaps. Under these conditions, the no-cost idea is especially appealing. If revenue-
neutral environmental tax policies are costless, then the burden of proof facing the policymaker is much

reduced: to justify the environmental tax on benefit-cost grounds, it suffices to know the sign of the
environmental benefits -- to know that they are positive. If costs are zero (or negative). this guarantees

positive net benefits. On the other hand, if one cannot be assured that the costs are zero, then before one

can recommend an environmental tax swap on efficiency grounds one has to be involved in the messy

business of comparing (uncertain) environmental benefits with abatement costs.

        Thus the debate about the double dividend reflects the desire to be able to make safe judgments

about environmental reforms in the presence of uncertainty. In my view, it makes a difference how this

debate is resolved, because this could influence what policyinakers view as the minimal information
requirements for fruitful environmental tax reform.

        The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II distinguishes three interpretations of the

double dividend concept and comments on the implications of each. The stronger interpretations are most

relevant to policy evaluation, and subsequent sections of the paper deal primarily with them. Section LII

examines the theoretical evidence for or against the stronger double dividend notions. Section IV presents

                                                      3
numerical results. Section V discusses the relationship between this issue and optimal environmental
taxation. The flnal section often conclusions.




II. Three Double Dividend Propositions


         One    can distinguish several double-dividend claims that might be made about a given
environmental tax initiative such as a carbon tax. Here are three:'


         Weak Form: By using revenues from the environmental tax to finance reductions in marginal
         rates of an existing disrortionary tax, one achieves cost savings relative to the case where the tax
         revenues are returned to taxpayers in lump-sum fashion.

         Imermediate Form: It is possible to find a distorlionary tax such that the revenue-neutral
         substitution of the environmental tax for this tax involves a zero or negative gross cost.

         Strong Form: The revenue-neutral substitution of the environmental tax for typical or
         representative distortionary taxes involves a zero or negative gross cost.



A. The Weak Form
         These hypotheses differ in terms of what they propose about the costs of revenue-neutral
environmental tax policies. Let "gross cost" refer to the cost. of a given tax initiative, abstracting from
whatever environmental benefits apply. Let CflE ATO derxte the gross cost of the new environmental

tax t accompanied by lump-sum tax reductions ATL sufficient to make the policy revenue-neutral.
Similarly, let C(t, at) denote the gross cost of the new tax t1 accompanied by cuts in the distortionary

tax At sufficient to achieve revenue-neutrality. The first proposition asserts that:

          CUE. at,) < C(te.AT3.                                                                                     (I)


    'Other notions have appewed. In European discussions, reduced unemployment and increased profits an often
referred to as the potential extra dividends (in addition to improved environmental quality) from environmental taxes.
See, for example. Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1993a). Carraro, Galeotti, and Gallo (1994). and Nielsen. Pedersen,
and Sorensen (1994). In this papa, the extra dividend is more fundamental: it relates to gross welfare costs rather than
specific economic variables (such as etnploynient or profits) that contribute to welfare.

                                                           4
The gross cost is tower when revenues are replaced through cuts in the distoitionacy tax than when

revenues are replaced lump-sum. Under this proposition. the 'second dividend is the tower distortionary

cost in the Ionner case (left-hand side) relative to the cost in the latter case (right-hand side).

         The weak double dividend notion is relatively uncontroversial. This is fortunate, because the key

assumption on which it depends is relatively innocuous. The weak double dividend claim can be shown

to be equivalent to the cLaim that replacing, at the margin, a lump-sum tax for a distortionary tax entails

a positive welfare cost (apart from environmental considerations).' This tatter claim is not difficult to

uphold, since the idea that swapping a distortionary tax for a lump-sum tax has a positive welfare cost is

part of the usual definition of "distortionary." So long as the tax t, deserves its title as a distortionary tax,

it will have a positive efficiency cost and the weak double-dividend claim will hold,

         One important clarification is in order here. Consider the case where t] is negative in the status

quo ante. Starting from a negative value (or subsidy), a further reduction in this tax (financed through

lump-sum taxes) may be efficiency-worsening. Under these circumstances, if a new environmental tax

is employed to finance reductions in a "distortionary' tax whose value is already negative, the weak

double-dividend will not obtain. This does not contradict the claim from the previous paragraph. In the

situation described here, the key requirement of the weak double-dividend notion -- that the tax t, have

a positive marginal excess burden -- is missing.

         The weak form can related to the elements of Figure 1. The figure often the typical partial

equilibrium and first-best framework for analyzing welfare effects of an environmental tax.' MC denotes

the private marginal costs of producing the given commodity, which in this example is coal.


     'This can be shown as follows. Consider the two post-reform situations associated with (I). One (associated with
the left-hand side) involves a reduction in a distortionary tax the other (associated with the rigjn-hand side) involves
a lump-sum tax reduction. The two post-reform situations are alike in other important respects: they involve the same
tax revenue and all other tax razes (incLuding kj are the sane. One can wiite the levels of welfare associated with the
two post-reform situations as W(t, ta', T3 and W(t5, t,, T3 where t,' = t, + At and 'FL' = 'FL + 6'FL (Note that
at<O. AT1<O.) The weak doubLe dividend assertion is equivalent to the assenion that W(t5, t2', T3 > W(t5. t,, 'L)'
This, however, is equivalent to the assertion that the gross efficiency cost of raising the distortionary tax from t' to t,.
where the change is financed through a reduction in lump-sum taxes from TL to It'. is positive. Thus, the weak double
dividend claim is upheld so long as the distortionary tax considered has a positive gross efficiency cost or excess burden.

    'In this example, the tax is a strict Pigovian tax in that it applies to a commodity with which pollution is associated
rather than directly to pollution emissions. The basic lessons apply to emissions taxes as well.

                                                             5
represents the social marginal cost curve, incorporating the marginal external damage (marginal external

cost). MED. MB represents the marginal benefit (demand) curve. If a tax is imposed on coal equal to

the marginal external damage, social and private marginal costs become aligned. The usual textbook

analysis regards the welfare gain as area B.'° This is the value of the environmental improvement (A+B)

minus the gross efficiency costs of the tax (A).

           This simple analysis suggests that the tax revenue R is transferred costlessly from those who pay

the   coal tax to the government and back to the private sector", with no efficiency consequences. The
weak notion of the double dividend recognizes the fact that this "recycling' of the revenues (R) may

indeed have efficiency consequences. The assertion is that when revenues axe used to cut existing

distortionary taxes, in particular, they help reduce the overall (gross) distortionary costs of the tax system.

If the gross costs under lump-sum replacementare given by area A, then under distortionary-tax

replacementthey are less than A.'2

           It is important to recognize, however, that other important cost considerations may be obscured

by the first-best, partial equilibrium framework embodied in Figure 1. In particular, when other taxes

(such as income taxes) are present, the area A in Figure 1 is not a good indicator of the gross costs of the

tax on coal. The weak double dividend noUon correctly claims that rebating revenues through cuts in

distortionaiy taxes reduces gross costs relative to their level under lump-sum replacement, but the

reference level from which the reduction occurs is generally quite different from that suggested by area

A in the diagram. We return to this issue below,



B. The Stronger Forms

          The intermediate and strong double-dividend notions involve assertions about the sign of the gross



     "In the case with non-constant private marginal costs or non-constant marginal external costs, the presentation is
slightly more complicated, but the results are essentially the same.

      "In the simplest case, the revenues axe returned to the private sector in a lump-sum fashion.

    2Of course, the government couid waste the revaues — for example, by applying them to government projects with
benefit-cost ratios below one. In this case the gross costs will be greaser than A. In this paper! do not consider which
use of revenues is most likely; I leave that to political scientists.

                                                            6
cost of a revenue-neutral policy in which an environmental tax replaces (some of) an existing distortionary

tax. The assertion is:

        C(k. t) c 0.                                                                                                 (2)

The assertion here is that swapping an environmental tax for a distothonary tax involves a negative gross

cost overall.

        The intermediate and strong double dividend notions differ in the strength of the claim as to the

extensiveness of the class of distortionary taxes for which (2) holds. The intermediate notion affirms that

there exists at least one distortionaiy tax Lx for which (2) applies; the strong notion claims that (2) holds

for typical or representative existing taxes. For any given distortionary tax (tx) involved in the tax swap.

condition (2) is stronger than (I) assuming C(k. LST3 > 0.

        One can decompose the overall gross cost C(k. at) into that which is"directly attributable" to

the environmental tax and that which is "directly attributable" to the reduction in the distoxtionary tax,'

The intermediate and strong double dividend notions can be interpreted as claims that the first cost -- the

cost resulting from to the environmental tax -- is smaller in absolute magnitude than the second cost --

the cost associated with the cut in the distortionary tax. In other words, when the taxes axe scaled to

imply the same revenue impact, the environmental tax introduces a smaller cost than an equal-revenue

change in the distortionary tax.

         It is important to be clear about what is meant by "costs." In conditions (1) and (2). costs (C) are

the monetary equivalents to the policy-induced changes in individual welfare (abstracting from welfare

effects associated with policy-related changes in environmental quality). In the relaxed theoretical work.

welfare depends directly on individual consumption of goods and services and enjoyment of leisure. It

should be recognized that, measured this way, economic cost can differ in sign and magnitude from

changes in other important macroeconomic variables such as GNP or the growth of GNP. The question




     'Since taxes intaact, the attribution of the cost of the revenue-neuual policy change into "direct" effects oft8 and
"direct" effects of &, is not automatic. A reasonable decomposition is to split CU8, At,) into CU8, AT11) and C(At,
ATU). where AT1 and AT are the lump-sum tax changes necessary to make the component changes k and At revenue-
neutral.

                                                            7
whether a given revenue-neutral tax swap entails positive costs is different from the question whether the

swap entails a reduction in GNP or its growth rate!4

         Relative to the strong version. the intermediate double-dividend version makes a more modest

claim about the circumstances in which gross costs will be zero or negative. It asserts the existence of

at least one particularly burdensome distortionaiy tax whose replacement by an environmental taxes would

involve negative costs. It should be noted that the case for removing or reducing an unusually costly
existing tax can be made without introducing environmental considerations. Even without bringing in the

environmental dimension, there would be strong reasons for replacing this tax with other taxes on narrow

(non-environmental) efficiency gmunds.LS Correspondingly, although the presence of this highly
inefficient tax may supply a target for general tax reform, by itself it does not offer support for introducing

the new environmental tax.

         As mentioned in the introduction, the validity of the strong form of the double dividend would

significantly reduce information hurdles associated with the evaluation of environmental taxes. If the
strong double-dividend obtained, policymakers would not need to establish magnitudes of environmental

benefits to justify the tax swap on overall benefit-cost grounds. Instead, it would only be necessary to
confirm that environmental benefits axe positive. In light of the substantial uncertainties surrounding the

magnitudes of environmental benefits from green taxes, the appeal of the suong form is quite
understandable. Much of the debate about the potential for environmental tax reform revolves around

whether the strong form holds. The remainder of this paper gives particular attention to this double-
dividend notion.




      GNP is an imperfect indicator of gross welfare for several reasons. One is that it only reflects the marginal welfare
conuib'utions of goods and serwces (to the extent that these are reflected in market prices); infrainarginal surpluses are
not incorporated. A second reason is that it disregard welfare contributions from non-marketed goods and services such
as leisure.

    'If efficiency were the only consideration, optimal Lax reform would achieve equality in the marginal efficiency
costs of all taxes with non-zero rates. Of course, efficiency is not the sole policy objeciiv& A highly inefficient tax
may be worth keeping if it has important virtues along other dimensions such as distribuiioa

                                                             8
III. Does the Strong Form Hold? Theoretical Considerations


A. A Key Result
        This section examines the theoretical evidence related to the strong interpretation of the double

dividend idea. An important theoretical investigation of this issue was provided by Bovenberg and de

Mooij (1992, 1993). These authors develop a simple general equilibrium model with one primary factor

of production -- labor --     and   three produced commodities --        a   "clean" consumption good, a "dirty"
consumption good, and a public good (nonrival in consumption). Production exhibits constant returns to

scale, and the rates of transformation between the three produced commodities ace constant and equal to

unity. Environmental quality is negatively related to aggregate production of the duty consumption good.

A representative household derives utility from leisure, from consumptioti of the three produced goods,

and from environmental quality. The two private goods and leisure are weakly separable from the public

good and environmental quality in the utility function.
        Bovenberg and de Mooij begin with the situation where the only tax is a labor income tax with

a constant marginal tax rate. They then consider the effects of a revenue-neutral policy change in which
a tax is imposed on the dirty consumption commodity and the revenues ale devoted to a reduction in the

labor tax rate. The commodity tax is non-infinitesimalt6. The strong double dividend claim is that this

policy would yield an increase in non-environment-related welfare, that is, in the uUlity hum the
composite of consumption and leisure enjoyed by the representative household.'7 These authors find that

this claim is substantiated if and only if the uncompensated wage elasticity of labor supply is negative.

that is. if and only if the labor supply function is backward-bending. Most empirical studies of labor
supply yield positive values for the uncompensated elasticity"; thus, the Bovenberg-de Mooij results tend



   "Alternatively, the tax is incremental but superimposed on an existing non-infinitesimal tax on the dirty consumption
commodity. The significance of the 'non-infinitesimal" assumption is discussed in Section V.

    "The separability assumption enables the authors to evaluate utility from the consumptiOn-leisure composite apart
from the utility from public goods or environmental quality.

    "See. for example, l{ausman (1985).

                                                           9
to reject the double dividend proposition in its strong form.'9

        What lies behind the Bovenberg-de Mooij result? There are two key components. First, the tax

on the environmentally harmful consumption good lowers the after-tax wage and generates distortions in

the labor market, and these labor market distortions axe at least as great in magnitude as the labor market

distortions from a labor tax increment of equal revenue yield. Hence, the revenue-neutral swap in which

the environmental tax replaces (some ot) the labor tax leads to no reduction (and usually an increase) in

labor market distortions. Second. the tax on the environmentally damaging commodity induces changes

in the commodity market -- "distorting" the choice among alternative commodities.2° These two

distortionary effects -- in labor and commodity markets -- imply that, apart from environmental

considerations, the revenue-neutral combination of an environmental tax and reduction in labor tax

involves a reduction in the non-environmental component of welfare. In fact, the distortions in the

commodity and labor markets are connected. To the extent that the environmentally motivated commodity

tax leads households to substitute other commodities for the taxed commodity, there is a reduction in the

gross revenue yield of the tax. This tax base erosion effect limits the extent to which the environmental

tax can finance a reduction in the labor tax, and augments the overall gross cost of the tax initiative.

        The intuition for this result is as follows.2'     Consider a static model in which there is one labor

market (no labor heterogeneity). Let Case 1 refer to the situation where there is just one produced

commodity. Suppose that initially there is a tax on labor but no commodity tax. Under these
circumstances the commodity tax (even an infmitesmal one) produces a non-infinitesimal excess burden.

This occurs because, under the circumstances just described, the introduction of a commodity tax is

formally identical to an increase in the labor tax. It reduces the real wage in precisely the same way an



    '9At the same time, Bovenberg and de Mooij's analysis supports the weak notion of double dividend, Their paper
concludes with 'Hence, there exists a 'double dividend' in the sense that a cost reduction can be achieved by using
revenues from pollution taxes to cut distationary taxes rather than returning these revenues in a lump-sum fashion?

   29t should be kept in mind that we are concerned with "distortionC in the gross sense — absflcting from
environmental considerations. Clearly environmental taxes can improve overall resource allocation -- reduce overall
distortions .- when the environmental dimensions is considered. We return to Ibis issue below.

    'See Poterba (1993) for a complementary discussion.

                                                          10
increase in a labor tax would.2 Now suppose. in contrast to this first case, that there are many distinct

produced commodities. As before, suppose that the initial situation involves only a tax on labor. Now
consider (Case 2) the effect of introducing a uniform but small tax on all commodities, and (Case 3) the
effect of introducing a small tax on just one of the commodities. Case 2 is formally similar to Case I;

it will generate non-infinitesimal excess burdens because this tax is equivalent to an increase in the wage
tax?3 Case 3 is relevant to the imposition of an environmental tax on one commodity. Bovenberg and

de Mooij show analytically that, for a given revenue yield, the excess burden in Case 3 is non-
infinitesimal and in fact is larger than in Case 1 or 2. The reason is that Case 3 generates the same or

larger labor market distortion as in the other cases and a larger distortion in the commodity maiteLs?

         A fundamental lesson from Bovenberg and de Mooij's analysis is that partial equilibrium analyses

of the gross costs of environmental taxes can be highly misleading. They show that environmental taxes

importantly affect resource use in markets other than the market in which the tax is applied -- with
significant implications for gross costs. These general equilibrium impacts are especially important if them
are prior taxes in other' markets such as the labor market.25
         These results indicate that there are two important omissions in Figure 1. They work in opposite


    The after-tax real wage is (I) the after-tax nominal wage divided by (2) the &oss of tax price of consumption.
Income taxes directly affect the after-tax real wage by reducing (1), whereas energy taxes directly influence this wage
by raising (2).

    '2A uniform commodity tax does not avoid distorting the commodity market in all circumstances. A sufficient set
ol conditions for its optimality is that commodity consumption be separable from leisure in utility and that the utility
function be homothetic. See Bovenberg and de Mooij (1993).

     'The gross cost is greater in Case 3 than in Case 2 under the stated assumption that the environmental tax is non-
infmitesimal. With an infinitesimal environmental tax, the commodity market gross distortion is negligible, and the net
distortionary impact in the labor market is zero (the effect of the new environmental tax just compensates for the effect
of the reduction in the labor tax). With the large" environmental tax. in COnUtSL the commodity market distortion is
non-incremental. So long as there is some substitutability across commodifl, the tax on the environmental commodity
leads tO substitution away from this commodity in consumption. This implies a loss of tax base (relative to the case
of no substitution) and, importantly, a reduction in the absolute magnitude of the cut in labor taxes which can be
financed by the environmental tax. Because of this tax base erosion effect, the enviromnaital tax is unable to finance
a reduction in labor taxes large enough to compensate for the implicit increase in labor taxes represented by the
environmental tax itself. Thus, when environmental taxes are "large, the revenue-neutral combination of environmental
tax and labor tax cut involves a gross distortionary cost for two reasons: (1) labor market distortions are enlarged, and
(2) a non-negligible distortion is generated in the commodity market.

    On the other hand, the partial equilibrium weLfare analysis is apt for a first-best world with no prior taxes.

                                                           11
 directions. First (as emphasized by the weak double dividend claim), the revenues R can be used to

 reduce gross distortionary costs.      This suggests that the partial equilibrium analysis would overstate the
cost of the environmental tax initiative. At the same time, the presence of other (labor) taxes implies that,

for any given use of the tax revenues, the gross distortion from the environmental tax will be larger than

implied by Figure 1. This implies the opposite bias horn the partial equilibrium analysis. Bovenberg and

de Mooij show that the latter effect is larger in magnitude than the former overall, the presence of prior

taxes implies higher gross costs from the environmental tax -- even when revenues are recycled through

cuts in the distoriionary tax. These two effects are schematized in Figure 2. Adopting terminology similar

to that introduced by Parry (1994) in a recent paper, I call the former effect the revenue-recycling effect

and the latter the tax-i nteraeaon effect.tm (The tax base erosion effect, mentioned three paragraphs above,

contributes to the more general tax interaction effect) Using a different analytical approach, Party obtains

results that conform to those of Bovenberg and de Mooij, showing that the tax interaction effect is of

greater magnitude than the revenue-recycling effect under plausible values for parameters.272'



B. How General Are These Results?

         The analytical results from Bovenberg-de Mooij and Party stem from simplified models. What
are the key simplifying assumptions of these models, and to what extent axe these simplifications critical

to the results?



1. Intermediate Inputs



    Parry terms these the "revenue effect and "interdependency effecL"

    "In Party's analysis, the revenue-recycling effect is greater than the tax-interaction effect only when two conditions
simultaneously bold: (I) output from the polluting industry (which produces the good subject to the environmental tax)
is a weaker than avenge substitute for leisure, and (2) the tax elasticity of emissions is well below unity.

     Figure 2 shows that to uphold the strong double dividend claim, the magnitude of the revenue-recycling effect must
in fact be larger than that of the tax-interaction effect — by enough to bring the gross costs to zero. In Bovenberg-de
Mooij and Parry's analyses, since the tax-interaction effect is larger than the revenue-recycling effect, envtronznernal
taxes not only involve positive gross costs, but larger gross costs than would result from the same tax tn a lint-best
setting where there are no pre-existing taxes and where revenues are returned lump-sum.

                                                            12
         One simplification of the models is that they disregard intermediate inputs. However, in

Bovenberg and Goulder (l994a). the Bovenberg-de Mooij model is extended to incorporate intermediate

inputs, and the results above prevail in the extended model. Bovenberg and Goulder analyze the effects

of environmentally motivated taxes on 'dirty" intermediate goods and on "dirty" consumption goods. In

each case, the strong double dividend claim fails to materialize when the uncompensated wage elasticity

of labor supply is positive. The economic basis for the result in the case of the intermediate good tax is

the same as that provided above for the commodity (consumer good) tax. Similar results axe obtained in

Bovenberg and de Mooij (1993a).



2. Capital
         Another simplification in the above models is their static nature. How would consideration of

capital affect the results? Including capital introduces the possibility that a revenue-neutral environmental

tax could shift the burden of taxation from one factor to another. l'his has efficiency implications to the

extent that, in the initial tax system, the marginal efficiency costs of capital taxation and of labor taxation

are different.29 To assess the importance of including capital in the analysis, two considerations axe

important First, one needs to consider the extent to which the marginal efficiency costs of capital taxation
differ from those of labor taxation under the status quo ante. On what do these marginal efficiency costs

dend? While labor taxes distort the labor-leisure margin -- the margin of choice between enjoying

teisure and enjoying consumption (by earning labor income) -- capital taxes distort the intertemporal

margin -- the margin of choice between consuming today and consuming in the future (by saving). For

a given labor tax, the distortion in the labor-leisure margin is greater the larger is the (compensated) wage

elasticity of labor supply. For a given capital income tax, the distortion along the intertemporai dimension



     "The discussion here is not formal. To my knowledge, no one has yet examined the double dividend issue
analytically in a dynamic, closed-model with capital and labor. Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1994) develop an
analytical model for a small open economy that employs labor and capital. The efficiency issues I shall discuss here
apply to an economy Chat is' large" in the sense that it influences the return to capital; these issues   largely absent
in the Bovenberg-van der Ploeg model of a small, open economy, where the return to capital is given by the world
market and the burden of domestically imposed great taxes is fully borne by labor. Ligthart and van der Ploeg (1994)
develop a static model with labor and a fixed ftor, capital. The issues I shalt discuss here are only of interest when
capital is not fixed in supply.

                                                           13
 is greater the larger is the         rtemporal elasticity of substitution in consumption. Thus, the relative

marginal efficiency costs of labor and capital income taxes depend on these elasticities and on the

magnitudes of labor and capital income tax rates.

           The second consideration is whether the burden or incidence of the environmentaJ tax falls largely

on labor or on capital. As is well known,3° taxes on consumption commodities (such as a consumer

gasoline tax) are implicitly taxes on labor? On the other hand, the burden of taxes on intermediate

inputs (such as a tax on fossil fuels) could potentially fall primarily on capital. This can occur because

such taxes can raise the cost of producing capital goods and thereby lower the rate of return. If this effect

is large enough, the burden of the tax will fall primarily on capital?

           These considerations indicate that the gross costs of a revenue-neutral environmental tax will be

lower to the extent that:


(1)        in the initial tax system, the difference in marginal efficiency costs (marginal excess burdens) is
           large,

(2)       the burden of the environmental tax falls primarily on the factor with relatively low marginal
          efficiency cost,

(3)       the base of the environmental tax is relatively broad, so that the gross distortions it generates in
          intermediate good and consumer good markets axe small, and

(4)        revenues from the tax alt devoted to reducing tax rates on the factor with relatively high marginal
          efficiency cost


These considerations raise the possibility of a zero or negative cost tax swap. For example, if the marginal

excess burden of capital taxes is higher than that for labor, and if the burden of a new environmental tax

falls primarily on labor, then introducing this new tax in combination with a revenue-preserving cut in




      30For a general discussion, see AuerbacU and KoUikouf (1987).

      '1jj, this phenomenon underlies the Bovenberg-de Mooij result. The environmental (commodity) tax 15 an
implicit labor tax which produces both labor and commodity market distortions.

      "Specifically, capital income will fall by a larger percentage than labor income. Labor income falls because the
tax raises costs of production, leading to an increase in the prices of consumer goods and a reduction in the real wage.

                                                           14
capital taxes can involve zero or negative gross costs.

           Would this result, if it occurred, resuffect the double dividend in its strong form? Or would it

only confirm the intermediate double dividend claim? The issue is semantic: the answer depends on

whether one classifies a (pure) tax on capital as a typical or representative tax. A more clear-cut

confirmation of the strong double dividend notion would occur if the gross costs were negative in a case

where revenues are returned through a general income tax cut (that is, through cuts in the marginal rates

applicable to capital arid labor). Returning the revenues through a general income tax cut "dilutes" the

gain associated with revenue-replacement, because it involves a reduction in the relatively efficient factor

tax as well as the more inefficient one. This method of revenue-replacement does not exploit the potential

contribution of item (4) above; but foregoing (4) enables the policy to test unequivocally the strong

double-dividend claim. The above considerations indicate that if the capital tax is extremely costly relative

to the labor tax, the gross costs can be negative even if the potential contribution of (4) is not exploited.

           Thus, once capital is considered, the theory gives more scope for the possibility of the strong

double dividend. Is it likely empirically? Most empirical studies for the U.S. indicate that capital taxes

have higher marginal excess burdens than do labor taxes." Under these circumstances, the prospects for

a strong double dividend become more favorable to the extent that:

(I')       in the initial tax system, there is large difference in the marginal excess burden (MEB) per dollar
           of revenue for capital taxation, as compared with the MEB per dollar for labor taxation.

(2')       the burden of the environmental tax falls primarily on labor, and

(3')       the base of the environmental tax is broad.


           Are these conditions met in the real world? Cowlition (2') indicates that the strong double

dividend claim could potentially be upheld for an environmentally motivated commodity tax, because such

taxes tend to be borne largely by labor. An example of an environmentally motivated commodity tax is

a tax on consumer purchases of gasoline. In a world where capital taxes have much higher excess burdens

than labor taxes, the gasoline tax (with revenues returned through cuts in income taxes or, even better.


       "See Ballard, Shoven, and V/halley (1985), and Jorgenson and Yun (t990).

                                                          15
thiough cuts in capital taxes) is appealing because it helps shill the burden of taxation from capital to

labor. Intuitively, this consumer-level tax functions like a consumption tax and shares the appeal of a

consumption tax in reducing intertemporal distortions, or distortions in capital markets. On the other hand,

a tax on consumet-s' gasoline purchases is obviously much narrower than a general consumption tax. As

indicated by condition (3'). the narrowness of the base is a liability. To the extent that substitution from

gasoline is easy. a given gasoline tax will generate less revenue and introduce larger gross distortions in

commodity markets, worsening the prospects for zero or negative gross costs?'"

         The prospects for the strong claim axe worse in the case of a tax on intermediate inputs. Certain

intermediate input taxes -- for example, a tax on fossil fuel inputs -- may have a strong justification when

environmental benefits are taken into account But the double dividend issue relates only to the cost side,

and intermediate input taxes do not have much promise on this side of the ledger. The reason is that these

taxes are often borne to a significant degree by capital. To the extent that fossil fuels are employed more

intensively in the production of capital goods than in the economy in general, an environmentally

motivated tax on fossil fuels will raise the relative price of these goods and be borne more by capital.

In the data set employed in my general equilibrium energy-economy-environment model of the U.S. (see

Goulder (1994a]), capital goods production is highly energy intensive. Consequendy. in policy simulations

the burden of fossil fuel (intermediate input) taxes falls primarily on capital, virtually ruling out the

possibility of the double dividend in the strong form.

         The new dimension that arises when capital is considered is that of shifting the burden of taxes

between factors and thereby exploiting differences in the marginal excess burdens of factor taxes. This

dimension has force only insofar as the existing tax system is inefficient in the sense that the marginal


    3Paradoxically, the very feature - a narrow base - that contributes to larger gross costs is the feature that often
makes environmentai taxes attractive in terms of overall efficiency. The narrower these taxes are, the closer they often
are to the source of the externality (icr example, certain types of emissions). Hence, even though the narrower base
tends to amplify gross costs, it also tends to expand gross benefits and overall efficiency (gross benefits minus gross
costs). To the extent that the objective is overall efficiency, large           costs should not stand in the way of
environmental taxes.

     3'This implicitly assumes that a uniform commodity tax is optimal (see footnote 23). Optimal commodity tax
principles indicate that, other things equal, there is an efficiency rationale for relatively higher taxes on commodjues
that are highly complementary to leisure. See, for example, Atkinson and Stiglitz (1980). chapter 12.

                                                           16
excess burdens of different taxes are not equal. Arguably, the case for reducing these inefficiencies is

independent of the case for a new environmental tax. The possibility of a double dividend in the strong
form is more difficult if one considers only situations where the "rest of the tax system" is optimal in

some sense. We return to this issue in Section V.


3. Pre-Existing Subsidies
        The issue just raised also is relevant to evaluating the strong double dividend claim in the presence

of prior subsidies: there may be independent reasons for revoking the subsidies. Still, it is worthwhile

noting that prior subsidies clearly offer scope for the strong double dividend. For example, a carbon tax

can serve to undo prior subsidies on fossil fuels and thereby reduce or eliminate the gross distortionary

costs in fuels markets. Shalt and Larsen (1992) emphasize this point in considering the potential for

carbon taxes in developing countries.



4. Emissions Taxes
        The analytical models discussed above consider taxes on commodities (consumer goods or

intermediate inputs) whose production or use generates pollution. Other things equal (abstracting from
monitoring costs, etc.), it is most efficient to tax the source of the externality, that is. emissions. Relative

to commodity taxes, emissions taxes can yield higher overall efficiency gains. But the results concerning

the double dividend.aze not changed. One can think of emissions as another intermediate input. As with

taxes imposed on an ordinary intermediate input, emissions taxes alter the mix of all intermediate inputs

and distort factor markets. The same mechanisms as discussed earlier indicate that emissions takes will

involve larger gross costs per dollar of revenue than the income (labor) taxes they replace. Whether they

are more or less attractive in terms of gross costs than intermediate input taxes depends on the production

technology. It may seem cournerintuitive that emissions taxes do not automatically fare beuer than
ordinary input taxes in terms of the double dividend. It helps to keep in mind that the issue here is gross

costs per dollar of revenue, not overall gross costs. The same feature that makes emissions taxes attractive

in terms of overall efficiency -- their ability to induce larger emissions reductions per dollar of revenue

                                                       17
than ordinary intennediate input taxes -- curtails their attractiveness in terms of gross costs.



5. Exhaustible Resources and Decreasing Returns

        To this point we have only considered axes on produced goods. In assessing the gross costs, we

needed to consider the distortions produced in the markets for the factors that produced these goods. In

particular, in examining the costs of a tax on fossil fuels, we regarded fossil fuels as produced intermediate

goods and attended to the related distortions in the markets for labor and capital.

         Of course, fossil fuels in their original form are primary resources, not produced goods. They are

exhaustible resources whose reserves are given by natureY The essentiai scarcity of natural resource

stocks gives rise to scarcity rents. A basic result from the literature on the taxation of natural resources

is that a constant tax on these rents does not alter the intertemporal allocation of these resources and has

no efficiency cost.37 This suggests that an environmentally motivated tax on, say, fossil fuels, might not

have a significant (gross) efficiency cost after all, given the exhaustible nature of these fuels. If this were

the case, then swapping a tax on these fuels for ordinary income taxes might be a negative cost option,

upholding the double dividend claim in its strong form.

         Should the previous results be discarded because they derive from models that ignored exhaustible

resources? Not necessarily. It should be recognized that in most cases, the environmentally motivated

taxes under actual consideration are not taxes on scarcity rents. The base of a carbon tax, for example.

is not the scarcity rent but rather the quantity of fuel purchased (since carbon combustion and the amount

of CO2 emitted are functions of the quantity of fuel consumed). In contrast with a tax on pure rent, the

tax on fuel output affects intertemporal choice and introduces a gross efficiency cost.3' Despite the

exhaustible nature of fossil fuels, a carbon tax does not attain the non-distortionasy ideal.




    34Known reserves, of course, are endogenous, a function of exploralion activity. This does not alter the main points
discussed here.

    "See, for example. Sweeney (1977, 1993), and Dasgupta and Heal (1979).

    3This is the case because. in general, the present value of the tax payment per unit of fuel is not constant through
time. On this see, for example. Sweeney (1977).

                                                           18
          Of course, this does not entirely disprove the significance of exhaustibility to the double dividend

issue. Even lithe environmental taxes in question are related to fuel output rather than rent, it is possible

that the gross efficiency costs of these taxes might be considerably lower when these 'outputs' are
extracted exhaustible resources. To continue with the fossil fuels example, extracted fossil fuels are the

product of several primary factor inputs: natural resource stocks (fuels in the ground), capital and labor,

The gross efficiency cost from taxes on these fuels will be a weighted average of the gross efficiency cost

generated by the tax in the exhaustible resource market, the capital market,             and   the labor market.39 To
discern this efficiency cost, one would need to know the extent to which the tax is borne by each of these

lactors and the marginal efficiency cost associated with reductions in scarcity rents, the return to capital,

and the wage. This information is not easy to obtain, to say the least Ascertaining the marginal

efficiency cost in the resource market alone is exceedingly difficult Despite these difficulties; further
empirical work aimed at gauging these magnitudes might be of considerable value.



6.   Involuntary Unemployment
         The above models assume all markets clear. However, introducing involuntary unemployment
in the models by way of a fixed real wage above the market-clearing value would not change the basic

results, assuming no other structural changes. In the original models. introducing the (reveriueneutral)
environmental tax reduces labor productivity and shifts leftward the labor demand function. The same

phenomenon occurs in a model in which the real wage is fixed above lit original market-clearing level;

the result is higher involuntary unemployment. The gross costs of this revenue-neutral policy arepositive

for the same reasons      as   in the market-clearing models. However, the results differ when a further
stnactural change is introduced. Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (1993a) develop a model with involuntary

unemployment (resulting from a fixed real wage) and three factors of production: labor, resources, and


     "Whether the strong double dividend arises depends on whether the government has already taxed fixed-factor rents.
In a model with three factors of production — labor, resources, and a fixed factor, Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (l993a)
show analytically that a tax on a "dirty" consumption commodity fails to yield a double dividend (in the strong sense)
if all the rents from the fixed Ixtor are already taxed. On the other hand, if fixed factor rents are not taxed, the same
type of tax offers the double dividend. In the latter case the commodity tax proxies for the tax on fixed factor rentL
and enjoys much of its efficiency potential.

                                                           19
a fixed factor.      In this model, under some circumstances the revenue-neutral combination of an

environmental tax and a labor tax cut boosts employment and raises the non-envizonmentaJ component

of welfare (that is, the gross welfare cost is negative). This occurs when the production share of the fixed

factor is large and substitution between labor and resources is easy. Under these circumstances a large

share of the tax burden 1mm the environmental tax is borne by the fixed factor, with relatively little

efficiency cost. Hence the revenue-preserving cut in the labor tax yields a gross efficiency gain that more

than offsets the gross efficiency cost attributable to the environmental tax.'°



7. The Environment As a Capital Good

         In the analytical models discussed so far, environmental quality, if it is represented at all, enters

as an argument of the utility function. It is a nonrival consumption good. The models that incorporate

environmental quality usually assume that utility from conswnption of "ordinary" goods and services is

separable from utility from environmental quality. This permits a clean separation of gross costs and

environmental benefits in the welfare analysis.

         Environmental quality may also function as a capital good. That is, a cleaner environment may

contribute positively to output, holding other inputs constant Accounting for the productive contribution

of environmental quality is a key element in developing truly integrated economy-environment models.

Such integration permits models to capture an important potential benefit from environmental taxes:

namely, the avoidance of the adverse impact of environmental deterioration on production.4'

         Once the capital goods aspect of environmental quality is included in an economic model, it

becomes more difficult to separate cleanly the gross costs and (environmental) benefits of tax policies.

'Gross costs" signifies the effect of the environmental tax on welfare, abstracting from welfare changes




     °The same qualitative result would obtain if there were no involuntary unemployment in this model, In this model,
the environmental tax serves as an implicit way to tax the rents from the fixed factor in the absence of a mote direct
instrument to do so.

   9lis is an important dimension of the environmental benefits from a carbon tax. To the extent that a carbon tax
slows the accumulation of greenhouse gases and reduces global warming, it avoids productivity losses in agriculture and
other climate-sensitive sectors.

                                                          20
linked to changes in environmental quality. In a model with environment as a capital good, it is difficult

(though not impossible) to perform this abstraction. In a very recent paper, Bovenberg and de Mooij

(1994) develop a model in which environmental quality functions both as a capital good and consumption

good. They show that, under certain circumstances, an environmental tax produces the two "dividends"

of a cleaner environment and faster economic growth. In my view, their result, strictly speaking, does not

provide support for the strong double dividend notion because it involves benefit-side issues; this is not

a case of negative gross costs. Rather, their result supports the notion that when production-related

environmental benefits are taken into account, environmental taxes sometimes can lead to faster growth

as well as a cleaner environment.42



8. Terms or Trade Effects

        All of the analyses discussed above adopt a closed-economy framework. In open economies.

another economic dimension -- changes in the terms of trade -- can affect welfare. In certain cases an

open economy can employ environmental taxes as a means of improving its terms of trade. Specifically,

if the economy in question is a net importer of the good on which the environmental tax is imposed, and

if this economy is large enough to exert monopsony power (that is, large enough to influence world prices

of this good). then imposing the environmental tax can improve this enonomy's terms of trade. By taxing

this imported good, this economy reduces national (and thus global) demands for the good and induces

a reduction in good's before-tax price in world markets. This shifts some of the burden of the domestic

environmental tax onto foreigners. assuming that the revenues from the tax are devoted to cuts in taxes

paid by domestic consumers or domestically owned firms, If the terms of trade gains are large enough.

they could offset the other gross costs associated with the domestically imposed environmental tax and

produce the strong double dividend from the point of view of the domestic economy.°


    '2Consideraiion of the capital good aspect of environmental quality seems to be very important in the overall benefit-
cost evaluation of environmental tax options and may help justify the replacement of ordinary taxes by environmental
taxes in several instances. But the strength of the case for the strong double dividend claim, as defined here, seems
largely independent of whether the capital good function of environmental quality is accounted for.

    °Terms of trade effects do not support the strong double dividend claim in global terms.

                                                           21
         For the U.S., an environmentally motivated tax on imported oil could fall in this category" On

the other hand, it is difficult to make the case that the U.S. would enjoy teams of trade gains from a

(unilateral) carbon tax because this tax applies largely to coal, of which the U.S. is a net exporter..



C. A Common Theme

         A unifying theme emerges from these considerations. Although the above analysis reveals

circumstances in which the strong double dividend can occur, with one exception (the teams-of-trade case)

these circumstances involve an essential inefficiency in the existing tax system on non-environmental

dimensions. That is, the strong double dividend can arise only if the initial tax system involves

inefficiencies in the form of differences in the marginal excess burdens of various taxes. If the

environmental tax shifts the tax burden from factors associated with high MED's to factors with relatively

low MED's. it can thereby reduce the non-environmental inefficiencies of the tax system and (if this effect

is large enough) yield the strong double dividend. Thus, the strong double dividend presumes a need.

based on non-environmental considerations, for factor tax reform. It is reasonable to ask why these

inefficiencies cannot be addressed directly (through changes in factor tax rates) rather than through an

environmental tax. It seems more natural to address these inefficiencies directly as part of general tax

reform than indirectly as part of environmental policy.

        One qualification to this last remark might be offered: there may be political opposition to

reforms that directly alter the relative taxation of factors. Under these circumstances one could regard a

revenue-neutral environmental tax policy as a more feasible alternative to direct reforms which axe

politically less palatable. The empirical support for this political argument is far from clear. Even if there

were an empirical basis for the argument. or might feel uncomfortable rallying behind it since it

essentially exploits the inability of voters to recognize the true incidence of environmental taxes.




   "The analysis is made more complicated by the ex.isLence of the OPEC cartel and the imperftly competitive nature
of the world oil market.

                                                        22
IV. Numerical Findings
         This section presents some numerical results applicable to the double dividend issue. Here I

consider only the results that bear on the strong double dividend notion defined above: the issue under
investigation is the gross costs (non-environment-related welfare costs) of revenue-neutral tax swaps. As

mentioned earlier (see footnote 7) some other studies define reductions in unemployment or increased
profits as additional 'dividends' from green taxes. I do not report results from these studies here because

I do not have the information necessary to combine the reported changes in unemployment, profits, and

other economic variables into the more general welfare notion expressed by "gross costs."'
         Table 1 presents results from five numerical models. These are the Goulder and Jorgenson-
Wilcoxen intertemporal general equilibrium models of the U.S., the DPI and LINK econometric
macroeconomic models of the U.S., and the Shah-Larsen partial equilibrium model, which has been
applied to five countries, including the U.S.'4 The results in Table I are for the revenue-neutral
combination of an environmental tax (usually a carbon tax) and reduction in the personal income tax.
except in cases where this combination was not available. I have focussed on the case where revenues

are returned through cuts in the personal income tax because this tax seems "typical" and "representative;'

hence this case is relevant to the strong double dividend claim.

         All welfare changes are gross welfare changes: they abstract from changes in welfare associated
with improvements in environmental quality (reductions in greenhouse gas emissions), and thus they

correspond to the gross cost concqt discussed above. In the Goulder and Jorgenson-Wilcoxen models.
welfare changes are reported in terms of the equivalent variation; in the Shah-Larsen model, the changes




    "Nor do I consider the evidence for the weak double dividend notion. As mentioned earlier, there is virtually
 unanimous numerical support for this notion, so a weighing this evidence seems unnecessary.

     "For a more detailed description of these models. see Goulder (1994a), Jorgenson and Wilcoxen (1990, 1994).
 Shackleton eta!. (1992). and Shah and Larsen (1992). The Shah-Larsen model i by far the simplest of the five models.
 in part because iL takes pre-tax factor prices as given. Despite its simplicity, the model addresses interactions between
 commodity and factor markets and thus incorporates some of the major efficiency connections discussed earlier.

                                                            23
are based on the compensating vaiiation.4' In the DRI and LINK macroeconomic models, the percentage

change in aggregate real consumption substitutes for a utility-based welfare measure4B
         In most cases, the revenue-neutral green tax swap involves a reduction in welfare, that is. entails
positive gross costs. This militates against the strong double dividend claim. Results from the Jorgenson-

Wilcoxen model, however, support the strong double dividend nOtion.49 To what might the differences
in results be attributed?

         A thorough examination of the differences in structure of these models, and an extensive test of

how these differences account for differences in model outcomes, is beyond the scope of this paper.

However, one potential explanation lies in the differences between the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen and Goulder

models in the marginal excess burden of capital taxation!0 The interest elasticity of saving is higher in

the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model than in the Goulder model. In addition, the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model

assumes that capital is fully mobile across sectors, while the Goulder model includes adjusunent costs.

which limit the speed ax which capital can be reallocated and lower the elasticity of capital demand. Thus,

elasticities of capital supply and capital demand are higher in the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model;
correspondingly, the marginal excess burden of capital taxation is considerably higher in the Jorgenson-

Wilcoxen model than in the Goulder model, and the difference in the marginal excess burdens of capital




   "The equivalent variation is the lump-sum change in wealth which, under the 'busthesns-usual' or base case,
would leave the household as well off as in the policy-change case. Thus a positive equivalent variation indicates that
the policy is welfare-improving. The compensating variation is the lump-sum change in wealth which, in the policy-
change scenario, would cause the household to be as well off as in the base case. In reporting the Shah-Larsen results
I adopt the convention of multiplying the compensating variation by -I, so that a positive number in the table signifies
a welfare improvement here as well,

     "The demand functions in these models are not derived from an explicit utility function. Hence they do fbI yield
utility-based measures. A difficulty with using consumption as a proxy for weLfare is that it disregards welfare changes
linked to changes in leisure.

   01t might also be noted that the Shah-Larsen model yields negative gross costs for four of five countries in
simulations which combine a carbon tax arid reduction in the corporate income tax. (Such results do not appear in Table
I.) Only in the case of the U.S. is such a tax swap a gross-wetfare-reducing venture.

   '°Of the five models in Table 1, these two are the most similar and allow for the most straightforward comparisons.

                                                          24
and of labor is larger. In the Goulder model, the difference in MEWs per dollar is $O.lO;' the

difference in the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model appears to be considerably higher.52 As indicated in the

previous section. a large deviation in the MEB's on capital and labor taxes works in favor of the strong

double dividend (particularly if the burden of the environmental tax falls on labor). This helps explain

why, in the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model, a revenue-neutral combination of carbon tax and reduction in

capital tax involves negative gross costs (that is, a positive change in gross welfare). It is more difficult
to account for the fact that substituting a carbon tax for a labor tax involves negative gross costs in the

model.

         Table 1 also includes GNP impacts. These are included simply because they may be of interest.

As mentioned above, conceptually they bear no systematic relationship to welfare impacts. Indeed, in

some of the numerical simulations the GNP and welfare changes axe of opposite sign.

         Like the theoretical results, the numerical outcomes in Table I tend to weigh against the strong

double dividend claim. But there is less than perfect agreement among the numerical results. Divining

the sources of differences in results across models is difficult and frustrating, in large part because of the

lack of relevant information on simulation outcomes and parameters. Relatively few studies have

performed the type of analysis that exposes the channels underlying the overall impacts. There is a need

for more systematic sensitivity analysis, as well as closer investigations of how structural aspects of tax

policies (type of tax base, nanowness of tax base, uniformity of tax rates, etc.) influence the outcomes.

In addition, key behavioral parameters need to be reported. Serious attention to these issues will help

explain differences in results and, one hopes, lead to a greater consensus on likely policy impacts.




    Tbe MEB's per dollar are $0.22 and $0.12 for the tax on individual capital and individual labor income.
respectively.

   "This assumption is based on reported values in Jorgenson and Yun (1990). The Jorgcnson-Yun and Jcrgenson-
Wilcoxen models have some similarities in structure and parameters, but there are important differences as well.
Marginal excess burden numbers from the Jorgenson-Wilcoxen model were not yet available.

                                                      25
 V. Relationship to Optimal Environmental Taxation



A. The Optimai Tax Rate and the Strong Double Dividend Claim
         The previous discussions concerned the effects of 'incremental tax reforms. How do these issues

relate to the optimal levels of environmental taxes?

         The basic partial equilibrium analysis of the optimal environmental tax invokes the "Pigovian"
principle: the optimal environmental tax is at a rate equal to the marginal external costs, or marginal

environmental damages (MEn). This principle implicitly assumes that the gross marginal cost (or
marginal abatement cost) associated with an environmental tax is equal to the tax rate. Hence if the tax
is set equal to MED. gross costs and environmental benefits will be equated at the margin, assuring

optimality.53

         The foregoing discussion indicates, however, that in a second-best setting a given environmental

tax may give rise to marginal gross costs that differ from the tax rate. As indicated above, the revenue

replacement effect tends to reduce the gross costs; other things equal, it tends to imply a higher optimal
tax rate, that is. a rate above MED. On the other hand, the tax interaction effect tends to raise gross costs;

other things equal, it implies an optimal raze below MED. A central question underlying the strong notion

of double dividend is whether the revenue replacement effect is strong enough to outweigh the tax
interaction effect. The answer to this question also determines the relationship between the optimal tax

rate and MED in a second-best setting. The previous discussion indicated that, under plausible conditions.

the tax interaction effect is of greater magnitude than the revenue recycling effect. This implies that,
under these conditions, the optimal environmental tax rate is below the raze implied by the Pigovian rule.

         This result is supported by analytical work by Bovenberg and van derPloeg (1993b) and by Parry
(1994)!' From Bovenberg and van der Ploeg's analysis, in a second-beg setting the optimal


    "Assuming the appropriate second-order conditions apply.

    "The seminal conuibution in this area was by Sandmo (1975), who analyzed the optimal configuration of
commodity taxes when one of the commodities generates an extanality.
      Pany derives analytically the conditions wider which the tax interaction effect wiil be greater than the revenue
replacement effect. Conducting broad sensithity analysis, he Finds that under plausible parameter values the Lax

                                                         26
environmental tax rate. t. is given by:


            = MED I p


where p is the marginal cost of public funds." In their model, p exceeds unity if and only if the

uncompensated wage elasticity of labor supply is positive. This is precisely the condition that denies the

double dividend in its strong form.

         Bovcnberg and van der Ploeg offer the following intuition for their optimal tax formula.

Environmental quality can be viewed as a good which the public sector provides by obtaining public

revenues through the environmental tax. The higher the value of p. the more costly it is to provide

environmental quality. Thus, the higher is p. the lower the optimal amount of environmental quality and

the lower the value of t, other things equal.5'



interaction effect is of greater magnitude. Parry suggests that in the U.S. the optimal environmental tax rate is
"typically" between 60 and 90 percent of the ?.D.

     'tie marginal cost of public funds (MCPF) is the welfare cost of an incremental increase in government spending
financed by taxes. For an explication of this concept and its relationship to the notion of marginal excess burden, see
Ballard and Fullerton (1992). For an analysis of how agvegate activity influences the MCPF, see Ligthart and van der
Ploeg (1994). Brendemoen and Vennenio (1993) develop and assess numerically a broader notion of the MCPF that
includes the environmental benefits from public projects.

    The Bovenberg van der Ploeg formula may appear to contradict an optimality requirement articulated by Lee and
Misiolek (1986). In fact, the results are consistent. (For a close examinalion of this issue, see Schob (1994J.) The Lee-
Misiolek requirement for an optimal environmental tax is that the difference between marginal abatement costs and
marginal environmental benefits pa marginal dollar of revenues must equal the marginal excess burden of existing
distortionary taxes. This can be written as:

                                                 ___- °mr
where C(TE,to) is total abatement cost, B is total environmental benefit, R is revenue, A is the marginal excess burden
of other taxes, and t, and t0 are the rates of the environmental and existing distortionary tax. Note that C is a function
of both; and . If t0 is zero, A is ro and the equation above reduces to:

                                                     BC/3t5 c3B/
the Pigovian rule. Let t represent the tax rate that satisfies the above equation. Now consider the case where there
are pre-existing taxes Cr0 > 0). How does ;**, the optimum when other taxes an present, differ from ;? Oates
(1991) points out that the tax elasticity at the Pigovian optimum is relevant here. If the derivative aC/at, were
independent of t,. one could determine from this elasticity whether t," is greater or less than t,. Howevet as
discussed above, higher pre-existing taxes raise the value of 3C/?t, evaluated at a given levels of t,. This means that
in the presence of other taxes, a lower value of; may be required to satisfy the Lee-Misiotek requirement.

                                                           27
         These issues are highly relevant to considerations of the optimal carbon tax. Nordhaus (1993)

calculates the optimal carbon tax in the case where revenues are returned lump sum, and compares that

with the optimal tax when revenues are returned through cuts in distothonaiy taxes. In the former case.
the optimal tax begins at about $5 ixr ton, while in the latter case it begins at $59 per ton! This seems

to contradict the notion. indicated by the optimal tax formula above, that second-best considerations should

reduce the optimal tax rate. It turns out, however, that although Nordhaus's experiments attend to the

revenue-replacement effect, they do not capture the tax interaction effect because the model did not
include pie-existing taxes. Including pie-existing taxes in the benchmazt data would likely reverse the
Nordhaus results. In this connection, simulations by Bovenberg and Goulder (1994b) indicate that the
optimal carbon tax declines with the level      oF   pre-existing taxes.



B. Caveats                                                                                   -

         These   models indicate that in the presence of other taxes, the optimal environmental tax rate is
lower than MED. Although these results seem intuitive, they are no more compelling than the case against

the strong double dividend idea. To the extent that morn complex models might expand the possibilities

for a strong double dividend, they also offer scope for an optimal environmental tax above MED.

         It is also important to recognize that the optimal tax formulae by Bovenberg-van der Ploeg and
Parry assume that the optimal environgnentai tax is part of an optimal tax system. These formulae do not

address the constrained second-best problem: how best to establish environmental taxes when the rest of

the tax system is suboptimal. Much depends on how the rest of the system departs fivm optimality.
Simulation experiments by Bovenberg and Goulder (1994b) for the U.S. economy indicate that the
"suboptimality"3' of the U.S. tax system implies a constrained second-best optimal carbon tax which is

lower than that suggested by the Bovenberg-van dec Ploeg formula The intuition is that a given
environmental tax generates a larger gross cost in a suboptimal setting than in a setting where other taxes

axe set optimally.


    "The tax system is suboptimal in the sense that marginal gross efficiency costs of different taxes are not equal.
To the extent that the Lax system is meeting other objectives, this need not be suboptimal in a broader sense.

                                                          28
 C. "Is a Small Tax Efficiency-Improving?" and Related Theoretical Issues

          The cost-side-oriented discussion of the double dividend is driven by the broader question as to

 whether the substitution of environmentally motivated or "green" taxes for ordinary taxes might be a

 welfare-improving venture. It is important to recognize that the difficulty of substantiating the strong
 double dividend claim is not art indication that green tax swaps are ill-advised. Even if gross costs are

 positive, the environmental benefits could outweigh these costs, possibly by a substantialmargin.
          But in light of the uncertainties, are positive net benefits likely? There is a line of reasoning that

suggests that policymakers can be assured that benefits will exceed costs provided that the environmental

tax is sufficiently "small." The argument is that the gross costs of an incremental environmental lax (with

revenues devoted to reducing ordinary taxes) is inftnitesmal; in contrast, the gross benefits from an
incremental environmental tax are non-incremental. This argument prompts two questions: (I) Doesa
"small" environmental tax indeed have a "small" gross cost? Arid (2) If so, is this of practical value to
poticytnakers?

         A result 1mm Bovenberg and de Mooij (1992, 1993) is relevant to the first question. In their
framework, an incremental environmental tax, with revenues returned as a reduced labor tax, indeed has
a zero gross cost. When the environmental tax is small, it yields the same labor market distortion as the

labor tax it replaces, and the gross distortion in the commodity market is infinitesmal, Hence the overall
gross cost is zero. So long as the tax yields a non-incremental environmental benefit, it offers an overall

welfare improvement50

         However, the claim that a small tax yields an overall efficiency improvement may not apply in

more general circumstances such as the case where the initial tax system is highly inefficienL The issue

is an example of the general second-best tax problem investigated by Lipsey and Lancaster (1956),
Bertrand and Vanek (1971), Dixit (1975). and others: In a suboptimal tax system, under what
circumstances does introduction of a tax in one market that helps bring prices closer to marginal cost in


    "A similar result appears in Bovenberg and van der Ploeg (l993t). The authors begin with a situation where
households have no concern for environmental quality, and the tax system is optimized conditional on those preferences.
They then assume a shift in preferences: the emergence of a concern for environmental quality. It is shown thai. in
this new setting, raising a tax on the 'dirty' commlity improves welfare,

                                                          29
 that market yield an ovcrall efficiency improvement? Although a number of authors have shown
                                                                                                    particular
 conditions under which this will occur (see, for example, Dlxii [1975]), this cannot be
                                                                                           guaranteed for tax
 systems that simultaneously involve labor, capital, and commodity taxation. These notions are reinforced

 by results from simulations of a carbon tax by Bovertherg and Goulder (1994b) and
                                                                                   by Parry (1994). In
 these simulations, an incremental carbon tax has incremental gross costs when the initial tax situation is

 efficient in the sense that marginal excess burdens of taxes are equated.
                                                                           However, the incremental tax
involves large gross costs when the initial situation reflects inefficiencies of the U.S. tax system.

        This suggests that, in many cases, one cannot be assured that a small environmental tax will

produce small gross costs. Moreover, even if this were the case, the knowledge that gross costs will be
small seems to be of limited practical value. In my view,     it cannot substitute for information about the
magnitudes of environmental benefits. In the extreme case where analysts have virtually no infoimation
about the magnitudes of these benefits -- except perhaps that they are non-negative — one cannot tell how

small is small enough. No matter how small the tax, it's possible that the (small)gross costs exceed the

(even smaller) gross benefits. Although it is useful to know that incremental taxes produce negligible
costs, to be of practical value this knowledge needs to be coupled with information about benefits.

        This discussion was not meant to lead to pessimism. Rather, it was intended to serve the
constnjctive purpose of drawing attention to significant issues in policy evaluation.
                                                                                       The key implication
of this discussion is that in evaluating possible green tax swaps, information about environmental benefits
is indispensable, Much of the interest in the possibility of a double dividend was fueled by a hope that

benefits considerations could be pushed aside. This seems to have been a false hope. The benefits side
is critical, and further research to reduce the uncertainties about environmental benefits is likely to be of

great value to policy analysts.




VI. Summary and Conclusions
       This paper has articulated different senses of the potential "double dividend' from environmental

taxes and examined the theoretical and empirical support for each.

                                                    30
        The weakest double dividend claim is that returning tax revenues through cuts in distortionary

taxes leads to cost savings relative to the case where revenues are returned lump sum. This claim is easily

defended on theoretical grounds and (thankfully) receives wide support from numerical simulations

        The stronger versions contend that the costs of revenue-neutral swaps of environmental taxes for

ordinary distorlionazy taxes involve zero or negative gross costs. The strongest version affIrms that this
is typically the case. An intermediate version asserts that this is the case in at least one instance. The

existing theoretical analyses of this issue cast doubt on the strong double dividend claim. At the same

time, the theoretical case against the strong form is not air-tight. In simple models the strong version

would obtain if the uncornpensated wage elasticity of labor supply were negative. In more elaborate

models, it could arise if the initial tax system were highly inefficient in factor markets (leading to

significant differences across factors in marginal value products per dollar) and the environmental tax

served to shift the burden of taxes to more efficient (actors. These inefficiencies may offer more of a

justification For direct attention to these inefficiencies than for indirect approaches through a revenue-

neutral environmental tax.

        Although the evidence is mixed, numerical results tend to militate against the strong double

dividend claim. There is a need for more systematic numerical investigations of revenue-neutral

environmentally motivated tax policies. More extensive policy analyses and broader sensitivity analyses

would help identify the channels driving the results and reveal the sources of differences in model

outcomes. The extent to which the burden of environmentally motivated taxes is imposed on exhaustible

resources (and on resource rents) remains a very interesting empirical issue, and greater attention to this

issue in numerical models could generate important insights.

        The difficulty of establishing the strong double dividend does not contradict the common

numerical finding that an environmental tax can promote higher levels of national income when revenues

are earmarked for capital formation. National income is distinct ftom welfare, and the double dividend

notions (at least as defined here) concern welfare costs.

        The presence or absence of a strong double dividend is directly relevant to the issue of the optimal

environmental tax. In simpler models, the conditions under which the strong double dividend claim is

                                                     31
absent (present) are closely related to the conditions under which the second-best optimal environmental

tax is lower than (greater than) the marginal environmental damages. Existing analytical models, in

casting doubt on the strongest double dividend claim, also indicate that the optimal environmental tax is

lower than the rate suggested by the simple Pigovian rule.

        The keen interest in the double dividend -- particularly in its strong ftnm -- reflects the

uncertainties faced by policymakers concerning environmental benefits. The strong double dividend

notion, if true, would reduce significantly the amount of information that policymakers need to make a

benefit-cost case for green tax swaps. The difficulty of establishing the strong claim implies.
unfortunately, that assessing magnitudes of environmental benefits remains a crucial task in policy

evaluation. This conclusion cannot be dodged by appeals to the net benefits from "small" environmental

taxes. One never knows a priori how small is small enough, and, moreover, even small environmental

taxes may have "large" gross costs when the existing tax system is suboptimal (in some sense).

        The critical importance of attending to the environmental benefits may the most fundamental

message from this examination. Reseaich that helps establish the environmental benefits associated with

various environmental tax options will have considerable value to policy analysts. While reseaxth can

reduce the uncertainties, they will remain a basic fact of life in environmental policymaking. Policymakers

cannot afford to wait until circumstances permit riskless policy choices; they would wait forever. A better

approach is to recognize the uncertainties and endorse environmental tax reforms when the prospects for

gain make the risks worth taking.




                                                    32
References



Atkinson, Anthony B.. and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980. Lectures on Public Economics. New York:
McGraw-I-till.

Auerbach. Alan J., and Laurence .7. Kotlikoff, 1987. Dynamic Fiscal Policy. Cambridge. England:
Cambridge University Press.

Bailard, Charles L., and Don Fullerton. 1992. "Distortionary Taxes and the Provision of Public Goods.'
Journal of Economic Perspectives 6(3): 117-131.

Ballard, Charles L.. John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, 1985. "General Equilibrium Computations of the
Marginal Wellare Costs of Taxes in the U. 5? American Economic Review 75 (1), pp. 128-138.

Bertrand, T.J., and J. Vanek, 1971. "The Theory of Tariffs. Taxes, and Subsidies: Some Aspects of the
Second Best." American Economic Review 61:925-31.

Bovenberg. A. Lans, and Ruud A. de Mooij, 1992. "Environmental Taxation and Labor Market
Distortions." Working Paper, Ministry of Economic Affairs, The Hague, March.

___________         and                 .1993. "Environmental Levies and Distortlonary Taxation."
Working Paper. Tilburg University, September. (Forthcoming in American Economic Review.)

___________ and                          .1994. "Environmental Tax Reform and Endogenous Growth."
Working Paper. Tilburg University.

Bovenberg, A. Lans, and F. van der Ploeg, 1993a. "Consequences of Environmental Tax Reform for
Involuntary Unemployment and Welfare? Working Paper. Tilbuig University. September. (Forthcoming
in European Journal of Political Economy.)

____________ and ____________,1993b. "Environmental Policy. Public Finance and the Labour
Market in a Second-Best World? Working paper. Tilburg University, October. (Forthcoming in Journal
of Public Economics.)

___________ and ___________•             1994. "Green Policies in a Small Open Economy." CEPR
Discussion Paper No. 785. (Forthcoming in Scandinavian Journal of Economics.)

Bovenberg. A. Lans, and Lawrence H. Goulder, 1994a. "Integrating Environmental and Distortionaiy
Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses." Working Paper. Stanford University, Mardi.

___________         and   ___________,1994b. "Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of
Other Taxes: An Applied General Equilibrium Analysis." Working Paper, Stanfoixi University. May.

Brendemoen, Anne. and Haakon Vennemo, 1993. "The Marginal Cost of Funds in the Presence of
External Effects." Discussion Paper No. 99, Reserach Department, Central Bureau of Statistics. Norway.
August.


                                                  33
Carraro, Carlo. Marzio Geleotti. and Massimo Gallo, 1994. 'Environmental Taxation and Unemployment:
Some Evidence on the Double Dividend Hypothesis in Europe." Working Paper, GRETA Econometrics,
May.

Dasgupta. Partha S. and Geoffrey M. Heal. 1979. Economic Theory and Exhaustible Resources.
Cambridge. England: Cambridge University Press.

Deazon, Angus, 1987. "Econometric Issues for Tax Design in Developing Countries." In David Newbery
and     Nitholas Stem. eds., The Theory of Taxation for Developing Cowuries. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Diamond, Peter, and J. Mirrlees, 1971. "Optimal Taxation and Public Production 1: Production Efficiency
                                                                                        -
and 11: Tax Rules," American Economic Review 61.

Dixit, Avina.sh, 1975. "Welfare Effects of Tax and Price Changes." Journal of Public Economics 4(2):
103-23.

Gaskins, Darius and John Weyant, 1994. The Costs of Controlling Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, forthcoming.

Goulder, Lawrence H., 1994a.. "Effects of Carbon Taxes in an Economy with Prior Tax Distortions: An
Intertemporal General Equilibrium Analysis." Working Paper. Stanford University. July. (Forthcoming
in Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.)

____________        1994b.    "Energy Taxes:      Traditional Efficiency Effects and Environmental
Implications." In James M. Poterba, ed.. Tax Policy and the Economy 8. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
June.

Hausman, Jerty A.. 1985. "Taxes and Labor Supply." In AL Auerbach and Martin S. Feldstein, eds..
Handbook of Public Economics, Vol. 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Jorgenson, Dale W. and Peter J. Wilcoxen, 1990. "Environmental Regulation and U.S. Economic
Growth." The Rand Journal of Economics 21(2), 314-340.

__________,and __________,1994. "Reducing U.S. Carbon Emissions: An Econometric
General Equilibrium Assessment" In Darius Gaskins and John Weyant (eds.). Th. Costs of Controlling
Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, forthcoming.

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Kun-Young Yin, 1990. Tax Policy and the Cost of Capital. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Kneese, Allen V.. and Blair T. Bower, 1968. Managing Water Quality: Economics, Technology.
Institutions. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press.

Ligthan, Jenny E., and Frederick van der Ploeg, 1994. "Pollution, the Cost of Public Funds and
Endogenous Growth? Working Paper. University of Amsterdam. October. (Forthcoming in Economic
Letters.)


                                                  34
Lee, Dwight R., and Waiter S. Misiolek, 1986. "Substituting Pollution Taxation for General Taxation:
Some Implications lot Efficiency in Pollution Taxation.' Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management 13:338-347.

Lipsey. R. 0., and K. Lancaster1 1956. 'The General Theory of the Second BesL" Review of Economic
Studies 24:11-32.

Nichols. Albert L., 1984. Targeting Economic incentives for Environmental Protection. Cambridge.
Mass,: MIT Press.

Nielsen, Soren B., Lam H. Pedersen, and Peter B. Sorensen, 1994. "Green Tax Reform, Unemployment.
and Endogenous Growth." Working Paper, Copenhagen Business School.

Nordhaus, William D.. 1993. "Optimal Greenhouse-Gas Reductions and Tax Policy in the 'DICE'
Model." American Economic Review 83(2) (Papers and Proceedings), pp. 313-317.

Oates, Wallace E.. 1991. "Pollution Charges as a Source of Public Revenues." Resources for the Future
Discussion Paper QE92-05. Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.. November.

OECD. 1992. The Economic Costs of Reducing CO2 Emissions. OECD Economic Studies 19, Paris.

Parry, Ian W.H., 1994. "Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling." Working Paper. Economic Research
Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, April.

Pearce, David W., 1991. 'The Role of Carbon Taxes in Adjusting to Global Warming." Economic
Journal 101, pp. 938-948.

Pezzey. John. 1992. 'Some Interactions between Environmental Policy and Public F'rnance? Working
Paper. University of Bristol. June.

Pigou, A. C., 1938. The Economics of Welfare, Fourth Edition. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.

Poterba, James M., 1991. '7ax Policy to Combat Global Warming: On Designing a Carbon Tax." In
Rudiger Dombusch and James ?t Poterba, eds., Global Warming Economic Policy Responses.
Cambridge,   MA: MIT Press,

_____________       1993.   "Global Warming: A Public Finance Perspective." Journal of Economic
Perspectives 7(4). 47-63.

Repetto, Robert. Roger C. Dower, Robin Jenkins, and Jacqueline Geoghegan, 1992. GreenFees: How
a Tax Shift Can Work for she Environment and the Economy. World Resources Institute, November.

Sandmo, Agnar. 1975. "Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities." SwedishJournal of Economics
77.

Schob, Ronnie, 1994. "Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation: Environmental View vs. Public
Finance View. Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of Munich. June.


                                                 35
Shackleton, Robert, Michael Shelby, Alex Cristolaro. Roger Brinner, Joyce Yanchar, Lawrence Goulder,
Dale Jorgenson. Peter Wilcoxen, and Peter Pauly. 1992. "The Efficiency Value of Carbon Tax Revenues.'
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. November 5 draft manuscript.

Shah, Anwar, and Bjom Larsen, 1992. "Carbon Taxes, the Greenhouse Effect and Developing Countries."
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 957. The World Bank, Washington. D.C.

Sweeney. James L., 1977. "Economics of Depletable Resources: Market Forces and lntertemporal Bias."
The Review of Economic Studies 44:125-42.

______________ 1993. "Economic Theory of Depletable Resources: An Introduction." In Allen V.
Kneese and James L. Sweeney, eds., Handbook of Natural Resource and Energy Economics, Vol. 3. New
York: North Holland.

Terkla, David. 1984. 'The Efficiency Value of Effluent Tax Revenues." Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 11:107-23.

Tullock, Gordon. 1967. "Excess Benefit" In Water Resources Research 3, pp. 643-4.




                                                36
      Figure I




                 MC a


MED

 I               MC




                        coai
                    Figure 2




                      En uUnncn cffn


         I                     I             I     gross


    Iu-I*a rt &1asyata —
0                                                  costs
                                       El.
    no r-aiaSs ta
                                                 ___
                                                          Table I
                                            Coaparative Maaricaj Results

                                                                                                  Results
                                                                                       Welfare           Pct. Change
                                                                                       Change            in Real aN?

                                                lYpe of                Form of
                                             Environmental            Revenue                         pci.   I
Model         Reference                                                                                           pd. 21
                                 Cotintn'         Tax               Replacement

DRI           Shackleton          U.S.       Phased-in              PersQnaj Tax
              et aZ.    (1992)               Carbon Tar'            Cut                  -0.39'       -0.00       -0.76
Goulder       Goulder (l994a)     U.S.       $25/ton                Personal Tax
                                             Carbon Tax             Cut                  -0.3r        -0.15       -0.22
              Goulder    (1994b) U.S.        Fossil Fuel            Personal Tax
                                             iltu   Tax             Cut                  -0.28"       -0.09       -018
Jorgenson-    Shackleton          U.S.       Phased-in              Labor Tax
Wilco.xe.n    et al.    (1992)               Carbon Tar'            Cut                   I.01'        0.03       -0.41
                a
                                                                    Capital Tax
                                                                    Cut                   0.19d        0.20        0.95
LINK          Shackleton          U.S.       Phased-in              Personal Tax
              et al.    (1992)               Carbon    Tat      Cut                      _0.51b        0.00       -0.35
Shah-         Shah and            U.S.       $10/ton            Personal Tax
Larsen       Larsen (1992)                    .                 Cut
  -                                                                                    -1049.         -0.020'
  •             1
                                 India                                                    129.         0.060
  •                              Indonesia                                                 -4.        -0.005
  •
                                 Japan                                                   269.         -0.008
                                 Pakistan                                                -23.         -0.070


Notes; (a) Beginning at $15/ton in 1990 (period 1), growing at five percent annually Co $39.80
                                                                                                         per con in :olu
(perIod 21), and remaining at that level thereafter.       (b) Percentage change in the Present vdiue of conswrquj.,,j-
the yodel does not allow for utility-based welfare pleasures.        (C) Welfare cost vet do) Idr of tax revenue. as
measured by the equivalent variation.     Id) Equivalent variation as a percentage ot tmnclanark
                                                                                                   pzJvar.. wealth.  f.)
Co.rpensatjng  variation in levels (millions   of U.S. do) jars).    If)
                                                                       Percentage change.in 4tt't (nut (2Q11.    un;is
one-period  giodel.
