                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SPECULATIVE ATI'ACKS ON PEGGED
                          EXCHANGE RATES: AN EMPIRICAL
                            EXPLORATION WiTH SPECIAL
                           REFERENCE TO THE EUROPEAN
                               MONETARY SYSTEM




                                      Barry Eichengreen
                                       Andrew K. Rose
                                       Charles Wyplosz




                                   Working Paper No. 4898



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   October 1994


We thank Florence Beranger and Lisa Ortiz for research assistance, and Matthew Canzoneri,
Robert Cumby, Robert Flood, and Jeffrey Frankel, Peter Garber, Alberto Giovannini, Vittorio
Grilli, Assar Lindbeck, Torsten Persson, Jean Pisani-Feriy, Nouriel Roubini, Lars Svensson, Axe!
Weber, and seminar participants at UC Berkeley, ESSIM, 11ES, the French Ministry of Finance,
the Kiel Institute for World Economics, and the Conference on the New TransAtlantic Economy
for comments. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in International Finance and
Macroeconomics and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Barry Eichengreen, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4898
                                                                               October 1994

                          SPECULATIVE ATTACKS ON PEGGED
                           EXCHANGE RATES: AN EMPIRICAL
                             EXPLORATION WITH SPECIAL
                            REFERENCE TO THE EUROPEAN
                                MONETARY SYSTEM


                                         ABSTRACT

       This paper presents an empirical analysis of speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates

in 22 countries between 1967 and 1992. We define speculative attacks or crises as large

movements in exchange rates, interest rates, and international reserves. We develop stylized facts

concerning the univariate behavior of a variety of macroeconomic variables, comparing crises

with periods of tranquility. For ERM observations we cannot reject the null hypothesis that there

are few significant differences in the behavior of key macroeconomic variables between crises

and non-crisis periods. This null can be decisively rejected for non-ERM observations, however.

Precisely the opposite pattern is evident in the behavior of actual realignments and changes in

exchange rate regimes. We attempt to tie these findings to the theoretical literature on balance

of payments crises.


Bany Eichengreen                                    Andrew K. Rose
Department of Economics                             School of Business
University of California, Berkeley                  University of California, Berkeley
603 Evans Hall                                      350 Barrows Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720                                  Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER                                            and NBER

Charles Wyplosz
INSEAD
Boulevard de Constance
77305 Fontainebleau
FRANCE
I, Introduction

       Epidemiologists study epidemics as a way of understanding the everday transmission

of infectious disease. In similar fashion, international economists can study currency crises

as a way of understanding the determinants of exchange rates and international capital flows.

It is surprising in this light that we do not possess a body of studies that establish stylized

facts about the behavior of macroeconomic variables around the time of speculative attacks.

Our goal in this paper is to begin the process of identifying such regularities. We ask

questions like the following. Are there differences the the behavior of key macroeconomic

variables prior to speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates compared to other periods?

Does the behavior of these key variables change in the aftermath of speculative attacks? Do

answers to these questions differ in the different times and places in which exchange rates are

pegged? Do they differ for ERM and non-ERM currencies, in particular?

        Our findings are different for the ERM and non-ERM subsamples. For the non-ERM

subsample we find significant differences in the behavior of budget deficits, inflation rates,

rates of credit growth, and trade balances when comparing periods preceding speculative

attacks and control-group observations. These differences are consistent with the predictions

of early contributions to the speculative attack literature -- what we call "first-generation"

models — like those of Krugman (1979) and Flood and C3arber (1984a).' For the ERM

subsample, in contrast, there is a striking lack of differences. The behavior of reserves and

possibly also interest rates differs between periods of crisis and tranquility; this is not

surprising, however, since these are two of the variables on whose basis we categorize

episodes as speculative crises. But the only other variables whose behavior differs

significantly between crises and non-crises in the ERM subsample are money growth and
inflation, and the direction of their effects is the opposite of those predicted by first-

generation models. For the ERM subsample, then, key macroeconomic and financial

variables to which first-generation crisis models direct attention do not behave as predicted.

       An alternative interpretation of ERM crises is based on second-generation models of

self-fulfilling speculative attacks and multiple equilibria in foreign exchange markets, in

which policy shifts in a more expansionary direction in response to the attack (Flood and

Garber 1984b, Obstfeld 1986). For the ERM subsample, we find little evidence of this

pattern. Thus, while our findings cast doubt on the relevance of first-generation models for

our ERM episodes of speculative crisis, they do not establish that second-generation models

of self-fulfilling attacks necessarily fit the facts.

        It is important here to note a problem of observational equivalence.2 While the

absence of differences in monetary and fiscal variables in periods leading up to speculative

attacks and other periods is consistent with models of multiple equilibria, it is also consistent

with a restrictive class of models with unique equilibria. Models like those of Flood and

Garber (1984b) and Obstfeld (1986) generate multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling crises

because they assume a contingent policy process in which policy shifts only in the event of

an attack. One can also imagine a model in which policy is expected to shift in a more

expansionary direction with certainty; the shift is not contingent. Anticipating that

eventuality, speculators may attack the currency just before the policy shift is observed. This

is a model with a unique equilibrium ii which the speculative attack is motivated by

imbalances in underlying fundamentals, but those imbalances only become evident after the

attack. Thus, our results for the ERM, which fall to detect distinctive behavior on the part


                                                   2
of key macroeconomic variables in the period leading up to speculative attacks, are still

consistent with first-generation models, but only with a restrictive sub-class in which no hint

of future policy imbalances is contained in past and current policy. But the fact that we find

little evidence of a shift in policy in more expansionary directions in the aftermath of

speculative attacks is difficult to reconcile this view.

         A final important finding is that the behavior of macroeconomic variables differs

significantly around the time of speculative attacks on the one hand and realignments and

changes in exchange rate regimes on the other. ERM countries undergoing realignments

have significantly higher inflation rates, interest rates, rates of money and credit growth and

budget deficits, and their trade balances are significantly weaker. None of these statements

is true about the events associated with realignments of non-ERM currencies or with the

collapse of the Bretton Woods, Smithsonian, or Narrow Margin regimes of pegged exchange

rates.

          Our investigation has obvious relevance to current policy concerns. 1992 and 1993

  saw a series of speculative attacks on European currencies that drove the Italian lira and

  the British pound out of the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary

  System (EMS) and challenged the viability of the Maastricht blueprint for European

  Monetary Unification (EMU). There remains considerable dispute over why these crises

  occurred. One view emphasizes the unsustainable policy stances of weak-currency

  countries (Dombusch 1993, Committee of Central Bank Governors 1993a,b, Williamson

  1993, Goldstein and Mussa 1994). It blames EMS members whose currencies were

  attacked for courting danger by their pursuit of lax monetary and fiscal policies and by


                                                  3
failing to adjust their exchange rates in timely fashion. Accommodating policies and

excessive wage and price inflation are said to have led to a loss of international

competitiveness, a current account deficit, and a profitability squeeze that left overvalued

currencies "ripe for the picking." Another view observes that, for several countries

concerned, the evidence of lax policies is far from compelling (Eichengreen and Wyplosz

1993, Portes 1993, Rose and Svensson 1993, Obstfeld 1994). Several ERM countries

displayed little evidence of excessive inflation, accommodating policies, or mounting

competitive difficulties prior to their currency crises. In this view, the speculative attacks

which forced them to raise interest rates created incipient macroeconomic imbalances

rather than the other way around and more generally increased the cost of defending the

prevailing currency pegs. If the first view is correct, then it may be possible to complete

Stage II of the transition to monetary union as sketched in the Maastricht Treaty by

returning to the narrow bands of the pre-1993 EMS as soon as Europe's recession ends

and policy convergence is restored. But if the second one is accurate, efforts to restore

narrow bands may prove futile regardless of the current stance of macroeconomic policies.

       In addition, the fiftieth anniversary of the Bretton Woods Agreement, combined

with dissastisfaction about the performance of freely fluctuating exchange rates, has

reinitiated discussion of international monetary reforms intended to enhance exchange rate

stability. In periods when foreign exchange markets are tranquil, it has become customary

to argue that exchange rates can be pegged within narrow bands if there is sufficient

convergence of national macroeconomic policies. In turbulent periods, in contrast,

observers display deep skepticism about whether policymakers will be able to resist


                                              4
market pressures regardless of the policies they are currently pursuing. In today's world

of high capital mobility, in other words, it may not be possible to restore narrow exchange

rate bands along the lines of the Bretton Woods System regardless of the stance of

macroeconomic policies. Our attempt to understand whether speculative attacks on

pegged exchange rates are necessarily prompted by the inadequate convergence of national

policies or whether such attacks can occur even in the absence of policy imbalances has

obvious relevance to transatlantic blueprints for international monetary reform.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II elaborates the

alternative theoretical models in more detail. Section III describes the data and procedures

used to analyze the empii-ics of speculative attacks. Section IV enumerates the speculative

episodes generated by our procedures and contrasts them with informal discussions of

balance-of-payments crises.3 We make special reference to ERM members, since their's

is the experience around which much recent discussion revolves. Section V reports

univariate characterizations of the behavior of key variables around the time of speculative

attacks along with comparisons to control groups, and asks whether the attack and non-

attack cases are drawn from the same underlying distributions. Section VI draws out the

implications of this empirical work for efforts to interpret speculative attacks in terms of

theoretical models.



11. Theoretical Models. Empirical Implications

        A. A Review of the Literature

       The first generation of balance-of-payments crisis models spawned a large


                                              5
literature that is difficult to catalog comprehensively. Our selective survey focuses on

contributions with empirical implications.

       Krugman's seminal article assumed that an exogenous government budget deficit

lay at the root of the balance-of-payments crisis. Excessively expansionary fiscal policy

(or, equivalently, in Krugman's otherwise stationary economy, any budget deficit) is

financed by issuing domestic credit. The authorities announce that they are prepared to

peg the exchange rate until reserves reach a specified lower bound (for present purposes,

zero), at which point they shift to floating. With the government pegging the relative rate

of return on domestic- and foreign-currency-denominated assets (in Knigman's model, the

exchange rate), investors wish to hold domestic and foreign assets in fixed proportions.

They rebalance their portfolios by exchanging some of the additional domestic assets for

foreign exchange reserves of the central bank. Since they exchange only a portion of the

incremental supply (portfolio proportions remaining constant), the shadow exchange rate,

which will prevail in the event that the pegging policy is abandoned, depreciates gradually

over time.4 When it first equals the current exchange rate, investors attack the peg,

depleting the authorities' remaining reserves, for to do otherwise would make available

arbitrage profits and imply market inefficiency.

          The empirical implication of the model, then, is that one should observe

expansionary fiscal and monetary policies prior to speculative attacks. Those policies

should be accompanied by a gradual decline in international reserves over an extended

period.

          While Krugman assumes purchasing power parity, it is straightforward to extend


                                               6
his model to a semi-small country setting so that a shift to more expansionary fiscal

policies increases the demand for domestic goods, driving up their price and leading to

real exchange rate appreciation in the period leading up to the attack. Goldberg (1988),

for example, relaxed the purchasing power parity assumption maintained by Krugman and

Flood and Garber (l984a). If it is assumed that domestic prices adjust only gradually in

response to excess demand, they begin rising as soon as agents recognize that the

exchange rate will be changed subsequently. The stickier prices, the longer the period

prior to the collapse over which real appreciation will be observed.

       In models with forward-looking wage contracts (Willman 1988), anticipated future

price increases due to currency depreciation affect current wages. As a result, wages

should start rising before the attack occurs. While the real interest rate falls as the price

level rises, stimulating output, the real exchange rate strengthens, shifting demand toward

imports and depressing output. If output is demand determined -- it depends positively on

the real exchange rate but negatively on the real interest rate -- then the behavior of output

in the period leading up to the crisis is theoretically ambiguous. If the trade balance

depends negatively on the real exchange rate (as domestic prices rise, demand shifts

toward foreign goods) and negatively on output, the deficit should grow in the period

 leading up to an attack unless a sufficiently large fall in output is observed.

        Other research has focused on modifying Krugman's assumptions regarding the

 money supply process, the post-attack regime, and the degree of capital mobility. In

 many of the successful attacks we analyze below, countries did not permanently shift to

 floating but instead re-pegged the exchange rate at a depreciated level, sometimes


                                                7
following a limited period of floating. Wyplosz (1986) analyzes devaluations in the

presence of capital controls which limit the degree of capital mobility. The more stringent

the controls, the longer the pre-attack period over which the standard correlates of

speculative crises -- fiscal deficits, domestic credit creation, real appreciation and trade

deficits -- will persist. With sufficiently stringent controls, collapses of the peg can be

averted; devaluations from one peg to another become possible. With permeable controls,

crises are still possible: Obstfeld (1984) shows that crises occur earlier the larger the

anticipated devaluation,

       Flood and Garber (1984a) mtroduce uncertainty about the rate of domestic credit

creation. In their discrete-time formulation, unanticipated increases in domestic credit can

cause the shadow exchange rate to exceed the pegged rate temporarily. Now speculators

attack the peg as soon as this situation makes available arbitrage profits. But as domestic

credit grows, an attack becomes increasingly likely, widening the differential between

domestic and foreign interest rates. This should be accompanied by a growing forward

discount on the domestic currency. Finally, the greater the uncertainty about the central

bank's credit policy, the faster reserves should be depleted. The larger the variance of the

process governing domestic credit creation, the greater the probability of a regime shift,

so that reserve losses exceed increases in domestic credit (Claessens 1991).

        To recapitulate, variants of the Krugman-Flood-Garber model have strong

implications for the behavior of macroeconomic arid financial variables in the period

leading up to a crisis. They predict that speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates

 should be preceded by growing budget deficits and accelerating rates of monetization or


                                                8
comparatively fast money growth, and rising wages and prices. Real exchange rates

should become increasingly overvalued, and trade deficits should widen. International

reserves should decline, domestic interest rates should rise, and forward exchange rates

should weaken before the crisis occurs.

       The second generation of speculative attack models has different empirical

implications. Flood and Garber (1984b) and Obstfeld (1986) were first to formalize the

possibility of self-fulfilling speculative attacks. In their models, multiple equilibria exist

in the foreign exchange market because of the contingent nature of the authorities' policy

rule. In the absence of an attack, monetary and fiscal policies are in balance, and

nothing prevents the indefinite maintenance of the currently prevailing currency peg.

There is no reason to anticipate the empirical trends described in the preceding paragraph

in the period leading up to the attack. If and only   if attacked, however, the authorities
switch to more accommodating policies consistent with a lower level for the exchange

rate.6 In this setting, speculative attacks can be self-fulfilling. But there is no reason to

anticipate adverse trends in monetary and fiscal policies, wages and prices, reserves or the

trade balance prior to the attack. That this is more than a purely theoretical possibility is

suggested by the following comment by a well-known market participant.



        "A change in the exchange rate has the capacity to affect the so-called

        fundamentals which are supposed to determine exchange rates, such as the rate of

        inflation in the countries concerned; so that any divergence from a theoretical

        equilibrium has the capacity to validate itself. This self validating capacity


                                                9
         encourages trend-following speculation, and trend-following speculation generates

         divergences from whatever may be considered the theoretical equilibrium. The

         circular reasoning is complete."7



         Early second-generation models were predicated on the ad hoc assumption of a

contingent policy rule. Subsequent contributions derived the policy process from the

optimizing behavior of governments. Ozkan and Sutherland (1994) postulated a tradeoff

between the interest rate and the level of unemployment, where the interest rate depended

on the exogenously given foreign rate and the exchange rate regime. They showed that

high and rising unemployment might lead the government to abandon the peg,

anticipations of which could lead to an immediate attack. It is easy to see how this model

can generate self-fulfilling attacks: if defense against an attack requires the authorities to

raise interest rates relative to world levels and their action further exacerbates

unemployment, multiple equilibria can arise.1 This formulation implies rising

unemployment in the period leading up to the attack, unlike the Wiliman version of

Krugman's model, where the direction of pre-attack output and unemployment trends is

ambiguous. Like the Krugman model augmented by risk premia, it predicts rising interest

rates.

         Thus, simple variants of alternative models generate rather different predictions for

the period leading up to an attack. First-generation models predicts expansionary fiscal

policies and/or rapid growth of money and credit, increasingly overvalued exchange rates,

and a steady drain of reserves. According to second generation models, in contrast, none



                                               10
of these patterns will necessarily be visible in the period leading up to the attack. First-

generation models do not predict any particular shift in the stance of monetary and fiscal

policy following the attack. Most second-generation models, in contrast, suggest that

rational self-fulfilling attacks should be followed by a shift in monetary and fiscal policies

in a more expansionary direction (although there are exceptions, e.g., Bensaid and Jeanne

l994).
         B. Previous Empirical Studies

       There exists only a handful of studies seeking to apply theoretical models of

speculative attacks to actual experience with pegged exchange rates. Apparently the first

such paper is Blanco and Garber (1986), who used a variant of the Krugman-Flood-Garber

model to predict the timing and magnitude of devaluations forced by speculative attacks

on the Mexican peso between 1973 and 1982.10 Blanco and (3arber examine whether the

model explains the timing of the devaluations that took place in 1976 and 1982 using a

standard money demand function and a first-order autoregressive function for the rate of

growth of domestic credit)' International reserves decline as a function of the difference

 between money supply and money demand, until the critical level is reached at which the

 speculative attack occurs. They pick the value for that threshold which minimizes the

 residual sum of squares subject to the constraint that the exchange rate that prevails

 following the attack is consistent with the post-attack level of domestic credit.

 Information from the forward market, in conjunction with the assumption of no risk

 premium, is used to proxy for the expected future exchange rate.

         Cumby and van Wijnbergen (1989) take a similar approach to analyzing attacks on


                                               11
the Argentine crawling peg of the early 1980s. Where Blanco and Garber combined all

money supply and money demand factors into a single variable and fit a stochastic process

to it, Cumby and van Wijnbergen estimate different time series processes for the money

demand disturbance, the foreign interest rate and domestic credit growth. They treat the

level of reserves at which the central bank abandons its currency peg as a stochastic

variable. They find that a sharp increase in the growth of domestic credit was the main

factor triggering the attack on the currency.

       These studies provide only limited information on the extent to which the

predictions of the theoretical literature fit the facts. Typically, they are predicated on the

predictions of the first-generation (Krugman) model and do not specify an alternative

hypothesis or class of models against which those predictions might be contrasted. They

focus on a particular country at a point in time, which raises questions — for those seeking

to assess the general explanatory power of the models -- about the representativeness of

that episode. Further light on the explanatory power of these theories can be shed only by

analyzing a comprehensive set of crisis episodes and contrasting the behavior of the

relevant variables in these periods with their behavior during non-crisis episodes.

        Studies which do not build directly on the theoretical literature on speculative

attacks come closest to what we have in mind. Klein and Marion (1994) use panel data

for 16 Latin American countries and Jamaica during the period 1957-1991 to study the

determinants of the duration of exchange rate pegs. In their model, the timing of the

peg's collapse is determined not by speculative anticipations but by the decisions of an

optimizing government which trades off the economic costs of misalignment against the


                                                12
political costs of modifying the exchange rate. They justify this emphasis by referring to

the prevalence of capital controls which limit the scope for adverse speculation in the

countries in question. Nonetheless, their results are broadly consistent with those of the

speculative attack literature. They find that the probability of a pegged rate being

abandoned increases with the extent of real overvaluation and that it declines with the

level of foreign assets.'2 The limitations of this study are that it focuses on semi-

industrialized economies rather than the industrial countries that are our concern here, and

that capital controls were prevalent throughout the sample, in contrast to the situation in,

say, Europe in the 1990s.

        Similarly, Edwards (1993, 1989) examines devaluation episodes in developing

countries between 1948 and 1971 and 1962 and 1982, respectively.13 The behavior of

macroeconomic variables in cases where devaluation occurred is compared with that of a

no-devaluation control group. Edwards finds that in the period preceding a devaluation

the foreign assets of the central bank typically decline, the real exchange rate becomes

overvalued, and fiscal policy becomes excessively expansionary. Besides the fact that

 Edwards is concerned with developing rather than industrial countries, a limitation of his

 studies for present purposes is that he compares devaluation and no-devaluation episodes,

 not attack and non-attack episodes.



 HI. The Empirics of Speculative Attacks

        A. Indicators of Speculative Pressure

        A first step in any empirical analysis is identifying speculative attacks. We seek to


                                               13
do so in ways that minimize the danger of finding patterns purely as a consequence of the

manner in which we generate the sample of attack episodes. Were we to limit our

attention to successful speculative attacks in which the exchange rate peg or regime was

altered (with the currency being devalued or floated), for example, our results would

suffer from selectivity bias insofar as some attacks have been warded off by central banks

and governments and successful and unsuccessful attacks differ from one another in

nonrandom ways.

       The obvious solution to this problem is to construct an index of speculative

pressure which picks up both successful and unsuccessful attacks.'4 Ideally, such an

index would derive the excess demand for foreign exchange from a model of exchange

rate determination (from which the policy actions needed to maintain the exchange rate

peg could also be derived). Unfortunately, much research (Meese and Rogoff 1983 is a

classic early reference) has underscored the inadequacy of models linking variables like

reserve flows and interest rates to the exchange rate. A particular set of weights and

fundamentals is only as defensible as the theoretical model used to generate it.

       Theory provides a way around this problem only if one is willing to adopt strong

assumptions about linkages between exchange rates and macroeconomic fundamentals. To

illustrate, consider the model underlying the Girton and Roper (1977) index of exchange-

market pressure. Assuming a textbook money demand function, Girton and Roper specify

the percentage change in base money h as a function of the percentage change in the price

level p, the percentage change in real income y and the percentage change in interest rates

i. Since base money is the sum of domestic credit D and international reserves R, we can


                                             14
define r = ER/H and d = D/H, where E is the domestic price of a unit of foreign

exchange. Thus,



       (rr*) + (d_d*)       (p_p*) + $(yy*)   - a(jj*)                       (1)



where asterisks denote the foreign country, and     (cr) is   the income (interest-rate semi-)

elasticity for money demand.

       Using purchasing power parity to substitute the rate of depreciation for the

inflation differential, and rearranging terms, we can derive:



       e + (i_i*) - (rr*) = (d_d*) - (y..y*) +(1+a)(i_i*)                     (2)



       The left-hand side of (2) is an index of speculative pressure, which says that

pressure increases as domestic reserves of foreign exchange decline, as interest rates rise,

and as the exchange rate depreciates (e, the log of the exchange rate, rises). The

theoretical underpinnings suggest that speculative pressure should be a parametric function

of fundamentals such as the rate of growth of domestic credit, the level of income, and

the interest rate differential.

       There are obvious problems with this approach. First, even within the confines of

 the model the weights attached to the three components of the index of speculative

 pressure are arbitrary, since terms can simply be added to both sides of (2). Thus, even

 imposing assumptions about what determines the value of the exchange rate does not pin


                                               15
down the weights attached to the components of the index or point to a specific list of

fundamentals.

       In addition, there is the fact that any such formulation is predicated on a model

linking fundamentals to the exchange rate, and thereby to variables like interest rates and

international reserves that can be employed in its defense. We have utilized a monetary

model to illustrate how indices of speculative pressure might be derived. So long as we

are unable to build reasonable empirical models linking macroeconomic fundamentals to

the exchange rate, however, we will be incapable of using such models to link the

exchange rate to instruments like interest rates and reserves that can be used to defend it

or to derive weights to be attached to the components of an index of speculative pressure

in a defensible way. To avoid predicating our analysis on a particular model of exchange

rate determination, we consider a number of different weighting schemes in the analysis

that follows.'5

       A further problem with measuring speculative pressure using linear combinations

of exchange rate, reserve, and interest rate changes is created by the fact that, in our

sample of countries and periods at least, the conditional volatility of percentage changes in

reserves (scaled by the monetary base) is several times the conditional volatility of the

percentage change in the exchange rate, which is several times the percentage change in

the interest differential. Movements in an unweighted average are therefore heavily

driven by reserve movements rather than, say, actual realignments. An intuitive if

arbitrary approach is therefore to weight the three components of the index so that their

conditional volatilities are equal.'6 This is the measure we consider below. We conduct



                                              16
sensitivity analysis in order to gauge how much different weighting schemes matter.
        B.

        We assembled monthly data from 1967 through 1992 for twenty-two (mostly

OECD) countries. The countries were chosen on the basis of data availability and include

(in order of IMF country number) the USA, UK, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France,

Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, Japan, Finland, Greece,

Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Australia, South Africa, India, and Korea, along with our center

country, Germany. The data are drawn from the cd-rom version of 1,uernational

Financial Statistics. We compute changes in the exchange rate relative to the DM and

changes in interest rates and international reserves relative to those of Germany.'7

       We use the following variables: short-term money market interest rates (IFS line

60b), internationaj reserves (line 11) corrected for international liabilities (line 16c)

wherever possible, the ratio of the central government budget position (line 80) to nominal

GDP (typically line 99a), the real effective exchange rate as measured by normalized unit

labor costs (line reu, available since 1975 only), the ratio of exports (line 70) to imports

(line 71) expressed as a seven-month centered moving average to eliminate excessive

noise, domestic credit (line 32), narrow money (line 34i) normalized for the rate of

growth of international reserves, and CPI inflation (line 64). The data have been checked

for transcription and other errors and corrected. Virtually all of our variables are

transformed by taking differences between domestic and German annualized first-

differences of natural logarithms.

       In interpreting our results, it is important to bear in mind limitations of the data.


                                               17
First, published series on international reserves are a very imperfect guide to the

magnitude of foreign-exchange-market intervention. Central banks sometimes report only

the gross foreign assets of the monetary authorities. Since it is standard operating

procedure to arrange for stand-by credits in foreign currency, this is a potentially serious

problem. When the authorities intervene, they draw on their credit lines without having to

sell any of their reported foreign assets. Even countries which provide data on foreign

liabilities omit a number of operations which are typically undertaken during periods of

speculative pressure, such as off-balance-sheet transactions like swaps and forward market

intervention.

       Even when published data are accurate, intervention by foreign central banks can

be hard to detect. In the ERM, interventions are compulsory at the margins of the

currency grid. It is always the case that two (or more) currencies reach their margins

simultaneously; thus, compulsory interventions are undertaken simultaneously by two (or

more) central banks. Because we analyze changes in the reserves of each country relative

to changes in German reserves and Germany has been the perennial strong-currency

country, we are likely to pick up much of this foreign intervention. But intervention

undertaken by third countries will not be detected. This would be the case if the

Netherlands intervened to support the Italian lira, for example. There is also the problem

of attributing Germany's interventions to a particular country. German intervention in

support of the Italian lira could produce a large percentage rise in German reserves

relative to those of the Netherlands, seemingly signalling an attack on the guilder in a

period when Dutch reserves were rising.' Only detailed data on exchange-market


                                             18
intervention, which central banks rarely release, would solve this problem.

        A further issue is that monthly observations may not be of a sufficiently fine

periodicity to identify every speculative attack, especially unsuccessful ones. Pressure

against pegged currencies can mount quickly and be repelled through interest-rate

increases or foreign-exchange-market intervention within the month. If an attack is

launched and repelled in a matter of days, the average behavior of interest rates and

international reserves over the month may not reveal the intensity of speculative

pressures.'9

        In addition, changes in capital controls may affect the meaning of interest

differentials and reserve changes. When controls are in place, the authorities may keep

the interest rate on the domestic money market virtually unchanged while defending the

parity with sterilized purchases on the foreign exchange market.2° The problems this

creates for our analysis could be circumvented through the use of offshore interest rates;

in practice, these are available for only limited pex-iods and countries, however. An

alternative is to use the imperfect data that are available on capital controls to contrast the

behavior of interest rates, reserves and other variables in periods when controls were

present and absent; we pursue this in Eichengreen, Rose, and Wyplosz (1994).



IV. The Attack Episodes

       We begin our analysis by selecting attack episodes (which we refer to as "crises").

Initially, we weigh the components of our index so as to equalize the conditional

volatilities of the exchange rate, the interest differential and reserves; we then examine


                                              19
outliers which are two or more standard deviations above the sample mean for this index.

Sometimes two (or more) outliers occur close together. To avoid measuring the same

crisis twice (or more), we exclude second (and subsequent) observations which occur

within given proximity to the first crisis (our window width is typically plus and minus six

months).

       A number of prominent pegged exchange rate crises, such as the September 1992

ERM attacks, show up in our initial list of crises. However, the list is dominated not by

exchange-rate realignments under the provisions of the EMS, the European Snake or the

Bretton Woods System but by large monthly movements in floating exchange rates. This

points to an interesting fact about exchange rate behavior: movements in exchange rates

that take place in the wake of speculative attacks are often not significantly larger than the

month-to-month movements that can occur in periods of floating. Unconditional exchange

rate volatility varies systematically between floating and pegged-but-adjustable exchange

rate regimes, in other words; pegged rates exhibit occasional spikes of volatility which do

not compensate for the typical periods of tranquility, since comparable spikes occur during

floating regimes.21

       One might argue that these large movements in exchange rates and interest

differentials between countries with floating currencies should be classified as speculative

attacks. If the governments concerned are engaged in a dirty float or are attempting to

maintain a tacit crawling peg, a large movement in the rate beyond the limits of the

implicit band might properly be regarded as a consequence of an attack. For other

periods and currencies, however, such as the dollar in the first half of the 1980s, when the


                                             20
exchange rate was essentially allowed to float freely, these episodes do not reflect

speculative attacks in the sense implied by either the first or second generation of

theoreucai models. Since most of the literature on speculative attacks and the interest

of most observers has focused on attacks on pegged currencies, we limit our sample to

countries and periods when currencies were pegged under the provisions of the Bretton

Woods System, the Snake, the EMS and other explicitly-announced exchange rate

bands.

       Even when we limit the sample in this way, several prominent realignments of

pegged exchange rates do not appear in the list of "crises." This directs one to a second

important fact: that not all realignments involve speculative crises. It underscores our

point that exchange rate changes and speculative attacks are not the same.

       To assess the plausibility of the attack episodes or "crises" generated by our

procedure and their sensitivity to different weights, we limited the sample to ERM

countries starting in 1979, since this pegged-rate regime has been the subject of intense

study. The list of months and countries that we identify as "crises" is arrayed in

descending order of magnitude in Table 1. For each, we report the value of the crisis

index, the percentage change in the exchange rate (the domestic currency price of the

DM), the percentage change in the interest differential, and the percentage change in

relative reserves.

       Three features of the table stand out. First, there is a correlation between the

dates of ERM realignments and our list of speculative attacks on ERM currencies. At the

head of the list are crises in a number of countries associated with the Fall 1992 ERM



                                             21
crisis. January 1987, which appears on the list for three countries, was the date of a

major ERM realignment. We also identify episodes in which no realignment took

place. Most of these are readily interpretable: to cite two recent examples, they include

pressure on the British pound in August 1992 and speculation against the French franc in

the Fall of 1992 following the Scandinavian devaluations. Second, the most severe crises,

as measured by our index, tend to be recent, underscoring the role of the growth of the

foreign exchange market and the removal of capital controls in augmenting speculative

capital flows.26 Third, changes in exchange rates, interest rates and reserves are

correlated in the manner predicted by theory and intuition: interest rate increases and

currency depreciation are positively correlated with one another, while both are negatively

correlated with reserves.28



V. Results

       A. Characteristics of Speculative Crises

       We now compare the behavior of macroeconomic and financial variables around

the time of our "crises' with a control group of non-crisis cases. We construct the control

group as all observations that remain (with six-month exclusion windows on either side)

once the crises are removed.

       The data are displayed in Figures 1 and 2.° The four top left panels of Figure 1,

for example, display the behavior of fiscal deficits (as a percent of GDP). They present

histograms for ERM crises, ERM non-crises (tranquil periods), non-ERM crises, and non-

ERM non-crises.3' Figure 1 also presents histograms for the smoothed ratio of exports


                                             22
to imports, the inflation differential, and the real exchange rate relative to its 1985 level.

Figure 2 contains comparable graphs for differential credit growth, differential money

growth, the interest differential, and differential reserve growth.32

        Differences are most apparent to the naked eye in the case of international

reserves. This is not surprising, since their behavior was one of the criteria used to

differentiate crises from non-crises. Note, however, that a crisis can still take place

without a loss of reserves (due to a large change in the exchange rate or the interest

differential), and that a large change in reserves can take place without necessarily

classifying an observation as an event.33 A number of other differences are also apparent

in the histograms. Non-ERM trade ratios and interest differentials appear to have

different distributions in crisis and non-crisis periods, for example.

       The distributions displayed in Figures 1 and 2 can be more systematically

compared using statistical techniques. Comparisons between the crisis and non-crisis

distributions are tabulated in Table 2. We report two non-parametric tests: the two-

sample Kolmogorov-Smimov test for equality of the distribution functions (which

examines the entire distribution), and the Kruskal-Wallis test for the equality of

populations (which focuses more on sample medians). We also report the traditional t-test

for equality of first-moments (without assuming equal variances).

       In Table 2 the null hypothesis is that there is no difference in the distributions of

our variables in crisis and non-crisis periods. The statistics tabulated are probabilities

computed under the null, so that small numbers lead one to reject the hypothesis of

equality of distributions, i.e., to find evidence that the variables appear to behave


                                              23
differently in periods of crisis and tranquility.

       According to the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, for the non-ERM sample we are able

to reject the null of equality for the budget deficit, the inflation differential, the ratio of

exports to imports, reserve growth and possibly differential credit growth. Results are

comparable for the Kruskal-Wallis test. Only for the real exchange rate, differential

money growth, and the interest differential is it impossible to reject the null that the

observations are drawn from a common underlying distribution.

        The t-tests, in the third column, similarly reject the null of equal means for

inflation, the trade balance, credit growth and reserve growth. Most of the differences go

in directions consistent with first-generation speculative attack models. Inflation rates are

lower, the ratio of exports to imports is higher, and reserve growth is faster in countries

not suffering balance-of-payments crises.35

        The results for the ERM are strikingly different. According to both the

Kolmogorov-Smimov and Kruskal-Wallis tests, we are unable to reject the null of equal

distributions for the budget deficit, the real exchange rate, the inflation differential, the

trade ratio, and differential credit growth. The results for differential money growth and

the interest rate differential are more marginal, while reserves behave quite differently in

attacks and non-attack periods --although, to repeat, reserves are one of the variables on

the basis of which we categorized the observafions.

        For the ERM sample we reject the null of equal means for relative rates of reserve

 growth, relative interest rates, money growth and inflation. The first two results follow

 from our procedure for distinguishing crises from non-crises. But the signs on the t-


                                                24
statistics for inflation and money growth indicate that both variables are larger for non-

crises than for crises, rather than smaller as predicted by first-generation models of

balance-of-payments crises.

       There is a danger of over-interpreting such results and, given the problem of

observational equivalence emphasized in the introduction, of spuriously rejecting the

predictions of the first-generation models. Nevertheless, the contrast between the ERM

and non-ERM samples is strildng. The results appear to corroborate some elements of

standard first-generation theoretical attack models for non-ERM observations while

apparently rejecting the model for the ERM.

       As for why these contrasts are so pronounced, we can only offer conjectures. Not

even ardent proponents of second-generation models of multiple equilibria and self-

fulfilling speculative attacks would deny that policy imbalances and competitiveness

problems have been at the root of some crises (m the final years of the Bretton Woods

System, for example). But second generation models suggest that the scope for self-

fulfilling attacks is greatest in an environment of high capital mobility and abundant

international liquidity. This characterizes the environment of the ERM to a greater extent

than predecessors such as the Snake and the Bretton Woods System, which could possibly

account for the different patterns we observe.

       We undertook a number of experiments as sensitivity analyses; some of these are

reported in Table 3. We narrowed the exclusion window from (plus and minus) six to

three months without changing our results (we also widened the window to twelve months

and obtained similar results). We doubled the weight on reserves in our index of


                                             25
speculative pressure which is used to identify crises; again, the results did not vary

greatly. Finally, we classified crises using a criterion of two (instead of three) standard

deviations above the sample mean; again, the results proved relatively insensitive to the

change.37

       B. Analysis pf Realignments and Changes in Exchange Rate Regimes

       In this subsection, instead of using our index of speculative pressure to identify

crisis episodes, we look at actual realignments and changes in exchange rate regimes. We

dub the latter "events" to distinguish them from "crises."

       It turns out that the results hinge critically on whether we compare events with

non-events or crises with non-crises. Contrary to the results of Section V.A on crises, the

first-generation speculative attack models work relatively well for ERM events but not for

non-ERM events. For the latter, there are few significant differences in the behavior of

key macroeconomic variables.

       Figures 3 and 4 are histograms for event and non-event episodes that correspond to

Figure 1 and 2 for crises and non-crises). The histograms reveal substantial differences in

the distributions of ERM fiscal ratios between events and non-events. ERM inflation and

money growth differentials also appear to be noticeably different.

       Table 4 is the analog to Table 2 in that it shows the tests for equality of

distributions and for equal means (now across events and non-events rather than crises and

non-crises). None of the non-ERM statistics indicate significant differences conventional

significance levels. This is true not only of the non-parametric tests for equality of

distributions and populations but also of the t-tests for equal means. The opposite is true


                                              26
of the ERM observations. Except for the fiscal ratio and the real exchange rate, the test

statistics reject the null of equality of distributions across events and non-events. The

differences in sample first moments between ERM events and non-events are economically

interesting as well. Inflation rates, money and credit growth rates, and interest rates are

all higher for events than non-events, while the export/import ratio and reserve growth are

lower. These results are quite consistent with standard first-generation models of

speculative attacks.

       The contrasts between Tables 2 and 4 underscore the fact that some realignments

and shifts from pegging to floating take place without speculative attacks, while not all

attacks are successful. Events" and "crises are different, in other words. The evidence

on "events" is broadly supportive of first-generation speculative-attack models but only for

the ERM subsample. The evidence on crises is also supportive of the first-generation

model but more weakly and only for non-ERM observations. This is consistent with the

notion that governments historically chose to realign ERM currencies on the basis of

standard macroeconomic criteria but that speculators chose to attack ERM currencies for

other reasons.3

        The fact that crises and events are are not the same is corroborated in Table 5.

The statistics tabulated there test the null equality of distributions and populations across

events and crises for our eight macroeconomic and financial variables. The tests are

performed for the ERM subsample, the non-ERM subsample, and the full sample. All the

variables except the real exchange rate are distributed differently in crises and events.

        We also tested for differences in the distributions of macroeconomic and financial



                                              27
variables before and after exchange-market disturbances. We compared their values six

months before and six months after both "crises" and "events." As Table 6 shows, there

are almost no statistically significant differences in the behavior of our eight variables

either for ERM or non-ERM observations.

       This result is consistent with simple versions of the first-generation model, which

posit that countries are running policies too expansionary to be compatible with indefinite

maintenance of the exchange-rate peg but do not specify a change in that policy following

the collapse of the peg. It is incompatible, however, with the restrictive subclass of first-

generation models which predict a deterministic future shift in policy in a more

expansionary direction as the factor prompting the crisis. It is also incompatible with

models of multiple equilibria which predict a shift towards looser policy following a

successful attack.

       Thus, taken together with our other results, the analysis in Table 5 points to

empirical shortcomings of all existing classes of models of speculative attacks.



VI. Conclusions and Emplications

       We have analyzed the behavior of a range of macroeconomic and financial

variables in the periods leading up to speculative attacks on pegged exchange rates. We

consider data from official exchange rate pegs in the OECD countries since 1967,

including the Bretton Woods System, the Snake of the 1970s, and the European Monetary

System. Our results are noticeably different for the ERM and non-ERM subsamples. For

the non-ERM subsample we identify significant differences in the behavior of budget


                                              28
deficits, inflation, export/import ratios, domestic credit growth, and international reserves

in pre-attack and other periods. Only for the real exchange rate, money growth and

interest rates is it impossible to reject the null that the observations are drawn from a

common underlying distribution. This is consistent with the predictions of first-generation

speculative attack models like that of Krugman (1979). For the ERM subsample, in

contrast, there is a striking absence of differences between events and other observations.

Aside from reserves and interest rates, which are two of the variables on whose basis we

categorize episodes as events, we tend to be unable to reject the null of equal distributions

for any variable, and where we reject that hypothesis the difference goes in the opposite

direction from the predictions of first-generation models. It does not appear, in other

words, that the policy imbalances to which first-generation models direct attention are

obviously associated with the incidence of speculative attacks on ERM currencies. This

absence of significant differences in the ERM subsample is consistent with the predictions

of second generation models emphasizing multiple equilibria and self-fulfflhing attacks.

The high capital mobility and abundant international liquidity of the relatively recent ERM

period, which make self-fulfilling attacks relatively easy to launch, may explain this

contrast.

        When we compare actual realignments and changes in exchange rate regimes with

tranquil periods, the results are strikingly different. The first-generation model works

well in predicting the behavior of macroeconomic variables for currencies participating in

the ERM but not for the non-ERM observations.

        Given the limitations of models of exchange rate determination and fundamental


                                              29
problems of observational equivalence, it is inevitably difficult to determine whether our

findings are more easily reconciled with descendants of the first or second generation of

balance-of-payments crisis models. Insofar as the pre-attack behavior of monetary and

fiscal variables is at the heart of the distinction between them, we believe that where ERM

crises are concerned our findings tend to shift the burden of proof toward the proponents

of first-generation models. Admittedly, we also fail to turn up strong evidence favoring

second-generation models, since we do not detect significant shifts in macroeconomic

variables in the wake of speculative attacks. But however they are inclined to interpret

the results, we hope that we have convinced our readers that shedding additional light on

these questions requires further empirical analysis of the sort we offer here.




                                             30
                                          Table 1; ERM Crises

ERM Crises
(Ranked in Order of Magnitude of Crisis)

Country           Date             Cnsis                             %(ii*)
Ireland          1992.11           18.7             -.34             2.34              - 33.58
Italy            1992.09           18.4            6.00               .24              -133.90
France           1992.09           14.9              .21              .33              -155.58
Spain            1992.09           10.6             4.68              .03              - 71.33
Denmark          1992.09           8.7               .43              .15              -90.36
Ireland          1986.08           7.8              7.41              .04               -1.40
Belgium          1982.03           6.4              7.16             -.13               -1.20
France           1987.01           5.1              1.46              .15               -31.58
Denmark          1979.06           4.8              2.03              .15               -21.91
Denmark          1987.01           4.7               .37              .12               -44.29
France           1982.06           4.7              3.83             -.03               -12.87
Denmark          1981.03           4.7              1.77              .28               -11.63
Italy            1981.10           4.6              4.87              .07                 9.18
UK               1992.08           4.6              1.69             -.03               -38.87
Ireland          1986.01           4.6              1.13              .32               -14.63
France           1981.05           4.2              1.34              .27               -12.53
Belgium          1992.09           4.2               .19              .01               -49.18
Italy            1987.01           4.2              1.96              .11               -18.08
Ireland          1982.12           4.0              2.20              .28                 1.41

"Crisis is defined as Crisis %e + 7[%E(i.i*)J .08[%(rr*)J, where e denotes the price of a DM, i is
the short interest rate, I is the level of international reserves, and an asterisk denotes German vaijables. A
six-month exclusion window and a one and a half deviation eiisode delimiter are used to define crises.




                                                      31
                             Table 2: Comparin! Crises t.o Non-Crises

                               oon-ERM———-—
                 K-S              K-W      t                            K-S               K-W

Fiscal Ratio     .00                .01               -1.93             .75                .78               0.12

Real Rate        .35                .53               -0.60             .45               .79                0.37

Inflation        .02                .01               -2.28             .20               .08                2.78

XIM               .00               .00                3.14             .18               .13                -0.91


Credit Growth .09                   .07                1.99             .35                .17               0.79

Money Growth .12                    .28               -1.19             .06                .03               2.65

Interest Rate     .34               .37               -1.20             .05                .05               -1.92

Reserve GrowTh .00                  .07                2.32             .00                .00               3.00

 K-S denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distribution across crises and non-crises),
using the non-parametric Kolomogorov-Smirnov lest; a low value is inconsistent with the null hypothesis. K-
W denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distribution across crises and non-crises),
using the non-parametric Kniskal-Wallis test. •t denotes a t-test of the null hypothesis of equality of first-
moments across crises and non-crises; a positive number indicates that the sample mean in the absence of crises
is higher than the sample mean during crises.

Throughout, a six-month exclusion window and a three-standard deviation event delimiter are used in defining
crises.




                                                        32
                Table 3: Robustness Checks for Crises/Non-Crises Comparison
Three-month Exclusion Window
                                   non-ERM
                            K-S                K-W                                  K-S                K-W
Fiscal Ratio                .00                 .00                                 .94                 .93
Real Rate                   .25                 .63                                 .61                 .79
Inflation                   .00                 .00                                 .22                 .09
X/M                         .00                 .00                                 .27                 .14
Credit Growth               .00                 .00                                 .84                 .52
Money Growth                .01                 .08                                 .07                 .03
Interest Rate               .33                 .23                                 .04                 .04
Reserve Growth              .06                 .01                                 .00                 .00

Doubled Weight on Reserves
                                   non-ERM                                                   ERM
                            K-S                K-W                                  K-S                K-W
Fiscal Ratio                .00                .01                                  .23                 .42
Real Rate                   .38                .56                                  .29                 .52
Inflation                   .01                .00                                  .22                 .14
XIM                         .00                 .00                                 .59                 .66
Credit Growth               .03                 .04                                 .35                 .17
Money Growth                .15                 32                                  .53                 .25
Interest Rate               .40                 .66                                 .03                 .04
Reserve Growth              .02                 .18                                 .00                 .00

A Two-Standard Deviation Event Threshold
                             non-ERM                                                         ERM
                        K-S             K-W                                         K-S                K-W
Fiscal Ratio            .00             .00                                         .30                .29
Real Rate               .30             .38                                         .22                 .36
Inflation                   .00                .00                                  .50                 .42
XIM                         .07                .07                                  .53                 .89
Credit Growth               .71                .73                                  .92                 .89
Money Growth                .04                .29                                  .11                 .08
Interest Rate               .55                .66                                  .05                 .04
Reserve Growth              .16                .58                                  .00                 .00


 K-S • denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distribution across crises and non-crises),
using the non-parametric Koloinogomv-Smirnov test. K-W denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis
(of equality of distribution across crises and non-crises), using the non-parametric Knska1-Wal1is test.




                                                         33
                       Table 4: ComDarin! Actual Events to Non-Events
                 —         —-non-ERM                                                ERM
                 K-S               K-W               t              K-S              K-W

Fiscal Ratio   .47                 .29             -1.42             .12               .04              1.94
Real Rate        .27               .20             -1.26             .47              .39               -1.17
Inflation        .54               .55             -0.46             .00              .00               -4.12
XJM              .55               .60             -0.60             .00              .00               3.44
Credit Growth    .08               .51             -1.09             .00               .00             -3.92
Money Growth .71                   .64              0.53             .01               .00             -3.58
Interest Rate .00                  .47             -0.02             .00               .00             -5.03
Reserve Growth .00                 .96             -0.89             .00               .02              2.42


'K-S' denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distribution across events and non-
events), using the non-parametric Kolomogorov-Smirnov test. K-We deaotes probability of rejection of null
hypothesis (of equality of distribution across events and non-events), using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis
test. "t denotes a t-test of the nufl hypothesis of equality of first-moments across events and non-events.

Throughout, a six-month exclusion window and a three-standard deviation event delimiter are used. Events
include: realignments; devaluations; flotations; and fixations.



                                 Table 5: Comoarina Events to Crises
                         Total                      —non-ERM                        ERM
                 K-S               K-W              K-S              IC-W             K-S               K-W

Fiscal Ratio     .00               .00              .29              .27               .29               .35
Real Rate        .81               .98              .85              .74               .56               .42
Inflation        .00               .04              .60              .60               .02               .01
XIM              .01               .01              .05              .06               .02               .01
Credit Growth .00                  .00              .00              .03               .24               .08
Money Growth .93                   .81              .25              .31               .05               .02
Interest Rate  .00                 .10              .01              .42               .64               .86
Reserve Growth .17                 .98              .01              .52               .11               .18


K-S denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distribution across events and crises),
using the non-parametric Kolomogorov-Smimov test. K-W denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis
(of equality of distribution across events and crises), using the non-parametric Kruska1-Walli test.

Throughout, a six-month exclusion window and a three-standard deviation event delimiter are used. Events
include: realignments; devaluations; flotations; and fixations.




                                                     34
   Table 6: Distributions Six Months Before and Six Months After Crises and Events

Cnses
                                                                                         ERM——-----
                           K-S               K-W                                 K-S               K-W
Fiscal Ratio               .76               .59                                 .92                .56
Real Rate                  .49               .28                                 .90                .56
Inflation                  .68               .92                                 .31                .38
XIM                        .68               .51                                 .59                .38
Credit Growth              .02               .05                                 .43                .32
Money Growth               .87               .71                                 .79                .51
Interest Rate              .65               .74                                 .59                .24
Reserve GrowTh             .03               .00                                 .90                .56


Events
                           —-non-ERM                                              _____
                           K-S               K-W                                 K-S               K-W
Fiscal Ratio               .74               .69                                 .56                .50
Real Rate                  .99               .66                                 .76                .65
Inflation                  .27               .62                                 .60                .68
X/M                        1.0               .92                                 .32                .31
Credit Growth              .04               .10                                 .19                .35
Money Growth               .77               .62                                 .04                .02
Interest Rate              .04               .02                                 .12                .09
Reserve Growth             .00               .05                                 .39                .16



AK-S denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distributions six months before
crises/events to six months aftei eventslcrises), using the non-parametric Kolomogorov-Smimov test. K-W'
denotes probability of rejection of null hypothesis (of equality of distributions six months before eveiits/crises
to six months after crises/events), using the non-parametric Kruskal-Wallis test.

Throughout, a six-month exclusion window and a three-standard deviation event delimiter are used.




                                                      35
                                                                                             .2                                       .2
                                                 .2
       •   15
                                                                                             .1

       .05
                                                                                              a              DfiIIJ 900
            0                                                                                      .    .12     1                         ., Is I 2,25                           2.5
                -:2-.s—.'a-.b5 6     .0'S .1                                  ó        .1
                                                                                                  Crises.      ERM                    Crises, non—EP'.4
                Crises. EM                       Crises.           non-ERM                   .2                                        2
           .2                                    .2
                                                 '5
                                                                                             -I
                                                 .2
       .05                                      .05                                                                                              o   cmJ11llf111Ilm a a
                                                                                              0                                        0
                                                                                                                           1.5                         .75        17
                                                                                                                                                                   1.25 1.5
           0•, ifljNJ4ia                          0             0JL                               •                                      .
                —.2                                                       6            .1                           ERM                                     nQr2-ERM
                                                                                             Non—Crises,                           Non—Crises,
           Non - Crises, ERM                   Non—Crises.           non—ERM                                        Outliers     E xcluaeO
    Patio of Fiscal Deficit to Output                                                         Ratio of Export s to Imports
           .2                                    .2                                          .4                                       .4
                1
                                                                                             .3                                       .3
                                                 .1                                          .2                                       .2


                                     B                                                                                                                       A               0
                                                                                                                                                                        .
                           5                                   0                       iS         ..o   70
                                                                                                               Doo
                                                                                                               100 130     160             .40       70     200        230   I SO
                       0                              -b              5           lb
                           ERM                                     r*ort—ERM                      Crises.      ERM                    Crises,             non—ERM
                -Crises,                         Crises,
           .2                                    .2                                          .4                                       .4
                                                                                             .3
                                                 .1                                          .2                                       .2
                                                                                             .1

                                                 o         a   lHfin,1i   o        0         0                                        0                                       Do
                      fldilJ= ,                                6      5           *0   16         40           100    10   265             40        70    100         130   150
       Non—Crises,             ERM             Non—Crises.           non—ERM                 Non—Crises,            ERM            Non—Crises, non —ERM
                      In-flation Differential     Real Exchange Rates
                      Six—Month window; 1.5 Sigma Crisis Threshold
    Histognams of Nlacnoeconomic Fundamentals
Figure 1: Comparisons of Crises and non-Crises
                                                                                        36
       .22                                        .12                                                                                .15
                                                                                        25
       .oe                                       .06                                                                                  .1
                                                                                                                 Al
       .04                                       .04                                                                                  05
                                      II   II                                   0
         0                                         a                                                                                   0
                    —SI    6         . .                                                                        6      . . .                     flPfl
             Crises, EM                           Crises,        non—EPM
        12                                                                                                                            Crises,          non—EON
                                                 .12
       .05                                        Os
                                                                                        -1
       .04                                        04
                                                                                       .05                                           .05
        0          a 0 d11IIll1k3          ll      0
             -.2     —.1   0     .         .2                                            0
                                                                                                                                                                  .2
        Non-Crises,            ERM              Non—Crises.       non—ERM                            a_ so
                              Outliers Excluded                                         Non—Crises,                   ERM           Non-Crises,          000—ERM
        Differential Growth of Credit                                                            Differental                      Money Growth
        .2                                                                             .25                                           25

                                                                                      225                                           .125

        0                                                           On     0   oD                          A   OJI AO
                    0
                                                   I                                         -                                        0
                          5      20        15                6         to       15               6   —54       —.2    6     . .            —.6   -.4   —.2   0    .    .4
             Crises.      ERM                     Crises, non-EM                             Crses,              ERM                  Crises,          rlon—ERM
        .2                                         2                                   .25                                           25

        .2                                        .1                                  .228                                          .125

        0                                                                               0                                             0
             —      ,.,   .      so        is           —s   o     s   *0       is           .16
                                                                                            — —.2                             .            'S    '.4    .2   0         .4
       Non—Crises,             ERM              Non—Crises,       non—ERM               Non—Crises,                   ERM          Non—Crises,           non—EPM
                              Excluded                                                                                Out hers Excluded
             InterestOutliers
                        Rate Differential                                                        Differential of Reserves
                   Six—Month window; 1.5 Sigma Crüsis Threshold
                     Histognams                                  0±    Financial Vaniables
Figure 2: Comparisons of Crises and non-Crises

                                                                                 37
      .25                                                                                      .25                                              25
       .2                                                .2
                                                                                                   .2                                           -t
       35
        .1                                                                                                                                     05
      .05                                                                                                      o                                         Do                    a        a
        0            DIILIBIIID   8Illo   in
              ___________________________________
              ________________________                    0    _____________________
                                                               _______________ ____________
                                                               ____________          _______                                                                    .15       1    LfrS
             •.2.i5—1-.ó56              os                    -S2—.is—.2—.O5.d5          .              .          .     I        2.5 IS            .                                   5
                                                                                                        Events,        ERM                      EventS,         non—EM
             Events, EPM                                 Events,         non—ERM               -
      .25                                            .251
                                                                                                   .1
                                                                                                                                                '1
       15                                            .351
                                                                                               .05                                             05    1
       .2                                                .1   -I

      .05                                                OS   I                                    0     ________________________
                                                                                                         __________________________              o
                                                                                                                                                           Oo
                                                                                                                                                         __________________________
                  f1,o      o                                                                                                           sS                  S       .15    ,       i.kS ,.±
        0     _______________                                 _______________
                                                                                                              00L0,.,                                           A
             -.2-.5-:1-.o5a .05.1                             -.2-.-3-.656 .dS .
                                                                                                   Non—Events,               ERM              Non—EventS, non—ERM
       Non-Events,                EPM               Non—Events. flOfl-ERM                                                 Outliers Excluded
    Ratio of Fiscal Deficit to Output                                                               Ratio of Exports to Imports
                                                     .                                             .2                                           .21
      .15
                                                                                               .15                                              251
       .1
                                                                                                   .2                                                I
                                                                                               .05                                             051
               IjiJ1liwiflDoo                  Do                                 0                       IIIIIIIIIII I
                                                                                                         __________       00113
                                                                                                                           000
             —
              _________
                     Q        1      20
                                                         . __________
                                                              -5     0                                  80  260        120 1o ISO               0180          100  220 i4o 166
             Events,        ERM                          Events,         nort—ERM                       Events,        ERM                      Events,         non—ERM
                                                     .15                                           .2                                           .21
                                                                                               .35                                             .351
                                                                                                   .1
      .05                                                                                                                                      05
                                                                                                                   FififihOjo
                                                                                                             0______            2   0   0       o    I
        0                                                °:                                        0
                     6                                         —      6     s   i'o                            100      tO              IsO          10       160     30       240     16
       Non-Events,                ERM               Non—Events.            non—ERM                 Non—Events, ERM
                                                                                                                                                     ____
                                                                                                                                              Non—Events,             non—ERM
                   Inflation Differenti.al          Real                                                                        Exchange Rates
                                      Six—Month Jindow
    Histognams                                       0±             Macnoeconomic Funamenta1s
Figure 3: Comparisons of Events and non-Events

                                                                                          38
       .15                                                                                                                               .15
                                               .15
        .1                                      .1                                       .1                                                  .1
       05                                      °'                                       .05                                              .05
                         ffi                                     1110
         o                                                                                0 __________________
                    -:     6      .1     .           -.2                 6        5         ______________                                       ____________
                                                                                                                                                 __________
                                                                                              —.2                6          .5                      —.1                    .5   .5
              Events,     EPM                  E'erts.
                                                           -     non—ERM
                                                                                                     —i                .i        .            e. .2     6 .1
       .15                                                                                    Events,                ERM                     Events, non-ERM
                                               .15
                                                                                                                                             15
        1                                        11
       .05                                     .05]
                         ______                              _________                                                                   •
                                                                                                                                         05
         0     00        _________ 0
              ____________________________                   thll1ft!11.  cOo
                                                     _____________________________
             —.2     .1    o     .1     .5           —.2   —.1           0   .1   .5           0                            0                 0
                                                                                                '2         '1     6    .1   .5                    -.•2   -.•i    6    .1   .5   .5


        Differential
                    L
        Non—Events, ERM                      Non—Events,
                               Outflers Excluded
                                        Growth of Credit
                                                                        nor—ERM
                                                                                         Non-Events.
                                                                                               Di'fferental
                                                                                                                      ERM               Non—Events, non-ERM
                                                                                                                                      Money Growth
        .2                                      .2                                      .25                                              .25


        .1                                                                              125                                             .225

                     00111
              ________________________                                   0
                                                      ______________________                     00 0
                                                                                              _______________________                                                 0
                                                                                                                                                   ______________________
                                                                                                                                                                0010
                                                                                                                                             0
             —fo
               -      6      10 15 26                —10 — 0       10 15 26                   —.6    —.4        —.2    0    .5   .4               —.6    —.4    —.26       .5   .4
             Events.     ERM                   Events, non-EPM                                Events,             ERM                        Events, non-ERM
        .2                                     .2                                       .25                                              25

        .1                                     .1                                      .125                                             .125

        0•
         ________________                                    .
                                                   ________________                            ________________                                      ____________
        —jo—s ó     10                                                                                  0 .5                                          —.4—2 0  .2
                                                0•—10—56
                                       126                5 10120                             —.6—:4—.2                          .
       Non-Events, ERM                       Non—Events,                non—ERM         Non—Events,                   ERM              Non—Events, non-EPH
                               Outliers Excluded                                                                      Outliers Excluded
             Interest             Rate       Dif'ferenUal                                       Di.fferential. of Reserves
                                                           Six—Month Vindow
                    Histognams                                   0±          Financial VaniaL1es
Figure 4: Comparisons of Events and non-Events

                                                                                  39
                         Appendix: The Context of EMS Crises

One way of gauging the plausibility of our procedure for identifying speculative attacks is
to relate the attack episodes identified by the index to historical events. In this appendix
we do so for each country-month crisis' generated by our procedure when the
components of our index are weighted to equalize volatilities, the sample is limited to
ERM members since 1979, and a one and a half standard deviation threshold is used. We
search the financial press for reports of speculative pressure on the currency in the month
in question.

June 1979: Denmark
Germany's support of the DM pushed up the grid against other currencies, adversely
affecting the weak members. European central banks were forced to sell DM to keep the
Danish krone from falling through the bottom of its band.

March 1981: Denmark
The Danish economy was suffering a large current account deficit, putting downward
pressure on the currency. Also, Italy's realignment and the resulting implications for
competitiveness reinforced the weakness of the currency.

May 1981: France
The franc declined in response to an upward move in U.S. interest rates and nervousness
about a possible Socialist victory in the second round of Presidential elections.

October 1981: Italy
France and Italy devalued, while the DM and the Dutch guilder were realigned upward in
the ERM.

March 1982: Belgium
Suffering high unemployment, a rising budget deficit and a large current account deficit,
Belgium devalued by 8.9%.

June 1982: France
France devalued by 5.75%, pushed in part by the strength of the dollar and waves of
speculation against the franc that washed away more than two-thirds of the country's
foreign exchange reserves.

December 1982: Ireland
Sterling's weakness raised questions about the stability of the punt.

August 1986: Ireland
ireland devalued the punt by 8% in order to encourage exports.

January 1987: Ireland; France; Denmark; Italy

                                             40
The 1 ith realignment of the EMS was barely complete before speculators began betting on
the next one. On January 6th the franc fell to the bottom of the ERM grid, spurred by
student riots and public-sector strikes. European finance ministers devalued the Danish
bone by 3% and the Belgian franc by 2%. Italy announced plans to liberalize its
exchange controls.

August 1992: United Kingdom
Reports that Helmut Schlesinger, the Bundesbank's president, had said that he felt that the
pound should be devalued triggered heavy selling of sterling.

September 1992: Italy; France; Spain; Denmark; Belgium
A sliding dollar and anxiety over France's referendum on the Maastricht Treaty contrived
to strain Europe's weak currencies. Sellers succeeded in driving the ha out of the ERM
and obliged devaluation of the peseta. The Belgian franc was hurt by the country's close
economic ties to France and the weakness of the French franc.

November 1992: Ireland
The punt displayed continued weakness in the wake of the September attack, the
depreciation of sterling, realignments by Portugal and Spain, and the looming removal of
Irish capital controls.




                                            41
                                      References

Agenor, Pierre-Richard, Jagdeep S. Bhandari and Robert P. Flood (1992), "Speculative
Attacks and Models of Balance of Payments Crises," Staff Papers 39, pp.357-394.

Bank for International Settlements (1993), 63rd Annual Report, Basle: BIS.

Bensaid, Bernard and Olivier Jeanne (1994) "The Instability of Fixed Exchange Rate
Systems When Raising the Nominal Interest Rate is Costly," unpublished manuscript,
ENPC.

Blackburn, Keith and Martin Sola (1993), "Speculative Currency Attacks and Balance of
Payments Crises," Journal of Economic Surveys 7, pp.119-144.

Blanchard, Olivier and Mark Watson (1982), "Bubbles, Rational Expectations and
Financial Markets," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 945.

Blanco, Herminio and Peter M. Garber (1986), "Recurrent Devaluation and Speculative
Attacks on the Mexican Peso," Journal of Political Economy 94, pp.148-166.

Claessens, Stijn (1991), "Balance of Payments Crises in an Optimal Portfolio Model,"
European Economic Review 35, pp.81-101.

Commission of the European Communities, Directorate-General for Economic and
Financial Affairs (1993), "The ERM in 1992," European Economy 54, pp.141-157.

Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European
Economic Community (1993a), Annual Report 1992, Basle: Committee of Governors.

Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European
Economic Community (1993b), "The Implications and Lessons to be Drawn from the
Recent Exchange Rate Crisis: Report of the Committee of Governors," processed, 21
April.

Cooper, Richard (1971), "Exchange Rate Devaluation in Developing Countries,"
Princeton Essays in International Finance no. 86, International Finance Section,
Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Cumby, Robert E. and Sweder van Wijnbergen (1989), "Financial Policy and Speculative
Runs with a Crawling Peg: Argentina 1979-1981," Journal of International Economics 27,
pp.111-127.

Deilas, Harris and Alan C. Stockman (1993), "Self-Fulfilling Expectations, Speculative
Attacks and Capital Controls," Journal of Money. Credit and Banking 25, pp.721-730.

                                            42
Dominguez, Kathryn M. and Peter B. Kenen (1992), "Intramarginal Intervention in the
EMS and the Target-Zone Model of Exchange Rate Behavior," European Economic
Review 36, pp. 1523-1532.

Dornbusch, Rudiger (1993), "Comment," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1,
pp. 130-136.

Edwards, Sebastian (1989), Real Exchange Rates. Devaluation and Adjustment: Exchange
Rate Policy in Developing Countries, Cambridge, Mass.: MI' Press.

Edwards, Sebastian (1993), "Devaluation Controversies in the Developing Countries," in
Michael D. Bordo and Barry Eichengreen (eds), A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods
System, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.40S-455.

Eichengreen, Barry (1991), "Reiaxing the External Constraint: Europe in the 1930s," in
George Alogoskoufis, Lucas Papademos and Richard Portes (eds), External Constraints on
Macroeconomic Policy: The European Experience, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp.75-117.

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz (1994) "Is There a Safe
Passage to EMU? Evidence from the Markets," unpublished manuscript, University of
California at Berkeley and INSEAD.

Eichengreen, Barry and Charles Wyplosz (1993), "The Unstable EMS," Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity 1, pp.51-143.

Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984a), "Collapsing Exchange-Rate Regimes: Some
Linear Examples," Journal of International Economics 17, pp.1-13.

Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984b), "Gold Monetization and Gold Discipline,"
Journal of Political Economy 92, pp.90-107.

Flood, Robert and Robert Hodrick (1986), "Real Aspects of Exchange Rate Regime
Choice with Collapsing Fixed Rates," Journal of International Economics 21, pp.215-232.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. (1994), "Exchange Rate Policy," in Martin Feldstein (ed.), American
Economic Policy in the 1980s, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp.293-341.

Funibashi, Yoichi (1988), Managing the Dollar, Washington, D.C.: Institute for
International Economics.

Giavazzi, Francesco and Alberto Giovannini (1989), Managing Exchange Rate FlexibilitY:
The European Monetary System, Cambridge: MIT Press.


                                          43
Girton, Lance and Don Roper (1977), "A Monetary Model of Exchange Market Pressure
Applied to Postwar Canadian Experience," American Economic Review 67, pp.537-548.

Goldberg, Linda (1993), "Predicting Exchange Rate Crises: Mexico Revisited," Journal of
International Economics (forthcoming).

Goldstein, Moms, David Folkerts-Landau, Peter Garber, Liliana Rojas-Suarez and
Michael Spencer (1993), International Capital Markets. Part 1. Exchange Rate
Management and International Capital Flows, Washington D.C.: International Monetary
Fund.

Goldstein, Morris and Michael Mussa (1994), "The Integration of World Capital
Markets," in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Changing Capital Markets:
Implications for Monetary Policy, Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City,
pp.245-314.

Grim, Vittorio (1986) "Buying and Selling Attacks on Fixed Exchange Rate Systems,"
Journal of International Economics 20, pp. 143-156.

Grilli, Vittorio (1990), "Managing Exchange Rate Crises: Evidence from the
1980s,"Journal of International Money and Finance 9, pp.135-182.

Gros, Daniel (1992), "Capital Controls and Foreign Exchange Market Crises in the
EMS," European Economic Review 36, pp.1533-1544.

Group of Ten (1993), International Capital Movements and Foreign Exchange Markets
[Dini Report], Washington, D.C.: Group of Ten.

Harberger, A. and S. Edwards (1982), "Lessons of Experience Under Fixed Exchange
Rates," in M. Gersovitz et al. (eds), The Theory and Experience of Economic
Development, London: Allen & Unwin.

Karnin, Steve (1988), "Devaluation, External Balance and Macroeconomic Performance:
A Look at the Numbers," Princeton Essays in International Finance no. 62, International
Finance Section, Department of Economics, Princeton University.

Klein, Michael W. and Nancy P. Marion (1994), "Explaining the Duration of Exchange-
Rate Pegs," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper no. 4651.

Krugman, Paul (1979), "A Model of Balance of Payments Crises," Journal of Money.
Credit and Banking 11, pp.311-325.

Meese, Richard and Kenneth Rogoff (1983), "Empirical Exchange Rate Models of the
Seventies: Do They Fit Out of Sample?" Journal of International Economics 14, pp.3-24.

                                           44
Monetary Committee of the European Community (1993), "Lessons to be Drawn from the
Disturbances on the Foreign Exchange Markets," processed, 13 April.

Obstfeld, Maurice (1984), "Balance of Payments Crises and Devaluation," Journal of
Money. Credit and Banking 16, pp.208-217.

Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), "Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises,"
American Economic Review LXXVI, pp.72-81.

Obstfeld, Maurice (1994), "The Logic of Currency Crises," National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper No. 4640.

Ozkan, F. Gulcin and Alan Sutherland (1993), "A Model of the ERM Crisis,"
unpublished manuscript, University of York.

Portes, Richard (1993), "EMS and EMU After the Fall," The World Economy 19, pp.1-
16.

Rose, Andrew and Lars Svensson (1994), "European Exchange Rate Credibility Before
the Fall," European Economic Review ,
Saiant, Stephen W. (1983), "The Vulnerability of Price Stabilization Schemes to
Speculative Attack," Journal of Political Economy 91, pp.'-38.

Salant, Stephen W. and Dale W. Henderson (1978), "Market Anticipation of Government
Policy and the Price of Gold," Journal of Political Economy 86, pp.627-648.

West, Kenneth (1987), "A Standard Monetary Model and the Variability of the
Deutschemark-Dollar Exchange Rates," Journal of International Ecànomics 23, pp.57-76.

Wihianison, John (1993), "EMS and EMU After the Fall: A Comment," The World
Economy 16, pp.377-380.

Wiliman, Alpo (1988), "The Collapse of the Fixed Exchange Rate Regime with Sticky
Wages and Imperfect Substitutability Between Domestic and Foreign Bonds," European
Economic Review 32, pp.18 17-1838.

Woo, Wing T. (1985), "The Monetary Approach to Exchange Rate Determination Under
Rational Expectations," Journal of International Economics 18, pp.1-16.

Wyplosz, Charles (1986), "Capital Controls and Balance of Payments Crises," Journal of
International Money and FinanceS, pp.167-179.



                                            45
                                            Endnotes

   1. These models derived from previous analyses of attacks on commodity-price stabilization
schemes (Salant and Henderson 1978, Salant 1983). The subsequent literature developing these
models is reviewed by Agenor, Bhandari and Flood (1992) and Blackburn and Sola (1993). We
are indebted to these reviews for our own survey of the literature.

  2. For discussion of this point see Flood and Hodrick (1986).

  3. We do this in more detail in the appendix to the paper.

  4. It is the supply of domestic assets following the attack rather than the pre-attack supply that
determines the shadow exchange rate; the two differ because speculators swap a portion of their
domestic asset holdings for foreign exchange when undertaking the attack that exhausts the
central bank's remaining reserves and forces the transition to floating (see Grilli, 1986).

  5.   See   also Flood and Hodrick (1986) and Wyplosz (1986).

  6. Dellas and Stockman (1993) showed that the same result can obtain if an attack induces
the authorities to impose capital controls on a regime of previously free international capital
mobility.
  7. George Soros, International Investment Research (July 5, 1994), p.2. We thank Luis
Freitas for bringing this statement to our attention.
 8. See also Gros (1992) and Obstfeld (1994).
  9. This contrast is subject to qualification by the problem of observational equivalence noted
in the introduction. This paragraph refers to simple variants of first-generation models; more
complicated variants of the first-generation model can suggest a deterministic shift in post-attack
policy in a more expansionary direction.

  10. A recent study which re-examines this episode is Goldberg (1993).

 11. This is an appropriate juncture at which to flag a point anticipated in the introduction.
Any empirical model of crises requires a model of the asset demands from which the exchange
rate is derived. Most investigators, like Blanco and Gaiter, use standard money demand
functions and assumptions akin to purchasing power parity. That such models fail to adequately
track exchange rate movements is well known; the problem is equally debilitating in the present
context where it is reserves rather than the exchange rate that are permitted to move.
  12. In addition, an increase in openness significantly reduces the probability of ending a peg,
while higher trade concentration increases the probability that a peg will end. These findings are
consistent with the optimum-currency-area literature, in which it is suggested that more open,
less trade-diversified economies have a stronger desire to peg.


                                                46
  13. Other studies which follow this approach include Cooper (1971), Harberger and Edwards
(1982), Kamin (1988) and Eichengreen (1991).
  14. Once we construct a sample of "events," it becomes possible to contrast their
characteristics with those of successful attacks in which previously pegged exchange rates were
abandoned as a way of gauging the extent of such selectivity bias, as we do below.

  15. Robert Flood has pointed out that this problem has an analogy in the literature on bubbles
in foreign exchange markets. Bubbles are another instance of multiple equilibria analogous to
the second-generation models' of speculative attacks on pegged rates, the difference being that
the exchange rate is freely determined in the exchange market bubbles literature while it is
pegged and reserves are freely determined in the speculative attack literature (or rather, reserves,
interest rates'and other policy instruments that can be used to defend the rate). Woo (1985) and
West (1987) test for bubbles using monetary models of exchange rate determination. Th;ir
attempt to identif' bubbles using this structural approach is no more convincing than their
monetary model. Our less structured analysis can be seen as a counterpart of the nonparametric
approach to analyzing bubbles of authors like Blanchard and Watson (1982).

  16. We typically add exchange rate changes to a .08 multiple of reserve movements and a
seven-fold multiple of interest rate differential movements.

  17. Germany was the leading strong-currency country in the latter part of the Bretton Woods
period and under the Snake as well as in the European Monetary System. We also computed
changes in most of our key macroeconomic variables relative to Germany.

  18. This pattern in fact occurred in September 1992. Thus, when we attach a high weight to
changes in relative reserves, our index identifies the guilder as one of the currencies that was
attacked that month.

  19. In future work, we hope to use weekly and daily data on interest rates and exchange rates
to identify other possible periods in which speculative crises occurred.
 20. For details, see Giavazzi and Giovannini (1989).

 21. This may be thought of as a peso problem in second moments.

  22. In 1987, for example, the finance ministers of the G-7 countries agreed at the Louvre
meeting to establish "reference values" for the dollar and other currencies "around current
levels" but refused to reveal the width of the reference range. According to Funibashi (1988),
they agreed to a narrow margin of plus or minus 2 1/2 per cent, after which intervention would
be called for on a voluntary basis, and a wider band of plus or minus five per cent, at which
point concerted intervention would be obligatory.

 23. On the free float of the 1980s, see Frankel (1994).



                                                47
 24. In particular, we limit our tests below to countries with explicitly declared bilateral
bandwidths of no more than 15%.

 25. Information on the events listed in Table 1 is provided in the appendix.

 26. This pattern becomes even more pronounced when we increase the weight on reserves
when constructing our index, as discussed below.

  27. The correlation between reserve changes and exchange rate changes is -0.13 and between
reserve changes and interest rate changes is -0.24. The positive correlation between exchange
rate and interest rate changes is a relatively low 0.04.

 28. Our list of events also changes in a sensible way when we alter the weights on the three
components of our index.

 29. It would be interesting, but beyond the scope of this paper, to analyze the crises which
occur closely together.
  30.       Crises    are defined        as observations where our measure of
speculative pressure lies at least one and a half standard deviations above its sample mean;
this threshold is used to create smootithess in the histograms. However, most of the
statistical results (e.g., in Table 2) use a three standard deviation threshold. A sensitivity
analysis shows that this cutoff point is arbitrary but not especially important.

  31. All four histograms scaled so as to be directly compared one another.

  32. Unlike the other variables, which are calculated for the 12 months preceding the event,
the real exchange rate is considered in the month immediately preceding the event since it is
constructed relative to its 1985 base.

 33. The differences in reserve behavior between events and non-events is more pronounced
for the ERM cases. This is not surprising, since as we noted above the ERM requires
mandatory intervention at the margin not only by the country in question but by the strong
currency country, typically Germany, our reference country against which the change in reserves
is measured.

  34. Sample size varies by variable due to missing observations and different sample spans.


  35. Only the difference is credit growth goes in the wrong direction.
 36. The weak results on interest rate differentjajs may indicate that there is considerable
measurement error inherent in the procedure which we use to identify speculative attacks, an
issue to which we return later. However, we frequently find similar results for actual
realignments and exchange rate regime switches.


                                               48
  37. An important limitation of these results (which we plan to rectify in future work) is that
they are based on univariate analysis. An absence of differences in the distributions of monetary
and fiscal variables in attack and non-attack cases when such variables are considered separately
may disguise interactions among them that differ across categories.

  38. We are grateful to Torsten Persson and Victor Rios-Ruell for leading us to this thought.




                                               49
