                              NEER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FROM SUPERMINIS TO SUPERCOMPUTERS:
                           ESTIMATING SURPLUS IN THE
                               COMPUTING MARKET




                                       Shane Oreenstein




                                    Working Paper No. 4899



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    October 1994


Tb turks tu Steve Berry, Tutu Eresnahan, Ken Brown, Erik EG'njoifsson, EBen Dulberger, Zvi
Criliehes, Brunwyn hail, Roger Koenker, Pablo Spiher, and Prank Wolak for useful discussion.
Pansetpanrs ar the CRiW, NBER, the University of Illinois, West-Virginia, and Econometric
Society meetings also provided many useful comments. luBe Lee and Jennifer HowiB entered
tiara.   Saudra Ospina and Ken Brown provided excellent research assistance. l gratefuily
acknowledge funding from the Center for Economic Policy Research at Stanford Universiw and
the Arnold fib Beckman Endowment at the University of llhnois. I also thank the Charles
Bshbag'e Institute frr their help with assembling the data used herein. Only I am responsible for
the errors contorned in this paper. Tiriis paper is part of NEER's research program in
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of th.e National
Bureau of Economic Research.

   l994 by Shaoe Greeus.tetu. All tights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted wtthout explicit pern-dssion provided that foB credit, including
notice, is giver', to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4899
                                                                               October 1994


                       PROM SUPERM1NIS TO SUPERCOMPUTERS:
                            ESTIMATLNO SURPLUS IN THE
                               COMPUTiNG MARKET


                                         ABSTRACT


       Innovation was rampant in the cnmputer indusny during the late 196CR and the 1970s,

Old innnvatinn vastly extend the capabihdes nf computers nr simply reduce the costs of doing

the same thing? This question goes to the heart of whether the rate of deehne in 'constant-

qualsty" cnmpnnng prices incorrectly identifies the sources of impnnvement and benefits from

tcchnnlng:cai change. This paper argues that innovation freed computers of technical constaints

to providing new senJees, nsamfesting many new eapabdities in systems with larger capacity.

Both anccdotai and qoantitative evidence suggest that many buyers adopted new systems to get

access to these new capabilities, not solely to take advantage of lower prices.

       The analysis divides itself into several related questions. FUst, what innovations in this

pei-icd arc asmciatcd with extensions of capabilities? Second, 'do buyers adopt products that

embody extensions of capabilities? Thud, how does a nseasurement framework represent that

action? Are extensions embodied only in increases in capacity or are they embodied in other

measurable featcres of a computer system as well?




Shanc fircenstein
Department of Economics
University of Illinois
Champaign, IL 61820
and NEER
L Iritmduetion

          innovation is rampant in adolescent industries. Old products die or evolve and new

products rcshace them. Each new gcncmtion of products offers new features, extends the

range of existing liratures, or lowers the cost of obtaining old fearures, Vendors imitate each

othcfs prcxlucts. so that what      been a novelty becomes a standard feature in dii subsequent

generations. Depending on the competitive environment and the type of innovation, prices

may or may not reflect design changes.

          The computer industry of the late i960s and l970s experienced remarkable growth

and ieeuning. At the start of the period several technological uncertainties defied easy

resolution. Must knowledgeable observer; could predict the direction of technical change, but

nut its rate Vendors marketed hundreds of new product desrgns throughout the 1970s, and a

traction of those products became commercially successful. in time the industry took on a

ceflainnntanty and predictability. By the late i970s, beth buyers and sellcun understood the

technical trajectory of the industry's products. Even the least experienced users understood the

capah;ilties and limits of the most popular commercial systems.

          Tins paper attempts to measure the economic benefits that accrued to buyers from

technological innovation in the computer industry. Its thesis is that many innovations that

created economic ulue in this period are associated with extensions in computing

cupuhiiites. as distinguished front a decline in prices, which occurred at the same time as the

extensions, 'ibis paper does not argue that price decreases were uinmportant to buyers, but

that price decreases alone tell an incomplete story about the welfare miprovements realized by

buyers.
                                                        I
         Tel: thesis goes to the dear' of too relaLlonshlp cetween rapid conotant quality' price

dechner and the Jbrred im1 rnvcment in eernopnc welfare. The open issue concerns whethe,

conr:ant quality crioc irelices provide the same inTonation about the experience of a buyoc

who continnes to buy computer syr'"res with o sin-dior set of ehomacteristics, as "veil as a

hover cohn '1' es od:'aro.ge or the avahability of charatteristels that did not previously exlco

There are ro"sens at think corstar.t euthity price indices do no pro' ide the sane. infinsnaton

for both types of buyer:. The correspondence bcneen constant quality price indices and

economic 'eifare viE be weaker vale'. prodoct charocosristics crinno' be repackaged (og. see

Traherpe"; [199(1'). For e:eimnpie, one large cemputec system may provide more services to a

buyer than 'coo sy' e':             xaoiy half thc omour :f measurable characteristics boo

appropriate ,velcare issue concerns buyer satisfaction with the extension of product space --

i.e., extensions of the range of quality available. If a set of adopters of new products could be

accurately survesed, how much would they be willing to pay not to give up the new

oaoahbity associatod both extensions of cornput's's'? A large body of work on cost of living"

indices suggests that the "viilingiess to pay" for product extensions may have a nonlinear

relationship to constant quality price decreases)

        The problem considered here does not lend itself to a single statistical test or

experiment. To reach a onvincmg conclusion, it would be better to see tf a variety of




       it is well known that prOc indices have problems measuring the benefits associated with new goods. The
scene problem arises if 'entonsions of product space (e.g., inventing s system with computer capacity twice as
high as sn pre'ieus system) crc associated with new sercices, L's either event there is an important issue
regarding the procedures for inoonasrating new goods into price indices. As Triplett [19119] argues the central
issue in dcvcloptng appropriate procedures revolve srocnd the goals of the indero whether ii intends to retire'
charges Ic the costs of prrdtscicg' or dirges in the "coo of i'zingd Th:s paper focuses primarily on issues
regarding the mesaorement cf chngcs scorning to buyers.
                                                      3

information sources points in a similar direction. This paper addresses itself to several related

questions. First, what innovations in this period are associated with extensions of capabilities?

Second, do buyers adopt products that embody extensions of capabilities? Third, how coold a

measurement framework reoresent that action? Are extensions embodied only in increases in

capacity or other measurable features of a compoter system?

        Many of these questions reqoire an explicit supply and demand framework. The

difficult issoe concerns the flt of a framework to a differentiated product industry; inevitably,

some features of reality are saerifiecd to a model. This paper modifies a Bresnahan-Beny

model of vertical quality differentiation, which differentiates products along only one

dimension, here, computing power? While simple, this specification captures much of the

difference in demand thr systems with different computing capacity, i.e., measurable changes

in demand liar systems with higher speed and more memory. The paper argues that changes in

capacity provide inlbrmation about the introduction of new capabilities and services. Thus,

the model quantifies an important extension in product space over time and the contribution

to surplas lions these extensions. In addition, the model estimates the decline in the cost

Sanction of computer vendors over time, which serves a secondary goal, namely to estimate a

frilly specified model of the computing market in which changes to the costs of producing

quality alters market outcomes. Finally, though the model predicts inter-system competitive

outcomes with only limited success, it provides a rough measure of the importance of new



    2 All previous research investigates automobile producer and buyer behavior (Bresnahan [1981], [t987b],
Fcemtra and Levinsoha [1989], Berry, Levinaohn and Pakes [1993]). Previous use of these methods required a
complete census on the price, quantity and characteristics of every product in the market. The methods developed
here can be used w5en a complete census of product characteristics is not known, which suits data typically
available so a computer industry researcher.
 product entry for buyer surplus.




         This section brief3y describes important features of technological change in the

 mauttramc computing market from 1968 to 1981. This period witnessed a rapid decline in

prices, a dramatic extension of capabilities. and a notable change in the quality of alternatives

to mainframes. For some buyers the economic benefit associated with technological change to

mainframes was associated with declines in prices, for others it was extensions of capabilities.

Each is discussed in turn.

         Over the long nan, usainfratne products underwent rapid decline in prices per

measurable unit of computing, usually measured by CPU speed and memory capacity. The

important open debate concems the association of dramatic change in price per computing

unit with the introduction of particular products and other market events.3 For example,

there is no agreement about the improvement over previous generations associated vrith the

introduction of the IBM system 370. This disagreement is important for any calculation of

economic welfare because the system 370 replaced the system 360, and each was the most

popular system in the United States in its day. Second, and more generally, the prices of old

and new generations of systems, which may be substitutes, do not follow a simple pattern.



       Corstniction of constant quaitty price indices has received mach attention because of its importance for
(IMP measurement There is much disagreement about the proper nsetheds to use and the proper data to employ
to measurc this phenomenon. See Gordon [1989], [1990], Duiberger [1989], Cole et al [1986], Tripiett [1986,
 1989], Bemdt and Gritiches [t990], Bemdt, Showaher. and Woolridge [1991], and Oliner [1992]. Related
 research on the welfare benetiu from technical change uses ain3slar price indices to recover surplus generated
 from declines in the price of aggregate competing capital. Sometimes this approach also requires niessuremeot of
'siilingness to pay for new capabilities, which is often oifticulr to obtain (e.g., see Bresnaban P986]. Flarnns
 [19871. Scads and Morrison [i992], Oryaolfsson [1993]).
Some observers argue that disequilibrium influenced the pricing of mainframes, thous

there is much disagreement about its root causes (Fisher et ad [1983], Dulberger [1989],

Gordon [1989]). This debate influences the interpretation of the technical improvements

embodied in new and old vintages. Both issues are discussed below.

       This industry also experienced extensions in capabilities in many dimensions. Some

improvements are reflected in the easily measurable features of a system, particularly those

extensions associatcd with increases in computing capacity. Larger computing niemogr and

faster CPU speeds permitted users to address increasingly more complex problems and

regularly pcrthnn tasks that could not be previously accomplished, let alone attempted.

Scientific and engineering users were the first to take advantage of faster computing speeds

and larger memories. Internal and extemal storage capacity also expanded, and input/output

speeds increased. Ihese innovations mac large databa cs easier to use and broadened their

potential applicability. Hardware architecture and operating system software underwent many

refinements associated both multi-user systems, a development crucial to all timesharing

applications and applications that require many users to perform quick queries of centralized

databases. Service bureaus, insurance and banking users, and many large organizations

employed these developments in new inventory and reservation systems. Later refinements

required qtnek access to large databases in real-time. These applications diffused widely in

the l9tibs and the refinements began diffusing in the mid 1970s (Fisher, McGowan, and

McKie [1983], Flamm [1989]).

       Other extensions were also very important, but are not so easily assoeiated with

measurable features of a processor. Solid-state circuitry, improved air-conditioning units, and
more OutrotO' dosgn aiso made systems more reliable and lowered serv:cing costs, which

resulted it' die exoarsi.m of computing into ever more essential enterprise functions New and

buttes pmgmrnmuog hngrtanes ai' diffused across many systems. By the end of the t97Us a

third.parr' software indusoy tar' begun to mushroom, further diffusing refrna'd application

cotiware across many computing platforms Other peripherals also in roved and became

embodied it printers, terniinals, and countless other minor components. The relevant point is

dint these rnesvatiora and many others were important to buyers. but arc not easy to measure.

       As die comgrter industry man"ed, users came to expect change — i.e., extensions of

capabilities or entirely new products —. and plan far change. Buyers modified the memory and

 peed of then CPU. hut here other dumbba investments in software or peripherals. Or, buyers

unhia teed particular software programs or peripheral components. but not other parts of their

systems. As buyers learned about their needs and discovered technological opportunities, as

new products were introduced, and as old products became obsolete, buyers had to

  nrhaoaii, reevaluate their situations. A regular cycle uegan o emerge: penphernl and

sofavore upgrading induced bottlenecks in CPUs, vrtdoi' induced further CPU upgrading.

ssi'dch induced further peripheral and software enhancements, The introduction of timesharing

and techniques for querying central databases further accelerated these regular cycles.

       Three important points follosv from this cycle: first, upgrading to larger CPU capacity

became associated with talcmg advantage of technical improvements in other parts of the

system. Thus the invention of and reduction in the price of; large computing capacity

enabled many users to tales advantage of technical change in complementary components.

For many buyers. demand for greater computing capacity reflected demand for
                                                 7

complementary peripherals and software. Second, the extension of capabilities in peripheral

componeots, software, and CPUs interacted with enhancements in other parts of the system.

The economic value created by' the extension of computing capacity, while obviously

imoortant, does not relate in any linear fashion to the decline in prices in constant quality

CPUs. Value creation must also relate to the prices and functions in other parts of the

system.

       Third. the rate of value creation to a buyer could be much different than the rate of

price decline in computing capacity. It may be faster if declines in prices enabled a user to

reahze local economies of scale in the distribution of computing services and employment of

computing capital investments. Localized economies could produce the repackaging problem

in CPU product characteristics, i.e., buyers value the increase in computing capacity

embodied in CPtJz Since researchers of centralized management of computing facilities (e.g.,

Inmon [l9hhi, Priedman and ConVord [1992]) emphasize the renlacement cycle, this factor

was probably very important for many buyem. On the other hand, the tme of value creation

to a buyer could be slower if the bottlenecks underlying the replacement cycle choked off the

ability to realize much advance. Since researchers of centralized management of computing

the ilities also emphasize increasing buyer dissatisfaction with translating enteeprise needs into

feasible teelmical solutions, particularly by the early l9SOs, then many buyers may not have

realize localized economies of scale.

       Notable changes to non-mainframes partially determined the relative value buyers

placed on the changes to large systems. If some buyers do not have a repackaging problem,

declines in prices may simply induce purchases of cheaper computing power, but not
                                                       8

necessariiv purchases of a bigger CPU. That is, the choice between a large or a small CPU

deoends on tho relative price!ner characteristic for small and large systems, as each is

introduced. This is imoortant because there were marsy changes in these ohoices over the

period. Pew general-purpose computing suhstiootes for mainfianoes were available in 1968, but

over the i970s minicomputer hardware along with general-purpose software was developed,

so that users could periorrn some small tasks that previously required mainfarnes, These

mirdcompnters wore especially attractive tie a decentralized computing environment. By l98i

minicomputer vendors were also beginrdng to offer users viable growth paths for their

systems if the users needs ourpeew large superrninis.4 In principle, buyers could (and many

did) break up their computing needs into smaller units, taking advantage of decentralized

management. Most importantly for empirical purposes, the costs and capabilities of smaller

systems shift over the period, and their purchase is outside the view provided by the data in

this paper.

        This brief history suggests that it may not make sense to conceive of technological

change as equivalent to a simple fall in the price level. Price declines enabled many events

that took place. Yet, important episodes of value creation were associated with specific

inventions that extended buyer capabilities into new areas -- e.g., the invention of reliable

real-time database query, the invention of multi-user computing without intenuption. Value

creation was not associated solely (or even primarily) with the decline in costs of the delivery

of these services. The willingness to take advantage of new capabilities in any period became

associated with a willingness to adopt computing capacity of higher and higher levels. The


   'Note rEar personal computers were only begimiog to difitise by t981 and were largely employed as
sophisticated rsrminals. PCa were not viewed as substitutes for mainframes except for very avail probiems.
                                                9
irnponanee of theY \Vii1s to pay for new capabilities will ultimately be an empirical

issue. Is there evidence of much adoption of systems with increases in capabilities?



llLBicabbki
       A soppl, -side model and a demand-side model compnse this papeds measurement

framczork. itic model theuses attention on the demand for computing capacity. The model is

dexible enough to allow underlying demand preferences to vary over different capacities and

sizes and to change over time. It also pennits the costs of supplying computing caoaeity to

decline ovcr time. Finally, it provides a rough test ofether vendors compete solely in

measu1 able features of computing capacity.

         r'wjd-stonsaderfl
       Consider a market in a given year As in Bresnahan's (1981], [1987a] model of the

automobile market, this study makes five assumptions: (1) All users evaluate all mainframe

computers in terms of the same (vertical) index of quality, i.e., computing power. (2) Users

diflbr in their vvillingness to pay for computing power. (3) There are many "uses" for

computer systems. each reqniring one computer system. (4) Eaeh potential user compares

among N possible diflbrent models. The net benefit from each model j in use i is U = e4

I I lere, e is the marginal utility of quality, which varies across users i, d is quality, and p is

price of the pro'dLiet (5) There is a composite good of "lower" quality, which is not part of

the focus product group, hut is a potential option for purchase by users. This will be good

zero, the "outside good' It sells for price P5 and has quality da. In this study, the outside

good is equivalent to a small IBM mainframe or a general-purpose superminieomputer. Its
                                                        10

 price and quality change each year.

          Equilibrium in the market concems the demand for computing power. The system

 choseo satisfies U;: > U15 for all], k          Thus, an optimal choice implies that st > h15 = (P           -

      -
 P5ghl ct3 for all],      k     i. Io equilibrium, users will fmd that they can rank systems (see
 Breanahan [1981] for elaboration) according to their compoting power, All] models are

 ranked according to d or lii; either is equivalent in equilibrium.5 Some systems will provide

 considerable computer cower but will be ercoensive, while others will pnovide little computing

 pover but will be inexpensive. The data in this study appear consistent with this slructural

 assumption for two reasons:       (I) A spread exists between the capabilities (and prices) of the
 least and most powenlid mainframe, and (2) roost measures               of computing performance and
prices are highly cotreiated.

          Let the willingness to pay for computing power, e1, be distributed according to some

thnction F(z). Thds function represents the cumulative distribution of purchasers with a

marginal utility of purchase less than z. Let S, measure the market share of product]. Model]
= N is the highest quality available and b1 measures a choice between] andj-1. This implies

   = F°(I -           Sj),j = l,...N, whem S =Q/M Q1             is   the qua tity sold for product i, and M
              [Bkal

is the total potential size of the number of uses, If M is a parameter to be estimated and Q is

data, then by design 0 <Z' S I, so M> )J'Q1, since the outside good is not observed.
That is, estimates of tat, the total size of the market, must exceed the total number of




                        d
      In this model > implies P > P0 for all obaen'edj ayatems, ainee a ayatem violating this inequality
would not tu chosen at all. Thus, phces must dat faster than quality as quality improves. Increasing the marginal
costs of qualiry can yield this outcome. Soc Bresnahan [1981, 1981] and Beny [1992] for farther elaBoration.
 Sarr"wd parehcos             H, to Bresietan [1981], [1987a], this paper also employs a uniform

tastri Than. b           I - [Y" Sj. Thus, estimating the density is essentially the same as

oNtuaato'g M ftc                  tliuarrateu in ftftre 1. The above implies a retationsnip betsseen

t:urkccneatncl:e7tte lcd d. (P-Rplj lN. toadapttoanineemplete
days et 1expoincd bcloss), take ae definition fur h anu substitute rcarsively to get d -                            tic —


1, lIP_-P )il -da'1,.S14.
                                          outart Figuar I appruxima_eiy ler

           ftc mode! cuts several notevvorth: features fast, equisaicot prices between model]

          I eaph uyiva1ent qualities. Second the value ofT -                      d5 is   the net quality of a system

cot iperco sstth 'in        aide good. Without a measure of the quaIl'3 'f the outside good. it is

   .5         I".e H t.f.ueJ3 .nputc an md' x ol a 'y. teoft 'aal9o ..omporecl with an

'u,s,i .t.ecly.'J ,.e" ,H intstookeathreare!o! oserpretotac beeausethepneeandquality
   'a e'c't. cIa oos.i we enartflbog over time. Third, eon'putbsg e -                      d does not ruqune any
               -SC., Loetertsties, oniy data on prtees and quantities. It I,, entirely a fi.inetion ef

trsa     t'd ys H ,ted coats and the data about the prd and market shares. This will suit

-. cilable data eel csliere there is acceptable infbruation o', prices and quantities, but not on
cc cry sy stem's characteristics.

IL Stpe[ at fin eons ilT sti


        Ore', uus authors ',ase   Sc5LThtXi   titus NI suns knosun, so es'urnating Ni is one novelty here (Beny [l992jj.

       Berry 119921 saqgees eatog disthbotionc other than the unifann. With an exponential distribution we get b
= - tflo(s. c' exp'-b. O) -t9ntni', S) where Ei is the mean of the exponential distribution. This must be set
to , since It is a t aIr rro'ed. Pre.iosinary research also used an exponential distribution and found no change in
the essernai welts, this paper ecu only show results for the miform distribution, For the pnee and quantity
data used ii thi, papen estimates of 2r.plied quality with the two distributions were highly correlated in every
year of't.a sri4'iO (e'oood .9).
          There are man' opl:ooal faxns for describing supplyside behavior, The simplest is

the care of independent pnicb;p This modei assumes that the economic actor who prices a

5' toe: cni -      ne:Oeto   lie ffLct if a rostem's onoe on iso rrr ntaauity f that system and

 foes nor mtema,tze the eftect oft' at systeods pace on tho prc'5tan isp; of any other system.

 eduginal c unuc u 'n lifi5f P; S/{([i(Th S1j]/thJt ;+{ii2t S'i]!(Fgi -fti)l sere
'i'us xorescni raker :3 'artage of 'lie reftion of b in tot us of prtces and implied

quasi'i toY

          TIe i.;deyotxIcn 'rithn; model e-asii" generalIzes Se a rrnlectu,n! ''ariatiuns n'odft

 Ti-e'oai'san iIY9'. an ap::o.arI; "ldelv used in 'esipirscai applications for testmg bohaviora'

    ansptior..s." Thu cc:)       of variation parameter tests the rssun.ptlon of Bertrand pricing

vzlili n to roucbiy equivalent to testing whether some unobserved factor other than demand for

compu' big capacity influences prices. Marrinal revenue is MR =               f-   exp(S)Q1stAj(d
                                                                                                      -
-          cgi"]. iris easier to estimate eaqs(6I than v liecacse it p"events accidental division by

      in a maximum likelihood aigodshns. Testing flcrtran bed avior amounts to 1estmg H:8 =

      P       argo, ftc: is Joce to i and Bertrand pricing ; rolected The demand elasticity far
system-' j is      = -Pg(P,Q.Mgiexpgigigi Notice that M anh eXp/P) are the only estimated

;'aramneters in MR and &, which means many factors influence the estimate of M. '[his is

important becaase the bounds on the estimate of ha M> Z1Q limits the elasticity. Since

exp(tf) acts in mvecse relation to tot estimates off may offset limits associated with




    8Notethatnaralnalmevunurrnstbensftslslyadlusted'MsenP=,vdmichisarareesentinthisdata This
paper adopts the c'snventior ,ha bnm' systems sompete against their nearest neighbors. Thus, the marginal bar aPt
from chaneiog a pboe is from caning into that nemghbo?a market abuse.

      See the disarasico in Bres'sahar :tr    sod Tirole t1989] fcr more on this paint.
                                                       13

estimaung 1st

         This modei of vendor behavior has several obvious dratdoaeks. Independent pricing

violates the spirit of multi-product competition in the mainframe computer industry.t5

Morcoser, the above specification is not ideal for modelling the pricing of older systems,

where the used market constrains pricing (Oliner [1993]). Finally, the above specifications do

not treat vendors asyuanetncally, which vtolates industry folklore about IBM s dominance.

  issue arc mponant issues for the estimation of vendor behavior, though not necessarily

important far the estimation of buyer surplus, nor necessarily for quantijing extensions in

product space. The discussion of results will ingidight when these issues pertain to this study's

analysis.



lMjththntiua
        ilerry 1:19911 compares the computed implied quality with measured quality and the

implied tnart nal revenue with measured marginal cost, which is the strategy used here, with

modtieatons to match available data. The measures of quality are the vector x1 for product j.

Then d, - tIL-' explstl1- tao and MR1 = exp(sy+ us), where ad5 andes1 are error terms.

The multiplicative Ibnn air the quality index is for convenience. The multiplicative form for

margnal cost, loilovsing previous research (e.g., Bresnahan [1981], [l987a]), assumes that

marainal costs are convex in characteristics. It also guarantees positive estimated marginal

costs. it is necessary to instrument for x5 since the cost of desiguing systems with x

characteristics detemsines the observed ehanieteristies and their prices (and quantities and

    '° This experiment e'nnot employ Bresnahsos [19811 approach to this issue because in this pspe?s data it is
very mconu000 toe the some hon tu market two 'neighboring" products.
                                                          14

implied qualitY. ieaoino te ri nuierneous eouaticns hats,

         Note that d. is en imp teit function of M end P This analysis assumes M is unkncnr

and ft is hooves 'vith uce exceqrYn described below," Let M= T(Xi—rrj valece TQ

e,,Q is the tots' number of observed purchases. This analysis assumes n =                        r    frr oh t. hut

otherwise there wil, be c operate ruppIy and demand eouation,s for each year n the inittal

estimates)2 As described reeiov, the data arc arrsngcd 'at determine P. in coon eor. This

benefits the sm datiurn later and does not significantly change estimation results

         Wreo M end the other pyrometers are not Leo' - at, they eon be ectresated atmg

,,ur' meor thrrc-°tsgo ioa°t rquores tAmemsya ti985 Mintmote f                           S,ry®P1 e, vhere
o Y - fxP2xr'YP:ft              ho P. — Z[7ZZ. and e = 'e4,ss). N                = IS, tviR). d and MR are
vectors of the left-hand side variables, x is the matrix of regressors, X is a block diagonal

matrix of regressors x, z is a matrix of the set of instruments for x, end Z is a block diagonal

matrix of instruments z The choice of x and z will be discussed below, Note, however, that

this s"stem con be estimated sinoe there exists a complete set of data on prices and quantities.

ihere ie no need fer 's veriobies for every system's characteristics. a is a 2x2 matrix of

consistent estimates for the variance and eovariance of & These estimates are found from the

nonlinear two-stage least squares errors and are equal to a =                ft (de)T, where T is the


      If M is known. then it i easy to estimate the independent pricing model. ft can be left unidentified
within a constant term. Thus. ore cm estimate hof -      - = ecl and hftMR) - x4cc = er ming a standard
mmimum—distance estimator.

      Other parameterizadons of the size of die market did not produce qualitatively different results so this
paper only presenrs the sbnp'ect soeo,ttcat,on.
    '2 Without further OL. norni-. r -.oohir,g of the outside good and its quality, d3, the structural form for P will
necessarily he sd bce. idresrai,sn 98:. :987] deals with this issue by positing a hedonic relationship hetaseen
the qualiri of the 'utatte aped sr,o 's price.
                                                        15

number of observations. Minimizing the above yields estimates for C4                     and M whieb then

yields estimates of dd5 and elasticities)4

         There is a subtle tradeoff between guaranteeing positive estimates of marginal costs

and g'aaranteerng plausible elasticity estimates for every product. If marginal costs are positive

by design, nvsreinai revenue may be negative for a few observations 'shere parameters

estimates are 'fbi away" from their respective optimums. This is problematic because it

destroys any maximum likelihood algorithm (be., ln(NR) does not exist for MR < 0). The

more general point is that the functional form cannot guarantee that all product elasticities are

less than negative one at non-optimized parameters. This is related, since MR5 = [P5(l±I/e)].

         The approximation in[P1(l±l/e))           ln(11) + I/c1 eliminates both problems and results in

positive marginal costs everywhere. This works well with this paper's data because 1/ is

much less than -1 tbr all but a few observations in the fmal estimates. The alternative solution

to the above problems, which is not presented, is to not guarantee that marginal costs are

positive. This alternative lets elasticities attain both plausible and implausible values without

stopping the whole estimation, but it sometimes results in negative predicted marginal costs.

Since a Sew implausible elasticities are inevitable under either specification, at least the

approximation above guarantees positive marginal costs. As it turned out, all but a few

elasticities stere much smaller than -l ar optimized parameters, so the cost of using the




      In practice, minimizing f can in very mime consuming. Effort is saved by meempsizing that the optimized
estimated (Send a wit in let(S)' = [X5c® P/Xf'[X(a®P3Yf Seeing land a equal to optimized values
and substituting into f yields a concentrated function determined solely by the value of M and market power
parameters. It is then straightforward to find the optimal a and 3 (as fitnetions of the optimal d and wilt). The
fmal step is tn find the sunderd ermes for all the estimates by computing the varianee-eovariancc matnx with all
the (already optimized) parameters.
                                                          16

approxm.ation was small.'




         The total buyeT surpius net of outside good =                    ([bt±b3+ ][d4]/2-[V-Ps])Q;.

Since d5 is not identified. di alone cannot be identified, The di               d0   can canoe from two

possible sonrces. If there is characteristic data for all systems, then it is possible to use the

estimate of 3 and X. Since this paper does not have data for all di,'sten-ts, c -                d0   come directly

from the estimate of M and the data on prices and qoantities.

         This method does not measure the benefits from buying a system in terms of its

characteristics. Nor does it measure the average benefits from buying a system, or the total

benefits, to buyers from computerizatiofi. There are two reasons for this, First, this model of

each yeats competition presumes to measure the benefits associated with the last hit of

computing power purchased, not the surplus associated with buying the first fractional unit of

computer power. Second, the method does not anchor the estimates of the quality of a system

over time. mat is, the absolute level of quality of a particular model is not constrained to be

similar over time. Thus, surplus estimates may change over time due to changing units of

comparison. In particular, the outside good changes each year, altering the relative benefits of

being in the mainframe market.

         These limitations make the method well suited to two unit-free estimates of the



       One other aitersative is to use an error structure like the one found in Bresnahan [1981,1987]. He solves
for the optinosi price sod quantity under the sssurnption that the mcdel is correct and compares those computed
numbers against the actual observed data. Breanaharts alternative requires a complete data act, i.e., characteristics
for all models. Whiie this exists for new automobiles, such data do not exist for the historical computer market,
rendering this sltenative infeasible.
                                                      17

importance of new enuy. One is to estimate the percentage of surplus in a given year

attributable to systems with certain features, such as young age or large computing power.

The main advantaoe of thrs measure is that the percentage of surplus is unit-free and easily

compared over time. If extension of capabilities matters in this market, then it must at least

hoid io the single capability extended here, computing power. If the percentage of surplus

associated with large systems falls over time, then we reject the view that this factor matters.

        A second experiment involves removing systems sssth particular characteristics and

comparing surplus generated with and without those systenn. This comparison is in the spirit

of sselfare calculations that hold population and demand characteristics constant, but change

the choice set available to consumers- As before, the percentage difference in surplus is unit-

free and easily compared over time. If buyers adopt new systems because they embody

'anohservahla hut valuable, extensions of capabilities, then removing new systems could result

O large losses in surplus.



YUnhI
        This papef s data on computer prices, quantities, and vintages comes from mdusfly

censuses from Intemational Data Corporation's (DC) EDP Industry Reports (EDPdR)is. IDC

estimated the number of installations of each type of computer system and, until 1981,




      Patrick McGovern begat compiling this census in 1962 in Computers and Automatlon magazine. It
continued in meddled form under tUC auspices from the mid 19bPs onward. The archivea of the Charles
Babbsae insmiuao at the University of Mianesota contains a collection. This paper also makes use of a set of
PUP toduosv Reouos contained at the Library for the Graduate School of Business at Stanford University.
                                                          18

estimated the monthly recta et woieh an aven'ge type of system leased)5 The data in this

paper begins     beth rite December 51 1968 report anal ends with the Januasy 1, 1981 report

The lest year ho 'olden °EC dhrirpeishro beoo'een the camber rfjosfiflatjons inoide an'

outside the United States as 1968 beer the entire fturteen year period, this data concerns

late installed case at "var 359 ditierent computer sytsems (see appendix of Greenstein

)i994]j This 's elearty the beer data available ott tim size of installed base and rental prices.0

VL1,Jlitatitmpk
           'fiim ut n, dlfl cdt n°n biases arIse from mcinrainin5 exelusise use ufiDCs

drfn)ioc of a meln.femt'. First 'be 1°f8 and. toad debidtir" ofa mainleame is too broad, It

Includes some systems rIco DeC reclassified as 'Digital DedIcated Application in 197o.

TEen. systems are actually minicomputers like the DEC PDP-8, not genemI-purpose systems.

Second, more redefinition problems arise on a smaller scale once IDC establishes several on

poing dnsannsss for systems ether than mainframes (1 e., minicomputers, small business

rstems, desktop). be roscar'b vs .'eeaslvnah" move a ryatem into the mainframe category

that was not previously there. Its rasearehers nlsn move a system out of the mainframe




      Phister identifies several years in which tt)C revised the reported nomber of installaliorLa in previous years,
osnicuisr for taM models in i967-t97. In those cases, Phisseds repcned uçKlstca were used. This makes mis
papods esttmavs ecmpsrable aim Phisteis [1979] sod Flanmis [1987a,b] description of the difitasion of
compu:irg eoesvrent, sthijs osed more aggregate IliaC dais. II also nsskes this paperti results comparable to
OItnefs 11992] 'oziysti dada' retirement patterns smong IBM mainframes, vhirh uses similar hOC data for IBIS
systems.

      IOu 'otter ."orp'obv dies seems exists for this perIod. Remarkably, only a few studiss of the eoorf,s'g
market (e.g Mtcoceis '979], Pfizer [1979], fissnm t1987a,bI, Duiberger [1989]. Ohner [1992], Khsm'io
[1994]l have used pests of thIs data and none have ever expletted all facets of it (e.g., see Irireenstein [1094'
an cxnmination of diffusion1
                                                                                                                 f'
                                                          19

category that previously was there.

         The best solution to this problem defmes the outside good consistently across different

yeses of the sample. This pope? s outside good is the smallest mainframe offered by IBM a

system 360/20 (introduced in September 1965). The system 360/20 has the virtue that it is

very close to the smallest mainframe in llIX2s census, but it provides a more consistent

definition of the lower hound on this market over time than that used by IDC. Moreover, its

price changes throughout the sample period, reflecting real changes in the quality and market

price of systems peribmaing small decentralized computing tasks. Finally, it eliminates only a

few useful potential observations in each year.2° Table 1 shows the results of this selection.

Consistently defining the outside good does not impose a large loss. The systems used by

more than 20,01)0 buyers typically are sampled. The ttreatest losses occur in the most recent

years, when this procedure elinamies 12 of the 178 potential observations from IDC's census.

                                          [Table 1 approximately here]

         liver with a eonststently defmed outside good, two potential problems remain. First.

ICC oevised its survey scope twice, once between 1969 and 1970, and once between 1976 and

1977, In both eases, IDC consolidated the number of models it covered,21 Second, by the end

of the sample, the difference between mainframes and some large general-purpose



    '  The roost important ease is IDX7s decision to include the tBM System 36 in the sample in 1976 (estimated
installed base at 5000 units) and exclude it from mainframes after that (bat include it in "small business
systems") Fairly experiments shossed that this particular flip.flop makes 1976's estimates inconsistent with other
years.

    ss Pars of the reason is that there is iess characteristic data available for the small systems. In addition, the
vast nojori'.y at eliminated systems were commercial failures.

      For example, the number of models covered in 1969 was 176, while only 147 were covered in 1970, In
1976 there were 305 medels covered, but only 188 in 1977. See Table I.
                                                      20
msmcomputer lawia. 'super'ssmS) bee. mes blurred. vthich raises questions about tile

survey's eosnp'ete'sees. The main issue is whether ODd ineluded in the mainframe eategory au

the supereshinleummtrr systems that ve"e dose substitutes for generakpurpose matnframes. si

reasonable ease outhit be made that ODd included most reles sot systems? but a reasonable

-ease could also be mode thea t did not? Ending the sample in 1981 holds this problem to a

mmrrnum.



             epsueruseTthetnetalledbascofsystetrsu:2 pe-enyearasameas"'eotauanrity
        uart et stare This isjus1ifien bec.stse nor' - ': no teased their eouipment in the late

i°°5's .nd wi0s Mono.             many mainframe compoters are not subject to frequent

 •eclue'dLnt breakdosw'.s, so the services delivered do not physically depreciate rapidly after

sale. If at oil thaugb tts market value may depreetate due to teehnoIoeal obsolescence). Tins

dosssbaei.He that this defInition overstates the poptdarity of m old system (md the general

          hi -e sass of the market) by showing that old and new systems are in competition.

          While ?b1ister [19791 clearly believes that ildUs estimates of installed base are the best



    °  tt is not clear whether the money spent on euperminie ever amounted to more tisan a small fraction of the
amount of mcney spent on mainframes. According to the 1983 l]ttC census for minicomputers and mainframes,
the value of tnstshed base sssariated with super-nsinicomputcrs came to roughly half the value of all
rsiricomputers, or rougy 15 percent of the value of the installed base of mainframes. IDOs census differs from
the other censuses, psrticulsriy CBEMA's, because IDC includes se',ersi systems as mainframes (i.e., those from
IBM) which others classifr as super-nsinicomputers. This makes fIrs census more "complete," which matters
by the early t980s. Fsr exsmple. ac'nrding to the CBEMA [1992], in l976 insinfranse shipments reached over 5
billion dollars, whiie the toed spent on all rnissicomputers was 1.8 billion, By 1982, CBEMA estimstes that
msinfr'sme shipments reached iO oiiior and mihicomputer shipments reached 7.7 billion. CBEMA Seas not
stare 'aloe fraction 'cent to super miri'omputers. but 7,7 billion clearly osen'tstes the size of the rompethicr
between m,si'sfrsme sod mtsiccosp'teiu.

     The most questionable omissions in thiCs msin.frsnse tables are those regarding the VAX models frnm
DEC, end chrrilar competitive models from other floss such as Wsng. Prime, sad Dais General.
                                                        21

among the available alternatives, he nevertheless warns about several potential problems that

could influence calculations using these data25 Dulberger also questions the accuracy of IDC's

estimates of installed base, while conceding that they arc the best publicly available!5 Given

these concerns, the data was tested for internal consistency, which it readily met.25 in any

event, no alternative is satisfactory. Sales data is not available, and it is not possible to

estintate suies horn the change in installed base from year to year, because it becomes an

increasingly poor estimate of shipments of systems when systems become more than a few

years old.

         lix: estimated the price of a typical system configuration, which is the price used in

this study. lUG's estinsates arc probably the right order of magnitude, but are also subject to

rneasurement error- l'hister uses these prices for estimates of the value of installed base.

HowevT lie believes that the prices for obsolete systems are too high, since IDC would use

the lest ulibred price hiir a system lacking any recent transaction, but that the bias in old

prices influences only a few of the systems in the United States. Flarnrn reaches a similar

conclusion befure using Phistefs estimates for a few calculations? Thus, no strong

    ° tie oases on pa. 250. "Ii is my opinion that 1to2s staff; files, and data sources make that organization's
published statisncs the test avai!abie." Yet, due to occasional revisions of previous EDP/IR reports, Phister is not
convinced that IDC's estimates of the size of installed base are precise. However, many of his uses of this data
reveal his hsthef that IDC got the general order of magnitude correct. Where available, this paper uses Phiste?s
correetons.
    ° (Ste especially difficult problem is that 1t1X2 may underestimate the uumbar of users who upgrade their
systcmma (Duihcrger, private communication).
    ° The history of each new- systens was exsnaned. Did the developmeni of its installed base follow a
reasonable panem of growth, i.e., several years of growth followed by several years of decline? The absence of
such s psncns questions the platambilimy of the data.

    27
       tu addition, using these prices is not sdthoot precedent in the hedonic literature. The prices for new
sysmerso used by Gordon (as-well as many others) are very similar to those used here. Gordon's prices for his
sample arier 197? were taieen from fiotnpuls ma nt , which is published by .
                                                         22
conclusions should rely exclusively on one price.

Vy3frych.aractenrte
         The characteristics that make up x partially overlap those used in Gordon's [1989],

[1999]., Dedborgefs [1989], and Olineds [1992] analysis of computer system hedonic

regressions (see Triplets for a complete summary of the relevant issues). MIPS, or millions of

instructions per second, is an estimate of speed. The maximum memory included in a system

is an estimate of memory size.25

        MIPS and memory size data use not available for every systero in evesy year.

Computer intelligence Coenon-stion (dC) provides information about the features of systems

extant in 1991 and other imnortant l'dstorical systems?9 CIC's characteristic data covers

roughly three quarters of the most important mabd±aeae and supetominicomputer systems

(mod primarily in business applications) in 1981, or more than 90 percent of the installed

base, 'izrdch makes it more coroprehensive than any other single data source. Table 1 shows

that mild characteristic data matches an increasing fraction of the total number of models IDC

surveyed. The sample size begins at 59 for 1968 and grows to 178 by 1981.

        tDC provides a meesure of the techrdcal generation of a system. Dulbergcr [1989]



   °  Because n'.intmam and maximum memory are highly correlated (between .6 arid .7 in a year), only one
could be used. Because there are nesny reasons ta think that mascimsun memory is more reievsot to buyers than
minimum (Brmnalsan end Greemtein [1992]), nsasdman memory is used throughout the estimation.
   °   The macnorm of these veriablee come from Computer tntelligenre Comomtions (CtC) 1991 Computer
System Reoort, 'sitiob has many virtues relative to aitematives, the Computerworid dais, whirls Professor
Gordon has kindly lent out, begins in 1977. Is covers too few systems up to 1981 to be useful. The Auethsoh
data, winch Profesmr tvtiohaeis isas lets out, covers the early part of else 1970s. Unfortunately, it also only oovom
a small number of yen's. While the Phismer (1979) data covers a longer period, it generally only records the
system charsreertstics for the most popular systems and not the whole mari.et. In fart, Phisterir data covers only
shoes 20 percent so 55) cisrment of the system models surveyed by Be. ClOts data covers the same systenvs, pim
many more.
                                                  23

arctics that hedonic techniques may be mismeasuring the factors deciding prices when the

data is taken from a cross-section of systems in a market undergoing rapid technological leap

froggine' by successive new systems. Duiberger argues that this "disequilibrium' requires an

explicit treatment in a hedonic framework. The simplest means for testing Duibergeis

arcumnent. as found in Bemdt and (llriliches [1990] and Oliner [1992], is a measure of the

time that has elapsed since introduction. This variable is labeled "techage" Systems that had

more experience in the marketplace should have more software and other complementary

system enhancements, ediich increase the system's quality for the user.

       IDC's censuses categorize every system by size, with size ranging from 2 to 7. This

measure is of limited usefulness for a regressor because it is categorical, not continuous, and

is hi able correlated with MIPS and memory. however, it will be useful for the simulations,

because it is available fbr all systems, and therefore it provides a means for testing important

differences betv,cen entry behavior on the highest and lowest end of the computing-power

spectrum.

       lr'struments (the z matrix) Ibm each system are all of the characteristic data from the

nearest lower and higher neighboring system (fur which there is characteristic data). These

characteristics are typically exogenous, since they are designed by another finn. Yet they are

also correlated with the characteristics of the neighboring system, so they make for good

hatrunients°
       'fable 2 shows how the typical system in the sample changes over time. The average

price of a system (deflated by a producer price index) and the average size of a system's


   ° Thaks to Steve Bony and Frank Wolak for this suggestion.
                                                      24
mstailattons included in the sample decline over most of the years of the sample. The typical

system contains more memory (from 1099 to 5592 maximum memory on avenge) and

pontoons more instntctioas per second (from .326 to 2.22). These statistics about MIPS and

memory suggest that the product spece was extended over the sample period, hut they are

msuracent for conclusions about the economic importance of the extension. The most

dramatic changes in the avenge occur in the last three years of the sample upon the eatry of

some large supercomputers. Despite the addition of aew systems to the sample, the everage

technical age grows (from 4.1 to 8.9); the inclusion of some very old systems in the sample

of later years is to blame for this incse.ase in toe average,

                                       [Table 2 approximately here]

        Figure 2 provides an illustration of the diflltsion of large systems and foreshadows

results from the estimation. Figure 2 shows a box-plot of the distribution of MIPS in the

computer systems used in each year.5 The dark areas provide the range between the first and

third quartile, while the wbdte line shows the median. Every line above it represents a

particular system until the maximum. While this is a coarse measure of computing capacity,

the figaro shows a gradual extension of the product space. It also shows a gradual buyer

adoption of those extensions, and gradual shifting of revenues to systems with bdgher

computing capacity. For example, the MIPS of the 95th percentile of 1968 is the median of

the MIPS of systems in use by 1981. in addition, the product space between the maximum

and the 95th percentile becomes progressively filled in over tinse with new products, even as



      The tigure onty shows the MIPS ratings for the syetems that vera used to the estimation, Woile this is an
incomptete sesopie of the systems in use, the coverage unds to be almost complete for the tsrgest systems sod
the most popular systems. Hence, this provides a pretty accurate reflection of changes for the targer systems.
                                                  25

these points vaiy. Yet many years must pass hefore the extensions of product space are

widely adopted. The 95th percentile stays roughly the same between 1968 to 1973 and

between 1974 and 1976, and only begins to grow after 1977.

                                  [Figure 2 approximately here]



'1ff Resrilts

       This section presents estimates of the model and various tests of those estimates. The

discussion also presents calculations of buyer surplus and the rate of decline in the cost

Sanction. These estimates and calculations quantil3' the dramatic changes in the computer

indusuy that took place oser this period.

adfltt3
       'l'abie 3 presents estinutes of the conjectural variations model. With a few exceptions,

most of the estimates of (1 and   f3   are of the predicted sign and are significant. Systems with

more eompuung power possess higher quality and have higher marginal cost. More memory

contributes to the perceived quality of a product and to its increasing cost in all but the 1968

sample. Faster systents have higher quality and higher marginal costs in all of the estimates

except the 1972, 1973, and 1980 samples, when the coefficients are not significant. Older

systems usually possess higher quality and have higher marginal cost, but the coefficient is

insignificant half the time on the supply side, Fstimates for the size of the potential market

are small, estimated at 1 percent. For unapparent reasons, the model appears to fit badly in

1968, 1974, and 1989.

                                  [Table 3 approximately here]
                                               La

       The acriabirs measuring acmputing power are often quantitatively important on both

tie demand and the supply rides. These results arc consistent with the basic assumption of

this model, that comçutiog oower none expiams most 0' the cross-rectio'a variation in

demand for comouting. Foe varying size of the technical ape variable does not support the

view that disc uilibduo pricing matters much for the model and data. which is also

'cnsisen. veith the methodological approach of this paper.

       A cunosty of :oe'e first estimates is that crrefficieats on the supply side do not seem

to show a large radaction in the costs of supplying characteristics over time At most, there

a smo'l (and erratic downward shIft in the costs of characteristics This seems at odds with

 eeli-kocwo decilnec ir the costs of rreioory and processors, Later estimates showed that this

:ottem was an artifact of too much econometric freedom. A more constrained cost-frmction

scxaoitkatioo, more typical of the literature, will measure some anticipated decline below.

        One other feature of these estimates has to do with the model's econometrics. The

cstinaate of the implied quality of a system in one year has almost no econometric relationship

to that eatiniate in another year. The model in each year requires that systems "price

discriminrte" between users with different viilingncss to pay for computing power. but it

does not rerlaire similar quality' estimates for a given system from year to year. Thus, nothing

inherently ties doom the estimates of the implied quality of a system from year to year and

the estimates of scrptus generated from those estimates of implied quality. Olven this

econometric freedom, it is remarkable that the coefficient estimates do tend to have the same

sOn and roughly some order' f ioagoitude from year to year and roughly make sense. At thc

same time, the demand paranacteos are not ciose to constant across all years, These changcs
                                                      27
support the view that there are frequent changes to the basic relationship between the

underlying valuation of computing capacity and the measurable features of computing

capacity.

VIL2. Testing the necdtd

        The null hypothesis is that the conjecture parameter is zero, 'which is rejected. The

vaiae nf the conjectural parameter rejects Bertrand pricing. The benefit to undercutting rivals

is small, ic.. price increases are closely matched. All specifications and experiments 'with this

data, many not sho'rn here, could not eliminate this result,

        There are t'wo fundamental reasons for this estimate. First, many products are priced

close togethcr, especially at the low end where many older systems arc found.32 The model

must mteTret these systems ac lose substitutes, especially when each system has such low

market share. While this is probably the right inference for most systems with small market

share, it underemphasizes the importance of systems that have significantly higher market

shares, Second, there is not enough flexibility in the marginal revenue equation to adapt to the

'wide dispersion of market shares in this data. The only free parameter is M, but M is

constrained to be irteater than the number of systems sold. While the model does attribute

less competitive elasticities to the high-market share systems, it may scale all the elasticity

estimates incorrectly. M would have to become much smaller to generate elasticity estimates

that are sensihie her the high-market share systems. The conjectural variations parameter

provides more flexibility because it rcscales the elasticities, while retaining more inelastic

elasticities for systems 'with higher market share. Systems with large market shares display

    32
       The difference between neighboring systems aserages araund 3 percent of the price of the lower prired
system, but grows for the iiigber priced systems.
                                                         28

 elasticities consistent with large differences between marginal cost and price, and high

 markups over marcinal cost?3

          This result suggests one of two thingy: First, if the model cnrrectiy models product

 differentiation, then the firms behave quite differently fiom Bertrand pricing (i.e., they are

 niuch less aggressive). Second, using a hypothesis that is more plausible the parameter may

 show that some factors outside the model              i.e., factors other than the pricing and product

 differentiation modeled here — largely decide competition between vendors, This is plausible

 if vendors arc competing by embodying unmeasured new features in each generation of their

products. This possibility mises the same thndsmentai issues with which this paper becan

i.e., nbout the proper meara for modeling product differentiation and behavior in this industy,




         Table 4 sununsarizes the simulation of the consumer surplus for each year for the

coricctnasl variations model. The estimates of net total surplus are large. rougbdy one to two

rolion dollars a month (these are net of the potential benefits of purchasing the outside

t'ood)?° However, the estimates are also enatic, moving around by more than 50 percent

from one cried to the next. The average surplus per system, switch controls for the changes

in the number of systems in use in a year, makes more sense, These estimates also fluctuate.


    a Only a subset ot the total number of systems svailsbls display high markups over cost, salsicis seems
plausible. tn.soeotion of the data reveals that these systems are almost always the systems with large market
snares sod they almost always come from HiM. T'oere is also a slight tendency far more expensive systems to
have larger (absolute value) markups, bet smaller markups as a oercentsge of price. Thts is because these
systems are not as closely priced (in absolute value terms) to theft neighbors as the by/er priced systems sod
also have lower market shares.

      StrIctly speaktng, this restriction makes these estimates of surplus incomparable both previous surplus
estimates in this market (e.g., Bresnalsen [1987], Fianscn [1989], Brynolfason [1993]).
                                                  29
  but less than those that estimate the amount of total surplus. These estimates show an

  irregular but steady decline in the consumer surplus per system alter 1971. Table 4 also

  shows the net total surplus per net dollar expenditure (net ut potential expenditure on the

 outside good). This too shows a slow hut steady decline oIler 1971.

                                    [Table 4 approximately here)

         There arc several oossibleexplanauons for the decline in net surplus per system and

 surplus per dollur, FLrst, the model may increasiny fall to properly expi buyer exit from
 the mainframe market La the lute 1979s. The availability of super-minicomputers, which

 shams up as a devalued otainframa computer in this model, could lie behind the trend. This

 notion is possible, hut only partially successful, The rise in the net expenditure after 1977 is

due to a large discreet change to the nommal price of the outside good (from 3675 to 28th))

and utflation in the late l970s, which pnxluces the decline in the surplus per expenditure after

 1977. Yet no such simple explanution can account for trends between 1971 and 1976. The

decline in net surplus per system is the result of the increase in the number of systems but not

the increase in net su.rplus. The lack of increase in net surplus is still the mystery.

        A second possibility, the most plausible one, is that the reduction of product

thtferentiation to one dimension oversimplifies substitution possibilities. The model

implausibly shows a crowded product space as new systems enter, as if all new entty occurs

ott intensive martins. In practice, many new systems may enter on extensive margins that this

model cannot measure, ibis ne'.v entry generates gains in true, yet unmeasureth consumer

surplus. Therefore, the estimate in Table 4 is too low, particularly in later yes.us as systems

get many new capabilities. This explanation suggests that, at best, these estimates can only do
                                                      30

a good job of estimating surplus generated at the extensive margin (more computing

capacity).

MlLThThe importance of entry on ext61LLthnJa;s
         Table S displays estimates of entry 00 the ordy extensive margin in this model, more

compoting capacity. The table shows the amount of surplus attributable to systems in tDC's

size 5, 6. arid 7 categories, the top three categories in its ordinal ranking of system size. The

percentage of surplus artiObumble to systems beth high capacities grows over time. Roudy

21 percent pfto surplus in 1968 is attributable to systems of size 5, 6, and 7, and only 8

percent to systems of size 6 and 7. Thds grows to as much as 54 percent for all, and 23 and

14 for size 6 and 7. respectively, in 1981. Much of the growth in size 6 comes before 1976.

oddie growth occurs almost every year for size 7 systems. This reflects a general trend and is

not an artifact of any arbitrary data defmition of size by IDC.55

                                       [Table S approximately here]

         The table hiel-dights two ether factors about growth on the extensive margin. First., the

fraction of the installed base of systems attributable to the high-capacity systems is small,

never amounting to more than 10 percent of the total number of systems in 1968 and 25

percent in 1981. Yet this small fraction of systems accounts for a disproportionate amount                   of

consumer surplus --      21   percent in 1968 and 54 in 1981. Part of this occurs because larger

 systems cast more to the customer. Even though there are fewer of them, the expenditure per

 system is great. Extending the product space a bit results in a huge increase of expenditore,



     '  For example, tExt's censuses show a perceptible decline in the entry ef size 2 systems after 1976
 (Greenstein [l993l-. Yet this bias does not explain the time trend in table 6 because most size 2 syste,ns wore
 net included in this sample as a result of adopting a consistent definition for the outside good.
                                                31

though not nearly as many new units, This estimate supports the argument that arowth on the

extensive margin may have large influences on buyer surplus.

        However, the same estfres quantd3' anew aspect to extensive margin growth. Note

how long it took for this market to register much growth on the extensive margin. Surplus in

size 7 undergoes steady, but slow growth. Surplus in size 6 grows rapidly in the first half of

the sample and slowly, but unevenly, from there on out. A close examination of the data

illustrates why. The most popular size 6 system, IBM 360/65, was first installed in late 1965,

By 1968 users installed over three hundred 360/65 models and over five hundred other more

expensive systems. The IBM 37/155 then supplants the 360/65 as the most popular system of

size 6 in the early 1970s, hut the dision takes seseral years to reaeh its peak. By the late

1970s, however, no single system dominates the large system size earegory any longer. There

is ordy gradual change on the extensmve mnargin in the mid to late 1970s as new systems only

slowly become widely used. The slow but steady entry of many different new systems

accounts for most of the growth in the late l970s,

       Table 5 also presents estmmstes of the percentage of sumlus in each year atthbutthle to

systems of different vintages, principally those less than or equal to 4 and 6 years old. This

partially addresses the coneem that new products not only are cheaper, but embody new

unmeasured features not reflected in the price. First, as expected, young vintages tend to

generate the most sumpias, averaging 22 to 47 percent of surplus, depending on the measure.

Tins result, combined with die inability of teehage to predict system demand, suggests that

buyers purchase systems for more than just capacity, but this quality is not measurable in a

simple manner. Second, the mmnpomtunee of young vintages differs dramatically from year to
                                                 32
year. A few specific vintages influence surplus estimates. The technical vintage introduced in

1965-66 demiaates the surplus caiculatinns until the mid 1970s, wisich unquestionably reflects

the popularity nf the tBM system 360. The next major wave of surplus is associated with the

IBM system 370 (mostly vintage =      1971   and 1973). Tnese tea vintage effects dn nnt wurie

themselves nut until virtually the end of the sample, when the entry of many flew systems

bet'ins to influence the surplus simulations,

       No other family of systems genemtes so much surplus as the system 360 and 370

because no other family of systems has such a large market share. While this qualitative

result is not surprising (see Greenstein [1994]), it raises important issues. First, it suggests

that estimates of the benefits from technical change in the early years of computing arc

determined by estimates of the benefits associated with the technical improvements in a few

of the dominant systems of that era. Only in the later years are the benefits spread acrcss

more models. Second, it highlights the importance of properly measuring the benefits

associated with the system 360/370. In any quantity-weighted measurement exercise, such as

the above, small changes in estimates of the benefits associated with the system 360 and 370

lead to large changes in estimates of the benefits to society from technical changes in

computing. Tins observation adds importance to the debate about the (measured) economic

benefits associated with the system 370 (e.g., sea Dulberger [1989], Gordon [1989], and

Triplett [1989]) and whether most of the benefits from technical Change accrued to buyers.

Finally, these results again misc the unresolved question about the proper method for

weighting a popular system relative to less commercially successful systems in a hedonic

regression.
                                                        -'-5

         Table 6 puts the pattern of enLry into final perspective. It computes the counterldctuaj

 surplus generated if all new systems were absent (those less than 4 and 6 years old). It

 displays this counterfactual surplus as a fraction of buyer surplus measured with all the

 systems. This is ía the spirit of welfare calculations that keep the demand characteristics

 fixed, but alter the choices available to buyers. Removing young systems simulates -demand in

 the absence of any technical change Not sthsingiy, surplus declines without new systems.

 However, in any given rear it does not decline by more than a few percentage points. The

 largest declines are associated with the counterfactual elimination of the system 360 in the

early years of the sample. In the mid I 970s the decline is less than 1 percent and less than 3

percent by the late I biOs, especially for young systems,

                                       T'able 6 approximately here]

         Table 6 displays a well-known characteristic of countc'rfbctual welfare measures of

technical change: a new technology is only as good as the alternatives to it are bad. Even if

no new systems were invented, buyers would continue to use old technology. In this model,

old systems are very close substitutes, and switching between substitutes is assumed to be

costless, The product space is 'crowded as a result, so that the absence of a new teehnology'

sends buyers to a worse, but lower priced, system. Since entiy on the intensive margins can

only generate large gains when the product space is not crowded, the bigg rphn to such

entry m this model are recorded early in the sample, when the indusL is still yOung. Since

this crowding is probably an artiflict of not measuring all the dimensions that buyers value,


       tt seems less plausible to estimate the counterfactual surplus in the absence uf a system eta particular
size, In that munterfactaal world, there would be a large supplier meapanae in shortnin pricing behavior and
lungrun desien behavior, Simulating that counerfactual behavior does not make any paint that cannot already be
matte with the resulu in table 7.
                                               34
and Table 5 shows that a substantial number of buyers continue to purchase young systems,

Tablo 6 represents a (potentially severe) underestimate of the true sueplus losses.

       Table 6 echoes the observation that innovation takes a long tinac to achieve its full

effect (only here it is about the entry of new systems). Though the net beneflt from new

systems is small in any given year, the cumulative effect over many years is quite large. That

is, if all technical change had ceased in l968, by 198i the cumulative losses in each year

would have been enormous. However, not to belabor the point, but the longrun estimate of

loss is surely an underestimate. Much evidence suggests that important product characteristics

are not being measured here, 'Fne amount of mismeasurement must increase as the time

periods in comparison become further apart.

       Tables 5 and 6 embody both the strengths and weaknesses of the approach taken in

this paper. On the one hand, standard hedonic methods could not lead to these tnhlns or the

conclusions reached from them. Table 6 quantifies the benefits from new technology in usc,

while hedonic price methods stop at estimating improvements in what is available. Though

this papeds conclusions require structural assumptions about the nature of demand, this is par

(hr the course in using data on both quantities and prices. My other Structural model that

incorporates more dimensions boll necessarily show the same effects highlighted in this paper

and possibly more. On the dovoiside, Tables 5 and 6 are only as good as the structural

assumptions that generated them. Parts of this paper (and other analyses of this market,

Bresnahan and Greonstcin l992]) suggest that product differentiation is incomplately

modeled here and potentially correlated with age. Entry probably also occurred on nore

extensive margins than are modeled. If that is so, Tables 5 and 6 provide a lower bound on
                                                          35
the welfare losses from the absence of innovation.

ttiondlie
         Table 7 estimates cost f(mcttone on exactly the same data as vms used in Table 3. the

two equations use something aba to standard hedonic specitications but supplement it with a

market oower correction, as fouad in a vertical mode! both conjectural variations. Eppation

two takes fre form ln(P3 = {FQ]/[PbvIg(P,Q,MJ                     rcct gg The second equation is similar,

but specifies a different F over tiroe. The market size, M, is assumed to be about 1 percent

larger thaa the observed market, taken from the previous conjectural variation estimates in

Table 3,37 All the data is pooled such that a hasone coefficient for MIPS, memory, and age,

but diflbrent year durraay coeliicicnts, viftich captures the change in the level of the cost

Fraction of firms.38 This specification assumes thar all firms draw from the sanic cost Fraction

in a given year. Rather than exphcitiy model the demand side, which has !itt!e interest here,

the estimates err ploy a reduced tbrm for demand. Demand is a fanction of the same set of

regressors and instruments as used previously, plus time dummies. This treats MIPS, memory.

age, and market power as endogenous and the time dummies as exogenous.

                                          [Table 7 approximately here]

         The cost Fraction estimates have the following three features: First, coefficients for

memory, MIPS, and age all have the correct stgn. Second, none of the estimates show a


       The above resets suggest that lois ts last by esttmatisg a e.anjectunti variations incatel as if M it known
(even 'Then it is not). In any event, in a eoo'setorsi vanstions nsodel, the coniectorsi parameter 'would scale any
estin'.nte, effectively acting in the opposite direcuon of any 'set.tni.ate of the roadset size. Hence, it is much easier,
and no less insisbffol, to simply aseonvn a given size of a market, compote the implied pnxloct elasticities, and
then estimate a coniect'nre parameter to sonic the elasticity estaontoa properly.

    °Thoogn the dammy coefficients an.' anbiaaed estimates, the mdcx will not be. It is a nonlinear function of
an mbiaaed estimate. To correct ibr thin bias, the estimated standard errora use an appmximation suggested by
Thpieu [t989. This involves adding ,,ne bait of the standard error to die coefficient before compoang the index.
                                                            36

 monotonically declining rate of technical change. The most problematic of all the estimates

 are 1968 throua 1970, which may be due to changes in IDUs sampling frame in those years.

 This problem does not seem to be a manifestation of the movement from. the iBM 360 to the

 tBM 370, vthicb was first introduced in 1971. Third, all the estimates measure rapid rates of

 technical change over the long am. Equation I, which estimates only one conjecture

parameter for the entire sample, fmds a decline in the cost function of 20.0 percent over 14

years and 30.3 percent from 1971 to 1981. The second equation, bedch estimates a different

conjecture parameter for each of the three IDC sampling periods, estimates declines of 11.7

percent over 14 years and 25.5 percent from 1971 to 198l, The diffenmc.es in the. estimates

suggest that thnctionai form influences the precise estimate of change in markei pcover and

the change in the cost frmnction. In both cases, decreases in the prices to consumcrs were due

partly to changes in market power and partly to declines in the cost function.0



yjjj.çjgg
          This paper measures the economic benefits that accrued to buyers from technical

innovation in mainframe computers. The thesis is that many innovations that created

economic value in this period are associated with extensions in computing capabilities.

Answers to the questions raised in the introduction provide a suitable summary of this



      Interacting s time trend with the conjecture parameter did not result in qualitatively different conclusions.
Equation two is presented because it is easier to interpret and read.

        Finally, it is not correct to infer that market power increased over time just because the C itteroacoed.
Instead, one must examine changes in the distribution of product specific elasticities. Close examination of those
elasticities, not abeam here, reveals a more competitive market over time — in the aerate that toe ntaduut product
specific elasticity is more elastic, as are every other order statistic of the elasticity. This is not surprisina in this
model since the product space becomea increasingly crowded over time.
                                                '1
analysis.

        What valuable mnovatoos m this period are associated voth extensions of capabtlities?

It was argued that technical change in the computing .rnaiker involved much more than rapid

declines in the price of existing capabilities. While pnce declines enabled many of the events

that took place, important episodes of value creation were associated with specific inventions

that extended buyer capabilities into new areas -- e.g., the invention of reliable real-time

database query, the invention of multi-user computing without interruption. Value creation

was not assoctated soleiy with the decline in costs of the -delivery of these services.

        Do buyers adopt products that embody extensions of capabilities? The economic

history and the econometric results show that adoption decisions were not solely the result of

buyers taldng advantage of lower prices thr existing capabilities. The data and estimates show

that many buyers purchased larger computing capachy embodied in products that caine into

existence in the l970s.

       How does a measurement framework represent that action? 'Bbs shady argued that

some fraction of the new capabilities associated with new systems is not measurable, but is

complementary with increases in computing capacity. Therefore, a model of the supply and

demand for products with difibrent computing capacity will capture some demand for new

capabilities. Such a model has several interesting features: I. Buyers slowly adopt higher

capacity systems, suggesting that greater attention needs to be paid to the diffusion of new

technolocy in this market (Cireenstcin [i994j); 2. Decreases in prices to consumers were due

partly to changes in market power and partly to declines in cost. All th-e estimates measure

rapid rates of decline in the costs of providing computer capacity over the long ran.
                                                38
       Are most extensions ordy embodied in capaeity or other features of the products?

Competition in computing is partially represented by extensions in computing capacity and

partially by the technological age of systems, but not entirely. The cionjectorai variation

estimates and the demand parameter estimates suggest there was not a stable relationship over

time between measurable features of products and revealed buyer choice. This is not

surprising because of the well-icnov,n changing value of outside goods. It is also not

surprising because of the likely changing valuation of computing capacity that resulted from

innovation of complementary components. Therefore, constant çoality indices of price decline

potentially oath the factors that influence changes to economic welfare for many buycrs.

       in sum, much significant innovation in this industry was associated with cascading

capabilities to new levels. This is not an argument that price decreases were unimportant to

buyers, only that price decreases do not tell nearly the bosole story about the welfarc

improvements realized by buyers -- perhaps they even tell a deceptive story, Thcrc arc many

implications from this conclusion for understanding competition and value creation in this

industry (e.g., see Bresnahan and Greenstein [t992]). This study focuses on whether constant

quality price indices provide good information about welfare benefits from technological

change. It will for the buyers 'hno continue to buy products with similar sets of

characteristics, but not necessarily for the buyers wio take advantage of the availability of

characteristics that did not previously exist. Many buyers fall into this latter camp. It is time

that these observations about extension of capabilities became a central part of the discussion

about the creation of economic benefits from technological change in computing.
                                             39

References

Amemiya., Talceshi [1985] Adytmccd..Eounrng, Canthridge: Harvard Frees.

Berndt. Ernst [1991].                                                         Reading, EtA,
Addison-Wesley.

BeratE, Ernst and Zvi Griiiehes [1990], 'Price Indexes for Microcomputers: Pm Exploratory
Study." NBER vvorldng paper #8878. Cambridge MA

Bemdn E. R, MT H. Showaner, and 3 MT Wo4'Iridgc [1991], "On the sensttivity of hedonic
price indexes for computers to the choice 01 functional fortes" Minieo.

Ben's' Steven 1. [1993]. "Discratu Cnoico ModeL of Oligopoly Product Differentiation,"
Rnd.Amrtal,of Economics.

Beny Steve, Jim Let insohr,. Mci Pakes [0)93], "Automobile Prices in Market Equilibriuns
Part I and H," Working Paper No. 4264, National Bureau of Economic Research, January'.

Bresnahan, Timothff F. [1989]. 'Empirical Stuthes of Industries with Market Power," in Ih
Hdfrk,ofJnMtftsLfkggoth'kea Eds: Richard Schmalensee md Robert Willtg North-
Holland Press.

Bresnahan, Timothy, F. [i9S7a], 'Competition and Cuilusion in die American Automobile
Oligopoly: The 1955 Price War". hatenal of lndustricd Economics.

Bresnahan, Timothy. F. [l987o], "Measuring the Spillover from technical Advance:
Mainframe Computer in Financial Services," American Economic Review. March

Bresnahan, Timothy', F. [1981], "Departures from Marginal Cost Pricing in thu American
Automobile Industry," 1ot1malanLEcoQQmthts, 17. pp. 201-227.

Bresnahan, TI imothy I. and Shane MT Oreenstcin [1992], "fcchnological Competition and the
Strncture of the Computing Industry," CEPR Working Paper No. 315, Stanford University,
Jane, 1992.

CBRMA, Computer Business I.qaipmcnt Manuthcturing Association [1992], information
l'echnology industry Databook, 1992, Washington, D.C.

Cole Rosanne, Chen, Y.C.. Bar4uin-Stollcman, Joan A., Dulberger, Ellen, Helvacian, Hurhan,
and Hodge, James H. [1986]. "Quality-Adjusted Price Indexes for Computer Processors and
Selected Peripheral Equipment," dse'y_ofkinrrcotdsaninesy 66fJanuary), pp. 41-50.

David, Paul A., and Creenutein, Shane MT. [1990], 'The Economies of Comnutibditv
                                               40

Standards: An inftoduction to Recent Research," EnmEd,.afTvdainatutNw
Ibnctkzt,      1, pp 3- 41, 1990.

Dulberger, Ellen R [1989], "The application of a Hedonio Model to Quality-Adjusted Price
Index for Computer Processors," in                                   Edited by Dale Pr.
Jorgenson end Ralph Landau, MIT Press.

Feenstra, Rob, and Jim Levinsohn [1989], "The Characteristics Aoproach and Oligopoly
PricEd," Mlrneo, University of Michigan.

Fisher, Franklin M. and McGowan John J., end Greenwood, ken E. [1983], EQISEd
SpindltdjidJatjIithte&EcncimicJsnalysi&LDiJL&Y1—IIdat MIT Press, Cambridge Mass

Flamm, Kenneth [1987a],
Qgmpxiutiatn. Washington D.C.: The Brookings Institute.

Flamm Kenneth [1987o],
Thchnoiog,', Washington D.C.: The Brookings institute.

Gordon, Robert J. [1990], IbutMtueutmuLaf urthkQ&',es, University of Chicago
Press, 1990.

Gordon, Robert I. [1989], 'Tne Postwar Evolution of Computer Prices," in Icshnokgyand
CapitaLfesmation, Edited by Dale W. Jorgenson and Ralph Landau. MIT Press.

Gabszeodcz, I. and J.F. Thisee [1990], "Entiy (and Exit) in a Differentiated industry," intinral
QLEonnarnatdutThaccz, 22, 327-338.

Greenstein, Shane [1991], "Lock-in and Costs of Switching Mainframe Computers Vendors:
What do Buyers See?" Faculty Working Paper 91-0133, University of Illinois, April.

Greenstein Shane [1994], "The Diffusion of Multiple Vintages in a Differentiated Product
Market: Best and Average Practice in Mainframe Computers: 1968-1983," Working Paper
No. 4647, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA. Febmary.

Hartman, Raymond S. and Teece, David J. [1990], 'Product Emulation Strategies in the
Presence of Reputation Effects and Network Externalities: Some evidence form the
Minicomputer Industry," EQQnQmk&QLInnestatlQa.anthNtlacbntilQgN

Mlchaels, Robert [1979], "Hedonic Prices and the Stnieture of the Digital Computer
Industry," JnijmairaflnduatriaLEconamica.

Oliner, Steve [1993], "Constant Quality Price Changes, Depreciation, and Retirement of
Mainframe Computers," in Foss et al (eds), Edcaa1amanLaad,IbtiaLIdatu, University of
                                            41

Chicago Press. pp. 19-62

Phisrer, Montgomery, Jr. [1979],   C lctaAngedflnt2isrg           Qn2nnsr, Digital Press,
Santa Monica.

Tmjtcnberg, Manuel [1989], "The Welfare Analysis of Product Innovations, with an
Application to Computed Tomography Scanners,' Jc)JJrnriLedJPo1iJkalEcono 97, 2, April.

Tmjtcnbcrg, Manuel [1990],
3cnsr,   Harvard University Press, Camhridge MA.

Enplert, Jack E. [1986], 'The Econormc interpretation 01 Hedomc Methods," 5WyJ2f
CapisrjtBrsirtgrvo1. 66. January.
Triplco, Jack E. [1989], "P6cc and Technological Change in A Capital Good: A Survey of
Research on Computers," in Iocbnolo'g and Capital Fonaritipti, Edited by Dale W. Jorgenson
and Ralph Landau, MIT Press.
                        Figuce 1
The detez±nation of nazket shere in a vertical cdel




          f[e             pth 0.
                     Buys productj.




                                        b
                b0
                     t


               r


           I       III   II


                     I        II   I!    IIIII;! I
a-)
Cl)                  I             II    I:   IiIIIItI

                   H      I   I    U H I!HIIIUUi
CID-
Qa
O)                            I    II   III 111111111

                                                                 >-
                    I    I    I    II   I II IIlHiEI
      Co
—0)r                               H    HI !UIU1{f H

C',                 I    I !            III IUIIHft
0
                                                   lU      C)

                                                           C)
                                                  rn
                                                   u_
                                                           r-

                                          1       li
                                                  1L C)
                                                           C)
                                                           C)


                                                  -r—1—_
                                                           C)
                                                           <_c
                                                           0)




               9                                     0
                          Table 1
       Ltching Industry Data with Daaractariatin Data

         Sample       Orginel             Medals with
       Installed     diadem at         C1iarartaristic Data
dear      Base         Models                     Tidenddi Jr

1966     19361          166             69               63
1966     21470          176             66               60
1970     25233          147             72               64
1971     19008          154             81               67
1572     21909          171             95               77
1573     21541          173            103               88
1974     22253          161            113               96
1576     23361          169            119              101
1976     23673          209            133              113
1577     23436          188            134              122
1978     26124          209            149              139
1579     29261          218            150              138
1960     24723          244            197              155
1981     28116          297            178              186
                                          Thbls 2
                                      Sanp1e StatistIc


Yan               Sod                   Variance     Mirdjnrm   Sanm       Saanle Size
1988     1.0993     1.7273               2.9536       0.0080     9.9200           93
1969     1.0952     1.7267               2.9813       0.0080     9.9200           60
2970     1.1426     1.7301               2.9933       0.0050     9.9200           64
1971     1.3489     1.8013               3.2445       0.0080     9.9200'          .67
1972     1.3197     1.5846               2.4158       0.0150     8.1920           77
1973     1.3984     1.5770               2.8123       0.0080     8.1920           88
1974     1.4783     1.9317               3.3950       0.0080     5.1920           98
             14         14                 2 2           78      4 ...rz      1
14       1 314           14                              7      .e
1977     1.7934     2.3271               6.3851       0,0080    16.3840       122
j.         1414               a                       0 CCC     32 14cr            a
1979     3.3519      1'
                    5.                  37. 9725      0.0080    32.7880       138
1980     3.7290    6.4303               41.3483       0.0080    32.7480       155
1981     3.1929   11.71 15             138.0776       0.0080    65.5380




Year      Sean    S-3d 39cr             /9c.''e     — Minimum                           Size
1988     0.3264    0. 2664.              0, (3704     0.1000     1.2000           53
1969     0.3983    0.6960                0.4303       0.1000     5.0000           80
1970     0.4203    0.9626:               0.4:391      0.1000     1.0000           84
1571     0.5080    0.7801                0.6084       0.1000     5.0000           87
1972     0.5635    0.8637                0.7460       0.1000     5.0000           77
1973     0.5886    0.86.47               0.7477       0.1000     5.0000           88
1974•    0.5855    0.5971                0.7347       0.1000     9.0000           96
1975 .   0.9844    0.9413                0.7077       0.1000     5.0'OOO      101
1978     0.8434    0.3406                0.8903       0.1000     5.2000       113
1977     0.5311    0.9163                0.8395       0.1000     9.2000       122
1978     0.5818    0.3933                0.9202       0.1000     5.2000       136
1979     0.9942    1,7482         .      3.0583       0.1000    15.0000       138
1980     1.0903    1.8972                3.4231       0.1000    15.0000       155
1981     2.2235    9.9075               98.1608       0.1000    99.0000       168
                                   Teble 2 (contineed)
                                    Sale Statitice
!tbJn- Rental Price )1982 Milliorae of Dollars)
 Year      Mean        Sod Rev        Variance      Minjjajm   Maxincrm    Saanle Size
 1568     0 0901        0.0529          0.0065      0,0074      0.3844         an
 1969     0 0840        0 . 1050        O . 0110    0.0097      0. 6434        60
 1970     0 0935        0.1093          0.0117      0 . 0078    0 . 5210       64
 1571     0.1134        0.1137          0.0129      0.0129      0. 9819
 1972     0 1104        0.1047          0.0110      0.0109      0 . 5103       77
 1973     0.0587        0.0926          0,0086      0.0092                     65
 1974     0.0559        0.0824          0.0068      0.0075      0.3953
 1975     0. 0'767      0. 0746         0.0056      0.0058                    101
 1976     0.0694        0.0676          0.0046      0 . 0063
 1977     0.0720        0 . 0763        0,0058      0.0049      0. 4143       Ian
 1978     0.0687        0.0720          0.0092      0.0048      0.4069        135
 1979     0 . 073].     0.0750          0.0096      0 . 0046    0. 3731       138
          0.0638        0 . 0671        0 . 0045    0.0040                    155
 1981     0.0584        0 .0617         0.0038      0 . 0037    0.3379        164




Ner of Installations Per Syste
Year       Mean        Sod Dan        Varience       MtadtzvcL Maaiznm ((ann1
 1958    362.3019      874.8664       755373.5763    2.0000     4550.0000     00
 1959    357.8333      820.8783       848016.8531    1.0000     6000.0000     00
 1970    394.2655     1124.194      81253813.9442    3.0000     6200.0000     61
 1971    263.7015      909.7735       825859.2429    1.0000     6700.0000     07
 1972    264.5325      758.1648       537067.0154    1.0000     5720.0000     77
 1973    244.7541      603.0341       363650.1482    1.0000     4360.0000     (70
 1974    231.8021      489.3844       239467.7604    1.0000     3104,0000     70
 1978    231.1980      488.5864       235891,2604    2.0000     2790.0000   101
 19'76   209.4956      497.7657       209549.4129    2,0000     2689.0000   110
 1977    192.0984      399.0211       189217.8580    1,0000     2450.0000   122
 1979    194.7383      354.0059       125320.1516    1,0000     1820.0000   136
 1979    183.0607      392.5604       124298.8368    1.0000     1910.0000   138
 1980    159.5032      306.8748        94172.1477    1.0000     1930.0000   159
 1981    169.3739      391.1079       152965,3991    1.0000     3600.0000   166
                                   Ta1e 2 (contirned)
                                    Sa1e Statietica
Technical Age
 Yeci      Sean             0ev       Variance    Lzrcm        dcran     Samnle Size
 914
1969
         40303
         4.6989
                        i94
                        2.1959
                                       37503
                                       4.8252
                                                   0,334n
                                                   1.0000
                                                                88340
                                                                98340
                                                                             53
                                                                             60
1970
1971
1973
1974
         5.1931
         5.4792
             '9
         5.9156
         6,5785
                          2
                        2.5382
                        2.9629
                        3.4092
                        3.7091
                                       5.4426
                                          4
                                       8,7755
                                      11.63.61
                                      03.7573
                                                   0 9170
                                                   0.2500
                                                   0.4170
                                                   1.1670
                                                               10.8340
                                                               11.8340
                                                               03840
                                                               13.8340
                                                                             54
                                                                             6'j
                                                                             7'
                                                                             88
                                                               14.8340       96
1975     7.2281         3.8218        14.6060      1.1670      15.8340      101
1976     7.1648         4.2308        17.9094      1.3340      16.8340      113
1977     7.8173         4.2723        14.2525      1.1570      17,8340      122
              03                            C      —    L6?0   a9 03cC      136
1977     5. 5930    I   5.0557        25.6615      1.0840      20.0000      138
1990     9.911)90       5.4092        29.2483      1.0840      21.0000      155
1981     9391           5. 103.9      32.5337      1.1670      22.0000      166
                                                   Tthie 3
                                             Paraater Est±watea

Occsrd   1966     1969   1977    7971    1972     1977    137 41971         1976     1777      1970      9979    1967       1397

car                  ,,*i,27**' 7,43*    99,77*   -707                              -2,317     2.66     -2.117   -6.217-737
063*     -7.76    7.77Y]7.27*    7,97*   2.2—             7,37*     O.41*O.76*O.77*            77.7*
                                                                                               0.22*
                                                                                                         7,77*   0.30       7,77*
907pa     7,73*   7.76   7,79*   4,77*   —7.07    -7.94   0.7.17    7.42    0.47*
                                                                                4.52*                    0.10*
633       0.04W                 0.01     0.05*    -0.37   0.27*     0,11*   0.17*    7.09*     7.02     -7.03    0.32       0.7.4
                  0.10* 0.03
                         1970 -
         1949     0969           9977    1973     1973    1974      1975    1976     0.977     9374      1779    1991       7.921

963      -9717    -9,717 7317 - 374               -0.06   -6 73*                               -4.26*         -9.02 -4 74*7
                                                                                                         7,76*-c7,4477,77*77
363                7,7177,79* 0.00*      1.00*     3.36    7,39*    0.67*   7,77*  7,77*        0,07*    7.17*
                                                  -2.77     3,33*   7.14    0.71*0,97*         049*               77   777*.
37.17    72.4*   7.04
             '*714*    9,39*
                      734*       7.27*
                                                                                   777       *771—7
H
633      —7,07
          7777*
         :2'7
                                 7.76    7779*    —1.19     7,41*   094*    9,99*                   .01
                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                 7.00
                                                                                                                        J7'
                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                            7.77
 Year
 1953
 1953
 1970
 1371
 1972
 1573
              Th
         Na: Suroloaf
             Per
           Sasrero
           9.1791
           9.9742
           0.0694
           0.1153
           0.0933
           0.0553
                         Net


                        649.53
                        733.59
                        392.01
                        859.85
                        923.13
                        839.75
                                 Table 4
                          Estimated Surplus

                                     total I Net Surplus
                      Nroeodatuie! tootalled
                      teas 0.10 * — Ease
                                      25541
                                      27333
                                      29283
                                      24603
                                      26920
                                      27301
                                              Per $ Net
                                              Nmseociiture*
                                                  2.75
                                                  2.59
                                                  2.28
                                                  3.29
                                                  2.73
                                                   1.59
                                                               Total
                                                                Net
                                                              Sur tua*
                                                              1793.34
                                                              2033,79
                                                              2033.82
                                                              2.837..05
                                                              2525.84
                                                              1511.44
 1574      0.0334       864.14        27747        1.07        929.47
 1975      0.0346       830.13        29510       1.16        1022.11
 1973      0.0287       866.50        31583       1.04         909.08
 1977      0.0417      1070.33        33201       1.29        1385.83
 1978      0.0344      1163.21        36209       1.20        1407.28
 1979      0.0340      1267.32        38386       1.15        1461.10
 1930      0.0147      1337.63        43798       0.61         820.33
 1741      0.0219      1457.85        49538       0.74        1086.45

    a..utloa reesoros toe .sorrlua paoerstso oat of the roteide goad.
Net exoeodirore leasT .72. represents toe exre.oditure so systems in.
the aerrle (IP.Qj tess the eaneoditore on the outsrde goad (tP0Q. -
                                     Table 5
   Pezzentage Surplus Associated with Different Vintages and Sizes

Year    Teabage        Tachage          edius
        4usars         Susars          Size =5         Size =6      Size
        A        B      A      B        A       B     .A      B     A       B

1968   0.48     0.37   0.70   0.62    0.13     0,06   0.07   0.03   0.01   0.01
1969   0.08     0.11   0.73   0.83    0.15     0.08   0.08   0.03   0.02   0.01
1970   0.10     0.14   0.92   0.71    0.16     0.08   0.09   0.04   0.03   0.01
1971   0.06     0.10   0.15   0.22    0.19     0.10   0.11   0.05   0.03   0.01
1972   0.15     0.15   0.25   0.29    0.20     0.11   0.15   0,07   0.04   0,02
1973   0.29     0.24   0.36   0.36    0.23     0.12   0.17   0.08   0.05   0.02
1974   0.44     0.32   0.49   0.41    0.24     0.13   0.21   0.09   0.06   0.02
1975   0.27     0.30   0.53   0.48    0.25     0.13   0.19   0.08   0.06   0.02
1975   0.20     0.29   0.58   0.53    0.24     0,13   0.20   0.08   0.07   0.02
1877   0.10     0.24   0.44   0.52    0,21     0.12   0.20   0.09   0.08   0.03
1978   0,14     0.23   0.41   0.50    0.22     0.13   0.20   0.09   0.09   0.03
1979   0.23     0.28   0.38   0.46    0.22     0.14   0.21   0.10   0.11   0.04
1980   0.23     0.15   0.38   0.34    0.18     0.11   0.25   0.10   0.14   0.04
1981   0.31     0.27   0.49   0.47    0.17     0.10   0.23   0.10   0.14   0.05
A: Surplus associaced with types of systems as percentage of total
    surplus.
B Percentace of installed base associated with sara type of
    system  -
              Coble 5
Size of Counter Factual Surplus en a
   Percentage of Coeerved Surplue

iar      Tocgo4
           7,oooved        Recoved
1958         0.951          0.938
1969         0.997          0.919
1970         0.994          0.875
1971        0.991           0.990
1972        0.994           0.982
1973        0.985           0.979
1974        0.973           0.970
1975        0.977           0.963
1975        0.982           0.958
1977        0.986           0.965
1979        0.985           0.965
1973        0,942           0.372
1980        0.990           0.980
1981        0.944           0.975
                                  TabiB 7
                           Cost Function EBtinates


Sa1e Statietics
VariaEle         Mean        Stdtev
Year        1975.8816        3.8561      14.8696           1966          1981
Men              24305        5.4442     29.6394          0,0080    .   65,8360
                                                          0.1000        99.0000




ern
MJ.ps             0.6553     3.5653      12,7110
                  7.2617     4.5623      20.8143          0.2500        22.0000
(pnioe)          -3.0653     1.0447

COrrelation of   Variables


Mips                     0.24271562
                        -0.25643255         -0.12966814
(price)6571416                              284'09                 -0. i4210
I
    i
    Valid cases
    Residoal 55:

        Variable
      cern

      age
      F. CV pecan
                          1437
                          0.213
                          4315.12
                                  Table 7 contiaued)
                                Coat 3\octioo Eatimates




                           Estimate

                                0.276
                                066
                                0.155
                               -655.9
                                            eodeo: rrao1e 3xo of rorce
                                            Rbar-soo,ared:
                                            SOd ermr of eat:
                                                Staodard
                                                 Error
                                                3Q47j**
                                                :3.3763*
                                                0.0771*
                                                128.f**
                                                                  0.209
                                                                  1.744
                                                               Real Coat
                                                                 Index




      .f3
      559
                               .5.97            4**
                                                345**
                                                                  QQQ
                                                                  947
      3070                     -2.435           0,494*           123.1
      571                      -3.457           050**            121.6
      572                      -3,426           0 49**           124.2
      573                      -2,771           0.514*            88,8
      d74                      -4.013           3,57*4            718
      d75                      -4.425           330*              48.5
      d75                      -4.69.3          0.60              37.1
      d77                      ,4.653           o,f5*             39.2
      d73                      -5.061           0.39              26.7
      579                       0.113           0,74**            18.4
      580                       5.906           0.78**            13.1
      581                      66l5             0.81*4             6.0
     *7..loe exceeds   1. 91
    **T..cel.ae exceeds 2.55
                              Table 7   (continued)

                            Coat Function Eatinatee



    Valid cases:       1435               Copendent variable: Lcg 5 price
    R-scuxred:         0.193              Rbar-sc'uared:         0.182
    Reedus1 SE:        6357.5             SOd error of set:      2.120
                                              Standard        Real Coat
       Variable         Estirrate              Error            Index
      rem                 0.234               O.0707**
      mips                0.127               0.105
      ae
      F, 58-59
                          0.055
                         -132.7
                                              0.120
                                              252.3
       r, 70-75          -983.5               204,5*5
       F, 77-81         -1470.3                5Q35*
      dEe                   3.479              C.52             100.0
      dES                   -3.511             0.55              98,8
      d70                   -2.886             0,67             261.9
      d71                   -2.668             0.88             243,7
      d72                   -2.535             0.67             249,4
      d73                   -3.000             0,69             174.9
      d74                   -3.141             977**            158.1
      d75                   -3,598             0.815*           102.1
      d76                   -3.897             0.80              757
      d77                   -3.470             599*5            127.0
I     d78                   -4.023             0.96*5            72.3
      d79                   -4.313             l,04**            56.3
      d80                   -4.751             1.02*5            36.0
      d81                   -5,419             1.12              13.4

     *T_.lue exceeds 1.96
**Tenlue exceeds 2.56
