NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FREE TRADE TAXATION
AND PROTECTIOMST TAXATION

Joel Slemrod

Working Paper No. 4902

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 1994

For helpful comments on an earlier draft I thank Hugh Ault, Richard Bird. Michael Daly,
Michael Devereux, Daniel Frisch, Carl Hansen, Peter Merrill, Peggy Musgrave, Roger Procter,
Stanford Ross, Peter Birch Sorenson, Emil Sunley, Alvin Warren, and the participants in a joint
international economics4mblic finance workshop at the University of Michigan. This paper is
part of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment and Public Economics.

Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

1994 by Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including Cs)
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4902
October 1994

FREE TRADE TAXATION
AND PROTECflONIST TAXATION
ABSTRACT
This paper explores the normative theory of international taxation by recasting it in

parallel with the theory of international trade. It first sets out a definition of "free trade taxation,"

rt in the global context and then in the unilateral context It then evaluates against this
standard the existing international

tax regime and the

U.S.

international tax policy, and

characterizes which aspects of tax policy are free trade and which am protectionist, differentiating
the "predatory protectionism" of tax havens and the "ownership protectionism" of tax policies that

favor domestically-resident multinational corporations.

Joel Slemrod

School of Business Administration
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER

Free Trade Taxation and Protectionist Taxation

Joel Slemrod

1.

Introduction
Perhaps the only statement concerning international taxation about which all participants

and observers agree is that it is extraordinarily complex. This is certainly true of thepractice of
international taxation, and the attempt to incorporate the complicated institutional realities makes

the conceptual analysis difficult as well. Moreover, these realities are changing rapidly as global
integration of national economies expands. Many have argued that the traditional objectives of
international tax policy, such as capital export neutrality, are no longer relevant for todays
economy, and have proposed radical changes in the U.S. system of international taxation.
The goal of this paper is to seek new insight — indeed a new language — for international

tax policy by recasting it in parallel with the theory of international trade. The potential gains
from such an exercise axe twofold. First, although international trade theory has been applied
principally to policy insmiments such as tariffs, quotas, and dumping, tax policy can have at
least as large an effect on the flow of goods across countries, the location of productive activity,

and the gains from trade as these trade policy instruments. Thus it is an important object of
study in its own right. Second. there is a long history of reasoning pertaining to trade--the
benefits of free trade, the costs of protectionism--that is fairly uncontroversial atnutig

economists. My hope is that by thawing on this reasoning the murky issues involved in
international taxation can be clarified.

There is a potential downside to this strategy. It is that, although the preference toward
free tradc is well established among economists, is not well established elsewhere. On the
contrary. (he debate over trade policy continues, with the economist's view sometimes prevailing

and sometimes not prevailing. The downside risk is that the ensconced prejudices and
misconceptions regarding trade policy will simply be attached to the issues of international tax

policy, blurring issues rather than sharpening them. But this is not really a problem, since

implicitly this is already happening. To make the linkage explicit could, in my opinion, only be
a plus.

In the hope of maximizing the gains from a fresh perspective, in what follows I will
purposely not refer to the standard catch phrases of international tax policy, such as capital

export neutrality, capital import neutrality, and national neutrality. Nevertheless, many of the

familiar arguments reappear here in somewhat different clothes.

2.

The Case for Free Trade
The case for free trade is that the gains from trade, and therefore national income, are

maximized when domestic consumers and producers face world prices that are undistorted by

import tariffs, export subsidies, and the like. Consumers are made better off by the opportunity
to exchange at world prices domestically-produced goods for goods that can be obtained from

abroad. The benefit from this exchange of goods will be maximized if domestic producers
produce the goods arid services that have the greatest possible value on world markets, which

they will do in their own interest if they are free to trade at world prices.
This classic result does not imply that all members of a country will be better off from a
move toward free trade. But, since national income increases, all members could be made better

off with a suitable redistributive policy.
According to this reasoning, free trade practiced by all countries will maximize world

income. More importantly, a free trade policy adnpted unilaterally will maximize the adopting
country's national income, reeardless of the trade policies of other countries. Even if a trading
partner is subsidizing its exports, the importing country is better off not to respond by shielding

its residents from world prices. As Krugman and Obstfeld haveput it, the appropriate response
is to send the subsidizing country a "note of thanks" for offering its goods at bargain prices!
(1991, p.1 12) As to countering a trading partne?s tariffs with tariffs of one's own, Joan

2

Robinson remarked that "it would be just as sensible to drop rocks into our harbors because other

nations have rocky coasts."(1947, p.192) Apparently economists' frustration with being unable
to communicate these ideas to non-economists has stimulated their invention of vivid metaphors.
The classic case for free trade depends on a number of assumptions about how the

economy operates. In the absence of these assumptions, a case for trade policy intervention can
be made. I do not have space in this paper to address each of these issues in detail; inslead I will
briefly summarize the key arguments that have been made:

1. If a country has monopoly or monopsony power with regard to a
commodity, a tariff or subsidy can enable the country to profit from it. In the case
of monopoly, the country ought to tax the export of the commodity to drive up its
world price; in the case of monopsony, it ought to impose a tariff on imports, to
drive down the price it pays for the good.

2. If the domestic economy is distorted, then trade intervention could offset
the distortion and thereby increase national income. The distortion could be due to
domestic tax policy, the lack of perfect capital markets for "infant" industries, or
some other distortion. In such cases, it is generally better to eliminate the
distortion than to counteract it with trade policy, because trade intervention

introduces new distortions even if it reduces others. Deardorff and Stern compare
trade policy to "acupuncture with a fork: no matter how carefully you insert one
prong, the other is likely to do damage." (1987, p. 39)

3. In the presence of oligopolistic markets, judicious policy can shift some of
the pure profits from foreign firms to domestic finns; if domestic firms are owned
by domestic residents, this can increase national income. Such a policy only
works under rather restrictive conditions regarding the nature of the oligopolistic

3

market, conditions which are difficult to identify empirically; for this reason
designing a successful policy of selective intervention is impractical.

4. Countervailing duties may be strategically useful as a means ofdiscouraging other
countries from using opportunistic trade policies.

There are also non-economic arguments for trade intervention, such as foreign policy or
national security concerns, and there are certainly domestic political reasons why trade
intervention will look attractive to politicians, but I will not address these issues here.
Note, with the exception of the distortion-offsetting argument, these rationales for trade

intervention are all beggar-thy-neighbor policies; that is, to theextent that they increase national

income. they do so at the expense of income in the rest of the world. Moreover, the decline in
income elsewhere will exceed the gain in domestic national income, so from a global perspective

these policies are wasteful. For this reason, a multilateral agreement to eliminate such practices
can potentially increase each participating country's national income.
No one country, acting on its own, can ensure that there is free trade throughout the

world. The classical case for free trade advises any country to adopt free trade unilaterally.
regardless of what goes on elsewhere. Most free traders do not, however, advocate unilateral
free trade with no qualification or amendment. Instead they support multilateral commercial

policy agreements - the GATT and more recently, the EC beatles and NAFTA - and often
support unilateral strategic use of commercial policies, such as countervailing duties and antidumping actions, designed to induce other countries to adopt free tradepolicies. Foreign
countries adopting free trade will generally beneilt one's own country, so it is worthwhile to
encourage those policies. In addition, a unilateral free trade stance is less viable politically in the
face of commercial policy interventions by foreign governments, unless it is accompanied by

'concessions made by other countries.

4

In summary, the trade policy prescriptions for the United States are (i) unilateral free
trade as a rule of thumb1 (ii) toleration of strategic use of protectionist

measures as a device to

eliminate tr ade barriers elsewhere, and (iii) support of multilateral agreements to
lower wade
barriers.

3.

The Meaniri of Free Trade Taxation
What international tax policies do these prescriptions suggest? To answer this

must first define the concept of free trade taxation, first in the global

question, I

context and then in the

unilateral context.
First, recall that the orthodox free wade position is that there should be no tariffs at all,
and no non-tariff trade restrictions at all. This simple policy stance is

obviously not applicable

directly when the subject shifts from tariffs to taxes, for the simple reason that the U.S.

federal

tax system must raise well over $1 trillion annually. There must be tax revenue, and lots of

it,

and all taxes (other than those economists call "lump-sum, such as
poll taxes) distort some

margin of choice, such as the work-leisure choice, the consumption-saving choice, and the
investment-or-not choice, and therefore axe the souite of inefficiency.

How to design the minimally distorting tax system, subject to the other goals of the tax
system such as equity and simplicity, has preoccupied public finance economists formore than
half a century. Unfortunately, no consensus has arisen on simple rules for achieving this goal.
There is, though, one proposition (due to Diamond and Mirrlees (1971)) which has far-reaching

implications. It states that, given certain conditiuns, a tax system should, whatever other
distortions it introduces, preserve "production efficiency;" the required conditions include thaf
pure profits either do not exist or can be fully taxed away, and that a broad set of fiscal

instruments can be utilized. Production efficiency is achieved when all firms face the same

input

prices, including the same cost of capital, and all firms face the same price of output. When this

is violated, it would be possible, by reallocating production among firms, to increase the value a!

5

output for the same amount of inputs. In other words, failure to achieve production efficiency

implies that the economy is operating with avoidable waste.
in a completely closed economy, production efficiency is compatible with either
consumption taxes or a pure income tax, where "pure" implies a Haig-Sirnons comprehensive

definition of income, including integration of the corporate and personal income tax

systems.

Under a pure income tax the cost of capital to firms will exceed the rate of return received by
savers, but

will be equal for all firms, thus preserving production efficiency. Under a

consumption tax the cost of capital is equal for all firms and is equal to the rate of return tor
savers.

3.1

Global Ootimalitv

From a global perspective, production efficiency is achieved and worldwide income is
maximized only if, regardless of where the real investment is located, the nationality oi the
investing finn's headquarters, or the citizenship of the capital owner, all investments face the

same risk-adjusted "hurdle rate," or pre-tax required rate of return. This condition ensures that
investments with lower pre- Lax (i.e. social) rates do not, for tax reasons, get made while

investments with higher pre-tax returns stay on the shelf. This is the standard for free trade in
capital, including both tangible and intangible capital, that I will use in what follows.
Consider a world economy in which each national economy is completely closed off

from all others. In this case the hurdle rate in each country will be determined by the interaction
among domestic residents' propensity to save, domestic investment opportunities, and tax and

other government policies that affect the rate of iturn. There is no reason to expect the hurdle
rate to be equal across countries, and therefore no reason for global production efficiency to be

satisfied. It is conceivable that investments which could earn 15% in one country will not go
forward, while at the same time investments located in another country yielding 8% will be
undertaken.

6

One potential benefit of opening up these closed economies is the amelioration of the
production inefficiency. Some of this will be accomplished if borders are opened
only to trade

in goods and services, but not to financial or investment flows.

Capital-intensive goods will be

relatively costly to produce in countries with a relatively high cost of capital, and will tend to be
imported rather than produced domestically, while labor or land-intensivegoods will tend to be

produced domestically and exported. The sectoral shift ofproduction will reduce the demand
for capital in those countries, pushing down the cost of capital. The same mechanism in reverse
will increase the cost of capital in those counthes which, in the absence of trade, had a relatively
low cost of capital and marginal return to investment.
Trade in goods and services is unlikely, by itself, to eliminate differences in the return to

investment for several reasons: different technologies of production, specialization of
production, and because of natural bathers (such as transportation costs) andman-made barriers
(tariffs, quotas, and so on) to trade flows. Thus, even with international trade in goods and
services1 cross-country differences in pit-tax required rates of return are likely to persist. The

free international flow of capital can, depending on what its tax treatment is, alleviate this

production inefficiency.

3.2 'What Tax Structures Are Consistent With Global Production Efficiency?

What pattern of tax rates and systems, including the corporate, personal, and withholding
tax rates and the system of double taxation relief, will ensure that free trade in capital is

achieved? The answer to this question depends on, among other things, what presumptions are
made about the extent of capital and labor mobility. Unless otherwise specified, in what follows
I will presume perfect capital mobility (all investments available to all investors on equal terms,
tax rules aside) and no labor mobility. These are stylized assumptions meant to capture the
current reality that capital is much more mobile across national boundaries than is labor.

7

One pattern that works is a pure residence-based tax system. Under this system residents

of each country are taxed on all their capital income, perhaps with a progressive rate structure,
regardless of where the physical investment is located or on what process of intermediation it

passes through. This could be achieved either if source countries forego any taxation of
nonresidents' earnings within the country, or if all countries tax the worldwide income of their
residents upon accrual, and offset source countries' taxes by offering an unlimited

foreign tax

credit. Under the first method, a country that levies a (presumably integrated) corporation
income tax must rebate any taxes collected 1mm foreign owners; for example, a wholly foreign-

owned domestic corporation would owe to the host country no corporation tax, and certainly no
withholding taxes. No foreign tax credit system would be needed for any country, as no
government collects taxes from foreigners in the first place.
Under the second method, all corporate income tax systems would have to be integrated.
so that the corporate tax acts essentially as a withholding tax for the personal tax system.

Integration benefits would have to be granted to foreign shareholders, coordinated by the
investor's home country so that the total rate of tax is no different for foreign and domestic

investments. Countries' corporate tax rates need not be identical for production efficiency to
occur. For any given set of personal tax systems, a high corporate rate would be offset by higher
imputation credits granted at the personal level to shareholders in the affected corporations.
It is important to note that the concept of residency used above refers to individuals, and

not to the legal or tax residence of corporations. A residence-based tax of this type would have
to look through the corporate entity to the individual shareholders, so that the total tax burden on
any given shareholder would not depend on the rate of source-based tax that is levied in any

jurisdiction or on the legal residency of the corporations whose shares axe owned. Under such a
system higher taxes paid by a corporation, holding constant worldwide rates of personal tax,

would be accompanied by lower taxes payable by the shareholders. Theapparent corporate tax
penalty is exactly offset by a lower cost of capital faced by the firm.
8

For production efficiency, it is not necessary that all countries levy the

rate of tax

on their residents. Nor is it required that any country levy the same rate on all its citizens. In the
presence of these differences, the pre-tax hurdle rate would be the same in all locations, but the
after-tax rate of return earned by any individual saver would depend inversely on the rate of tax
levied by his or her home government.
Current international tax arrangements are a long way from this pure residence-based
system, because of concerns over national sovereignty and also because of certain inescapable

administrative and compliance concerns. First of all, no country has seen fit to refrain from
taxing the excellent tax "handle" afforded by domestically-located, but foreign-owned, capital;

furthermore, as long as some countries continue to tax on a worldwide basis, lowering sourcebased tax often merely transfers revenue from the host country to the home country treasury.
Second, there is concern that if foreign-owned capital were exempt from taxation, domestic

residents would be able to set up foreign corporations and thereby avoid taxation. Finally, and
related to the foregoing concerns, is that it is much more difficult for a country to monitor and

collect tax revenue from tax bases located outside the country. For this reason many countries
do not even subject foreign-source income to taxation; many of those that do so according to law
are not particularly successful in actually collecting tax on foreign-source income.
Taking account of the administrative and compliance costs of taxation implies that a pure

residence-based tax is not optimal; it is certainly not close to what we observe today. What
about the other extreme altemative, a pure source-based tax? Under this system, each country
taxes all income generated within its borders, at the same rate, regardless of who owns the assets,

and foregoes any taxation on the foreign-source income of its citizens. This would involve a
flat-rate business tax, no additional personal income tax on corporate income, and no
withholding taxes.

Several problems arise with this sort of system. First of all, progressive taxation of a
comprehensive measure of income is impossible, because foreign-source income cannot be

9

included in the base. Second. as long as tax rates differ across countries it puts tremendous

pressure on the definition of 'where" income is generated; I will have more to say about this
issue later. Finally, a source-based tax system ensures global production efficiency only if all

countries choose exactly the same effective tax rate, where the tax rate is interpreted as net of
any income-related benefits provided by the host government In the absence of this condition,

the pvc-tax hurdle rate will be higher in those countries which feature higher tax rates. Recall
that uniformity of tax rates across countries was not required for the production-efficient
residence-based system described earlier. Absent some mechanism for harmonizing tax rates,
the source-based tax system does not guarantee free trade in capital.

The pure residence-based tax and pure source-based systems are not practical tax regimes

that support production efficiency. Are there hybrid regimes which support free trade? One
such pattern, discussed in Devereux (1993), features no withholding taxes, equal overall
corporate tax rates for any company regardless of the location of investment, equal corporate tax
rates faced by all companies investing in a given country, and a residence-based personal tax
system under which any personal tax paid on capital income is independent of the location of the

company. This tax regime is consistent with free trade in a stylized model of the world economy
in which individuals can freely purchase shares in companies headquartered in any country, and

any company can make real investments in any country. Two further assumptions are
noteworthy. The first is that, for any given location, one country's finns are considered to have
access to a separate set of investments from any other country's firms. Second, the only way an
individual investor in Country A can obtain an equity interest in an investment of a Firm from

Country B in Country C is by buying shares in B; the option of directly buying shares in ifs
affiliate company in Country C is ruled out
Both of these assumptions are critical to the results obtained. Because firms' invesuneirts
have distinctive characteristics, ensuring equal overall corporate tax rates for any firm regardless

10

of the location of real investment is not sufficient for production efficiency. No firm must be
discriminated against, in addition to the requirement that no location be discriminated against.
This model is also a useful framework for addressing the claim made in Frisch (1990)
and Hufbauer (1992) that production efficiency does not require equal corporate tax rates forany

company reganiless of the location of the investment. Their argument is that, given the
openness of modem portfolio flows, multinational companies do not play a decisive wle in the

allocation of capital investment across counties. In essence, they characterize theparent
companies of multinational enterprises as being predominantly providers of headquarter services

and coordination. The affiliate operating companies raise much of their capital by borrowing
and selling shares on international markets. If. at the margin, the affiliates raise funds from
portfolio investors, be they debt or equity holders, rather than from parent-provided equity, then
the issue of two potential layers of corporate taxation and double taxation relief is not important

in assessing investment incentives. (If at the margin all funds come from borrowing, then no
layer of corporate taxation is important for understanding the incentive to invest).
This issue does not arise in the context of Devereux's model because it is assumed there

that foreign affiliates are entirely equity financed by the parent. Introducing this consideration
into a formal model raises the issue of optimal financing of foreign affiliates when portfolio and
parent equity financing are both available, and have different tax consequences. No such model

has been worked out. As Gordon and Jun (1993\ point out, any such model would have to
address the key non-tax difference between the two — that corporate investments abroad allow

joint control and operation in two counties, whereas portfolio investments just affect ownership
of the firm's income; their empirical investigation finds only a small part of the mix betwccn

portfolio and direct equity firms to be tax-influenced. As long as marginal investments by
foreign affiliates are substantially financed by parent equity transfers, the taxation of
multinationals' foreign-source income remains an important factor in capital allocation.

11

Let me try to summarize the conclusions of this discussion of what international tax
systems are consistent with free trade in capital, defined as equal hurdle rates for all investments.

In stylized models of the world economy that restrict the range of available financial strategies,
either a pure residence-based or pure source-based (with equal tax rates in all countries) are
consistent with production efficiency; however, administrative and compliance considerations

suggest that the residence-based system is impractical, and there is no reason to expect
harmonization of source-based tax rates. Hybrid systems with elements of both source-based
and residence-based taxation can also be consistent with global free trade.

The current system certainly does not exactly replicate any of the structures that would
be consistent with free trade, just as worldwide tariff and other commercial policies are not

consistent with complete free trade in goods and services. This implies that alternate policies
could increase world income.
3.3 Unilateral Free Trade Taxation

Let me now put aside the meaning of fire trade taxation in a global context, and return to
appropriate unilateral tax policy. By analogy to trade policy, the first prescription is that, as a
rule of thumb, unilateral free trade taxation be pursued. But what exactly does unilateral free
trade mean in the context of capital income taxes? Although I want to focus my attention on
outbound foreign investment, I will first say a few words about efficient taxation of inbound
investment. It is a well-known result in optimal taxation (see, e.g., Slemrod (1990)) IJust, under
certain conditions, a small open economy should impose no investment-reducing tax on inbound
investment; the conditions include abstracting from administrative and compliance conccrns
Note also that certain taxes on inbound investment may not be invesaneni-reducing if the
capital-exporting country offers a foreign tax credit.
As discussed above, this theorem has not prevented source-based taxation of capital

income from being the international norm, one which I expect to persist. This raises the
question of the appropriate tax treatment of outbound foreign investment in a world where
12

source-based taxation is the norm. Because the answer will be counterintuitive to seine, let me
pursue the analogy with trade policy regarding goods and services. If a foreign Country levies

import duties, what is the appropriate response of the exporting country? The unilateralfree
trade response is to allow those goods to leave the country at the world price, and let the
importing country's domestic price be higher than the world price because of the import duty. It

is not appropriate to levy an export subsidy high enough to offset the import tarifL
The analogy to the taxation of cross-border flows of income from investment is as
follows. If the country where the investment is located levies a tax, the country where the

investor is resident should offer no credit for these taxes. Furthermore, if it wishes to levy an
income tax on its residents, the base for such a tax should be income net of taxes levied by the
source country. It is as if the source country is levying a tax on imports of capital; the capital-

exporting country, in its own interest, ought not to offset it with an export subsidy.
In practice no county, and certainly not the United States, adopts this policy. Instead all

capital-exporting countries offer some form of offset to taxes imposed by the source county,
either in the form of a limited tax credit for foreign taxes paid or by exempting foreign-source
income from the taxation that is applied to domestic-source income.
The U.S. policy of providing foreign tax credits has been characterized as "mercantilist'
by Schmidt (1975). because it favors foreign investment at the expense of the national interest.

This claim is correct from a unilateral perspective because it is in the interest of one country to

ensure that, at the margin, the return to the county of all investments be equal, and the return to
the county includes taxes paid to the country and not taxes paid to the host county. Thus, full
taxation of foreign investment income with deductibility of foreign taxes paid is unilaterally
appropriate but not consistent with global free trade in the presence of ubiquitous source-based

taxes. Is it fair to characterize this policy as beggar-thy-neighbor behavior? In a sense it is,
because the loss from this policy to the host

county due to lost investment would exceed the

gain to the capital-exporting nation. This usage of the term is somewhat strained, though,as the
13

trade analogy makes clear: if all importing counties impose a tariff on a particular good, then it
is beggar-thy-neighbor for an exporting country jg to impose an export subsidy.
In practice all nations forego the unilaterally optima], but bcggarthy-neighbor, policy,
and in so doing avoid one route to double taxation of foreign investment that would be inimical

to global free trade. Its as if, faced with tariffs imposed by all nations importing a certain good.
all the exporting nations imposed exactly offsetting export subsidies. This would eliminate any
trade distortions, and thus be optimal from a global perspective, but would not be in the

exporting countries interest because it would essentially be a transfer payment to the foreign
government. Thus it is inevitable that the division of revenues becomes an important and
contentious element of the current international tax regime. Bilateral tax treaties generally
feature a reciprocity clause, requiring equal withholding levies for capital flows in both
directions; this is designed to maintain an equitable distribution of tax revenues in the presence

of two-way capital flows. Whether it in fact achieves this goal depends also on the corporate tax
rates and the details of the integration systems in place; on this point see Ault (1992).

Thus, in contrast to trade policy, a basic feature of U.S. taxation of foreign-source
income — the alleviation of double taxation — cannot be defended on the ground of unilateral free

trade, but must be viewed as part of a system that could be consistent with global free trade.
However, other aspects of international tax policy can be made consistent with unilateral free

trade, in the sense of avoiding beggar-thy-neighbor policies. For example, because the United
States' domestic saving and investment is large relative to world markets, it likely has some

monopoly power, i.e. the ability to affect world interest rates. if it is a net capital exporter it can
take advantage of its power by taxing capita] exports, thus driving up the rate of return on its net

exports; if it is a net capital importer, it should tax capital imports, thus driving down the rate of
return it must pay on those imports. The spirit of unilateral free trade dictates that these
opportunities not be exploited.

14

The prescriptions for free trade included the possible strategic use of policies directed at

countries who do not themselves play by the rules of global free trade. Are there any useful
analogies of this idea to international tax policy? Can one identify tax actions taken by other
countries which are protectionist in nature, and which could arguably require "countervailing"
tax action?

Discrimination against foreign-owned fu would probably qualify. However, most
developed counthes pledge nondiscrimination of company taxation through the existing network

of bilateral tax unties. A standard feature of these treaties is a clause which stipulates that tax
treatment of a domestic company will not depend on whether the company is domestic-owned or

foreign-owned.
Thus, two of the fundamental features of the international tax structure — relief of double

taxation and nondiscrimination —are broadly consistent with, but by no means assure, global free

trade. Continued adherence to these principles is clearly desirable. But that leaves many of the
aspects of a country's international tax regime unspecified. It also leaves unclear what criterion

ought to be used to evaluate these aspects. Shoui the criterion be unilateral national income
maximization, with the presumption that adherence to double taxation relief and
nondiscrimination fulfills the country's obligations to free trade? Alternatively, should the U.S.
seek to extend the range of policies which, if adopted multilaterally, can, by enhancing free trade
in capital, potentially lead to increased national income in the U.S. and abroad? This is a critical
question which underlies all policy analysis of international tax policy, but which is usually left

implicit. I believe that policy debates would be clarified if this issue is dealt with explicitly.
In what follows I address five topics in international tax policy with the dual objectives
of assessing how consistent they are with free trade principles and, in light of these findings,
evaluating the appropriate policy stance in each area. The first two topics — the value-added tax
and integration — are not currently features of the U.S. tax system, but may be in the future, and

15

certainly are important features of the tax systems of many of our major trading and investing

partners. The final three topics are of current and future relevance to the U.S. tax system.

4.

Asuects of Tax Policy: Free Trade or Protectionist?

4.1 The Value - Added Tax
The United States stands alone among the 0-7 countries in not having a value-added tax

(VAT) as part of its revenue structure. Many of those who advocate adopting one in this country
point to its apparent export-enhancing features, comparing them to a tax break for exports such
as that implicit in the FISC program or the export-sourcing rule.
In fact a uniform, flat-rate VAT is in no way protectionist or mercantilist. It is

completely consistent with free trade in capital and ideas. This is true even though a VAT, as
usually implemented, taxes imports and rebates all tax that has been paid on the value added of
exports. This treatment of imports and exports merely ensures that a flat-rate VAT is.

administrative issues aside, equivalent to a uniform retail sales tax. As such it imposes no tax on
capital investment, regardless of ownership, and causes no distortion in the location or
magnitude of investment.

-

The essence of this argument is often misunderstood. The essence is that a VAT, as

usually implemented, allows the immediate deduction of capital expenses and for this reason is
not a deterrent to investment. The treatment of imports and exports is flQI essential. Not taxing
imports and not rebating tax on exports would convert the VAT from a retail sales tax to an
output tax, but would still in the tong run not impose a tax on capital as opposed to any other

productive input. For this reason, advocates of the VAT who stress its export-promoting

qualities are misguided. Of coure, substituting a VAT for a tax which is not neutral with
respect to exports of capital or goods can have a trade-enhancing effect. It is also true that a

16

VAT which exempts non-traded goods such as services can have trade effects. On these points
see Feldstein and Krugman (1990).

4.2 lnteration

Having a separate tax on corporation income, with interest paid deductible, and OLI the
capital income of individuals leaves open the possibility that the income earned on behalf of
corporate equity owners will be taxed twice, once at the corporate level and again when either
dividends are paid to the shareholders or capital gains are taxed at the personal level. Most

economists believe that this double taxation causes an inefficiently low allocation ofcapital to
the corporate sector, biases toward corporate debt financing and distorts corporate distribution

policy.
In order to alleviate the double taxation many countries have enacted some fonn of

corporate tax integration, either in the form of a preferential corporate-level tax on distributed

earnings or, more commonly, by offering tax relief at the shareholder level via a full or partial
imputation credit or by simply reducing or eliminating the normally applicable rate of tax on
dividend income. I will focus my attention on shareholder level relief, the more common of the
two kinds of integration.
Shareholder-level tax relief offered to domestic residents, reganiless of whether the
shares owned were of domestic or foreign corporations, and regardless of whether the income of

the corporations was domestic or foreign-source, is perfectly consistent with free trade. Under
free trade each country has the right to determine the level of taxation on capital income of its
residents. Granting such tax relief would increase the after-tax rate of return for residents on
equity investments, and reduce the cost of capitai to any firm receiving funds from these
residents.

Note that it is not required that the shareholder relief be available to foreign shareholders.

nor is it in most situations. One noteworthy exception is the United States-United Kingdom tax
treaty, entered into in 1978, under which a U.S. direct investor is entitled to one-half of the
17

normally available imputation credit; the U.K. offers this treatment to other countries as well. In
many cases, though, the imputation credit has been extended by treaty to foreign portfolio
investors.

A more problematic aspect of most integration schemes is that resident portfolio
investors are granted no credit for dividends received from foreign corporations. Furthermore,
domestic corporations cannot take into account foreign-sourte income in the calculation of the
amount of credit associated with their dividends paid to domestic shareholders; however, there is
generally a 'stacking" rule such that dividends paid to domestic shareholders are presumed to

come first from domestic-source income, and only from foreign-source income after all domestic
income has been distributed.
In those cases where foreign-source income is deemed to be distributed to domestic

shareholders, the implicit multilateral understanc1ig toavoid an extra layer of taxation on

foreign-source income is broken. Under a full imputation system, foreign-source income is

essentially taxed twice, with foreign taxes deductible, while domestic-source income is taxed
once. Recall from Section 13 that this system is consistent with unilateral national income

maximization, but is not consistent with global free trade because the hurdle rate of foreign
direct investments from companies resident in integration countries will be higher than that of
other investments.

Note that if a country with a classical (non-integrated) corporate tax system were to grant
no double tax relief for foreign-source income and
subject it to full tax with deductible foreign

income taxes, this would also be incompatible with global free trade, but with one extra layer of
tax for both domestic-source and foreign-source income. In this case there would be three levels

of tax on foreign-source direct investment income (foreign corporate, domestic

corporate, and

domestic personal) and two levels of tax on domestic-source corporate income. The

fully

integrated tax system described above would subject foreign-source income to two levels of tax

18

and domestic-source income to one level. Either case is inconsistent with global free trade
because it penalizes foreign investment.

4.3 Border Protectionism and Ownership Protectionism
One important difference between trade policy and tax policy is that while wade policy
operates at the bottler and is blind to corporate residency, tax policy can operate at the margin of
corporate residency. For example, U.S. tariffs are imposed on all imported products, regardless
of whether the good is produced abroad by a foreign-owned company or an affiliate of a V S

owned company. Domestically-produced goods are not subject to tariffs, and benefit (or suffer,
if the imported goods are inputs) from the higher domestic prices caused by tariffs, regardless of
whether the producer is U.S.-owned or foreign-owned. Thus, wade policy raises the issue of

what might be called "border protectionism."
Income taxation, because it can impose differential taxation depending oncorporate

residence, may also involve another kind of protectionism that! will refer to as "ownership
protectionism." Whether it does or not depends on the structure of the income tax in place. If,
for example, all countries scrupulously practiced nondiscrimination of business enterprises,

levied no withholding taxes, and all operated territotial systems of taxation, any two
corporations with the same real operations and results spread over the world would pay the same

total tax, regardless of the residency of the parent corporations and even in the face of varying
tax rates across countries. A French company and U.S. company would pay the same total tax if

both companies operated exclusively in the U.S., exclusively in France, exclusively in
Singapore, or in some combination of these and/or other countries.
Differences can arise, though, because the U.S. taxes its resident multinationals on a

worldwide basis and France taxes on a territorial basis. In this case there is a potential tax
penalty placed on a U.S. multinational versus a French multinational that depends on the

locational pattern of activity. There would be no substantial difference if the two multinationals
19

operated exclusively in countries of similar tax rates such as France and the U.S. The difference
arises only to the extent of operations in a low-tax country. The U.S. parent company, but not
the French parent, could be subject to a residual tax upon repatriation of income from its affiliate

in the low-tax country. The apparent difference is also mitigated if the U.S.multinational
operates not only in low-tax countries, but also in foreign countries withaverage tax rates that

exceed the U.S. average rate. In this case the U.S. system allows repatriated income from a lowtax country such as Ireland to be "mixed" with repatriated income froma high-tax country such
as Germany, with the result that no net tax need be paid to the United States government.

From the standpoint of global efficiency, there is noreason that the total (corporate plus
individual) tax burden on the income of a multinational enterprise shoulddepend on the parent

companys country of incorporation. It is no more efficient than, in a domestic context, taxing
corporations with names beginning with the letters A through K at one rate, while taxing at a
higher rate those with names beginning with L through Z (and not allowing name changes!). If

enacted, Lollapollooza Corporation could not compete withKennebunkport Corporation if they
produced exactly the same products. If they produced slightly different products, Lollapollooza
might survive, but at a diminished scale and diminished variety ofoutput. As Frisch (1990) has
argued, one efficiency cost of this discrimination could be a reduced variety ofproducts
available to the world market.
,Vhether higher corporate taxes translate into higher total taxes depends on the tax system

in place. As discussed in Section 3.2. this would not occur if all countries adopted a pure
residence-based tax, where residence refers to the residence of individuals andnot corporations.
Corporations subject to more tax would necessarily have shareholders who hada lower personal
tax burden, and so their cost of capital would be low enough to offset the higher corporation tax

payments. Under the current international system of taxation, which is not apure residencebased system and not perfectly integrated, this offset willnot occur.

20

Some have claimed that a tax penalty on U.S. resident multinational enterprises would be

especially harmful to the U.S. national interest. One argument is that legal residence generally is
associated with "headquarters' activities, such as research and development, that are especially

beneficial to U.S. economic performance. if these benefits to the country cannot be captured by
the firms themselves, there is an economic argument for subsidizing, andcertainly not

penalizing, such "externality' producing activities. A relatively high tax rate on the worldwide
activities of U.S. based multinationals would, over the long run, divert economic activity to
other multinationals, reducing the amount of headquarters activities carried out in this country.
This argument ignores the availability of alternative policies that are bettertargeted to

address the externalities issue. Any specific activities, associated with the headquarters of

multinational enterprises or not, that produce posbive externalities should be subsidized and, br
the most part, already are. I have in mind research and development expenditures, which can be

expensed rather than amortized for tax purposes, and which are eligible for an incremental tax

credit. It may be that the current effective rate of subsidy is too low, but that argues for raising
it, the rate of tax on all U.S. headquartered multinational enterprises, regardless of their
externality producing activities, is too blunt an insirument for this purpose.
Another line of argument is based on the empirical fact that U.S. companies tend to be

primarily owned by U.S. citizens, while foreign companies tend to be owned by foreigners. For
this reason it would be in the national interest to develop policies which shift profits from

foreign to U.S. companies. In oligopolistic markets, tax breaks can work just as well as export
subsidies (i.e.. only in very selective circumstances that are more easily conceptualized than

made operational) in shifting profits toward domestic finns. However, as Levinsohn and
Slemrod (1993) show, in the simplest case this profit shifting is best achieved by subsidizing the
output of domestic firms, but not distinguishing between domestically-located and foreign-

located production (and to allow foreign taxes as a deduction). There may be a case for favoring
foreign operations if some sectors are perfectly competitive and some art oligopolistic; in this
21

case a tariff may have to be used, and location nonneutrality tolerated, so as totarget the subsidy

to the oligopolistic industries. In this case the targeting advantage of trade policy over taxpolicy

overrides the production inefficiency caused by the tariff.
4.4 Income Shifting and Tax Havens
Another important difference between tariff policy and tax policy is that the basis for
duties is the value of transaction, while for income tax policy the basis is a measure of income.
Income is a considerably more slippery concept to defme, and the location of the incàme of an
integrated global enterprise is a conceptual nightmare; Ault and Bradford (1990) have gone so
far as to argue that it is not meaningful.

Given differences in tax rates across countries, and the fact that no
countxy has a pure
residence-based system of taxing corporations, there are incentives to take advantage of the

difficulty of locating income to reduce an enterprise's worldwide tax burden. A multinational
operating in two countries in which the marginal tax raze on a dollar of income is different
would, ceteris naribus, prefer to shift income from the high-tax country to the low-tax country.
Such shifting can be accomplished by the judicious setting of prices of transactions between

corporate affiliates, or by judicious international financial policy (e.g., doing borrowing in hightax countries).

Holding the location of real activity constant a country gains when a doliar of taxable
income is shifted into it, while the country from which it is shifted loses. The world is cunently
populated by a set of countries, known loosely as tax havens, that set low marginal tax rates and

look the other way, or even encourage, the inward shifting of taxable income. Tostanch the
outward flow of taxable income, countries which have relatively high tax rates must establish an
enforcement structure to monitor transfer pricing, earnings stripping, and other methods of

income shifting.
Tax havens can be classified into two types. In one type, the country levies a very low
tax rate on the income from manufacturing operations located in its jurisdiction. In the second
22

type, the country offers a low tax on the income of corporations whose Legal domicile is that
country. One motivation behind becoming the lust type of tax haven is to attract real investment
and economic activity into the country. This is not a primary motivation behind the second kind
of tax haven; in this case the country is essentially offering its services, for a fee, to individuals
and corporations pursing tax avoidance and evasion.

Even the first type of tax haven opportunistically gains from income shifting. Consider
the example of Ireland, which offers a preferential tax rate of 10% on the income reported due to

manufacturing operations in that country. Having established an affiliate itt Ireland, a
multinational enterprise has the incentive to shift taxable profits to that country from higher tax

countries. Thus it is no coincidence that such countries implement a low marginal cffcctive tax
rate (METR) on investment via a low statutory tax rate strategy as opposed to a strategy of a
high statutory rate combined with generous investment tax credits and/or depreciation

allowances. Although any particular low METR can be obtained with the latter strategy, it
would not make the country a magnet for income shifting, only for real activity.
Local content rules are a useful analogy to tax havens in the domain of international

trade. Imagine that the United States imposes quantity restrictions on the import of steel from
Japan

and Korea. In order to enforce such restrictions, there must be a way to identify imports

from an unrestricted country, such as Mexico, as having originated in Mexico rather than in
Japan or Korea.

ibis is usually accomplished by attempting to measure the "local content" of

the imports from Mexico. and requiring it to be above a prespecified level in order to be
imported without restriction. These rules are similar to the anti-treaty shopping provisions of
income tax treaties, which seek to limit the rerouting of income through tax havens to minimize
tax payments. A country which, for some compensation, collaborates with the restricted
countries to evade the United States local content rules is acting similarly to a tax haven. In

what follows I will refer to the behavior of tax havens with a concocted tarn — "predatory tax

23

protectionism.' It is predatory because it is clearly a zero-sum or, as I argue below, a negativesum game, in which the tax haven's gains are offset by losses to the rest of the world.

From a global perspective, the presence of tax havens is costly for at least two reasons.
First, there are substantial resource costs expended by the tax collection agencies of the rest of

the world to minimize inappropriate income shifting, and substantial resources costs expended
by the multinationals themselves to accomplish such shifting. Second, there are distortions in
the kind of real activity that the (first type of) tax haven atnacts, i.e. high margin production
such as pharmaceuticals and electronics which facilitate income shifting. Absent income
shifting considerations, there is no economic reason why such activities should be located in
Ireland or Puerto Rico, which can offer income shifting advantages to U.S. corporations.
I have argued elsewhere (Slemrod, 1988) that the costs due to tax havens and income

shifting are appropriately dealt with via a multilateral agreement which would restrict statutory
corporate tax rates to lie within a smau band and impose sanctions on those countries that choose
not to comply; countries would be permitted to be magnets for real investment, but would have

to do so by offering investment tax credits rather than low statutory tax rates. This (i.e., a
minimum statutory corporate tax rate) is the approach suggested as a firststep toward more
corporate tax harmonization by the Ruding Committee, the experts' committee of the European
Commission charged with recommending what, if any, tax harmonization should be adopted in
concert with the 1992 curtailment of barriers to free trade in goods and services; this suggestion
was not, however, embraced by the European Community.

On a unilateral basis, it is imperative that the U.S. international tax system be designed to

counteract predatory tax protectionism. It is clear that the U.S. rules in this regard impose large
costs on multinationals operating here (see Blumenthal and Slernrod, 1994), but it is also evident
that the potential stakes involved in income shifting are large as well (Harris,

1993). In a

purely domestic context it does not generally make economic sense to push tax enforcement
until the point where, at the margin, revenue gained equals cost, because the revenue gained does

24

not represent a benefit to the country, but instead is a transfer of resources. In the context of
international income shifting, revenue gained does represent a benefit to thecountry (although

not to the world as a whole), as it comes at the expense of a foreign treasury. Thus it does make
sense, from a unilateral perspective, to push enfoxement much harder in an incomc shifting

context than in a domestic context From a global perspective, as suggested above, there will be
an inefficiently large expenditure on this kind of enforcement.

4.5 Worldwide or Territorial System?
Because it involves most of the issues discussed above, it is fitting to close byaddressing
the choice between taxing worldwide income, with a limited foreign tax credit, and taxing only

income earned within the U.S. To be precise, the territorial alternative I consider would tax
passive or portfolio income on a worldwide basis, but tax activc business income on a territorial
basis.

Because either system affords relief from double taxation, either is generally consistent

with free trade. However, a territorial system allows and, compared to a worldwide system.
encourages host countries to attact capital investment by offering a low marginal effective tax
rate. This is inimical to free trade because it implies that the hurdle rate will be lower in those
countries than elsewhere. It allows lower razes because there is no residual tax imposed by the

U.S. government. It encourages low rates because high rates are less likely to be offset by
credits from the home country government once the United States gets out of the business of
offering foreign tax credits; only Japan and the United Kingdom will remain, and these countries
have tax sparing treaties with many developing countries which essentially exempts foreign-

source income earned in the treaty partners countries from residual taxation by the home
country.

How does the choice look from a unilateral perspective? First of all, the territorial
system is simpler to administer and comply with than the worldwide system, so a switch will in
25

the long run save on collection costs. However, as Tillinghast (1991) has noted, an exemption
system would still be complex both because passive and active income would have to be

distinguished and because a territorial system would increase the potential gains from income
shifting and therefore put pressure on the transfer pricing rules and other enforcement tools.
Another important criterion is whether a worldwide system of taxation offers a better

defense against predatory tax protectionism in the form of tax havens. Does the potential
residual tax imposed either upon accrual or repatriation provide an important backstop to our
attempt to tax domestic-source income, in the same way that the corporation tax can be justified

as a backstop to the objective of taxing capital and labor income in general? This is an

important question which I view as open. It would be worthwhile to compare the success in this
regard of those countries, such as France and the Netherlands which operate territorial systems.
How do the two systems stack up with regard to ownership protectionism? I argued

above that there is no compelling reason for the U.S. government to either penalize or subsidize

U.S. parental multinational enterprises versus those of other countries. Under the current
system there is a relative tax penalty to U.S. multinationals whose foreign operations are
predominantly in low-tax countries; the U.S. will impose a residual tax on repatriated earnings, a
tax not owed by non-U.S. multinationals.

Note, though, that a careful recent study (Grubert and Mutti, 1993) concludes that the tax
shortfall from switching to an exemption system would be small, $0.2 billion compared to $97.9

billion of foreign-source income. This is because many of the U.S. multinationals that operate in
low-tax countries also operate in high-tax countries, and thereby can set their repatriation
strategy to avoid any residual tax to the U.S. government. It is also because some U.S.
multinationals now repatriate a mix of high-taxed dividends with low-taxed royalty and interest
income to avoid substantial residual tax; under an exemption system, the dividend income would
be exempt, but the royalty income would still be subject to worldwide taxation subject to a
foreign tax credit.

26

These revenue estimates suggest that, taking all U.S. multinationals as a group, whatever

ownership tax penalty currently exists is small, and would not be significantly altered by the
change to a territorial system. A cautionary note about the revenue estimates is in order, though,
because they depend critically on an assumption of minimal behavioral response to the change in

tax regime. This is unlikely to be true; for example, repatriations now labelled as royalties could
be reclassified as dividends, thus avoiding U.S. tax. The extent of this kind of "relabelling

elasticity" is difficult to forecast accurately.
5.

Conclusions

-

Compatibility with free trade is not the only standard against which to judge an

international tax system. Its implications for equity, within and across countries, and its
consistency with domestic tax regimes come to mind as two other potentially important factors.
Nevertheless, as national economies become more integrated, and as barriers to trade in goods

and services fall, the importance of international taxation for the efficient functioning of capital
markets will become a central concern.
Free trade in capital is achieved only if the hurdle rate for investment is equal regordless

of the location of the real activity, of the nationality of the corporation doing the investment, and
the nationality of the ultimate owner of the equity income. The existing international tax regime

could be consistent with, although certainly does not achieve, this result because countries of
residence adopt some form of relief from double taxation. As in the case of a set ofexport

subsidies offsetting import tariffs, this system reduces wade distortions, although it creates
nettlesome issues

of transfers between the importing and exporting countries.

The fact that a central feature of U.S. international tax policy — double tax relief — is best
viewed as part of a multilateral understanding that supports freetrade makes it problematic to

evaluate the ancillary characteristics of that policy. In cases where they conflict, what criterion
should be used to evaluate tax policy? Should it be unilateral national income maximization,

with the presumption that adherence to double taxation relief and nondiscrimination fulfills the
27

country's obligations to free trade? Or should the U.S. seek to extend the range of policies
which, if adopted multilaterally, can, be enhancing free trade in capitaJ, potentially lead to

increased prosperity in the U.S. and abroad? I am hopeful that the perspectives offered in
this paper will shed light on the answers to these important policy questions.

28

References

Ault. Hugh, "Corporate Integration and Tax Trea's: Where Do We Go From Here?" ]
Notes International, March 16, 1992.

Ault, Hugh and David Bradford, "Taxing International Income: An Analysis of the U.S. System
and Its Economic Premises," in A. Razin and J. Slemrod (eds.) Taxation in the Global
Economy. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990).
Blumenthal, Marsha and Joel Slemrod, "The Compliance Cost of Taxing Foreign-Source
Income: Its Magnitude. Detenninants and Policy Implications," unpublished manuscript.
University of Michigan, January 1994.

Deardorff, Alan V. and Robert M. Stem, "Current Issues in Trade Policy: An Overview," in R.
Stern, (ed.). in R. M. Stern (edj. U.S. Trade Policies in a Chang-ine World Economy.
(Cambridge: MiT Press), 1987.
Devereux, Michael, "On Efficiency Criteria in the International Taxation of Income from
Capital," Keele University Department of Economics Working Paper No. 93-8, May
1993.

Diamond, Peter and James Mirrlees, "Optimal Taxation and Public Production I: Production
Efficiency." American Economic Review. 1991, pp. 8-27.
Feldstein, Martin and Paul Krugman, "International Trade Effects of Value-Added Taxation," in
A. Razin and J. Slemrod (eds.) Taxation in the Global Economy. (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press), 1990.
Fnscb, Daniel J., "The Economics of International Tax Policy: Some Old and New

Approaches." Tax Notes, April 30. 1990. pp.581.91.
Gordon, Roger and Joosung Jun. "Taxes and the Form of Ownership of Foreign Corporate
Equity." in A. Giovannini, R. 6. Hubbard and I. Slemrod (eds.) Studies in International
Taxation. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 1993.

Grubert, Hany and John Mutti, "Taxing Multinationals in a World With Portfolio Flows and
R&D: Is Capital Export Neutrality Obsolete?" Unpublished manuscript. December 1993.
Harris, David, Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod and Bernard Yeung, "Income Shifting in U.S.
Multinational Corporations," in A. Giovannini, R. 6. Hubbard and I. Slemrod (eds,)
Studies in International Taxation. (Chicagu: University of Chicago Press), 1993.
Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, assisted by Joanna M. Rooij, U.S. Taxation of International Income:
Blueprint for Reform. (Washington. D.C.: Institute for International Economics), 1992.

29

Krugman, Paul R. and Maurice Obsifeld, International Economics: Theory arid Policy. Second
Edition. (New York: Harper Couins), 1991.

Levinsohn, James and Joel Slemrod, 'Taxes, Tariffs, and the Global Corporation," Journal of
Public Economics, May 1993, pp. 97-116.
Robinson, Joan, Essays in the Theory of Employment. (Oxford: Blackwell), 1947.

Schmidt, Wilson E., 'U.S. Capital Export Policy: Backdoor Mercaritilism," in U.S. Taxation of
American Business Abroad. (Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute). 1975.
Slemrocl, Joel, 'Effect of Taxation with International Capital Mobility," in Uneasy Comnromise:
Problems of a Hybrid Income Consumption Tax. (Washington. D.C.: Brookings

Institution), 1988.
Slemrod, Joel, "Tax Principles in an International Economy," In Michael Boskin and Charles E.
McLure, Jr. (eds.), World Tax Reform. (San Francisco: ICS Press), 1990.

Tillinghast, David R International Tax Simplification." The American Journal of Tax Policy,
Vol. 8, No. 2. (Spring 1991) pp. 187-247.

30

