NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DYNAMICS OF PART-TIME WORK

Rebecca M. Blank

Working Paper No. 4911

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994

This research has been supported by NSF grant SES-9209245 and the Center for Urban Affairs
and Policy Research at Northwestern University. Thanks are due to Yasuyo Abe, Rebecca
London, and Leslie Moscow for excellent research assistance, and to Bruce Meyer, Dan Sullivan
and Bo Honoré for useful comments. Earlier versions of this work were presented in seminars

at Michigan State, NUER, Northwestern. Ohio and UPenn. This paper is pan of NBER's
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Rebecca M. Blank. AU rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including C
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4911
November 1994

THE DYNAMICS OF PART-TIME WORK
ABSTRACT
This paper uses 14 years of data from the P5W to explore dynamic labor supply choices
among adult women between full-time, part-time, or no labor market work. A variety of models

indicate that past choices should be important in predicting current labor supply choices. This
paper compares the effectiveness of several estimation sntegies which require more or less
historical information. The results indicate that past history in labor supply choices among adult
women is very important in predicting current labor supply; given the lack of such data in many

cases, the paper explores how much is lost when limited or no longitudinal information is
available. In addition, the paper explores the substantive question of the role of part-time work

in the labor market. Part-time workers are a very heterogeneous group; different part-time
workers are in the midst of very different labor supply patterns. Most women use pan-lime work

as a temporary alternative to full-time work or to being out of the labor market; few women use

it as a uansitional step into full-time employment. Simulations suggest the potential impact on
future labor supply of mandating that low-skilled women who are out of the labor market enter
part-time work.

Rebecca M. Blank
Department of Economics
2003 Sheridan Road
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208
and NBER

The Dynamics of Part-Time Work

Introduction
The role of part-time work in the labor market is not well understood.

Some argue that part-time work creates difficulties for workers, pointing to the

lesser availability of health and pension plans among part-time workers, and

to the lower average wage levels on part-time jobs. Others argue that part-

time work provides labor market flexibility to workers who face other

demands on their time, allowing workers who are currently unable or
unwilling to work hill-time to maintain their labor market connections and

skills. Consistent with this last argument, there is increasing emphasis on
placing public assistance recipients into mandatory part-time work, on the
theory that this will aid their movement toward economic self-sufficiency by
leading to future full-time employment.

This paper investigates dynamic labor supply choices among adult
women, with a particular focus on the role of part-time work. The primary
substantive question of the paper is "How does part-time work fit into long-

term patterns of labor supply?" I am particularly interested in knowing
whether pad-time work acts as an "intermediate state" that some women utilize

1

as they move toward full-time work. This is important in evaluating the policy

claim that putting non-working women into part-time jobs will assist them in

moving toward full-time work. To answer this question, however, we need
to understand the dynamic patterns underlying the choice of all labor market

states utilized by adult women. Thus, this paper also provides an empirical

investigation of labor supply choices among women, with more careful
attention to the role of past history and of heterogeneity in preferences in
determining current and future labor market status.
In addition to substantive questions about part-time work and female
labor supply, this paper provides useful information for empirical researchers

about the value of utilizing longitudinal data on past labor supply choices to

predict current labor supply. Because I have a particularly long panel (14
years), I can compare the usefulness of controlling more or less completely for

past labor market history, either by including more years of past history, or

by modelling sequential patterns of past choices more fully. I can also
compare lagged dependent variable estimates to random-effects estimates,

which characterize in a different way the population heterogeneity that is
presumably reflected in past history and which can be implemented on cross-

sectional data without any past labor supply information.
The results of this analysis indicate that past labor market choices are

critically important for understanding and predicting current labor market
choices among women. This is particularly true for part-time workers; at any
2

point in time, part-time work is used by women following very different
dynamic labor supply patterns. While part-time work is used by many women

for brief periods of time (highly correlated with changes in household
demographics), it is only infrequently used as a stepping stone from out of the

labor market into full-time work. It is much more likely to serve as a shortterm alternative to someone who is predominantly out of the labor market, or

to someone who is predominantly a full-time worker. There is also evidence
of substantial heterogeneity among adult women in their labor supply behavior.

Some women appear to be very stably attached to a particular labor market

state, while other women are more likely to be frequent movers between
multiple labor market states. Random effects models of this heterogeneity do
not fit the data as well as models that include lagged information on past labor

supply choices, but for some purposes random effects models may be almost
as useful as lagged dependent variable models.

II

Part-time Work and Dynamic Labor Supply: What Do We Know?
Among the 19 percent of the workforce that worked part-time in

1992, over two-thirds were women. Figure 1 indicates that a relatively

constant share of employed women have worked part-time over the past 25

years, between 2.5 to 30 percent of the female labor force.t Of course, the

This is based on number of people working less than 35 hours per week on their main Job.
the official definition of pail-time work.

3

growth in female labor force involvement means that the number of part-time

female workers has expanded enormously. In contrast, there has been a slow
increase in the share of part-time workers among employed men over the past

25 years, from about 8 percent to over 12 percent of male workers, as figure

1 shows. Part-time work among men is also more cyclical than among
women, reflecting a greater amount of involuntary part-time work among
men 2

Despite an ongoing public discussion about the problems and/or
advantages of part-time jobs, labor supply research that has focused on part-

time work is surprisingly scarce? A few studies have investigated part-time
work choices at a point in time, including Long and Jones (1981), Nakainura

and Nakamura (1983), and Blank (1988). These studies indicate that women

with younger children, more children, and higher levels of other income are
more likely to work part-time.4

2lnvoluntary pad-time work occurs when workers indicate that they are working pad-time
even though they are available for and want MI-time work. In 1992, 40 percent of male parttimers indicated they were involuntary, while only 25 percent or female part-timers sought nihtime work.
3For a review of the literature, see Blank (1990b).
4A larger literature analyzes wage differentials between part-time and full-tune workers (for
instance, Nakamura and Nakamura, 1983, or Blank, 1990a). ml. research typically concludes
that equivalent part-time workers earn less than their 611-time counterparts, although the size of
this effect varies across occupations and depends upon the correction for selectivity into pan-time
work. Non-wage compensation differentials are even larger. Jones and Long (1979), Corcorsn
et *1. (1983) and Sundt (1987) control for the effect of past labor-market involvement on current
wages. At least in the short run, part-time wells appear correlated with lower wage growth.

4

A number of "counting exercises" have investigated the use of part-

time work in a more dynamic context. Moen (1985) includes simple spell
tabulations of part-time and full-time spells over short periods of time. Main

(1988) uses retrospective life histories of British women to display lifetime

patterns of part-time and full-time work.

Blank (1989) estimates the

determinants of part-time spells using hazard rates.5 These studies tend to
show quite complex patterns of labor market movement among adult women

and indicate that part-time work is a transitory labor market state for most
women. But most of these studies are limited. Except for simple descriptive
analysis, we know very little about the women's choices over time between
part-time and full-time spells of work and spells out of the labor market.

Ill

Models of Dynamic labor Supply
The standard static labor supply model conceptualizes hours of work

as a function that can be written as:

(1)

Hours = f(S, 'Y0 D, Z),

where S is a vector of human capital attributes of the individual that determine

compensation and wages. Y0 is a vector of other income sources in the

5Attempts to estimate the determinants of women's spells of labor market participation and
nonparticipation (without explicit attention to the issue of pan-Lime work) include Heckman and
Willis (1977) and Hill and O'Neill (1989).

5

household and includes both the earnings of other individuals as well as non-

earned income. D represents a vector of labor market demand conditions that
may constrain labor market choices. Z is a vector of household composition

and demographic characteristics that is used to control for differences in the

opportunity cost of market work and for differences in preferences across
households. If labor market choices in each time period are independent of

choices in all past and future years, then estimation of (1) using current
information on all the variables will suffice.
A variety of labor supply models, however, predict time dependence

in labor supply. First, human capital investment models suggest that current

compensation will depend on past labor market experience, which in turn
affects current labor supply. This implies that the human capital vector, S,
should include information on accumulated experience. Second, there may be

time dependence in labor supply options exclusive of compensation effects.
If labor market involvement expands a woman's job networks and job search

knowledge, she may be more likely to work if she has worked more in the

past. A theory less accepted by economists but often raised in policy
discussions about labor supply is that past labor market involvements may
change women's preferences over time, so that the utility associated with work

may increase (or decrease) over time as work experience changes.6

6Eckstein and Wolpin (1989) make this point; their estimatca indicate that the disutility of
employment increases with experience.

6

Third, there may be heterogeneity in women's preferences with regard
to how they evaluate their labor/leisure

choices. In the absence of direct

information on this phenomenon, past labor supply choices are often assumed
to reveal evidence about this heterogeneity. In this case, past patterns of labor

supply are important not because they directly affect current choices, but
because they are correlated with other less measurable variables that influence

both past and current choice. Fourth, life cycle models of labor supply predict

that labor supply choices will depend not only on past but also on future
expectations about labor supply and household demands. Since most data sets

contain no information on future expectations, these are typically proxied by
information on past behavior.

The point of this paper is not to try to distinguish between these
competing explanations. Researchers who have estimated models designed to
highlight each of these particular theories of labor supply have found evidence

of time dependence. My interest is in conducting a less structural exploration
of dynamic labor supply choice, although like all empirical papers I will have
to make certain distributional and functional form assumptions.

Rather than estimating the static model in (1), I want to estimate a

more general dynamic version.

Specifically, I want to estimate the

determinants of the sequential set of labor market choices, assuming these

choices are correlated over time, starting in period 1 when a woman first

7

be
enters the labor market and opts to work h1 hours. These choices can
characterized as a series of probabilistic equations that evolve over time:

(2a)

Prob(Hours1hi js1, Y01, D1, Z1)

(21,)

Prob(Hoursh2 h1, S2, Y02, 1)2, Z)

(2c)

Prob(Hours3h3 j h2, h1, S3, Y03, D3, Z3)

(2d)

Prob(Hours.rhT I h1, hT.2, ... , h1, ST, 'oT' 1)T 7-r)

where the choice of hours in each period is assumed to be the result of all past

optimizing choices among labor/leisurelhome production options of the
individuaL7 Unfortunately, unrestricted estimates of (2d) are impossible to
compute when T becomes at all large, because of the difficulty of computing

all of the necessary intercorrelations between periods.

One way to solve this problem is to paraineterize the utility function

in a way that assumes preferences are separable over time (Heckman and
MaCurdy, 1980; MaCurdy, 1981; Browning, Deaton and Irish, 1985; and

Altonji, l986). These models of life-cycle labor supply assume that people
are able to fully adjust their labor supply in each time period. More recent

work has estimated models that allow somewhat slower labor supply

'Fertility decisions may also be endogcnous. I do not deal with this, other than to control for
cumulative past fertility decisions through the vector Z that characterizes household constraints.

'A somewhat different specification is provided by Eckatein and Wolpin (1989), although they

also specitr and estimate a particular form of the utility function, which is then used to simulate

dynamic labor supply choices.

8

adjustment, typically assuming some type of habit adjustment model (Hotz,

Kydland and Sedlacek, 1988; Bover, 1991). The focus of this work is to
measure the intertemporal adjustment in labor supply that occurs as wages
change along a given lifetime wage profile.

I choose a different approach to study the dynamics of labor supply,
for a variety of reasons: First, the explicit parameterization of utility required

to produce estimable specifications in the research cited above makes it
difficult to determine how much the results depend on the parameterization.

I do not want to impose a particular model of intertemporal labor supply on
the data, but want to test for patterns of time dependence among labor supply
choices in as nonparametric a manner as possible. Second, such specifications
assume wages are not affected by labor supply choices, an assumption that the

existing literature on part-time wages clearly indicates is incorrect. This is
particularly important, given my interest in separating part-time and full-time

work choices. Third, these models are primarily designed to estimate the
elasticity of intertemporal male labor supply to wage variation over time,
which is not the main concern of this study. Household characteristics should

be far more important in determining women's labor supply decisions-particularly their movements iii and out of part-time work—than ire changes
in short-run wage levels. I therefore want a model that allows me to estimate

the effect of a wide range of time-varying variables on labor supply choice.

9

An alternative way to simplify the problem in (2) is to characterize the

continuous hours of work variable by a few discrete labor market states. I
will assume that a person's labor market involvement at any point in time can

be adequately summarized by three discrete categories: (1) Out of the labor

market (Hours = 0), referred to as OLM; (2) Part-time work (0 C Hours C
35), referred to as PT; and (3) Full-time work (Hours

35), referred to as

FT. The result is a discrete version of (2) with three labor market states in
each period. This simplification is consistent with existing evidence on how

the labor market functions. First, firms explicitly define and advertise part-

time jobs, so that this distinction is recognized institutionally in the labor
market. Second, as noted above, there is a difference in the compensation of
equivalent workers in part-time and full-time jobs, which indicates that these
two categories embody real productivity differences.

With a three-way characterization of labor supply choices, I can
investigate the dynamic model in (2) in three different ways. First, I can

focus on the determinants of the duration of time spent in any one labor
market state. This results in standard duration analysis of OLM, PT, and FT
spells. The biggest drawback to this approach is that it does not allow me to
estimate patterns of movement across multiple labor market states over time.9

one can estimate a hazard modcl with multiple types of spells allowing for a
11111 set of intercorrelations between the spells, but this sort of estimation is beyond current
econometric abilities.

10

Therefore I also investigate a second approach, which ignores the issue of
spells and estimates the discrete version of (2) in each time period, controlling

for past labor market history. l'his means estimating a three-way multinomial
logit of the choice between labor market states, including dummy variables to

represent the full range of (discrete) labor market choices made in past

periods. The third approach is to use a three-way multinomiat logit to
estimate current labor supply choices, but rather than including explicit

information on past labor market history to instead characterize the
heterogeneity across individuals with random effects.

(ills would be

particularly consistent with the third model of time dependence described
above, where past history merely proxies for underlying stable differences in

preferences.) Because this approach requires only cross-sectional data to
implement, it is interesting to compare the goodness of fit properties between
the lagged dependent variable estimates and the random effects estimates. All

three of these models are developed in more detail below.

Iv
The Data

The data used in this paper are from the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID) from 1976 to 1989. Data prior to 1976 are not usable for
my purposes, since labor supply information on wives was not available before

this year. This provides 14 years of information. Included In my sample are

11

all women between the ages of 18 and 50 in 1976, who are spouses or family

heads in all 14 years.'° Thus, I have attempted to select a sample of women
who, for the entire time period, are in a position to make labor supply choices.

Explicitly omitted are women who are in school or living with their parents
during any of these years, or women who are old enough to have reached the

usual retirement age.

I also omit those persons who were part of the

oversample of low-income families in the PSID. There are 1463 women who
meet these criteria, which provides 20,482 observations (1463 times 14 years).

Where I make comparisons to men, they are sampled in an identical way.

Throughout this paper, a part-time worker is someone who reports

working less than 35 hours per week on her longest job last year. This
ignores differences in annual weeks of work among women. The alternative
is use a full-time definition based on annual hours of work (such as 1680 hours

per year—35 hours per week times 48 weeks per year.) This would seriously

overestimate the incidence of part-time work, however. For most of these
years I only have information on main job last year." Any full-time worker
who enters or leaves the labor market during the middle of the year will show

an annual hours figure that will look like pan-time work, even though it

'family heads' loosely here to refer to womdn who are both unrelated individuals as
well as the head oft group of related individuals.
IOj use

12

actually reflects the end (beginning) of a spell of non-work and the beginning

(end) of a spell of full-time work.
Figure 2 presents the range of labor supply choices among both men

and women over these 14 years. Plotted is the cumulative share of the
population as hours of work increase, based on data from the entire 14 year
period. The solid line is based on the adult women sample described above
and the dashed line shows hours choices among an equivalent sample of adult

men. As the graph shows, substantially more women are out of the labor
force (at zero hours), and their cumulative share between 0 and 40 hours rises

more rapidly than men's. Both groups show a large spike at 40 hours. The
number of men working over 40 hours is much higher, and men's cumulative

share rises quickly above 40 hours, while women's is more flat. Few women

or men work less than 20 hours per week. An average, 28 percent of the
women in our sample are out of the labor market at any point in time during

these years, another 23 percent are working part-time, and 51 percent are

"Experimentation with an annual hours of work definition of 'part-time confirms this
problem. In the moat recent yen ot the PSID, there ismonthly information on labor supply, but
the tort period over which this is available limits its useMness. An alternative approach would
be to define five labor market states instead of three: 012.1, Part-time/Pan-year, Part-time/Fullyear; Full-time/Pan-year, and Full-time/Full-year.

13

working full-time. In contrast, only 3 percent of the men are out of the labor
market, 4 percent work part-time and 93 percent work full-time.'2
V

Observed Transitions and Labor Supply
Patterns in the Raw Data
Because

of the scarcity of information on dynamic labor supply

choices, it is interesting to start by looking at simple tabulations of the patterns

of labor market change in the raw data. Table 1 presents the avenge
transition matrix for adult women and men between the three labor market
states over the 14-year period. Table 1 indicates that a substantial number of

women remain in the same labor market state over any two-year period: 79

percent of the sample lies on the diagonal of the transition matrix. Much
greater stability is present among full-time and OLM women than among —
time women, however. While 86 percent of the women who work full-time

in year t are observed to work full-time in year ti-I; only 66 percent of the
part-timers in year t will remain part-time workers in year t+ 1. Twenty
percent of part-time workers will move up to full-time work, and 14 percent
will move out of the labor market. Thus, table 1 indicates that part-time work

ReaFae that these data .rc based on hours of work in the longed job held lad year. The
share of men who arc out of the labor force is quite low compared to weekly labor force
participaLion data, since a person would have to be out of the labor market all year in order to be
placed in this category.

14

is clearly a more transitional category than either of the other two labor market

states.

While the adult women's transition matrix looks relatively stable, the

men's transition matrix is extremely stable. Ninety-four percent of the men

stay in the same labor market state (are on the diagonal) over a two-year
period, mostly in full-time work. Of those working part-time, over half will
be in full-time work in the next year.
Table 1 emphasizes the differences between the male and female labor

force and indicates that dynamic labor supply estimates for men are of much

less interest than for women. Most men work full-time at some point during

the year. Women show much greater variance in their labor supply choices,
both at a point in time and in their movements over time.

Given an interest in the dynamic role of part-time work in women's
labor supply choices, it is interesting to look at a three-year transition matrix,
to see whether any frequent patterns of movement between the OLM, PT and

FT categories occur. Table 2 presents the three-year transition matrix for
adult women, showing the probability of being in one of the three labor market

states in year t+2, conditional upon all possible patterns in years t and t+1.
Table 2 indicates that over a three-year period 66 percent of women

stay in the same labor market state for all three yeaa The transitional nature

of part-time work is even more apparent in table 2. Among all women who

worked part-time in year t, 66 percent were still in part-time work after 1
15

year, while only 49 percent (11.4 percent out of 23.3 percent) are still there

after 2 years. Those who move between labor market states are distributed
widely throughout all the cells in the matrix.
Table 3 presents information on aggregate labor supply patterns over

the entire 14-year period. For comparison purposes, table 3 also shows the
equivalent patterns among adult men (who one would expect to show more
stable patterns than adult women), and among all adult women in my sample

who are married 10 or more of the 14 years (who one would expect to show
less stable patterns if married women are more prone to changing labor market
status).

With 14 years of data and 3 labor market states, there are
(approximately 4.8 million) possible data patterns. Among the 1463 women
in the sample, I observe only 931 of these patterns, with a substantial minority

of the women located in only a few patterns. Twenty-two percent of all adult

women never change labor market states over a 14 year period, as part 1 of
table 3 indicates. The bulk of these are full-time workers. Only 1 percent of

the sample is permanently attached to part-time work. In comparison, 68
percent of the men remain in one labor market state for 14 years, almost all
of them working full-time.

Part2oftable3 indicatesthatoverhalfofthewomenareinthesame

labormarketstateatleastlOofthel4years. Yet, itisalso tnjethatmost
women have some experience with multiple labor market states. As part 3
16

indicates, 64 percent of the women have spent at least one year out of the
labor market, 69 percent have worked part-time at least one year, and 85

percent have worked full-time at least one year. A substantial minority of
women seem to be 'movers"—40 percent have spent time in all three labor
market states over the 14 year period. Interestingly, as column 3 indicates,

there are not large differences between those women who are stably married

over this period and all women.
The last two parts of table 3 investigate the prevalence of any sort of
"stepping-stone" pattern between OLM, PT and FT moves. Part 6 tabulates

the share of women who ever show a pattern of OLM to PT to FT work
(regardless of the number of years spent in each state). Part 7 tabulates the
reverse stepping stone pattern, moving from FT to PT to OLM. The results

indicate that few women in part-time work are in a transitional state between

OLM and full-time employment.'3 The majority of part-time workers enter
part-time work from a full-time spell and return to full-time work, or they
enter pad-time work from OLM and return to OLM. This suggests that part-

time work is used as a temporary alternative to another (more permanent)

labor market state, not as a transitional state.

The results in tables

1

through 3 confirm that women show a great

deal of movement in their labor supply choices over time. Much more so than

It is possible that a larger proportion of women work pad-time for a month or two before
finding MI-time work and that higher frequency data would show more stcppiug stone" patterns.

17

among men, there are frequent changes in labor supply among many women,

implying that dynamic analysis of labor supply decisions may be more

interesting for women than for men. Although women appear to be a
heterogeneous group,

a

substantial minority seem stably attached to a

particular labor market state. Part-time work is clearly a more short-term and

transitional state than OLM or full-time work, but it is used less as a
transitional state into or out of the labor market than as an alternative to either

OLM or full-time work.
VI

Estimating the Determinants of Spells in
a Labor Market State

A.

Competing R&/c Duration Models of 0111,

PT, and FT Spells

An obvious way to investigate dynamic labor market movements is to

focus on the observed spells in part-time and full-time work and out of the

labor market.

This section introduces a competing risk multiple-spell

estimation model that I will use to investigate both what moves women into

spells of part-time work from full-time work or OLM, as well as the
determinants of the length of part-time spells. The analysis of time-dependent

data is by now relatively standard and does not require much introduction.'4

"For a discussion of duration models, sec Lancaster (1990).
18

Let F(t,Xj3) be the cumulative distribution function of time spent in
part-time work, with f(t,Xj3) as its related density function. X1 represents the
vector of independent variables [S1, Ym, D, Z,J, with fi as the vector of related

coefficients. One can characterize the probability of leaving pad-time work
at any point in time as the hazard rate, h(t,Xj3), which is the probability that
a spell ends in period t, given that it lasted to t-1. For any completed spell of
part-time work, the likelihood that an individual is observed to work part-time

from time 0 to time t is simply f(t,X,P).
The probability that an individual spends a particular amount of time

in any labor market state can be straightforwardly estimated, once a hazard

function is chosen. A semi-parametric hazard, where the data essentially

determines the shape of the hazard function in each period, is often
preferred.'5 Time-vaqing covariates (such as number of children, household
non-earned income, etc.), can be readily included in the estimation, as can any

number of right-censored spells.
A few particular issues are important in implementing spell duration

estimates with this data. First, because of the lack of any retrospective
information, I have to omit all left-censored spells. While this is a standard
procedure, it is particularly worrisome in this case, because the most stable

Dcpending on the data, freeing up the hazard in each period is not alwayl possible. Flinn
and Beckman (1982), for instance, auggeat a particularly flexible form of the lime variable. The
approach used here is similar to that suggested in Meyer (1988).
19

individuals—those who remain working Mi-time or part-time, or who are out

of the labor market in all observed years—are all left-censored. By throwing

these individuals out, I may be throwing out a very important part of my
sample.

Concern about this issue is one reason I turn to alternative

explorations of the data in the next section.

Second, I am particularly interested in estimating competing risk
models of labor force movement. Ending a spell of part-time work to move
out of the labor market is almost surely a very different type of spell ending

than is moving into MI-time work. In addition, to the extent that I want to
estimate the determinants of the start of part-time spells, I need to distinguish

between Mi-time and OLM spells that end in pad-time work and those that

end in other activity. Competing risk models can be implemented in a
straightforward manner)6 I simply assume that at any point in time, an
individual in labor market state j is "at risk' of ending a spell in the labor
market by either moving to labor market state k or by moving to labor market

state I. Each of these moves has an underlying hnard rate, hk(t,Xt, (3k) and
h1(t,X1, P,). The aggregate haard of leaving labor market state j can be

characterized as a simple additive function:

(3)

h(tX, (3) = hk(t,Xt, (3& + h1(t,x, fiji).

6Fora discussion of the iuun involved in estimating competing risk models, see the above
rtferences on duration analysis, as well as Heskman and Honore (1989), Han and Hausman
(1990), and Narendranathan and Stewart (1991).

20

With only minor complications, this additive hazard can be readily estimated.

Third, I observe a substantial number of individuals who experience

multiple spells in the same labor market state over 14 years. This is
particularly true of spells of part-time work, which tend to be of short
duration. The best way to work with data which contain multiple spells is to

include information on past labor market spells in the estimation (Honore,

For Stance, I can include information on the type of spell

1991).

immediately preceding the current one. In a competing risk model for part-

time spells, including a control variable for whether the prior spell was an
OLM spell lets me determine whether people who move into part-time work

from out of the labor market are more likely to leave the labor market again

or to move on to full-time work. I can also include information on the
observed spell number, on the length of previous spells in the same labor

market state, and on the length of time since a previous spell was last
observed.

Given the frequency of multiple spells in the data, including these

multiple spells in the estimation procedure is probably quite important to the

analysis. The cost of including multiple spells, however, is that it makes
traditional adjustments for population heterogeneity impossible to carry out.

Once characteristics on past spells are included in the estimation, the
assumptions needed to estimate standard heterogeneity models no longer hold

(Honore, 1991).

This is not necessarily a major concern, however.
21

Heterogeneity adjustments try to control for unmeasured population
differences; including information on past labor market choices should also

control for these differences.

In the following section, I control for

heterogeneity in several alternative ways.

B.

Estimation Results
Table 4 summarizes the spell data in my sample. I observe up to five

spells of OLM and part-time work over 14 years, although the higher-sequence

spells tend to bequite short. First observed spells in full-time work average
close to 4 years, out of the labor market spells average 3.2 years, and parttime spells average only 2.6 years, again indicating the more transitory nature

of part-time work. Second spells in all labor market states avenge between
2 and 3 years. When the sample is limited to non-censored spells, the spell

lengths are shorter. Table 4 indicates that there are a substantial number of

second and higher spells in this data, making the use of multiple-spell
estimation techniques particularly attractive.

Table 5 presents the results of three multiple-spell competing risk
estimates, as described above. The first two columns of table S present the

estimates for spells out of the labor market. The third and fourth columns
present the estimates for spells of part-time work, and the last two columns

present the estimates spells of full-time work. Hazard rates are estima'4

22

S

semiparametrically, with dummy variables included for each time period.'7

Positive coefficients in table 5 indicate that higher values of a variable make
it more likely that a current spell type will end in an exit to the indicated labor

market state. Thus, the coefficients in row one imply that older workers are
likely to have longer OLM spells because they are less likely to terminate a

spell OLM and move into either full-time or part-time work, although the
probability of moving into full-time work is lower. Older workers in part-time
spells are also less likely to terminate their spell and move into full-time work,

but are more likely to move out of the labor market.

The first group of variables in table 5

presents

the coefficients on

personal and household characteristics from these three competing risk models.

A few results stand out. First, older women are less likely to end a spell out
of the labor market or to move into full-time work. Second, black women are

more likely to move into MI-time work. Third, less educated women are
more likely to terminate spells of full- or pan-time work and leave the labor

market. Fourth, an increase in the total number of children increases the
propensity of a woman to move into full- or part-time work, while an increase

in the number of preschoolers decreases the propensity to move into full-time

work and increases the propensity to leave the labor market. Part-time spells

17Bccause of the uparsity of spells above 6 years, a single dummy variable is used to control

forspells of6tolyearslength, andanotherforall spellsof8ormorcyears. Thismeanathat
7 dummy variable. estimate the hazard rate in each 'competing risk' branch of the three models
in sableS.

23

are little affected by the number of children but strongly affected by the
number of preschoolers. Fifth, women with higher other income in their
family are less likely to become full-time workers. Sixth, local unemployment

rates increase the length and probability of OLM spells, but have little effect
on part-time or full-time spells.
The second group of variables in table 5 controls for previous spells.

These variables are very significant for all types of spells, and underscore the

importance of past history on current spell duration. The length and type of
spell ending is strongly influenced by the previous spell type. For instance,

women who enter a part-time spell from out of the labor market are much
more likely to leave the labor market again than move into full-time work.
Women who enter a part-time spell from full-time work are much more likely

to return to hill-time work than to move out of the labor market. These
results are consistent with the data tabulations above, which indiested that few

people use part-time work as a stepping stone between OLM and full-time
employment.

The observed spell number has weaker effects on spell lengths)8
Higher number spells of OLM or part-time work (which tend to be shorter

spells) are less likely to end in hill-time work. To the extent that full-time

Thc inclusion of a

variable to control for observed spell number may be somewhat

problematic, since the observed first spell after 1976 may not be the flat spell of the woman in
this type of work. The omission of this variable has little effect on other covariates.

24

work is a more stable category for many women, this may reflect the fact that

women who have higher sequence spells in this data are frequent movers, and
thus more likely to be in OLM or part-time spells. 1920

Figure 3 plots the hazard rates estimated in table S for each of the
three competing risk models for a specific woman.21 Because the woman is

assume to have a preschooler, she has a high (41 percent) probability of
leaving a full-time spell after one year (the sum of the two hazard functions

among full-time workers), but this declines steeply over time. In contrast, if
this woman work part-time the probability of ending her spell is 47 percent in

the first year and remains high over time. After 5 years, almost all part-time
workers have exited part-time work. If this woman is out of the labor market,

she has a 47 percent chance of going to work after one year. The probability

that this woman will enter part-time work from out of the labor market is
everywhere higher than the probability that she will move into full-time work.

'% other estimates (not shown here), based only on second and higher spells. I included
controls for the length of the previous spell in the same labor market state and the length ofCame
since that spell occurred. Both of these variables were highly significant. The longer a previous
spell and the more recent that spell, the more likely that the current spell will continue.
20Other specifications included occupational controls and controls for changes In variables as
well as their level values. While sonw of these had significant coefficients, their inclusion bad
Little effect on the coefficients reported here. An important àxcluded variable in all the models
is a control for involuntary part-time work, but the PSID has no data on this.

21The base individual whose hazard rates are calculated in flgure 3 ii a white married women
with a high school degree, two children (one a preschooler) whose non-earned income ts $25 .000,
in a county with a 6.9 percent unemployment rate.

25

These hazard rates underscore the differences between part-time and

full-time workers and, together with the results of table 5, indicate the
importance of looking at women's labor supply choices in a dynamic context.
Spells of either OLM, part-time, or full-time work are strongly influenced both

by the nature of the previous spell as well as by the type of spell exit that

occurs (the use of a competing risk model significantly increases the
explanatory power of the model). In addition, these hazard models indicate

the importance of personal, household, and environmental variables in
determining the length and nature of labor market spells. Part-time workers,

in particular, are a very heterogeneous group, at risk of either increasing or

decreasing their labor market efforts. The differential effects of control
variables in influencing the movement into and out of part-time work indicates

that, depending on their personal and environmental characteristics, women

observed working pan-time in any particular period may be in the midst of
very different routes through the labor market.

VII

Modelling a Complete Set of Labor
Market Patterns Over lime
While the duration estimates just discussed provide useful information

about women's dynamic movements through the labor market, they have at
least two problems. First, they focus only on spells in a single labor market

state. Totheextentthatmyprimary interestisinthefuilpatternoflabor
26

market behavior over 14 years, the duration models do not estimate this. In
fact, as noted, those patterns that are most striking—persons who remain in the

same labor market state for the entire 14-year period—must be thrown out of
the data as left-censored spells. Second, these duration estimates may not fully

account for heterogeneity across women. Although two limited measures of
spell count and past spell type are included in the estimates, one might believe

that past patterns of labor involvement have a much greater impact on current

choices than these duration models allow. For both of these reasons, this
section presents an alternative way to analyze women's movement through the

labor market.

A.

Multinomial Logit Lagged Dependent Variable ModeLr

I am interested in developing a technique that will measure the
probability that a woman follows any sequence of labor market choices over
time. The dynamic model of labor supply in (2) provides a starting point for

this analysis. In this section I estimate a simplified version of (2) which
assumes that the probability an individual is observed in any particular labor
market state can be denoted as

(4)

Prob(LMS1=L) = f(X, g(LMS1, LMSk2, ... LMS.j)) 1=1, 2, 3

where LMS1 is a discrete variable indicating labor market state that takes on

27

threevalues I= lifHoursO(OLM)

I=2ifO<Hourst<35(PT)

and =3ifHours35(FF).

X is the vector of personal, household, and economic environment variables
discussed above and g(.) is a function that describes past labor market patterns.

Written this way, the probability of observing an individual in any particular

labor market state can be estimated as a multinomial logit, with controls for
the labor market patterns observed in past periods. For example, this implies
that the probability a person is of out of the labor market in time period t can
be written as

(5)

Prob(LMS

1)

exp(Xfl1 +

L171)

1 +exp(x/31 + Ly1) + exp(xfl2 + L,y,)

where L is the vector of dummy variables representing — labor market

history. j3 and $2

are

coefficient vectors that indicate the effect of the X

variables on OLM and part-time work, respectively. y and 72 describe the
effects of past labor market patterns on the probability of choosing OLM or
part-time work, respectively. Full-time work is the residual category. Using
the standard multinomial logit format, equivalent equations can be written for

the probability of being in part-time and in full-time work.

28

The characterization of labor market history is important in this
model. I will compare results from three different lag specificatio&2
(1) Full Lag Specification:

If there are j lag periods in the model,

there arej3 potential patterns of history that an individual could follow, given

three different labor market states. A separate dummy variable specifying
each of these possible patterns provides the fullest possible set of controls for

past labor market patterns. Of course, this specification is only feasible at
relatively low levels of j.
(2) Simple Lag Spec jflcation: One of the simplest specifications for
j lag periods is to include a dummy variable for each independent labor market

stateineachpastyear,whichresultsin2jlagparameters. Foreach lag
period, this means including a dummy variable that controls for whether an

individual was OLM and a dummy variable that controls for whether an
individual was a part-time worker (full-time work status can always be derived

from these two dummy variables). This specification assumes that the effect
of each past labor market choice is independent of the pattern of choices that

precede or follow it, so that multiple years in one state of the labor market
have a simple. additive effect on current labor market choices.

None of these lag stnictures interact past labor market choices with the other control
variables, due to conitnints on the number of parameters I can feasibly estimate. For instance,
the effect of put education on the probability of working full-time may be different for someone
who has been out of the labor market for the put three years.

29

(3) Compla Lag Spec jflcation: An alternative between the full and
the simple lag specification is to control for the labor market state at each past

point in time (the simple specification) as well as past patterns over time.
Withj lag periods, one can specifr a set of 2(2j-1) + (j-2) dummy variables that

completely distinguishes all possible past patterns, but imposes some adding
up constraints, In particular, this means including all of the 2j dummies from

the simple specification, as well as controlling for the total number of times
that each state was observed over the pastj periods (2(j-1)+(j-2) independent
dummies). For example, with three lags, the complex lag specification would
include 11 dummy variables:

if person OLM in period t-1, 0 otherwise;
OLM.2 = 1 if person OLM in period t-2, 0 otherwise;
OLM.3 = 1 if person OLM in period t-3, 0 otherwise;
1 if person PT in period t-1, 0 otherwise;
OLM..1 =

1

PT =

fl= 1 ifpersonPT inperiodt-2,Ootherwise;
PT= 1 ifpersonPT inperiodt-3,Oothezwise;
2OLM =

ifOLM., = 1 intwoofthreepastperiods;
3OLM= lifOLMbJ= linthreeofthreepastperiods;
1

2FF =lifPT=1intwoofthreepastperiods;
3FF = 1ifPT1= linthreeofthreepastperiods;
2FT =

1ifFT.=

lintwoofthreepastperiods.

These 11 dummy variables can be used to uniquely characterize every one of

the 27 possible — labor market states within a three period lag structure.

30

B.

Eatimation Results

Table 6 presents estimates of labor force choices, using two quite

different lag specifications. Columns 1 and 2 present the results from a

multhomial logit model with three lag periods, using a complex lag
specification (11 lag parameters in each branch of the logit.) It will become

clear below why I elect to focus particularly on this 3-lag structure. For
comparison, columns 3 and 4 choose a very different lag structure, which uses

information from the largest possible number of lags (13). As one adds lag
periods, the number of usable observations shrinks. Thus, with 13 lags, I can

use only the 1463 observations on labor market choices in 1989, while with
3 lags I can use 16,093 observations, using information from 11 years of labor

market choices for each person. By necessity with this smaller number of
observations, I use the simple lag specification for the 13-lag model. Thus,
between these two models, we can see the trade-off between more lags (but a

simpler lag structure and fewer observations) versus fewer lags (but more
observations and a more complex lag structure.)

Many of the coefficients on the explanatory variables are similar in
sign and magnitude between the first two and second two columns in table 6,

although the coefficients estimated from the 3-lag model are much more

significant. In both cases, older persons with less education, fewer total
children, more preschoolers, more non-earned income, and in areas with
higher unemployment rates are more likely to be out of the labor market than
31

working full-time (the omitS category). Compared to full-time workers,
part-timers are less likely to be black, and more likely to be older, married,
and have more preschoolers.
Table 7 simulates the estimated effect of past labor market history on

current labor market choices, using the coefficients from the 3-lag model
estimated in columns 1 and 2 of table 6. Using a typical" woman (age 25,
white, high school education, married, 2 children, 1 preschooler, and $25,000

in non-earned income, with a county unemployment rate of 6.9 percent), the

table simulates the probability that this women is currently out of the labor
market, or working part-time or full-time, given all possible patterns of labor
force involvement over the last three years.

Note three things in table 7. First, the most recent year's history is
most important in determining current labor force status. For instance, women

who were out of the labor market in the most recent past year (row 1 and
rows 4-11) have over a 50 percent probability of being out of the labor market

next year. Second, those persons with stable — labor market histories (rows
1-3) are strikingly more likely to continue in the same labor market state than

even persons who have been in the same labor market state for the past 2
years (rows 4-5, 12-13, and 20-21). Third, in these estimates as in the simple
tabulations, pad-time work is a much more transitory state than OLM or fulltime work.

32

The conclusion from table 7 is that time dependence in labor supply
choices

among adult women appears to be extremely strong, even after

controlling for the standard set of household, skill, and economic fictors.
Further tests of the extent and nature of this time dependence are provided in
table 8. Table 8 shows the likelihood fimction values that result from a series

of increasingly more complex lag specifications, testing two different
hypotheses about the importance of time dependence on labor supply choices.

Part 1 of table 8 looks at the effect of controlling for longer lag periods, while

part 2 looks at the effect of controlling more fully for all possible lag patterns

within a given lag period.

Part 1 presents the log likelihood values and the related likelihood
ratio tests that result as an increasing number of lag periods are included in the

data set. For instance, the first row of part I indicates that going froma 7period lag structure (using the complex lag model described above, with 32 lag

parameters in each logit branch) to an 8 period lag structure—implemented on

the same data—results in no significant increase in the likelihood function.

This is true for 8 lags versus 7 lags, as well as for 7 lags versus 6 lags.
Below 6 lags, however, dropping a lag period results in significantly worse
explanatory value, particularly when moving from 3 to 2 lags or from 2 to 1
lags, as measured by the likelihood ratio test. This suggests that a great deal
of past labor supply information is necessary (at least 6 years) before further
past lag periods become unimportant in explaining current labor supply.
33

Part 2 of table 8 investigates the effect of controlling more completely

for all past lag patterns, given a preset lag length. For models that include
from 2 to 8 lags, the simple model (which assumes the effect of past labor
market choices are additive over time) fits the data significantly worse than the

complex model, which also includes controls for multiplicative effects. In

turn, the complex model fits less well than the full interactive model for

models that include 2 to 4 lags? This section indicates that there is no
'simple" specification of past lag patterns that fully captures their effects.
Rather, increasingly complex models that control for as many past patterns as

possible fit the data increasingly better.

The short summary of table 8 is that there does notappear to be any
"short-cut" to dealing with time dependence in labor supply estimation, at least

among adult women. The more lag periods (up to at least 6 years), and the

more complex the lag specification, the better the model fits the data. The
time dependence in labor supply is both 'deep" (in the sense that past labor
supply choices continues to affect current choices for many years), and 'wide"

(in the sense that all unique past patterns of labor supply choices appear to
affect current choices; past patterns cannot be conveniently grouped together
into only a few significant patterns.)

t3Tbe zU model, with controls for every possible past tag pattern, cannot be readily
implemented for more than 4 lags.

34

Taken together, the results in tables 7 and 8 also indicate that past
labor market histories are crucially important in determining current labor
market location for adult women. The coefficients on these past histories are

large and significant in most cases. Simply observing information from a
current labor market spell provides little predictive information about next
year's labor market choices since different past labor market histories have
such a strong effect on future choices. I return to this point below.
With respect to part-time work, tables 6 and 7 confirm many of the
results noted above. The use of part-time work is heavily affected by personal

and household characteristics. Even after controlling for these, however, parttime work remains a labor market state which women are more likely to leave.

Among other things, this implies that the use of part-time work is harder to
predict than are other labor market choices. Past use of part-time work is less

likely to lead to future part-time work than are other types of labor market
choices.

C.

Multinomial Logit Random Effects Mo4eLc

As noted above, one reason to include past lag histories in labor
supply models is because they may reflect endogenous differences in women's

preferences that create heterogeneous choices.

l'his suggests that an

alternative to a multinomial logit model of labor supply with lagged dependent

variables is a multinomial logit model that controls for heterogeneity in the

35

population through random effectsP' In addition, ills worth noting that a

random effects model may be the only feasible model when only crosssectional data on labor supply are available. In this case, one interpretation

of heterogeneity adjustments is that they are a way of controlling for the
unmeasured (in cross-sectional data) differences in past labor market histories.

Assume there are two types of women, not fully accounted for by the

control variables in these logit equations. A standard way of characterizing

heterogeneity is assume that the constant term in the multinomial logit
estimates differs across heterogeneous groups of individuals. The result is that

the probability of being out of the labor market now becomes the more
complicated expression:

1

(6) Prob(LMS, = 0) =
(1-F)

exp(XJ31 + C11)
+ exp(X31 + C11) + exp(Xfl2 +
exp(Xfl1 +

1

+
C12)

C)

+ exp(Xfl1 + C22) + exp(Xfl2 +

C)

Both controlling for heterogeneity and including tagged dependent variables results in biased
estimates of the heterogeneity, for the same reason that it is not appropriate to include
heterogeneity corrections in duration models with information on past wells. The assumptions
under which random effects models produce unbiased estimates do not hold in the presence of
lagged dependent variables.

36

where P is an estimated coefficient equal to the probability of being a type 1

person? while C11, C12,

C, and C are the random effects parameters

associated with being a type 1 or type 2 person in each branch of the logit.
In estimating this model, there is one additional complication. I have
14 observations on each person. In estimating the likelihood function for each

individual, I need to take account of the fact that the probability of being a
type 1 person is applied similarly to all 14 data periods. This implies that the
likelihood function for any individual is maximized by estimating

ru
(7)1111=

LIC

exp(Xfl1 +
DENJ

exp(Xj31 +
DEN2

where

C) H exp(X2 +
ftp

C21)

C12)

DEN1

+ C22)
II exp(XJ32
DEN2

ftp

H'l+
H'
kqDENJ J

kçf DEN2

DEN! = 1 + exp(X,fl1 + C11) + exp(X.fl2 + C12) and
DEN2 = 1 + exp(Xfl1 + C21) + exp(X.fl2 + Cr3 for any tE(z,p,f).

z is the set of all time periods during which this person is out of the labor
market; p is the set of all time periods during which this person works parttime and f is the set of aLl time periods during which this person works lulltime. Maximizing the log of this likelihood function across all individuals in

5This form of heterogeneity is admittedly quite arbicary. I experimented with interacting the
control variable coefficients and the random effects, but had problems making this more complex
model converge.

37

the sample results in estimates for the

vectors fl, fl2 for the random effects

terms C11, C12, C, C, and for the probability parameter, P. In the results

below I estimate three random effects rather than two, which is a
straightforward extension of the above model.

D.

Estimation Results from Random Effects Logit

Columns 5 and 6 of table 6 presents the results from maximizing the

log of a likelihood function similar to (7) for all individuals, but with three
rather than two random effects. The coefficients indicate the effect of the

relevant variable relative to the omitted (full-time) category. Thus, the first
row indicates that older workers are more likely to be found out of the labor
market or in pad-time work, although the likelihood of being out of the labor

market is higher than the likelihood of being in pad-time work.
Compared to the estimated coefficients on the two lagged dependent
variables models, shown in columns 1 through 4 of table 6, the random effects

coefficients are different in a number of cases, in terms of size and
significance. Lower education levels and more preschool children have
particularly strong effects in keeping women out of the labor market in the
random effects model.

Table 9 summarizes these estimates by simulating the probability of
being in each labor market state for a typical woman of either type 1, 2, or 3,
using the coefficients reported in columns 5 and 6 of table 6. Taking the same

38

set of base personal and household characteristics as were used in the
simulation in table 7, table 9 shows the differences in labor market choices
predicted by the random effect model for women of each of the three types.

The probability of being a type 1 worker is estimated at 27 percent.

Type 1 workers are mobile across all three labor market states, and have a
significant probability of working part-time, working full-time or being out of

the labor market. In contrast, type 2 workers have a very high probability of
being out of the labor market (79 percent in the simulation in table 9) with less

chance of working either part-time or full-time. The probability of being a
type 2 worker is 30 percent. Finally, type 3 workers are almost always found

working hill-time. The probability of being a type 3 worker is estimated at
43 percent.
The broad characterization coming out of this random effects model

is that there are three distinct labor market types: 'workers," who typically
work hill-time; non-workers," who are typically out of the labor market; and
'movers' who migrate between all three of these states. There is a substantial

probability mass associated with each of these three types. These results
clearly suggest that some number of women appear permanently attached to

39

full-time work, and some appear permanently out of the labor force. But a
across labor market states.26
significant number (27 percent) are more mobile

E.

How Do These Models Compare?

The three models estimated in table 6 are based on three different
conceptions of how to characterize female labor force choices. The 3-lag
model assumes that a complex but relatively short lag specification is adequate,

the 13-lag models opts for many lag periods but a simple lag specification,
while the random-effects model ignores past labor market history and attempts

to estimate the unmeasured heterogeneity in labor supply choices among
women at any

point in time. This section compares the advantages and

disadvantages of each of these models.

Table 10 presents three different measures of the goodness of fit
among these three models, based on a comparison of the actual data for 14.63

women in 1989 (the last year of my sample) versus the estimated data from

each of the three models for this year. Part 1 compares the aggregate
predicted weight in each labor market category. In the actual data in 1989, 24

percent of the women are out of the labor market, 23 percent work part-time,
and 52 percent work full-time. Taking the average predicted probabilities for

26Although there are problems with interpreting the coefficients as noted above, I also
estimated a multinomial 141 model with both three years of tag information and with two random
effects, allowing all of the lag parameters to vary in the random effects. This model indicates that
even after control1i for three years of lags, some heterogeneity appears to remain in the data.
In general, the two random effects indicate a group of stayers" who remain in the same labor
market state over time, and mover? who change labor market states frequenfly.

40

each woman in the sample for each labor market state indicates that the 3-lag
model predicts almost identical aggregate probability weights, while the 13-lag

model is exactly right (to 1 decimal place.) The random effects model comes
in third, but doesn't do too badly. A chi-squared test comparing each of these
three model predictions to the actual data indicates that the null hypothesis that

the predicted numbers are identical to the actual numbers can_not be rejected

at a 10 percent level of significance for any of the three models.
In contrast to predicting the aggregate probability in each category,
part 2 of table 10 compares how well each model predicts labor supply choices

for each woman in the sample. The numbers indicate how many cases are

predicted accurately by the model for each labor market category, where
accuracy" is defined as a predicted probability of 67 percent or greater that

the woman will be in the labor market state where she is actually found.
Among the 1463 observations, the 13-lag model accurately predicts the labor

supply choices of 78 percent of the sample, while the 3-lag model is correct
74 percent of the time. The random effects model is substantially worse, with

only 7 percent of the observations correctly predicted. This is because the
random effects model assigns eveiy woman some probability of being either
type 1, type 2, or type 3. The result is that the predicted probabilities for each

woman are a mix of the predicted types. While its aggregate probability
weights are not too far off, the individual predictive ability of this model is

41

extremely bad.

In all three models, the probability that these individual

predictions are identical to the null hypotheses can be rejected with 99 percent

confidence. The chi-squared statistic for the random effects model is
particularly large.

Finally, past 3 of table 10 does a more standard goodness of fit test,
based

on Heckman's (1984) suggested procedure for comparing a set of

estimated sample values to a set of actual observations. Consistent with the
other results, one cannot rqject the null hypothesis that either the 13-lag model

or the 3-lag model are similar to the actual data, while the null hypothesis that

the random effects model is similar to the actual data is rejected with 99
percent certainty.

Two very important conclusions emerge from table 10.

First,

although the results in tables 7 and 8 emphasized the significance of extensive

and fully specified lag patterns in fitting current labor supply choices, table 10

suggests that such complete specifications may not be necessary for good

predictive value. In fact, the 3-lag model, estimated with a complex lag
specification, predicts both the aggregate probability weight in each labor
market state as well as actual individual choices almost as well as a model that

includes another 10 lag periods. While there may be significant differences

in the likelihood functions of these two models, the difference in their
predictive values is quite small. I compared a number of alternative models,
and the predictive value of including only two lags is noticeably worse, as is
42

the predictive value of including three lags but with only a simple lag
specification. In contrast, the value of including more than three lags, or of

specifying that lag structure beyond the complex specification in table 6,
columns 1 and 2, has little additional predictive value. Thus, having data on

only a few lag periods is adequate for specifying time dependence in labor

supply choices if one's primary intent is to predict labor supply choices at
some future time or for some alternative sample of persons.

The second major conclusion from table 10 is that the value of
controlling for past labor supply history depends heavily upon the purpose of

the exercise. If you want to estimate the aggregate population weights, all

three of these models are generally effective. In this case, using crosssectional data with a random effects specification may be entirely satisfactory.

If, however, you want to predict individual labor supply choices, then the
availability of longitudinal and lagged information on labor supply is much

more important, and the lagged models are far superior to random effects
models.

VIII

Implications for Women's Labor Market Behavior:
Some Simulated Results
Any of the estimates derived above can be used to simulate the

behavior of women over time, estimating the probability that they will follow

a particular sequence of labor market choices. This type of simulation may
43

be particularly interesting with regard to the question "How do women move
from out of the labor market into full-time work? A number of policies in

recent years have focused on moving women who receive public assistance
into employment. In most cases, this means placing them in a part-time job.

For instance, the welfare reform plan proposed by President Bill Clinton in

summer 1994 requires eligible welfare recipients who do not find private
sector work to work between 15 and 35 hours in an assigned public sector job.

The hope is that this part-time work will increase their labor market
connections and experience and, over time, will result in their moving into

full-time self-sufficient employment. This section estimates a series of

simulations that test whether moving women into part-time work is a
reasonable approach, based on the historical experiences of adult women over

the past two decades.

Table 11 presents simulation results for several low-skilled women.

Assuming these women have been out of the labor market for the put two
years, the simulations estimate the effect of moving into part-time or full-time

work this year (as opposed to spending another year out of the labor force) on

the probability of working part-time or full-time next year. All of these
simulations are based on the coefficients estimated in the 3-lag model and
shown in columns 1 and 2 in table 6.

The first simulation is for a black

woman without a high school degree, with two grade-school-age children, who

is unmarried, age 25, and has only $2500 in non-earned income. The second

44

simulation is for the same women but assumes that both of her two children
are

preschoolers. The third simulation assumes that the woman has a high

school degree.
The first simulation indicates that if this woman stays out of the labor
market one more year, the probability she will move into full-time or part-time

work the following year is quite low (26 percent). If, however, she works
part-time this year, there is almost a 50 percent probability she will remain a

part-time worker next year and a 29 percent probability she will move into

full-time work next year. If she works full-time this year, there is a 78
percent chance she will remain in full-time work next year.

Comparing the results in these simulation, there are two major
conclusions.

First, the personal and household characteristics of the

individual matter enormously in her labor supply choices. The woman with
preschoolers has a much lower probability of working full-time in the future,

regardless of what she does this year. I emphasize this point because much

of this paper has focused on coefficients other than those on the control
variables. While past labor market histories are very important in predicting

future labor market choices, the control variables are also important,
particularly education level and number and age of children.
Second, if a woman has been out of the labor market for three years,

moving into part-time work will substantially increase her probability of
staying in the labor market the next year, but it will only somewhat increase
45

her probability of moving into full-time work. The only way to substantially

increase her future probability of full-time work is for her to work full-time
this year. This is consistent with all of the evidence above: Few women use

part-time work as a way to move from out of the labor market toward full-

time work. Women who have been out of the labor market and move into
part-time work are much more likely to leave the labor market or stay in part-

time work than to move on to full-time work.

These simulations are only suggestive of the effects of a policy that

mandates welfare recipients move into part-time work. They show the
expected future labor market patterns among women over the past 14 years
who have voluntarily moved into part-time work from an extended spell out

of the labor force. As a result, one might believe that they substantially
overstate the effect on fixture labor supply choices of mandatorily demanding

that a woman take a part-time job. They do, however, underscore policy

issues that deserve more consideration: According to these simulations,
moving into pan-time work substantially increase a woman's probability of

being in the labor market in the fixture.

If the goal of welfare-to-work

programs is increased labor force participation, these simulations support the
idea that current part-time work increases future labor force participation. If,

however, the goal is to move women into economic self-sufficiency, which
almost always requires full-time work, then it is less clear that mandating part-

time work will help as much. Rather, the results in this paper suggest that
46

women who move from out of the labor market into full-time work tend to

make that leap immediately. At least historically, few women have either
chosen or been able to put together a sequence of jobs that lets them move
sequentially from out of the labor market, into part-time work, into full-time

work.

Ix
Conclusions
This paper analyzes the dynamics of adult women's labor market

behavior over a 14-year period between 1976 and 1989. It uses

several

different techniques to investigate the nature and the pattern of labor supply
choices made by women over time. The results indicate there is a substantial

amount of labor market movement among individual women over these years,

which is strongly correlated with personal characteristics and household
demographic changes. The results also indicate the importance of analyzing
longitudinal data in order to understand current labor supply choices among

women. Women's current choices are strongly affected by their past labor
market choices. Even information on labor supply choices as far back as 6
years helps explain current labor market behavior.

Yet, for those with more limited longitudinal data from which to
explore labor supply choices, this paper indicates that models with only 3
years of lag information can predict individual and aggregate labor market

47

involvement almost as well as models with more lag periods, if a relatively

full specification of lag patterns is used. Models with less than 3-year lags or
with only very simple controls for past lag structure are less adequate. In

addition, random effects models, based only on current labor supply
information, are also quite effective in predicting aggregate labor supply
patterns, although they are very ill-suited for predicting individual labor supply

decisions and do not fit the data as well as models controlling for past labor
supply choices.
With regard to the use of part-time work in the labor market, this

paper indicates that it is rarely used by women as a transitional labor market
state. Most women use part-time work as an alternative to full-time work and

return to hill-time work after some period of part-time employment, or they

enter part-time work from out of the labor market and then leave the labor
market again after a part-time spell. There is little evidence here that placing
women in part-time jobs will greatly increase their probability of moving into
full-time employment over time.
Women show a far greater diversity in their labor supply choices than

do men, and move between labor market states more frequently. This is the
result of two groups of women in the labor market: A substantial number of
women are extremely constant in their labor supply decisions, either working

full-time or not working at all over many years. This heterogeneity in longterm behavior is one primary cause of diversity in labor supply choices among

48

women.

Another group of women, however, can be more readily

characterized as "movers," and change labor market states with greater
frequency. Thus, the diversity observed in female labor supply at any point
in time is the result of both underlying stable heterogeneity in behavior among

some, as well as extensive mobility across labor supply choices over time
among others.

Further analysis of these issues might usefully focus in three areas.

First, this paper contains little information on the nature of the jobs that
women are taking. Given the evidence here on the heterogeneity among the
part-time work force, it would be interesting to see what types of jobs are used

by different groups of part-time women. Second, this paper necessarily
aggregates labor supply decisions into three discrete labor market categories.

By doing this, a great deal of information on labor supply choices is thrown

away. Third, the econometric models used in this paper are limited in the
extent to which they estimate intercorrelations between different labor market
choices and in the ways in which labor market history is fed into the estimates.

Attention to more complete econometric estimation procedures could provide

a better understanding of the full set of interactions between past and present
labor supply choices.

49

References

Altonji, Joseph, "Intertemporal Substitution in Labor Supply: Evidence from
Micro Data," Journal of Political Economy. Vol 94:3, part 2, June
1986. ppSl76-S215.
Blank,

Part-time Jobs Bad Jobs?" in A Future of Lousy
Rebecca M.,
Jobs? The Changing Structure of U.S. Wages, Gary Burtless, editor.
Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution, 1990a.

Blank, Rebecca M., "The Role of Part-time Work in Women's Labor Market
Choices Over Time, American Economic Review. Vol 79:1, May
1989. pp295-99.

Blank, Rebecca M., "Simultaneously Modelling the Supply of Weeks and
Hours of Work Among Female Household Heads," Journal of Labor

Economics. Vol. 6:2, April 1988. pplll-204.
Blank, Rebecca M., "Understanding Part-time Work," in Research in Labor
Economics, Volume 11, Laud J. Bassi and David L. Crawford,

editors. Greenwich, CN: JAI Press. 1990b.
Bover, Olympia, "Relaxing Intertemporal Separability: A Rational Habits

Model of Labor Supply Estimated from Panel Data," Journal of
Labor Economict. Vol 9:1, January 1991. ppSS-lOO.
Browning, Martin, Angus Deaton and Margaret Irish, "A Profitable Approach

to Labor Supply and Commodity Demands over the Life-Cycle,"
Econometrica. Vol 53, May 1985. pp503-44.

Corcoran, Mary, Greg I. Duncan and Michael Ponza, "A Longitudinal
Analysis of White Women's Wages," The Journal of Human
Resources. Vol 18:4, 1983. ps97-520.
Eckstein, Zvi and Kenneth I. Wolpin, "Dynamic Labour Force Participation
of Married Women and Endogenous Work Experience. Review of
Economic Studies. Vol 56, 1989. pp375-90.

50

FIiIUI, Christopher J. and James J. Heckman, 'Models for the Analysis of
Labor Force Dynamics,' in Advances in Econometrics, Vol 1,
Greenwich, CN: JAI Press. 1982.

Han, Aaron, and Jerry A. Hausman, 'Flexible Parametric Estimation of
Duration and Competing Risk Models. • Journal of Applied
Econometrics. Vol 5, 1990. pp1-28.
Hecknian, James J. "The Good of Fit Statistic for Models with parameters
Estimated from Mierodata. - Econometrica, Vol 52:6, 1984.
pp 1543-7.

Heckman, James J. and Bo E. Honore, 'The Identifiability of the Competing
Risks Model,' Biometrika, Vol 76:2, 1989. pp325-30.

Heckxnan, James J. and Thomas E. MaCurdy, "A Life-Cycle Model of
Female Labor Supply,' Review of Economic Studies. Vol 53, August
1980. pp559-78.

Heckman, James J. and Robert J. Willis, 'A Beta-logistic Model for the
Analysis of Sequential Labor Force Participation by Manied
Women," Journal of Political Economy. Vol 85:11, 1977. pp27-58.
Hill, M. Anne and June E. O'Neill, "A Dynamic Model of Women's Work,"
Baruch College working paper. March 1989.

Honore, Bo E. "Identification Results for Duration Models with Multiple
Spells," Northwestern University working paper. July 1991.
Hotz, V. Joseph, Finn E. Kydland and Guilherme Sedlacek, "Intcrtemponl
Preferences and Labor Supply,' Econometrica. Vol 56, March 1988.
pp335-60.

Jones, Ethel B. and James E. Long, 'Part-Week Work and Human Capital
Investment by Married Women," Journal of Human Resources, Vol
14, Fall 1979. pp563-78.
Lancaster, Tony, The Econometric Analystf of Transition Data. Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press. 1990.

51

Long, James E. and Ethel B. Jones, "Married Women in Part-time
Employment," Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Vol 34, April
1981. pp314-2S.

MaCurdy, Thomas E., 'An Empirical Model of Labor Supply in a Life-Cycle
Setting," Journal of Political Economy. Vol 89:6, December 1981.
pp1050-85.
Main, Brian G., "The Lifetime Attachment of Women to the Labour Market,'

in Women and Paid Work, Audrey Hunt, editor. New York: St.
Martin's Press. 1988.

Meyer, Bruce D. 'Semiparametric Estimation of Hazard Models."
Manuscript, Northwestern University. 1988.

Moen, Phyllis, "Continuities and Discontinuities in Women's Labor Force
Activity," in L(fe Course Dynamics: Trajectories and Transitions,
1968-80. Glen Elder, editor. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
1985.

Nakamura, Alice and Masao Nakamura, 'Pan-time and Full-time Work
Behavior of Married Women,' Canadian Journal of Economics. Vol
16, May 1983. pp229-57.
Narendranathan, Wiji, and Mark B. Stewart, "Simple Methods for Testing the

Proportionality of Cause-Specific Hazards in Competing Risks
Models," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and StatLctia. Vol 53:3,
August 1991. pp331-40.
Sundt, Leslie A., "The Effect of Work Interruption on Subsequent Earnings,'
University of Arizona working paper, 1987.

52

TABLE 1

Two-Step Labor Market Transition Patterns
Year 1+1

Ycart

Row

u1J4j

Out of
Labor Market
1.

Out of labor market
% of total
% of row

Total.

Adult Wonias

28.0

21.6

4.0

2.4

77.1

14.3

8.7

3.2
13.5

15.5
66.4

20,1

% of total
% of row

2.7
5.6

4.2

41.8

1.7

85.7

Column total.
% of total

27.4

23.7

48.9

100.0

2.6

Pta-time
% of total
% of row

4.7

Full-time

U.

23.3

48.7

AdukMe.

Out of labor market

of total
% of row

1.8

0.3

0.6

68.3

10.3

21.4

Pan-time
% of total
%of row

0.2
4.1

1.7
42.1

53.8

1.0
1.1

2.1
2.2

90.3

3.0

4.1

93.0

%

2.2

Ths&dmc

% of total
% of row

of total

93.4

96.7

Column totals
%

4.0

100.0

Bused on thc aiim of 13 two-year transition matrica, flED data, 1976-1989. 19.019 observations on
Suit women; 16.523 obsenstion' on Suit men.

TABLE 2
Three-Step Labor Market Transition Patterns Among Adult Women
Year 1+2

Pa*tetn_s in

Yeas,

t tth t+ I

Out of
Labor Market

In

pj

Row
Totals

1.4

21.7

OutofLM,OutofLM
% oftouj
%of row
Out of Liii. Part-time
% of total

%of row
Out of Ui. Fi&-tiane
% of total
% of row

Pail-Sn.. Out of Liii
%oftosai
% of row

17.8

82.4
1.2

29.5

2.4
11.1

6.6

2.3
55.6

14.9

0.6

4.1

2.5

0.5

0.5

1.6

19.4

17.8

62.8

1.9
58.2

1.0

0.4
12.0

3.2

29.9

2.5
16.5

15.4

3.2
68.1

4.7

Pan-Sn.
% of total

%of row
Pan-Sn., Full-time

%oftotai
%of row
Full-time, Out of Liii
% of total
% of row

1.5

11.4

9.6

73.9

0.4
8.1

23.8

1.1

1.7

0.6

20.9

0.6
19.7

2.8

59.4
0.5
11.7

2.2
51.6

1.6

4.3

36.7

1.6
3.9

2.5

37.3
90.1

41.4

6.1

27A)

219

49.1

100.0

Full-time. Pan-Sn.
% of total

%o(row
Pull-Sn., Full-Sne
% of total

%ofrow
Column Total.
% of total

SoS on the nirn of 12 three-year tnnaition mathoea, PSID 4.1. on sluM woena', 1976-1989. 17,556
observation..

TABLE 3
Patterns of Labor Market Involvement Over 14 Years
(PSID data, 1976—1989)

Ad

Mult

Women

Men

Out of labor mkt

5.0
1.1

0.2
0.2

5.8

Pin-tine
Full- time

16.1

67.7

12.7

Total

22.2

68.1

19.8

14.5
8.7

0.9

16.3

0.4
93.3

31.0

60.2

94.6

57.3

64.5
69.2

13.9
24.7

72.2

84.6

99.5

82.3

40.5

6.3

43.8

9.3
9.7
18.3

0.1
1.3
18.2

10.6

20.9

1.3

30.2

5.I

21.7
30.1

Mull Women
Martial 10 or More

ofl4Ycara

1. Non-mover,
Percentage spending all 14 yean
1.3

2. Infrequent movers
Peicaitage spending at lent tO years
Out of labor market
Pan-time
Full-time
Total

37.0

10.0

3. Percentage
ever spending at least 1 year
Out of labor market
Pan-time
Full-time
4.

69.5

Percentage in .11 3 labor market usa over 14 years

5. Percentage in exactly 2 labor market stata over l4yan
0 UI/Pan-time
OLM/FuII-time
Put-time/Full-time

9.3

16.5

6. Percentage ever moving OLM — Pan-time-. Full-time
Total percentage
Percentage or those who ever work pert-time

7. Percentage ever moving Full-time -. Pitt-time -. OLM
Total percentage
Percentage of those who ever work pen-time

Numberofobservationa

17.7

3.2

19.4

25.6

13.1

26.8

1,463

1,27!

1,156

TABLE 4

Characteristics of Spells of Out of Labor Market. Part-time, and
Full-time Work Among Women
(All Non-lsft-C.nsorsd Sp.IIs Within th. 14-Vor Psrlod)
Spells Out of the

Part- time

Labor Market

Spells

AU

Non-

CensorS

AU

Full- time
Speus

NonCensorS

AU

NonCensored

I. First Spells
Number
Average length (yeats)

EMing in 1 year
2 yeats
3 yeas.
4 yeas.
S yeas.
6-8 yeas.
9-13 yeas.

731

3.22

571

925

801

859

584

1.85

2.60

1.61

3.81

2.04

43.0
16.8
11.5

62.9

49.0

70.9

15.9

17.9

12.0

9.3

10.2

7.5

5.6
3.8

5.1
2.6

6.6
5.7

4.1

10.3
8.0

4.2

6.0
4.0

2.01
0.2

—

3.1

36.7
17.6
8.4

60.6
17.0

6.9
5.4

5.0

0.4

6.0

11.9

1.3

7.2
2.9

II. Second Spoils
Number

286

202

436

333

379

197

Average length (yeas.)

2.53

1.50

2.19

1.42

19$

1.55

84

52

164

87

101

2.10

1.21

2.14

1.33

2.37

15

7

33

15

14

1.00

1.00

2

0

Ill. Third Spelt
Number

Avenge kugth (years)

40
1.13

IV. Fourth Spells
Number
Averagc length (yesa)

.79

5

1.13

2.29

1.00

1

1

0

V. Fifth Spoils
Number

Average Iength(yean)

1.50

3

1.67

1.00

1.00

TABLE 5

Determinants of Spell Length
8usd on S.ml-Psramstric Competing Risk Model.
Using All Non-Isft-C.n.orsd Spell.
Penooal and

Spells Out of the
Labor Masket

Pan-time
Spells

Part-unit Fuli-time

Out of

Fanülyvariabla:
Age

(lblack)

&itingto

Ill

.010'

-.009'

(.007)

(.009)

(.007)

(.006)

-.226
(.299)

.3870
(.185)

.164

.131

.077

(.203)

(.178)

(.190)

.340'

-.130
(.138)

.766"

-.233'

(166)

(.160)

-.101
(.107)

.195
(.162)

-.080
(.117)

(.159)

(.173)

(.158)

Education equal to

-.176'
(.124)

-.107
(.155)

(.119)

.160
(.190)

-.198
(.178)

(lya)
Totaloumbcrof
children

.117'

.15!"

(.051)

(.060)

-.082
(.018)

-.424"

Other (non-earned)
income

-.002
(.002)

-.006"

County unemployment
rate

(.018)

Nusnbcrof children

ier ageS

Exiting to
Out of LM Pitt-time

-.032"

-423" -.097

Married

Full-time

-.023'

Education las than
high school

ItighICILOCI

Pub-time
Spells

.039'

(.101)

.240'

.005
(.008)

.003

(.006)

-.037
(.173)

.081

.229'

.377'

.071

(.192)

(.129)

(.204)

(.134)

-.014
(.051)

-.015

-128'

(.041)

(.061)

.026
(.047)

.411" -.268"
(.078)

(.081)

-.004"

.001

.480"

.152'

(.104)

(.086)

.003'

.001

(.001)

(.00!)

(.001)

(.002)

(.002)

-.008
(.023)

.010
(.016)

.018

.047'

.034'

(.015)

(.021)

(.017)

Spell History Variabla:
Previous spell type
(Col 1&2: P-Time,
Col 3-6: Out of LM)
Number of spell

Number of shape
parameters
Likelihood value

Numbcrofobscrvatjoas

.272" -.362"

.675" 5%"

(.108)

(.132)

(.111)

.056
(.019)

-.149'
(.209)

7

7

.882"

-.252'

(.095)

(.136)

(.111)

-.100'

-.149"
(.063)

-.139
(.110)

-.149'

(.072)

7

7

77

-2360

-3250

-2563

1118

1561

1354

'Significant at 10% level; "Significant at 1% level. Standard error, in peraithna.

(.080)

TABLE 6

Logit Models of Dynamic Labor Market Choices
Logit Modci with
3

Ago

Race

(lbIack)
FAucalioc less than
high school

.032"

.006'
(.004)

-.030
(.102)

-.244"

.080'
(.057)

.099
(.083)

.201

.201

(.428)

(.340)

- .014

.504'

.290
(.251)

(.040)

.355
(.303)

(.055)

-.004
(.128)

(.015)

(.065)

-.074"
(.031)

.698"

Number of children

tSer ageS

.047"

(.379)

(.094)

Total number of
cbiMren

(.002)

.073"

-.581'

.438"

(I =yes)

(.019)

.014
(.016)

Maa*et

.903'

(.073)

Married

Tune

Out of
Labor
Maàet

Out of
labor

(.456)

.575"
.248"

"'

Logit Model with
3 Random Effects

(.096)

(.088)

high school

(.053)

.344"

.006"

(.333)
.071

(.077)

(.418)

.017

-.155

(.026)

(.175)

.277"
(.049)

.004"

1.294"
(.049)

.970"
.521"
.275"

.474'

1.127"

(.393)

(.318)

(.030)

.345

.018"

Pai.Tune

.027"
(.002)

-.440"
(.057)

.137"
(.049)

.193"
(.039)

.247"
(.050)

.295"
(.015)

.363"
(.031)

.015"

.003

-.001

(.001)

(.003)

(.002)

(.011)

.007
(.009)

.058
(.094)

.024
(.079)

-5.758"

-3.635"

-7.557"

-4.196'

3 sepsis ctas

(.230)

(.180)

(.975)

adwssed incacbcolni,

(.001)

.025"

County unanpioy-

mat rate
Constant

Time

(.004)

Educationequalto

Other (non-earned)
income

Lag.

Out of
labor
Maitet

Logit Model with
13 Lag.

Nuarhot o(pannsm for

II

II

(1.160)

26

26

(.001)

.043"
(.007)

(.001)

.028"
(.007)

foroacbo(tbrrsthcm

put lag peru.
Prob4ypc 1) = .271 (.013)

Prob(typc2) = .299(.013)
Prob(typc3) = .430(.014)
Number of obscivation.

16093

1463

20482

Likelihood function

-9223

-667

45111

Standard errors in parentheses.

"Significant at the I percent leveL
'Significant at the 10 pcrcat leveL

TABLE 7

Simulated Probabilities of Labor Market Choices
Conditional on Past Labor Market Patterns
(Based on coefficients estimated In columns 1 and 2 of table 6)
Probability in Year I 'flat Woman is

Labor Supply Pattern in
Years t-3, v.2, and t-t

Out of Labor

M.rket

Pan-Time

Full-Time

82.3
6.6
3.0

11.7

78.4

6.0
15.0
90.9

65.6

25.0

9.4

16.9

13.7

6. OPO

69.4
58.2

31.6

7. PPo

51.1

10.3
10.2

9. OFO
10. FF0

1. 000

2. PPP

3. FFF
4.
5.

P00
FO0

8. F0

II.

PFO

50.7
61.4
57.6
49.4

12.

OPP

17.6

13. FPP

8.9

14.

OOP

28.5

15.

POP

6.1

38.6
31.1

18.1

19.0
19.9

22.5

27.3

23.2

69.9
68.2

12.5

57.0
63.9
52.7

19.6

22.9
14.5

18.
19.

PFP

22.9
23.2
9.9
8.9

0FF

18.0

52.0

30.0

20.

OFF

14.2
5.8
23.5

14.6

71.1

18.0
17.0

76.2

16.6

62.0
63.1
63.5
69.1
61.9

16. FOP
17. FFP

21. PFF
22.

OOF

23. POF
24. FOF
25. PPF

54.2
61.0

FPF

6.9

21.4
16.4
29.6
24.0

27. OPF

133

24.6

26.

20.4
6.9

13.2

24.0
35.9
30.1

59.5

Estimates based cc cocificiemis rottS t cobanis 1 sad 2 of table 7. The base individual for these
simulations i s25 yesr old married white wcc. with a high school degree sad two children. I under the
age of 5. with other income of $25.000 sad a cotmty iaieznployniaitnte of 6.9 petct.

0: Out of labor Mnket
P: Past-Ste Work
F: Full-time Work

TABLE 8

Effect of Including more Lag Information on
the Fit of a Multinomial Logit Model
1. Efl.ot of Including rio,. yen of legg.d information
t—

Number •f

Lag Yam
8

7
6

5
4
3
2

Log Likelihood jj'

Number of
Observations

likelihood

COOSrOUSOg rot

Ratio Test2

Usgs

1-1 Lags

-4659.6
-5504.9
-6381.6
-7294.6
-82213

-4662.1
-5507.9
-6405.8
-7316.3

-8283S

-92226

-9378.0

310C

-10325.0

-10776.1

902.C

5.0
6.0

8778

48.C'

10241
11704

434

13161

117.C

14630
16093
17556

2. ENact of controlling mor. fully for th. leg patt.rn
=

Lag likelihood Function DaM On

Number of

Likelihood Ratio Test3

Sunpie

Complex

Full

Model

Model

Model

-46914
-55416

—
—
—
—

4

-73425
-827L4

-4659.6
-5504.9
-6381.6
-7294.6
-8225.3

-81873

3

-92729

-9222.6

-9202.8

lOOt

2

-10334.5

-10325.0

-10316.1

19.0

Lag Yam
8
7
6
5

-6340,2

SimpleComplex

Complex-

Full

61.C
75.C

—

82.r

—

9&8

—

922

—

7LC
39.C
17.8

SantE soca includes 2t lag parameters, with a dummy variable for the labor market stats in each —
year (only two dummy variables per year are neoded, since the third sale i bown once the first two stales

sac known.) For s 3-lag model. this mesa including • dummy variable for OLM,., OW.,. OLM..,,

VF, F.2, and vç,.
Cowux uaca includes 2(2t.l)+ft-2) lag parameters, with s dummy variable rot the labor market state in
each pat year (2t parameteni plus • dummy variable for the nianber or total times each state occurs
[2(t-I)+(t-2) independent paraznetetsj. This model I ableic distinguish between all possible — patterns.
although it imposes certain adding ip conatrainta. For a 3-lag model, this mess including the same
dwnsnies a in the simple model, as well a dummies variables if two of the three yam an OLM. if three
of the three years are OLM, if two of the three yam are PT, if three of the three yam are PT, and if two
of the three years are Fr.
Ftss aoca includes t' lag paraaneten, with a dummy variable for each possible past pattern.
'Uses complex model, described above.
7Chi-squared with 5 degrees of freedom.
'Chi-squared, with varying degrees of freedom for each row and column.
Significantst the I percent level.

TABLE 9
Simulated Probabilities of Labor Market Choices
From Random Effects Model
(Based

on coefficients estimated In columns 5 and 6 of table 6)

Probability in Year t that Woman is

Probability
Associated

Out of
Labor
Market

PartTime

FullTime

Type 1

22.3

56.4

21.3

27.1

Type 2

79.2

10.6

10.2

29.9

Type 3

9.1

8.7

82.1

43.0

Aggregate
Probabilities

33.7

22.2

44.1

Estimated
Type

1'l Type

Estimates based on coefficients reported in columns 1 and 2 of table 7.
The base individual for these simulations is a 25 year old married white
woman, with a high school degree and two children, 1 under the age of 5,
with other income of $25,000 and a county unemployment rate of 6.9
percent.

TABLE 10
Comparison of Model Effectiveness
1. Aggrsgat. prsdlct.d w.Ight hi sech labor merk.t stat.
Out of

Law

Twit

FullTime

Pazt-

2 Tat of Similarity
Between Actual and PredictS

a. Actualdata

24.5

23.2

52.2

5. 3-lag model

24.4

23.5

52.0

an 5: 0.01

c.

24.5

23.2

52.2

a vs c: 0.00

25.7

24.5

49.7

a vi d: 0.25

23-lag model

4, Random effects model

2. Nunib.r of accuratsly predicted Individual data points (0(1463 observations, number where
the model prodictods greaser than 67 percent probability that the 'Sividual would be hi the correct labor
mastet state.)

Out of

laser

Part-

Market

Tame

FullTune

1463

359

340

764

1087

264
(73.5)

170

653

(50.0)

(85.4)

193

664
(86.9)

Totat

a.

Actualdata

5. 3-Iq model

(percentage correct)

(74.3)

c. 13-lag model
(percentage correct)

1136

d. Random-effcctsmodel
(pcrcentageconect)

Test of SIIILiIaZIty

an b: 126.3"
•

(77.6)

279
(77.7)

(56.8)

108

6

0

102

(7.4)

(1.7)

(0.0)

(13.4)

a vi c 94.5"
avid: 1260.7"

3. Goodnna-of-flt test (Heckman)
Test of Similarity
to Actual Data
a. 3-lag model

0.19

b. 23-lag model

0.03

c.

Raafotn-effecta model

13.85"

Based on cstnn.tn from the three models shown in table 6. using the 14th yenr of data (1989) with
1463 observations.

"Sfficanti)differat at I pcrc leveL

TABLE 11

Simulated Probabilities of Moving from Out of the Labor Market
into Full-Time Work for a Low-Skilled Woman
For a woman who baa beat out of the labor market two ycan. her probable labor maitet naus next year

dqczxls on what she does this yesn
Peat 2-Year
Pattern

Elected Pattern
This Year

Probabilities for Next Year
Coalitionsi on Stats. this Year

Out of
Labor

M.rket

Time

Tint

1. Person 1 Cliaract.rlatlcs: Black woman. age 25. unanied, 2 chikirat, no preschoolcn, high
school dropout, non-earned incomc=$2500, county unanployment rate =6.9.

OLM-OLM
OLM-OLM
OLM-OLM

OLM

Fr
FT

73.8
21.6
11.8

12.0
49.4
9.7

14.2
29.0
78.5

2. Person 2 CIsaract.rlstlcs: Same as pcraon 1. but both chikiren are preschoolers.
OLM-OLM
OLM-OLM
OLM-OLM

3.

012.1

PT
FT

89.5
43,1
33.3

6.3

4.3

42.5
11.8

14.3

54.9

Person 3 CharacteristIcs: Same as pcaon 1. but with high school education.

OLM-OlJ(

OLM

OLM-OLM
OLM-OLM

FT
FT

68.!
17.5
8.9

13.8

18.2

49.8

32.7
82.0

9.1

Simulation. based on cocfficiatts from the 3-lag model shown in columns I sad 2 of table 6.

4)

-

cc

4)

fl

-.

I

I

I

-

I

I

I

Ft

Women

Men

Percent Working Part-Time, Women vs Men

TC

Year

68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93

10-

1. -

20-

:
1

Part-Time Work Among Employed

Figure

C.)

E

cc
—

I.e

V

C

—

cc
—

C

rt

'C

cc

I-

C)

I

70

80

15

20

Women

25

Hours per Week

F.—

45

F

50

----

Men

Cumulative Population Share

1'igure 2

55

60

65

Figure 3

1
I
2

v—fl

Part-lime Hazard Rates

To Ol.M

2

v—fl

I

v—i.

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end or the list. To subscribe to aU NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.
Number

Author(s)

Title

4854

Ethanan Helpman
Manuel Trajtenberg

A Time to Sow and a Time to Reap: Growth
Based on General Purpose Technologies

4855

Anti K. Kashyap

Sticky Prices: New Evidence from Retail Catalogs 9/94

4856

Hans-Werner Sinn

A Theory of the Welfare State

9/94

4857

Niko Canner
N. Gregory Mankiw
David N. Weil

An Asset Allocation Puzzle

9/94

4858

James Dow
Gary Gorton

Noise Trading, Delegated Portfolio
Management, and Economic Welfare

9/94

4859

Francis X. Diebold
David Neurnark
Daniel Poisky

Job Stability in the United States

9194

4860

Michael D. Bordo
Anna I. Schwartz

The Specie Standasd as a Contingent Rule:
Some Evidence for Core and Peripheral
Countries, 1880-1990

9/94

4861

David Genesove
Christopher J. Mayer

Equity and Time to Sale in the Real
Estate Maslet

9/94

4862

Don Fullerton
Diane Lim Rogers

Distributional Effects on a Lifetime Basis

9/94

4863

6. William Schwert

Mark-Up Pricing in Mergers and Acquisitions

9/94

4864

Enrique G. Mendoza
Assaf Razin
Linda L. Tesar

Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics:

9/94

4865

Jeffrey A. Frankel
Andrew K. Rose

A Survey of Empirical Research
on Nominal Exchange Rates

9/94

4866

George I. Borjas

Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality
Revisiteth What Happened to Immigrant
Earnings in the 1980s?

9/94

4867

ioel Slemrod

The Seesaw Principle in International
Tax Policy

9/94

A Note on Subsidizing Gifts

9i94

Carl Hansen
Roger Procter

4868

Louis Kaplow

Date
9/94

Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates
on Factor Incomes and Consumption

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber,ban'ard.edu.
Date

Number

Author(s)

Title

4869

Harry Gnjbert
Joel Slemrod

The Effect of Taxes on Investment and
Income Shifting to Puerto Rico

9/94

4870

Dani Rodrik

What Does the Political Economy Literature
on Trade Policy (Not) Tell Us That We
Ought to Know?

9/94

4871

Lan E. 0. Svensson

Estimating and Interpreting Forward

9/94

Interest Rales Sweden 1992-1994
4872

George 3. Eorjas

Immigration and Welfare. 1970-1990

9)94

4873

José De Gregorio
Federico Slurzenegger

Credit Markets and the Welfare Costs
of Inflation

1W94

4874

Brandice I. Canes
Harvey S. Rosen

10)94
Following in Her Footsteps? Women's Choices
of College Majors and Faculty Gender Composition

4875

Raghuram 0. Rajan
Luigi Zingales

What Do We Know ahout Capital Structure?
Some Evidence from International Data

I(W4

4876

Gene Grossman
Elhanan Helpman

Foreign Investment with Endogenous Protection

10,94

4877

Gene Grossman
Ethanan Helpman

Electoral Competition and Special Interest
Politics

1M4

4878

C. Keith Head
John C. Ries
Deborah L. Swenson

The Attraction of Foreign Manufacturing
Investments: Investment Pmxnotion and
Agglomeration Economies

10i94

4879

David M, Cutler

Market Failure in Small Group Health Insurance

10,94

4880

Douglas Holtz-Eakin
John R. Penrod
Harvey S. Rosen

Health Insurance and the Supply of

10/94

4881

Nouriel Roubini
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open
Economies

10,94

4882

Nouriel Roubini
Gina Maria Mitesi-Ferretti

Optimal Taxation of Human and Physical Capital
in Endogenous Growth Models

10,94

4883

Raquel Fernandez
Richard Rogerson

Public Education and Income Distribution: A
194
Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform

Entrepreneurs

To order any or these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER WorkIng
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at uberiianard.edu.
Number

Authcwi's)

ThIe

Date

4884

It Glenn Hubbard

Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance

I(W4

Jonathan Skinner
Stephen P. Zeklcs
4885

Martin Feldstein

Fiscal Policies, Capital Formation and Capitalism

10,94

4886

Oliver Hart
John Moore

Debt and Seniority An Analysis of the Role
of Hard Claims in Constraining Management

10/94

4887

Ricanlo J. Caballero

Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.

10/94

Eduardo M.R.A. Engel

Manufacturing: A Generalized

4888

Martin Feldstein
James H. Stock

Measuring Money Growth When Financial
Markets Are Changing

10,94

4889

Mark Hooker
Michael Knetter

Unemployment Effects of Military Spending:
Evidence from a Panel of States

10,94

4890

John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey

Market Timing Ability and Volatility
Implied in Investment Newslettas'

10,94

(Si) Approach

Asset Allocation Recommendations
4891

W. Kip Viscusi

Cigarette Taxation and the Social
Consequences of Smoking

10,94

4892

Alan M. Taylor

Domestic Saving and International
Capita! Rows Reconsidered

10/94

4893

Maurice Obstfeld
Kenneth Rogoff

The lntertemporal Approach to the

l0i94

4894

Michael M. Knetter

Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?:
Evidence from Cennan Export Prices

10,94

4895

Peter Diamond

Insulation of Pensions from Political Risk

10/94

4896

L.awrence H. Goulder

Environmental Taxation and the Double
Dividend"; A Reader's Guide

10/14

4897

A. Lans Bovenberg
Lawrence H. Goulder

Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence
of Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses

10,94

4898

Barry Eichengreen
Andrew K. Rose
Charles Wyplosz

Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange Rates:
An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference
to the European Monetary System

10,94

Current Account

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working

Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edis.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Dale

4899

Shane Greenstein

From Superininis to Supercomputers: Estimating
Surplus in the Computing Market

10,94

4900

Orazio P. Attanasio
Thomas C. DeLeire

IRAs and Household Saving Revisited:
Some New Evidence

1(W4

490!

Timothy F. Bresnahan

The Competitive Crash in Large-Scale

1W94

Shane Greenstein

Commercial Computing

4902

Joel Slemrod

Free Trade Taxation and Protectionist Taxation

10,94

4903

Assaf Razin

Resisting Migraiiorn The Problems of Wage
Rigidity and the Social Burden

10,94

The Roles of Marketing, Product Quality and

10,94

Efraim Sadka
4904

Ernst R. Berndt
Linda Bui

David Reiley
Glai Urban

Price Competition in the Growth and
Composition of the U.S. Anti-Ulcer
Thug Industry

4905

Thomas C. Kinnaman
Don Fullerton

How a Fee Per-Unit Garbage Affects
Aggregate Recycling in a Model with
Heterogeneous Households

10/94

4906

Daniel S. Hamerrnesh

Aging and Productivity, Rationality and
Matching: Evidence from Economists

l0i94

4907

Kooyul Jung

Investment Opportunities, Managerial
Discretion, and the Security Issue

10194

Yong-Cheol Kim
Rent M. Stulz

4908

Decision

Jun-Koo Kang
Rent M. Stulz

How Different is Japanese Corporate

4909

Robert J. Bairo

Democracy and Growth

10i94

4910

Richard B. Freeman

Crime and the Job Market

10i94

4911

Rebecca M. Blank

The Dynamics of Pail-Tune Work

11194

10j94

Finance? An Investigation of the
Information Content of New Security Issues

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5.X pa copy (plus sio.oo per order for
postage and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER. 1050 Massxhusetts
Avenue, Cambridge. MA 02138-5398. Advance payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check

or credit card. Checks should be made payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If
paying by credit card, include the cardholder's name, account number and expiration date. For all mail orders, please
be sure to include your return address and telephone number. WorkJng papers may also be ordered by telephone
(617-868-3900), or by fax (617-868.2742).

National Bureau of Economic Research

Doinec
0 Full subscriptions

Forgn"

Academic Libraries!
Standard Faculty Members

Standard

$1300

$650

$1625

$975

300
300
270
270

75
75
135
135
75
135
75
35
135
135
75
35

350
350
350
350

110
110
210
210
110
210
110

Paula! subscriptions
O Corporate Finance
o Stocks. Bonds, and Foreign Currency
o International Finance and Macroeconomics
o International Trade and Investment
0 Monetary Economics
o EconomIc FluctuatIons

150

270
150
70

OLong-RunEconomlcGrowth
o Sources of ProductMty Growth
OTaxatlon

OtaborStudles

270
270

O Economics of Health and Health Care
o EconomIcs of the Elderly
o Inckistrlal OrganizatIon

150
70
70

35

70
o Technical Working Papers
o HIstorical Development of the American Economy 70

35
35

Academic Libraries!
Faculty Members

200

350
200

85
350
350

50

85
85

210
210
110
50
50

85

50

85

50

200

* A full subscription Includes all topics lIsted under "pailial subscriptions" except for Technical Working Papers and papers
on the Historical Development of the American Economy. These must be ordered in addMon to the lull subscription.

Please Inquire about subscription prices for Africa and Australia.

PAYMENT OPTIONS
D YES! Please begin nvr subscription to the NBER Working Paper Series. I have indicated above which papers I
would like to receive.

Plse mail my papers to this address
By Phone (617) 868-39(X)

By FAX

(617) 868-2742

Name _________________________________

By Mail:

Pubilatlons Department

Address

National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138

___

o Payment in the amount of_______ enclosed.
o Please charge my

Card Number

0 VISA

0 MasterCard

________________________
Phone

Card expiratloit ______________________

Signature

_________________

FAX

______

