                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         ETHNICITY. NEIGHBORHOODS, AND
                          HUMAN CAPITAL EXTERNALITIES




                                      George J. Borjas




                                  Working Paper No. 4912




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 1994




I am grateful to Julian Betts, Thomas MaCurdy, James Rauch, Glenn Sueyoshi, Stephen Trejo,
and Finis Welch for helpful comments, and to the National Science Foundation and the Russell
Sage Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor
Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

   1994 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4912
                                                                             November 1994


                           ETHNICITY. NEIGHBORHOODS, AND
                            HUMAN CAPITAL EXTERNALITIES


                                          ABSTRACT


       The socioeconomic performance of today's workers depends not only on parental skills,
but also on the average skills of the ethnic group in the parent's generation (or ethnic capital).
This paper investigates the link between the ethnic externality and ethnic neighborhoods. The
evidence indicates that residential segregation and the external effect of ethnicity are linked,
partly because ethnic capital summarizes the socioeconomic background of the neighborhood
where the children were raised. Ethnicity has an external effect, even among persons who grow
up in the same neighborhood, when children are exposed frequendy to persons who share the
same ethnic background.




George J. Borjas
Department of Economics, 0508
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilrnan Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
     ETHNICITY, NEIGHBORHOODS, AND HUMAN CAPITAL EXTERNALITIES

                                              George J. Borjas


        Ethnic neighborhoods have long been a dominant feature of American cities (and of cities

in many other countries). In fact, segregation by race and ethnicity often defines the invisible line

that creates a neighborhood. These neighborhoods insulate people of similar backgrounds, and

foster a set of cultural attitudes, social contacts, and economic opportunities that affect workers

throughout their lives.

        In earlier work (Boxjas, 1992, 1994), I have argued that ethnicity has an external effect on

the human capital accumulation process.' Persons raised in advantageous ethnic environments

will be exposed to social and economic factors that increase their productivity, and the larger or

more frequent the amount of this exposure, the higher the resulting "quality" of the worker.

       As with the models that dominate the new growth literature, sufficiently strong ethnic

externalities may delay the convergence of ethnic differentials indefinitely. My earlier empirical

work indicated that the earnings of children are affected strongly not only by parental earnings as

in the usual models of intergenerational income mobility, but also by the mean earnings of the

ethnic group in the parent's generation (which I called "ethnic capital"). As a result, the ethnic

spillover effect retards intergenerational improvement for relatively disadvantaged ethnic groups,

and slows down the deterioration of skills (i.e., the regression towards the mean) among the more

advantaged groups.



       tThe importance of human capital externalities in intergenerational mobility was stressed in the early
       work of John Conlisk (1977) and Glenn C. Lourv (1977), who uses the concept of "social capital" to
       analyze how racial discrimination influences the social mobility of blacks. Shelly Lundberg and Richard
       Startz (1992) investigate how human capital externalities may alter the impact of antidiscrimination
       programs on social mobility.
                                                       2


       The process through which the ethnic externalities are transmitted, however, is not well

understood. This paper investigates one possible mechanism, ethnic neighborhoods. The insight

that human capita! externalities and geography are linked is not new. In his pathbreaking work,

Robert E. Lucas (1988) cites the crowding of similarly skilled workers into a small number of city

blocks as a key detenninant of the economic development of cities. Similarly, William Julius

Wilson's (1987) influential work on the creation and growth of the underclass argues that blacks

who live in poor neighborhoods are not exposed to "mainstream" role models, thus hampering the

economic mobility of blacks.

       This paper presents an empirical study of the link between geography and ethnic

externalities. The analysis uses the 1/100 Neighborhood File of the 1970 Public Use Sample of

the U.S. Census and a specially-designed version of the National Longitudinal Surveys of' Youth

(NLSY). The Census data groups workers into one of over 40,000 neighborhoods, while the

NLSY file groups workers into one of 1,978 zip codes. Hence it is possible to determine the

extent to which ethnic groups segregate in particular neighborhoods, and the impact of this

segregation on the process of human capital accumulation and intergenerational mobility.2

       The main finding of the analysis is that residential segregation and the influence of ethnic

capital on the process of intergenerational mobility are intimately linked. In particular, the impact

of ethnic capital on the skills of the next generation arises partly because the ethnic capital variable

is an excellent proxy for the socioeconomic background of the neighborhood where the children




        2Thc role played by neighborhood effects in determining socioeconomic outcomcs is currently the
        subject of intensive research; see, for instance, the survey of Christopher Jencks and Susan E. Meycr
        (1990) and the critical appraisal by Charles F. Manski (1993). Empirical evidence linking
        neigbborhood effects to teenage pregnancy, criminal behavior, educational attainment, and human
        capital accumulation is given by Anne C. Case and Lawrence F. Katz (1991), Mary Corcoran, Roger
        Gordon, Deborah Laren and Gary Solon (1992), Jonathan Crane (1991), and James E. Rauch (1992).
                                                     3


were raised, and these neighborhood characteristics influence intergenerational mobility: In other

words, the ethnic capital model provides an alternative wa of capturing neighborhood effects.

Ethnic capital, however, plays an additional role in intergenerational mobility. Even among

persons who grow up in the same neighborhood, ethnic capital matters when children are

frequently exposed to other persons who share the same ethnic background.




I. Ethnicity and Neighborhoods

       Because little is known about the residential clustering of many of the ethnic groups used

in the empirical analysis below, it is usefUl to first document the link between ethnicity and

residential segregation.3 The descriptive analysis is based initially on data drawn from the 1/100

Neighborhood file of the 1970 U.S. Census (15 percent questionnaire). These data not only

contain the individual-level demographic variables typically available in Census files, but also

group individuals into one of 42,950 "neighborhoods." Neighborhoods are contiguous, relatively

compact, roughly the size of a Census tract, and have an average population of 4,000 persons

(U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1973). Although the specific geographic location ofa neighborhood

cannot be determined (other than its location in one of the nine Census regions), the data file

reports a number of demographic characteristics describing the neighborhood (such as the fraction

of persons who are either first- or second-generation Americans, and the fraction of persons who

are college graduates).




        3A large literature documents the extent of residential segregation among blacks and Hispanics: see
        Frank D. Scan and Marta Tienda (1987), Nancy A. Denton and Douglas S. Massey (1989). Mark Alan
        Hughes and Janice Fanning Madden (1991), and Scott McKinney and Ann B. Schnare (1989).
                                                 4


       I restrict the analysis to persons aged 18-64. 1 begin by documenting the residential

segregation of immigrants and second-generation Americans, and the extent to which residential

segregation changes across generations. A person is an immigrant if he or she was born outside

the United States (or its possessions), and is a second-generation American if either parent was

born outside the United States. All other persons are grouped and labeled "third-generation"

Americans, although this sample obviously includes higher-order generations. The 1970 Census

does not provide any information on the ethnic ancestry of persons in the "third" generation.

       As noted above, the neighborhood file reports the proportion of the population in each

neighborhood that is either first- or second-generation. This statistic was calculated by the

Bureau of the Census using all available observations in the neighborhood (i.e., the 15 percent

sample of respondents who filled out the relevant questionnaire). I use these data to estimate the

fraction of persons in the neighborhood who are either first- or second-generation for the average

person in a number of demographic groups.

       Table I summarizes the extent of residential segregation. The first row reports that the!

average immigrant resided in a neighborhood where 32.7 percent of the population was either

first- or second-generation. This pattern of residential location differs significantly from what one

would expect if immigrants were randomly allocated across neighborhoods. The 1970 Census

indicates that only 16.6 percent of the population was first- or second-generation.

       Because the aggregate characteristics reported in the neighborhood file do not include the

proportion of the neighborhood's population that is foreign-born, I calculate this statistic by

combining the birthplace data reported in each individual's record with the aggregate
                                                            5


    neighborhood characteristics provided by the Census Bureau.4 The typical immigrant lives in a

    neighborhood that is 15.3 percent immigrant, even though only 4.8 percent of the population was

    foreign-born.

           Residential segregation persists into the second generation. As the second row of Table I

    shows, the average second-generation American resides in a neighborhood that is 28.2 percent

    first- or second-generation.

           The 1970 Census does not provide any information on ancestry past the second

    generation. As a result, I cannot determine how the pattern of residential segregation changes

    beyond the second generation for most groups. Intergenerational changes in residential

    segregation, however, can be documented for the subpopulation of Hispanics, the vast majority of

    whom are foreign-born or have parents or grandparents who are foreign-born.3 Table I indicates

    that there is very little movement of Hispanics out of Hispanic neighborhoods even in the third

    generation. The average Hispanic immigrant lives in a neighborhood that is 35 percent Hispanic;

    the second-generation Hispanic lives in one that is 33 percent Hispanic; and the typical third-

    generation Hispanic lives in one that is 29 percent Hispanic. The fraction of Hispanics in the

    population is only 4.4 percent. The clustering of Hispanics into Hispanic neighborhoods,

    therefore, is prevalent and persistent.6
(
N

           41n particular, I take the Census Bureau estimate of the proportion of persons in the neighborhood who
           are first- or second-generation to be the population proportion. I then multiply this number by the
           sample estimate of the proportion of the first- and second-generation persons in the neighborhood who
           are foreign-born.

           'Calculations from [he General Social Surveys indicate that over 90 percent of persons who classify
           themselves as Hispanic are foreign-born, have parents who are foreignborn, or have grandparents who
           are foreign-born.

           6Although the residentiat segregation found among these ethnic groups is substantial, it is not nearly as
           striking as that found among blacks. Table I reports that the avenge black lives in a neighborhood that
           is 54.7 percent black.
                                                  6


       In addition to the clustering of first- and second-generation persons into certain

neighborhoods, there is substantial segregation by ethnic group. To document the differences

across national origin groups, I focus on the 39 largest groups in the data. These 39 groups

include 83.7 percent of all first-generation Americans, and over 9 percent of all second-

generation Americans. The national origin of immigrants is, of course, determined by their

country of birth. The national origin of a second-generation person is determined by the father's

birthplace (unless only the mother was foreign-born, in which case it is determined by the

mother's birthplace). Table 2 lists the 39 national origin groups used in the analysis.

        I first calculated the proportion of the population who are either first- or second-

generation and who have a particular ethnic ancestry. This number is reported in the first column

of the table, and represents the probability that a first- or second-generation person from that

group will be found in a particular neighborhood if the ethnic group was distributed randomly

across neighborhoods. Most of the groups make uprelatively small fractions of the population:

only 0.8 percent of the population, for instance, is first- or second-generation Irish.

        Table 2 reveals that immigrants and their children, regardless of national origin, cluster in

neighborhoods that have large numbers of first- or second-generation Americans. The typical

second-generation person of English ancestry resides in a neighborhood that is 23.5 percent first-

or second-generation; the respective statistic for Irish persons is 31.3 percent. for Italians 32.0

percent, and for Mexicans 27.8 percent. There is little evidence, therefore, that only economically

disadvantaged groups are crowded into ethnic neighborhoods.

        To document how type-f ethnics cluster in specific neighborhoods, I calculate the fraction

of the neighborhood's population that has the same ethnicity as the average type-f person. The

Census Bureau does not report the fraction of the population in each neighborhood that belongs
                                                       7


to each of the groups. Hence I calculated this statistic from within the 1/100 sample. Because the

family members of a type-f ethnic are likely to be type-f ethnics, and because the 1/100 Census file

is a random sample ofhouseholds the stratified sampling scheme introduces an upward bias in the

calculation of the fraction of the nighborhood's population that is typef. I choose a conservative

index of within-group residential segregation, and calculate (for each person in the data) the

proportion of persons in the neighborhood who reside outside the household unit and who are

type-f ethnics.7 Table 2 reports the average of this statistic for each of the groups. In view of the

relatively small sample size available for each neighborhood (the mean and median number of

observations in a neighborhood is 26, and the interquartile range is 9, from 21 to 30), some

caution is required in the interpretation of the data.

        The probability that type-f ethnics live near other type-f ethnics is much higher than one

would expect iftype-f ethnics were randoniiy distributed across neighborhoods. Among second-

generation workers, the typical person ofIrish ancestry lives in a neighborhood that is 3.3 percent

Irish, although first- and second-generation Irish make up only 0.8 percent of the population; the

typical Italian lives in a neighborhood that is 12.1 percent Italian, although Italians make up only

2.8 percent of the population; and the typical Mexican lives in a neighborhood that is 18.1 percent

Mexican, although Mexicans make up only 1.3 percent of the population Among the 39 national

origin groups, the typical immigrant lives in a neighborhood in which 83 percent of the

population shares the same ethnic background, and the typical second-generation person lives in a

neighborhood in which 6.6 percent of the population shares the same background.




        7This methodology does not entirely solve the problem because extended family members are also likely
        to be type-f ethnics and to live in the same neighborhood (but as part of a different household unit).
                                                        8


        I conclude the descriptive analysis of the Census data by documenting that ethnic

residential segregation exists across a number of demographic and skill groups. Table 3 shows

that there is little difference in ethnic residential segregation across age groups. The typical

second-generation person aged 18-34 resides in a neighborhood that is 27.4 percent first- or

second-generation, while the respective statistic for an older person is 28.5 percent. In addition,

the differences in residential segregation across education groups are often small. The typical

high school dropout in the second generation lives in a neighborhood that is 28.7 percent first- or

second-generation, while the respective statistic for the typical college graduate is 27.8 percent.

Finally, the data indicate that internal migration decisions among first- and second-generation

Americans do not seem to alter the ethnic composition of their residential environment. Second-

generation persons who have lived in the same house for over 10 years live in a neighborhood that

is 29.4 percent first- or second-generation, while the respective statistic for persons who have

lived in the house fewer than 3 years is 26.3 percent.

        The NLSY reveals even stronger patterns of residential segregation. The analysis uses a

version of the NLSY that identifies the subset of persons who resided in the same zip code in

1979, at the time the survey of young persons (aged 14-22) began. Hence it is possible to

determine if NLSY respondents live near other NLSY respondents who share the same ethnic

background.




        The numbering system used to identify zip codes in the NLSY file differs from that used by ihe Postal
        Service. Although the data indicate which subset of NLSY respondents live in the same postal area, it is
        impossible to locate the zip code within a particular metropolitan area. Because the zip code refers to
        the 1979 residence, many of the respondents were still living in the parental household,. As a result, the
        residential segregation measures in the NLSY tend to reflect the ethnic environment in which the
        respondents were raised.
                                                         9


       Ethnicity is determined from the response to the question: "What is your origin or

descent?" Although most persons in the NLSY gave only one response to the question, about

one third of the respondents gave multiple answers. In these cases, I used the main ethnic

background (as identified by the respondent) to classi& people into ethnic categories.

       For each person in the data, I calculated the probability that other NLSY respondents in

the zip code had the same ethnic background. The NLSY, however, surveyed other persons in

the family unit who were in the "correct" age range (i.e., 14-22 in 1979). As a result, there are a

large number of siblings in the data: 27 percent of the respondents have one sibling, and an

additional 19 percent have at least two siblings. To avoid the bias introduced by this sampling

scheme, I calculated the residential segregation measures on the sample of non-related persons

who reside outside the household unit.9 Moreover, because the NLSY oversampled blacks and

other minorities, I used the sampling weights in the calculations.

        The segregation indices are reported in Table 4 far the 25 ethnic groups identifiable in the

           There is strong evidence of residential segregation. The average black lived in a

neighborhood that was 63.4 percent black, while the average Mexican lived in a neighborhood

that was 50.3 percent Mexican. Overall, the typical NLSY respondent lived in a neighborhood

where 30.4 percent of other non-related respondents shared a common ethnic background.''




        9To reduce costs, the NLSY also sampled households which resided geographically close to each other.
        This sampling strategy suggests that the measures of residential segregation calculated in these data
        probably overstate the true extent of segregation.

        1001 the 12,686 observations   in the 1979 wave of the NLSY, I deleted 2 persons because they had
        invalid zip codes, and 939 persons because they had invalid ethnic classifications.

        11As with the Census data, the NLSY residential segregation measures should be interpreted with
        caution. There are fewer than 100 observations for 11 of the 25 ethnic groups.
                                                 10


       Note that this statistic is much larger than the respective statistic in the Census data, where

only 7 to 8 percent of the neighborhood's population belonged to the same group. The Census

results, however, underestimate the extent of residential segregation because all third-generation

workers are classified as non-ethnics (because no information is provided on the ethnic

background of third-generation persons). As a result, even though the typical immigrant in the

Census lives in a neighborhood where 8.3 percent of the population is composed of first- or

second-generation persons who belong to the same ethnic group, a much larger fraction of the

neighborhood's population might be composed of third-generation workers who also belong to

the same ethnic group. The NLSY avoids this problem because all persons in the data (regardjess

of their generation) report their ancestry.



IL Econometric Framework

        My objective is to determine the relationship between ethnic externalities and

neighborhood effects in the intergenerational transmission process. The econometric model

underlying the analysis is given by:



(I)



wherey,1 measures the skills (such as educational attainment or the log wage) of person iin ethnic

groupj; x gives the skills of his father and     gives the average skills of the ethnic group in the

father's generation (which I call ethnic capital). Note that Y,. takes on the same value for all

persons in groupj. All variables are measured in deviations from the mean.
                                                       11


       Equation (I) can be derived from a model where utility-maximizing parents invest in their

children, and where ethnicity has an external effect on the production of children's skills (Boijas,

1992). Ma result of the ethnic spillover, the human capital of children depends not only on

parental inputs (as measured by the exogenous human capital of the parents), but also on the

external effect of ethnicity, as summarized by the average skills of the ethnic group.

       The spillover effects underlying the ethnic capital model have much in common with the

human capital externalities that are at the heart of the recent literature on economic growth

(Lucas, 1988; Paul M. Romer, 1986), as well as with the notions of social capital and

neighborhood effects that are stressed routinely in the sociology literature (James S. Coleman,

1988, 1990; Wilson, 1987). If the ethnic externality is sufficiently strong, skill differentials

observed among ethnic groups can persist for many generations and may never disappear. Note

that the expected skills of the son of the average father in ethnic groupj are given by:




(2)



The sum f3 + 2' therefore, determines if the mean skills of ethnic groups converge across

generations; hence f31 + 13215 an inverse measure of the rate of "mean convergence."2 If the sum

of coefficients is less than one, ethnic differences converge over time; if it is greater than one,

ethnic differences diverge across generations.




        12Robcrt I. Barro and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992) provide a discussion of alternative concepts of
        convergcnce in the context of growth models.
                                                  12


       As we have seen, ethnic groups cluster in particular neighborhoods. This clustering

suggests that part of the ethnic capital effect in equation (I) may be capturing the iniluence (if

there is one) of the neighborhood's socioeconomic background on intergenerational mobility.

Suppose, for example, that ethnic groups are completely segregated so that there is one ethnic

group per neighborhood. The ethnic capital variable        would then also represent the mean skills


ofthe neighborhood, and the coefficient 132 in (1) would capture the total impact of the ethnic
spillover and of the neighborhood's socioeconomic background. The coefficient of ethnic capital

would be significant even if ethnicity did not have a direct impact on intergenerational mobility,

but neighborhood characteristics mattered.

        The data do not exhibit this extreme type ofsegregation. Ethnic groups, however, are

likely to cluster by skill level, so that unskilled ethnic groups live together in low-income

neighborhoods and skilled ethnic groups live in high-income neighborhoods. The ethnic capital

variable would again be correlated with the skill level of the neighborhood, and the ethnic capital

coefficient could be capturing neighborhood effects (i.e., the impact ofthe neighborhood's overall

socioeconomic background), rather than the direct effect of ethnicity. In effect, the ethnic capital

model "works" because ethnic capital proxies for the relevant neighborhood characteristics which

influence the intergenerational transmission process. If ethnicity did not have a direct impact on

intergenerational mobility, controlling for the relevant neighborhood characteristics (such asmean

income and education) would drive the ethnic capital coefficient down to zero.

        Ethnic capital might still matter, above and beyond neighborhood effects, if intra-group

contacts within a neighborhood are more frequent or are more influential than inter-group
                                                            13



contacts.'3 Children who belong to ethnic groupj are then exposed to a different set of values,

social contacts, and economic opportunities than children who belong to other ethnic groups but

who grow up in the same neighborhood. In effect, the aggregate socioeconomic characteristics of

the neighborhood are not a sufficient statistic summarizing the environment facing type-fpersons.

As a result, ethnic capital influences the intergenerational mobility process even after controlling

for neighborhood effects. Ethnicity per se has an impact on intergenerational mobility.

           The empirical work presented in this paper decomposes the impact of the ethnic capital

coefficient into neighborhood effects (the extent to which the ethnic capital variable proxies for

neighborhood characteristics which influence all persons who reside in the same neighborhood,

regardless of ethnic background) and into an ethnic effect. A simple way of determining the

extent to which the impact of ethnic capital (i.e., the coefficient 132) operates through

neighborhood effects is to expand the model in (1) to include a vector of neighborhood fixed

effects:




(3)




where          is a dummy variable set to unity if person i in ethnic groupj resides in neighborhood k.

The parameter vector (0.•"8) gives the neighborhood fixed effects, which are assumed to be




           t3Richard D, Alba's (1990) study of social contacts among 1J.S.-born white ethnics indicates that half of
           all non-related childhood fricnds belong to the same ethnic group. Harry J. Hoizer (I 988) has shown
           that friends are a key source of information about job opportunities, so that intra-group referrals play a
           major role in the job search process and might explain the concentration of some ethnic groups in
           narrowly-defined occupations.
                                                        14



exogenous.'4 The coefficients 8 and 2 measure the within-neighborhood impact ofparental

skills and of ethnic capital. As long as neighborhoods matter in the transmission of skills, the

"net" rate of mean-convergence (i.e., net of neighborhood effects) implied by the fixed-effects

model, 8 + 8,, is conceptually different from the "gross" rate implied by equation (1),                +

          Equations (1) and (3) can be estimated directly in the NLSY data discussed above. It is

unusual, however, to come across data that contain all the requisite information: ethnicity, the

skills of two generations of workers, and neighborhood of residence. Nevertheless, a relatively

complete analysis of the relationship between ethnic capital and neighborhood effects can be

conducted even if the data do not provide any information on parental background (as is the case

with the 1970 Census neighborhood file). In particular, suppose mean parental skills in thegroup,

      are observed even if parental skills are not (the source of the data on           will be discussed

below). The individual-level data available for second-generation workers in the 1970 Census can

then be used to estimate the regression models:




(4)               y,,=j3i+co,
(5)




Because equations (4) and (5) regress individual-level data on an aggregate measure of ethnic

skills, I call this type of model a "semi-aggregate" regression. It is easy to show that:




         '41t would be interesting to analyze how parents choose the type and intensity of "ethnicity" that the
         wish to e.'cpose to their children. William N. Evans, Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab (1992)
         show that endogenhing the "peer group" effects greatly weakens the relationship between outcomes and
         neighborhood characteristics.
                                                  15




Proposition 1. EQ3)=31     I2

Data on parental skills, therefore, are not required to estimate the-gross rate of mean

convergence.Because the mean skills of the ethnic group instrument for parental skills,the

omitted variable bias introduced by leaving out parental skills is simply the "recovery" of the

                                                    if E(6)=81 +
coefficient j3. It would now be usefi.il to determine                    so   that the net rate of mean

convergence can also be estimated without information on parental skills. I proceed to show that

this is indeed the case in an important special case, and that the difference between the gross and

net rates of mean convergence is attributable solely to the change in the ethnic capital coefficient.

        Consider first how the coefficients of parental and ethnic capital in equation (1) change

when neighborhood fixed effects are introduced into the model. The probability limits of the

estimated coefficients in (1) when the true model is given by (3) are:




(6) plim   ,   =61
                               t>1



(7) plim
                               O.k



                     -____


where   = Var(x7) Var(71) —
                              Var(,.)2; Pk15 the fraction of the population that lives in

neighborhood Ic E(x I k) is the mean value of skills among parents who live in neighborhood k,
                                                   16


where the expectation is evaluated over all i andj; and E(;. 1k) is the mean value of the ethnic

capital variable among all persons who live in neighborhood k, where the expectation is again

evaluated over all I and).

        In general, the introduction of neighborhood effects affects the coefficients of both

parental skills and ethnic capital. Suppose, however, that type-r ethnics residing in region kare a

random sample of the population of type-x ethnics, so that the skill distribution of type-r ethnics

in region k is the same as their skill distribution in the population. This assumption implies:




(8)             E(xIk)=i


where the expectation in the left-hand-side is taken over all iin group t in neighborhood k, while

the right-hand-side simply gives the level of ethnic capital for group t. i refer to (8) as the "skill-

invariance" assumption. Equation (8) implies E(x, Ik)=E( IA), Vk, so that the bracketed term

in (6) vanishes. It is usethl to summarize this result as:




Proposition 2.   If the distribution of type-f ethnics across neighborhoods is skill-invariant,

plim =ö, and the coefficient of parental skills is unaffected by the introduction of

neighborhood fixed effects.




Note that the skill-invariant geographic assignment of type) workers is distinct from and weaker

than assuming that type-f ethnics are distributed randomly across neighborhoods.
                                                  17


        The skill invariance assumption is also useflul in determining the relationship between the

estimator 6 (from equation (5)) and the net rate of mean convergence. This relationship is

summarized by:



Proposition 3. If the distribution of type-j ethnics across neighborhoods is skill-invariant, then

plimô=61 + 6.



As before, it is unnecessary to have information on parental skills in order to estimate the rate of

mean convergence (net of neighborhood effects).

        The results can now be used to determine why the two rates of mean convergence

estimable in Census data might differ. Because the coefficient of parental skills is unaffectedby

the introduction of neighborhood fixed effects, the difference between the "gross" and "net"rates

of mean convergence is attributable entirely to the change in the coefficient of the ethniccapital

variable (assuming the skill invariance assumption holds). Therefore, the inclusion of

neighborhood fixed effects into semi-aggregate regressions can be used to assess the relationship

between ethnic capital and geography. I summarize this result as:



Proposition 4. Suppose the distribution of type-f ethnics is skill-invariant. The difference in the

estimated rates of mean convergence I and 3 gives the impact of neighborhood effects on the

ethnic capital coefficient.
                                                        18



       Because of the practical importance of these results, it is worth stressing that the skill

invariance assumption is unlikely to hold strictly in the data. The analysis of the Census data

presented below uses two alternative measures of skills (educational attainment and log wages) to

estimate the rate of mean convergence. Even if there were no skill differentials among type-j

workers residing in different neighborhoods, the restriction in (8) would be violated if there exist

neighborhood wage differentials which are independent of skills. These differentials imply that the

mean wage of type-f parents in a particular neighborhood differs from the measure of ethnic

capital for groupj. Therefore, the analysis must control for regional wage differentials prior to

applying the results presented above. The construction of an index of regional wage differentials

at the neighborhood level is discussed below.

        A more difficult problem with the skill-invariance assumption is simply that the skill

distribution of type-f ethnics probably does differ across neighborhoods.'3 I will show below,

however, that the restriction implied by skill invariance is not grossly inconsistent with the

geographic sorting of type-f ethnics.

        Finally, the discussion has assumed that the ethnic capital effect is constant across

neighborhoods and persons. This need not be the case. In fact, the ethnic capital model implies

that the spillover effects of ethnicity should be larger for persons who are more frequently




        131t is easy to determine how the coefficients of parental skills and ethnic capital change when
        neighborhood effects are introduced into the model and the skill invariance assumption does not bold.
        Suppose that highly-skilled type-f workers move into wealthy neighborhoods, and unskilled type-f
        workers move into poor neighborhoods. This implies that E(x I) > E(1 It) in wealthy
        neighborhoods (1) and that E(x 1k)   c E( 1k) in low-income neighborhoods (k). It follows from
        equation (6) that E(,)=5, +p,where p >0. Thus the nonrandom sorting of skilled workers into
        "good" neighborhoods magnifies the impact of the parental contribution to the children's skills. As a
        result, the inclusion of neighborhood effects will reduce the coefficient of parental skills in the
         intergenerational transmission equation. It is also easy to show that this type of nonrandom sorting
        leads to a smaller ethnic capital coefficient in models which omit the neighborhood fixed effects.
                                                     19


exposed to an ethnic environment. Put differently, the ethnic capital effect should be larger for

those children who grow up in neighborhoods where many of the residents share the same ethnic

background. The empirical analysis presented below investigates the extent to which the ethnic

capital effeät depends on the ethnic composition of the neighborhood.



111. Results

        I initially use the sample of second-generation workers in the 1970 Census file to analyze

the relationship between ethnic externalities and neighborhood effects. I restrict the analysis to

second-generation men aged 18-64, who worked in the civilian sector in the year prior to the

Census, who were not enrolled in school, and who. were not self-employed. As before, the ethnic

group of the second-generation worker is defined in terms of the father's birthplace (unless only

the mother was foreign-born, in which case it is defined in terms of the mother's birthplace). I use

two alternative measures of the worker's skills, educational attainment and log wage rates.

        Because Census data do not directly link the skills of second-generation Americans with

the skills of their immigrant parents, I use the 1/100 Public Use Sample of the 1940 Census to

estimate the mean skills of the national origin group in the parent's generation. It is likely that

(adult) second-generation persons enumerated in the 1970 Census are the children of the

immigrants who arrived in the period prior to 1940,16




        16Boijas (1993) discusses the methodologof intercensal comparisons that underlie the empirical
        analysis using the Census data. The intercensal linkage between parents and children can be improved
        by focusing on workers in specific age gToups. For example, the children of immigrants aged 25-44 in
        1940 are likely to be relatively young in 1970. I experimented with a number of alternative age
        breakdowns and obtained similar results.
                                                 20


       Table 5 reports the average educational attainment arid log wages for the 36 ethnic groups

that can be identified in both the 1940 and 1970 Censuses with sufficiently large numbers of

observations. These 36 ethnic groups make up 97.4 percent of working immigrant men in 1940,

and 95.5 percent of the second-generation working men in 1970. There is substantial dispersion

in skills and wages across national origin groups and there is a strong positive correlation between

the skills of the immigrant group in 1940 and the skills of the corresponding second-generation

group in 1970.

       To calculate the variable measuring mean skills in the parent's generation (i.e., the

empirical measure of ethnic capital), I pool the sample of immigrant and native men in the 1940

Census (for a total of 231,606 observations), and estimate the regression model:




(9)




where x, gives the skills of person i in national origin groupj;   is a vector of socioeconomic

characteristics including age, age squared, and region of residence; and    is a dummy variable set

to unity if person i belongs to groupj (natives are the omitted group). The regression is estimated

separately using educational attainment and the log wage rate as dependent variables. The

parameter vector (•••,i,) gives the empirical measure of ethnic capital for theigroups.

       Table 6 reports the estimated rates of mean convergence. Equations (4) and (5) give the

basic specification of the model, except that the regressions also control for the second-generation

worker's age and age squared. The regressions use a random-effects estimator which allows for
                                                        21


an ethnic group-specific component in the error term.'7 Consider initially the middle panel

reporting the transmission coefficients obtained in the log wage regression model. Column I

indicates that the rate of mean convergence (or I3 + 132 in terms of the mode! in the previous

section) is 0.45, in line with the results of earlier work (Eorjas, 1992, 1993).

       The next column controls for the bias introduced by regional wage differentials. As noted

above, the skill-invariance assumption is violated if some ethnic groups have relatively high wage

levels simply because they live in high-wage areas. To control for regional wage variation, I

estimated the following regression in the sample of third generation workers in the 1970

neighborhood file:




(10)




where w, gives the log wage of person I; Xis a vector of standardizing variables (including

educational attainment, age, age squared, marital status, and dummy variables indicating if the

person is black or Hispanic); and Dt is a dummy variable indicating if person i resides in

neighborhood k. The vector (v1,• w4) gives the skill-adjusted neighborhood wage level. This

wage level is included as an additional regressor in the intergenerational earnings equations, and

the resulting transmission coefficient is reported in column 2 of Table 6.' The transmission

coefficient falls to 0.40 (a drop of about 0.05 units).



        in particular, the residual = vj + up where is the group component. It is welt known that
       ignoring the group component in the error term seriously underestimates the standard error of the ethnic
       capital coefficient.

        '8The coefficient of the neighborhood wage level was typically in the 0.4 to 0.5 range.
                                                        22


        Column 3 of the table adds the vector of neighborhood fixed effects into the regression)9

 Controlling for the neighborhood fixed effects reduces the estimated transmission parameter

 substantially, to about 0.2. Assuming that the skill-invariance assumption holds, the transmission

 coefficient changes because the estimate in column 3 "nets out" the relationship between the

 ethnic externality and neighborhood effects (but leaves unchanged the impact of parental skills).

 It is interesting to note that the resulting coefficient of 0.2 is roughly the same as the coefficient of

 parental capital in my earlier work (Boijas, 1992). It seems as if neighborhood effects account for

 most (if not all) of the ethnic influence in the intergenerational transmission process. Ethnic

 capital seems to be a very good proxy for the relevant characteristics of the neighborhood's

 economic and social environment which influence the intergenerational transmission process gp4

'-which are common to all persons living in the same neighborhood, regardless of ethnicity."

         The last three columns of Table 6 usethe 1/100 County Group file of the 1970 Public Use

  Sample (15 percent questionnaire) to estimate an identical model in a sample of second-generation



         t9There are 53,703 observations in the sample of second-generation working men and 23,415
         neighborhoods. There are 9,522 neighborhoods with only one observation; 5,895 neighborhoods with
         two; 3,616 neighborhoods with three; 2,162 neighborhoods with 4; and 1,161 neighborhoods With 5.
         The remaining 5 percent of the neighborhoods have between 6 and 12 observations. Despite the fact
         that a sizable number of neighborhoods have only 1 observation, the estimated rate of mean convergence
         is consistent. I use a two-stage procedure to estimate the random effects model which includes the
         vector of neighborhood fixed effects. The first stage regression includes age, age squared, and a vector
         of ethnic fixed effects. This regression is estimated on a data set where all variables are differenced
         form the respective neighborhood means. This procedure is numerically equivalent to introducing the
         neighborhood fixed effects. The second stage then uses a GLS estimator to estimate the relationship
         between the coefficients of the first-stage ethnic dummy variables and the ethnic capital variable.

         20The discussion assumes that the neighborhood of current residence is the same as the neighborhood
         where the individual was raised. Because of the misdefinition of the neighborhood. the results confound
         the ethnic externalities that influenced the human capital accumulation process with externalities that
         arise front living in an ethnic neighborhood at the present lime. This problem, however, does not seem
         to be very important. The results are vety similar for two alternative skill variables, log wages and
         educational attainment (which presumably was completed at an early age). Moreover, the transmission
         coefficients are roughly the same regardless of how long the person has lived in his current residence.
         The estimated transmission parameter is 0.43 for persons who moved to the house prior to 1960. and is
         0.46 for persons who moved to the house after 1967.
                                                        23


workers defined exactly as in columns 1-3. This Census file reports the metropolitan area (instead

of the neighborhood) of current residence. Persons who live outside metropolitan areas are
grouped into economically similar "county groups." A total of 408 metropolitan areas and county

groups are identified in the data.

       Not surprisingly, the transmissioncoefflcient reported in column 5 is almost identical to

the respective statistic in column 1. To control for regional wage variation, I estimated a

regression in the sample of third-generation workers similar to (10) with county group dummies

instead of neighborhood dummies. The skill-adjusted county wage level was then introduced as

an additional regressor in the model. This reduced the coefficient to about 0.37, which is roughly

the same as the analogous coefficient in column 2.

       The coefficient in the last column of Table 6, however, differs drastically from the

respective coefficient in column 3. Controlling for county fixed effects barely affects the

estimated transmission coefficient; it remains at about 0.4. Put differently, the ethnic capital

variable and the vector of county fixed effects are uncorrelated. There is no evidence, therefore,

that ethnic capital has anything to do with geography at the county level. At the neighborhood

level, however, geography is intimately linked to the ethnic capital effect.2'

        The top panel of Table 6 reports the transmission coefficients obtained from regressions

which use the worker's educational attainment as the dependent variable. The results are virtually

identical to those obtained in the log wage regressions. Including the neighborhood fixed effects




        21A regression of education (or log wages) on a vector of countiy group dummies has an R-squared of
        about 0.09, so that 91 percent of the variance in education and log wages is attributable to within-county
        variation. In contrast, only about 45 percent of the variance in these variables is attributable to within-
        neighborhood variation.
                                                      24


reduces the transmission coefficient from 0.36 to 0.17, while adding in the county dummies barely

changes the estimated parameter (it declines to O.33).22

       Finally, the bottom panel of Table 6 reports the transmission coefficients obtained in a log

wage regression which also includes the educational attainment of the second-generation worker

as a regressor. Although the transmission rates are much smaller (because the transmission that

occurs through educational attainment is netted out), adding neighborhood fixed effects changes

the estimated coefficients in exactly the same way an in the top two panels of the table.

        In sum, the analysis reveals a link between ethnic capital and neighborhood effects, but it

provides no information about which set of neighborhood characteristics are being proxied by the

ethnic capital variable. Column 4 of Table 6 shows that the neighborhood fixed effects can be

summarized in terms of a small number of neighborhood characteristics. The neighborhood

characteristics included in the regression are: the percent of the neighborhood's population that

has at least a high school diploma; the percent that has at least a college diploma; the labor force

 participation rates of men and women; the unemployment rate; the percent of workers employed

 in professional occupations; the percent of families below the poverty level; and the percent of

 families with at least $15,000 in household income. All of these neighborhood characteristics

 were calculated by the Census Bureau (and are included in the Public Use Sample).

        The inclusion of these aggregate neighborhood characteristics reduces the transmission

 coefficient from 0.36 to 0.27 in the education regressions, and from 0.4 to 0.25 in the log wage

 regressions. In other words, a small vector of variables that are common to all persons living in




        22ause education differences across neighborhoods almost entirely reflect true differences in skill
        levels, I did not attempt an analogous construction of a "skill-adjusted" neighborhood education level.
                                                         25


 the neighborhood, regardless of ethnic background, can explain over half of the drop in the ethnic

 capital coefficient.23

         It seems, therefore, that a large part of the impact of ethnic
                                                                                capital is simply disguising for
 neighborhood effects which have nothing to do with ethnicity. This
                                                                   interpretation of the results,

 of course, depends on the validity of the skill-invariance assumption, As shown in Section II,

 when the distribution of persons across neighborhoods is
                                                                    skill-invariant, including neighborhood

 effects in semi-aggregate regressions reduces the estimated rate of mean convergence solely

 because the ethnic capital coefficient is "standing in" for neighborhood effects,

         Parental skills are not observed in the Census data, so that it is not possible to assess

directly the validity of the skill-invariance assumption. I can test, however, if the geographic

distribution of second-generation workers rejects the skill-invariance assumption. Consider the

following regression model:




(Ii)            .Y,jk = y0G+'y1(G XD)+s,ft,



whereyYk gives the skills of second-generation worker i in groupj in neighborhood /r, G gives a

vector of dummy variables indicating the worker's ethnic group; and D gives a vector of dummy

variables indicating the worker's neighborhood. The skill invariance assumption states that the

mean skills of a worker in ethnic group) are independent of the
                                                                          neighborhood of residence, so

that the coefficient vector y1 is zero.




       23Afthough I do not report or discuss the estimated coefficients of the
                                                                               neighborhood characteristics, it
       would be interesting to study how (and why) these various characteristics influence the intergenerational
       transmission process.
                                                        26


       I calculated the analysis of variance decomposition implied by (ii) using both the

educational attainment and log wage of workers in the second generation.24 To net out the

impact of regional wage differentials on the analysis, the worker's log wage is deflated by the

skill-adjusted neighborhood wage level defined earlier. Despite the very large samples used in the

analysis, testing the hypothesis that the coefficient vector y1 differs from zero yields F-statistics

which are barely above the critical value oft; the F-statistic in the educational attainment

regression was 1.21, and the F-statistic in the log wage regression was 1.18. In contrast, the F-

statistic testing the significance of the group effect (i.e., whether the coefficient vector y0 was

zero) was 17.2 in the educational attainment regressions and 95.9 in the log wage regressions,

substantially above the critical value of I •4•23

        I now use the NLSY (where parental skills are observed 4 where it is unnecessary to

maintain the skill invariance assumption) to confirm that there is a very strong link between

neighborhood effects and the ethnic capital coefficient. The analysis uses the 1990 wave of the

NLSY, by which time the respondents were aged 25-33 and only about 5 percent were still

enrolled in school. Equations (1) and (3) give the basic specifications of the models. The

 regressions also control for age, gender, whether the person is a first- or second-generation

 American, and whether the person was enrolled in school in 1990.




         24The test excludes the 9,522 neighborhoods that have only I second-generation working man.

         23A related way of assessing the importance of the skill-invariance assumption uses the concept of the
         intracluster correlation (Kish, 1965; Cochran, 1977). This correlation is positive if the characteristics of
         persons within a cluster are more closely related than those of persons randomly chosen from the
         population. When the cluster is defined to be the ethnic group, the intracluster correlation is about 0.1
         (for both education and log wages). This correlation increases to 0.2 when the cluster is defined to be
         type-f ethnics living in neighborhood k. Put differently, the neighborhood provides additional
         infonnation about the skill dJstribuiion of persons in a particular ethnic group.
                                                      27


       As with the analysis of Census data, I use two measures of skills, educational attainment

and the log wage rate. Each NLSY respondent in 1979 reported the father's education and

occupation (which was coded using the 1970 Census codes). I constructed a wage for each father

by matching the father's occupation code with the average log wage in the occupation, as

reported by the 1970 Census.

       To obtain a measure of ethnic capital, I used the 1/100 1980 U.S. Census to calculate the

mean educational attainment and mean log wage for each of the ethnic groups in the parents'

generation.26 The Census data report the ancestral background of U.S-born residents (obtained

from questions resembling the self-reported ethnic background in the NLSY). To increase the

probability that the average skills of the ethnic milieu corresponded to that in which the NLSY

respondents were raised, I restrict the 1980 Census sample to men aged 3 5-64.

       Table 7 reports the summary statistics of the variables used in the analysis. There are

sizable ethnic differentials in educational attainment and log wages among NLSY respondents and

their parents. Table 8 reports the estimates of the ethnic capital model. The coefficients in the

first column of the top panel reveal that the educational attainment of NLSY respondents depends

on both the father's education and on the mean education ofthe ethnic group in the parent's

generation. The estimated rate of mean convergence is 0.44. The introduction of a vector of5lO

county dummies in the second column reduces both of the coefficients somewhat; the parental

coefficient falls from 0.24 to 0.2 and the ethnic capital coefficient falls from 0.20 to 0.14. Column




       26The ethnic characteristics are calculated using a 20 percent random sample of the 5/100 A File of the
        1980 Public Use Sample. I also constructed comparable ethnic characteristics from within the NLSY
       itself. Although the findings do not depend on which measure of ethnic capital is used, I only report the
        regressions that use the Census measure (which are calculated over much larger samples and contain
        less sampling error).
                                                             28


   3   investigates the relationship between ethnic capital and neighborhoods by introducing a vector

       1,937 dummies indicating the zip code of residence. The parental coefficient declines further

   to 0.17 and the ethnic capital effect evaporates (the coefficient falls to 0.04). Net of

   neighborhood effects, therefore, the rate of mean convergence is only 0.21, about half the size of

   the gross rate, and the decline is mostly due to the weakening of the ethnic capital effect. The

  NLSY results, therefore, strongly confirm the implications of the analysis of the Census

(__jghborhood data."
            The remaining two panels of Table 8 reestimate the model using the (log) wage and the

   adjusted wage. The estimate of the rate of mean convergence using the log wage is 0.70, which is

  higher than the one found in the Census. The introduction of county dummies reduces the rate of

  mean convergence to 0.57, with the ethnic capital coefficient remaining unchanged. Finally, the

  introduction of neighborhood fixed effects reduces the coefficient of ethnic capital to 0.05, and is

  statistically insignificant. Note, however, that the coefficient of parental capital has declined by




            270f the 1,937 zip code fixed effects included in the educational attainment regressions, there are 900
            zip codes with I observation, 256 with 2, 168 vith 3, 123 with 4, and the remainder have 5 or more
            observations. Of the 1,453 zip code fixed effects included in the log nge regressions, there are 733 zip
            codes with I observation, 223 with 2, 140 with 3, 80 with 4, and the remainder have 5 or more
            observations. A regression of educational attainment (or log wages) of the NLSY respondents on a
            vector of zip code dummies has an R-squared of about 0.4, so that about 60 percent of the variance in
            educational attainment and log wages can be attributed to within-zip code variation. Over 80 percent of
            the variance in these variables, however, can be attributed to within-county variation.

           "it is also possible to estimate Census-type semi-aggregate regressions on the NLSY data, so that the
            regressions omit the worker's parental background. When educational attainment is the dependent
           variable, the coefficient of the ethnic capital variable (and standard error) is 0.438 (0.047) in the model
           which does not include either county or neighborhood dummies; 0.329 (0.030) in the model which
           includes county dummies; and 0.173 (0.029) in the model which includes zip code dummies. This
           pattern of coefficients closely mirrors the results documented in the Census data. A similar pattern is
           obtained in the log wage regressions.
                                                         29


about 0.13 units, which indicates that the geographic distribution of NLSY respondentsis not

consistent with the skill-invariance assumption.29

       The last column of Table 8 shows what happens to the parental and ethnic capital

coefficients when I introduce a small vector of neighborhood characteristics (rather than zip code

dummies) to control for neighborhood effects. Because the NLSY file does not contain any

population estimates of economic or social characteristics in the zip code, all neighborhood-

specific variables must be calculated from within the data and contain substantial sampling error.

I estimated the mean education and log wage of the parents ofNLSY respondents in each zip

code. Controlling for these two characteristics reduces the ethnic capital coefficient by about

0.05 units in the education regression and by almost 0.3 units in the log wage regression. As with

the Census, a small vector of neighborhood characteristics which are common to all persons living

in the neighborhood helps explain why the ethnic capital variable matters (particularly in the log

wage regressions).33




IV. Ethnic Capital and the Ethnic Composition of the Neighborhood




        291n particular, highly-skilled type-f ethnics tend to cluster in wealthier neighborhoods, while less-
        skilled type-f ethnics cluster in poorer neighborhoods.

        3O is of interest to note that the results do not change substantially when the model is estimated on the
        subsample of NLSY respondents who were aged 14 to 18 years old at the time of the initial interview in
        1979. The residential location decision for these young persons was probably made by their parents, so
        that the neighborhood fixed effects are less likely to be endogenous. In the educational attainment
        regressions which do not include neighborhood fixed effects, the parental coefficient (and standard
        en'or) was 0.235 (0.009) and the ethnic capital coefficient was 0.097 (0.026). The inclusion of
        neighborhood fixed effects changed the coefficients to 0.170(0.007) and 0.017 (0.032), respectively. In
        the log wage regressions which do not include neighborhood fixed effects, the parental and ethnic
        capital coefficients were 0.343 (.048) and 0.498 (0.111). Including neighborhood fixed effects changed
        these coefficients to 0.202 (0.043) and 0.054 (0.160).
                                                      30


       The evidence suggests that, to a large extent, the ethnic capital effect summarizes the

impact of neighborhood characteristics (common to all the residents of the neighborhood) on the

intergenerational transmission process. In view of this result, it is worth asking if ethnicity per se

plays any role in intergenerational mobility, above and beyond the influence of parents and

neighborhoods:.

       Ethnicity is likely to play a more important role among persons who grow up in a

segregated ethnic environment. After all, these persons will probably experience (and be

influenced by) more frequent social, cultural, and economic intra-group contacts. The analysis in

the preceding section ignored this implication of the model because it assumed that the ethnic

capital coefficient was constant across workers. To determine if ethnicity plays an independent

role among workers raised in segregated neighborhoods, I now allow the ethnic capital coefficient

to vary according to the extent of residential segregation in the neighborhood.

        In particular, I interact both the ethnic capital variable and the parental skills variable

(when.available) with dummies indicating the proportion of persons in the neighborhood who

share the same ethnic background. The regression model also includes the dummy variables

indicating the proportion of the neighborhood's population who belong to the respondent's ethnic

group (so as to allow for different constant terms). Finally, I estimate the models both with and

without neighborhood fixed effects."



        'i did not interact the neighborhood effects with the dummy variables describing the proportion of
        persons in the neighborhood who have the same ethnic background as the worker. This restriction helps
        to isolate the impact of ethnic capital among persons who live in the same neighborhood (and hence
        were exposed to the same overall neighborhood characteristics). I also estimated the models by simply
        interacting the fraction of persons in a neighborhood who have the same ethnicity with the relevant
        variables and obtained qualitatively similar results. Table 9 indicates, however, that there are strong
        nonlinearities in the relationship between the ethnic capital coefficient and the extent of residential
        segregation. Moreover, there is a great deal of sampling error in the residential segregation statistics.
        As a result, I prefer the specification that clusters persons into a small number of neighborhood types.
                                                       31


       The evidence is summarized in Table 9. Consider initially the results obtained from the

1970 Census file. Even after controlling for neighborhood effects, both the education and log

wage regressions show that the rate of mean convergence is larger among persons who live in

highly segregated neighborhoods. The education regressions, for.example, indicate that the net

rate of mean convergence is 0.15 for those who live in neighborhoods where none of the

neighbors share the same ethnic background; 0.23 for those who live in neighborhoods where at

most 15 percent of the population share the same ethnic background; and 0.27 for those who live

in neighborhoods where over 15 percent of the population has the same ethnic background.32 In

the log wage regressions, the respective statistics are 0.13, 0.29, and 0.38.

        It is worth stressing that these estimates of the rate of mean convergence net out

neighborhood effects. If the impact of parental skills is constant across neighborhoods, the

evidence suggests that ethnicity might be playing an important role for persons who live in

segregated neighborhoods, above and beyond the influence of parents and neighborhoods.

        This implication is partially confirmed by the analysis of the NLSY data, where the rate of

mean convergence can be decomposed into the parental and ethnic effects. The educational

attainment regressions, for instance, show that (even after controlling for neighborhood fixed

effects) the ethnic capital coefficient increases from 0.05 for children who grew up in areas where

fewer than 5 percent of the non-related neighbors have the same ethnic background to 0.12 for




       32The results arc not sensitive to the particular definition of residential segregation. This particular
       breakdown, as well as the breakdown of neighborhoods in the NLSY data, was chosen because it
       provided a reasonable number of observations for each type of neighborhood. In the Census data, there
       were 27,006 persons who lived in the most integrated neighborhoods, 18,676 who lived in the "mixed"
       neighborhoods, and 8,021 who lived in the most segregated neighborhoods. In the NLSY education
       regressions, the respective number of observations are 1,999, 2,506, and 3,064, while in the NLSY log
       wage regressions, they are 1,189, 1,428, and 1,644.
                                                32


children who grew up in areas where at least 33 percent of the neighbors share the same ethnicity.

Similarly, the ethnic capital coefficient in the log wage regressions rises from 0.03 for those who

grew up in "integrated" neighborhoods to 0.14 for the children raised in the most "segregated"

neighborhoods (although many of these coefficients have large standard errors).

       The NLSY results suggest that not only does the ethnic capital coefficient increase as the

neighborhood becomes more segregated, but also that the coefficient of parental skills decreases.

The log wage regressions, for instance, indicate that the parental coefficient (net of neighborhood

effects) declines from 0.32 for persons raised in the most integrated neighborhoods to 0.26 for

persons raised in the most segregated neighborhoods. The relative unimportance of parental skills

for persons raised in segregated neighborhoods might indicate that group influences "take over"

as the neighborhood becomes more segregated.

       Because the coefficients of parental skills and ethnic capital move in different directions as

persons are raised in more segregated neighborhoods, the rate of mean convergence (net of

neighborhood effects) only increases slightly in the NLSY log wage regressions, from 0.35 for

persons living in integrated neighborhood to 0.40 for persons raised in segregated neighborhoods.

In the educational attainment regressions, however, the net rate of mean convergence is roughly

the same (around 0.25) across the various types of neighborhoods.




V. Ethnic Capital and Measurement Error

        Many of the results presented in this paper are consistent with a different interpretation of

the ethnic capital effect. Suppose that parental skills are measured with error. The ethnic mean

then provides a very good instrument for parental skills. As a result, part of the parental influence

on intergenerational mobility would be captured by the coefficient of the ethnic capital variable,
                                                   33


 even if ethnic capital did not enter the model (see Borjas, 1992, for a formal derivation of the

biases introduced by measurement error). The greater the noise-ta-signal ratio in parental skills,

the greater the ethnic capital coefficient.

        This interpretation of the results is particularly important in light of recent evidence that

measurement error in parental skills imparts a sizable downward bias on the correlation between

the earnings of fathers and sans (Joseph G. Altonji and Thomas A. Dunn, 1991; Solon, 1992; and

David I Zimmerman, 1992). Prior to these studies, it wasgenerally believed that the coefficient

of parental skills in an intergenerational transmission equation was on the order of 0.2 (see, for

example, the survey by Gary S. Becker and Nigel Tomes, 1986). The recent studies, which

typically use panel data to average parental earnings over a number ofyears (and thus "wash out"

the measurement error introduced by transitory changes in earnings), report much higher

coefficients, on the order of 0.3 to 0.4.

        The empirical results presented in this paper suggest transmission coefficients(as defined

by the rate of mean convergence) that are typically above 0.4. In fact, the rate of mean

convergence was roughly 0.5 to 0.7 for children raised in segregated neighborhoods. Taken at

face value, therefore, the evidence suggests that ethnic capital might play an important role even if

the intergenerational correlation between parents and children wasas high as 0,3 to 0.4.

       The NLSY data permit a more detailed analysis of some of the biases introduced by

measurement error. As noted earlier, there are a large number of siblings in the data, with each

sibling independently reporting ethnic background, as well as the parent's education and

occupation. The correlation among the siblings' responses is high, but it is far from unity. For

example, the correlation between a sibling's report of the father's education and the father's

average educational attainment as reported by all other siblings is 0.9; the respective statistic for
                                                        34


the father's occupational earnings is 0.8; and nearly 30 percent of the respondents identi& most

with an ethnic background which differs from the "main" ancestry reported by at least one other

sibling (although typically the other siblings report the alternative ancestry as a second or third

ethnic background). The availability of other sources of information on parental skills and ethnic

background suggests that these alternative measures of the variables can be used as instruments in

the intergenerational transmission equation. The IV estimates of the transmission parameter can

then be used to assess the practical importance of the bias introduced by measurement error in

parental skills and ethnic background.33

         I restrict the analysis to NLSY respondents who have at least one sibling in the data. For

those who have only one sibling (58 percent of the sample), the instruments are given by the

sibling's response. For those who have more than one sibling, the instruments are defined as the

average response of all other siblings. The instruments are the average skills of the father (either

educational attainment or log occupational wage) as reported by the other siblings in the data, and

a   set of dummy variables indicating the ethnic background of the other siblings.34 The regressions

use   the IV-random effects estimator proposed by Jerry A. Hausman and William B. Taylor

(1981)."


         33Orley Ashenfelter and Man B. Krueger (1992) use this methodology to analyze the impact of
         measurement error in educational attainment on estimates of the rate of return to schooling. Their
         analysis suggests that measurement error imparts a sizable downward bias on estimates of the rate of
         return to schooling.

             created a vector of dummy variables indicating the ethnic group reported by each sibling in the data.
         The instrument is formed by avenging this vector over all other siblings, so that it can be interpreted as
         the probability that the other siblings report a particular ethnic background.

         35The model is estimated in two stages. In the first stage, the children's skills are regressed on the
         father's skills, other explanatory variables (age, gender, etc.), and a vector of dummy variables
         indicating the self-reported ethnic background. The first-stage model is estimated using instrumental
         variables. The second stage consists of a GLS regression in which the estimated coefficients of the
         ethnic dummy variables are regressed on the ethnic capital variable. The regressions that control for
                                                        35


        A comparison ofthe IV estimates in the first row of Table 10 with the corresponding OLS

estimates in Table 8 indicates that the coefficient of parental skills increases both in the education

regression (from 0.24 to 0.28), and in the log wage regression (from 038 to 0.48). The results

also indicate that the IV estimates of the ethnic capital coefficient remain sizable and significant.

In particular, thE coefficients are 0.18 and 0.30 in the education and log wage regressions

respectively,only slightly below the OLS estimates reported in Table 8. It is evident, therefore,

that measurement error in parental skills or in ethnic background cannot account for the results..

        The remaining rows of the table interact the measures of parental skills and ethnic capital

with dummy variables indicating the proportion of persons in the zip code who share the same

ethnic background as the worker. The coefficients in Table 10 resemble those reported earlier,

particularly in the education regressions. The coefficient of parental skills is smaller and the ethnic

capital coefficient is larger among workers who grew up in segregated neighborhoods (even after

controlling for neighborhood effects). The impact of parental education, for instance, declines

from 0.29 to 0.14 (in an IV model which includes neighborhood effects) for workers who live in

more segregated neighborhoods; while the ethnic capital coefficient rises from 0.01 to 0.17. In

view of the small samples sizes and large standard errors, however, many of these differences are

not very significant.36


       neighborhood effects use a data set which has been differenced from the within zip-code means in the
       first stage.

       36Although the evidence is not consistent with an explanation that stresses classical measurement error
       in parental skills or ethnic background, there arc ocher measurement problems which may account for
       some of the results. I have focused on a one-factor model where one particular type of skills (either
       educational attainment or the log wage) is transmitted across generations. There is evidence that this
       one-factor approach does not provide a satisfactory explanation of the process of intergenerational
       mobility. Altonji and Dunn (1991) report that the correlation in earnings among siblings is larger than
       would be expected given the size of the correlation between parents and children. This result suggests
       that perhaps a vector of trails is being transmitted, so that the ethnic capital variable could be proxving
       for an aggregate measure of these traits.
                                                   36




VI. Summary

        It is increasingly evident that ethnic skill differentials tend to persist from generation to

generation. Part of the correlation arises because of the linkage between parental skills and the

skills of children: Even if ethnicity did not matter, the children of skilled parents are likely to have

above-average skills. This correlation, however, is not sufficiently high to account for the

sluggish rate at which the mean skills of ethnic groups converge overtime. To explain the slow

rate of convergence, recent work borrows from the new growth literature and stresses the

importance of ethnic externalities in the human capital accumulation process. This ethnic spillover

implies that the skills of ethnic children depend not only on parental skills, but also on the mean

skills of the ethnic group in the parent's generation. The intergenerational transmission of this

ethnic fixed effect explains why it takes a relatively long time for ethnic skill differentials to

converge.

        This paper investigates the nature of the ethnic externality. The study focuses on one

possible channel through which the ethnic externality might operate, the ethnic neighborhood.

Using the Neighborhood File of the 1970 U.S. Census and the National Longitudinal Surveys of

Youth, I documented substantial residential segregation by ethnicity. Even though only 16.6

percent of the population in 1970 was first- or second-generation, the typical immigrant resided in

a neighborhood that was 32.7 percent first- or second-generation, and the respective statistic for

second-generation workers was 28.2 percent. In addition, there was a strong likelihood that

persons belonging to a particular ethnic group reside in a neighborhood where a relatively high

number of persons share the same ethnic group.
                                                   37


       The empirical analysis indicated that the rate of mean convergence in the skills of ethnic

groups was significantly reduced after controlling for neighborhood fixed effects, This finding

indicates that much of the ethnic capital effect works through the fact that low-income ethnic

groups cluster in low-income neighborhoods, and these neighborhood effects influence

intergenerational mobility. The analysis, however, also revealed that neighborhood effects cannot

account for the entire impact of ethnicity on intergenerational mobility, particularly for persons

residing in ethnically segregated neighborhoods. Ethnicity has an impact above and beyond both

parental and neighborhood effects for persons who are frequently exposed to a particular ethnic

environment.

        There are many related issues and questions that are not addressed in this paper. For

instance, what happens to the nature and impact of ethnic externalities as the groups intermarry?

How do the different ethnic influences clash when disparate ethnic and racial groups cluster in the

same neighborhoods? What are the policy implications of the interactions between ethnic

externalities, residential segregation, and intergenerational mobility? Because of the underlying

significance of these questions, the study of the links between race, ethnicity, and human capital

externalities is sure to remain a fertile ground for thture research.
                                              38


                                       REFERENCES

       Alba, Richard D. Ethnic Identity: The Transformation of White America. New Haven,
Corn.: Yale University Press, 1990.

      Altonji, Joseph G. and Dunn, Thomas A. "Relationship Among the Family Incomes and
Labor Market Outcomes of Relatives," Research in Labor Economics, 1991. 12, pp. 269-310.

       Ashenfelter, Orley and Krueger. Alan B. "Estimates of the Economic Return to Schooling
from a New Sample of Twins." Unpublished Manuscript, Princeton University, August 1992.

       Barro, Robert J. and Sala-i-Martin, Xavier. "Convergence," Journal of Political Economy,
April 1992, jQQ(2), pp. 223-251.

       Becker, Gary S. and Tomes, Niget. "Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families,"
Journal of Labor Economics, July 1986, (3, Part 2), pp. SI-S39.

      Bean, Frank D. and Tienda, Marta. The Hisoanic Population of the United States. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1987.

     Boijas, George J. "Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility," Ouarterly Journal of
Economics, February 1992, j.Ql(1), pp. 123-150.

       ______________• "The Intergenerational Mobility of Immigrants," Journal of Labor
Economics, January 1993,11(1, Part 1), pp. 113-135.

       ______________• "Long-Run Convergence of Ethnic Skill Differentials: The Children and
Grandchildren of the Great Migration," Industrial and Labor Relations Review, July 1994, 41(4),
pp. 553-573.

      Case, Anne C. and Katz, Lawrence F. "The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family
and Neighborhood ott Disadvantaged Youths." Unpublished Manuscript, National Bureau of
Economic Research, May 1991.

       Cochran, William G. Sampling Techniques. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1977.

       Coleman, James S. "Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital," American Journal
of Sociology, 1988, 94(Supplement), pp. S95-S 120.

       ________________ Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1990

        Conlisk, John. "An Exploratory Model of the Size Distribution of Income," Economic
Inquiry, July 1977, 15(3), pp. 345-366.
                                               39


       Corcoran, Mary; Gordon, Roger; Laren, Deborah and Solon, Gary. "The Association
Between Men's Economic Status and Their Family and Community Origins," Journal of Human
Resources, Fall 1991, ZZ(4), pp. 575-60 1.

       Crane, Jonathan. "The Epidemic Theory of Ghettos and Neighborhood Effects on
Dropping Out and Teenage Childbearing," American Journal of Sociology, March 1991, 96(5),
pp. 1226-1259.

      Denton, Nancy A. and Massey, Douglas S. "Hypersegregatiori in United States
Metropolitan Areas--Black and Hispanic Segregation Along 5 Dimensions," Demography, August
 1989, (3), pp. 373-391.

        Evans, William N.; Oates, Wallace E. and Schwab, Robert M. "Measuring Peer Group
Effects: A Study of Teenage Behavior," Journal ofPolitical Economy, October 1992, 100(5), pp
966-991.

        Hausman, Jerry A. and Taylor, William E. "Panel Data and Unobservable Individual
Effects," Econometrica, November 1981, (6), pp. 1377-1398.

     Hoizer, Harry I. "Search Method Use by Unemployed Youth," Journal of Labor
Economics, January 1988, (1), pp. 1-20.

      Hughes, Mark Alan, and Fadden, Janice Fanning. "Residential Segregation and the
Economic Status of Black Workers: New Evidence for an Old Debate," Journal of Urban
Economics, January 1991, (1), pp. 28-49.

       Jencks, Christopher and Meyer, Susan E. "The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a
Poor Neighborhood: A Review," in Laurance B. Lynn and Michael G. H. McGeary, eds., in_r
City Poverty in the United States. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1990, pp. 111-
186.

       Kish, Leslie. SurveySampling. NewYork: JohnWiley& Sons, 1965.

      Loury, Glenn C. "A Dynamic Theory of Racial Income Differences," in Phyllis A. Wallace
and Annette A. LaMond, eds., Women. Minorities, and Emyloyment Discrimination. Lexington.
MA: Lexington Books, 1977, pp. 153-186.

      Lucas, Robert E. "On the Mechanics of Economic Development," Journal of Monetary
Economics, July 1988, 22(1), pp. 3-42.

      Lundberg, Shelly and Starti, Richard. "On the Persistence of Racial Inequality."
Unpublished Manuscript, University of Washington, 1992.

       Manski, Charles F. "Identification ofEndogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
Problem," Review of Economic Studies, July 1993, Q(3), pp. 531-542.
                                             40


       McKinney, Scott and Schnare, Ann B. "Trends in Residential Segregation by Race: 1960-
1980," Journal of Urban Economics, November 1989, 26(3), pp. 269-280.

       Rauch, James E. "Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital:
Evidence from the Cities," Journal of Urban Economics. November 1993, 4(3), pp. 380-400.

      Romer, Paul M. "Increasing Returns and Long-Run Growth," Journal ofPolitical
Economy. October 1986, ¶j(5), pp. 1002-1037.

      Solo; Gary R. "Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States," American
Economic Review. June 1992, (3), pp. 393-408.

       U.S. Bureau of the Census. Supplement No Ito Public Use Samoles of Basic Records
from the 1970 Census: Description and Technical Documentation. Washington, DC: U.S.
Government Printing Office, 1973.

       Wilson, William Julius. The Truly Disadvanta2ed: The Inner City, the Underclass, and
Public Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1987.

      Zimmerman, David J. "Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature," American
Economic Review, June 1992, 2(3), pp. 409-429.
                  TABLE 1. RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN 1970 CENSUS


                                          Percent of Population in Neighborhood that is:

                                         First or
Neighborhood Characteristics   First     Second                                       Sample
of Average Person in:        Generation Generation            Black      Hispanic      Size

1st Generation                    15.3           32.7         6.9         10.2        63,099
2nd Generation                     6.7           28.2          4.3         5.2       156,134
3rd Generation                     3.8           13.8         11.7         3.9       905,213

Hispanics:
 1st Generation                   22.2           36.7         6.5         35.0        10,713
 2nd Generation                    9.4           27.3          5.1        33.0        10,801
 3rd Generation                     8,9          21.9         11.4        28.8        25,202
3rd Generation;
 Blacks                            3.1            8.0        54.7          3.7       109,533
 Whites                            3.7           14.4         5.6          3.1       771,359

Notes: The "white" sample includes all non-black, non-Hispanic third generation workers. The
population proportions are as follows: immigrants, 4.8 percent; first or second generation, 16.6
percent; blacks, 11. 1 percent; and Hispanics, 4.4 percent.
 TABLE 2. RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN 1970 CENSUS, BY NATIONAL ORIGIN GROUP

                                                First Generation                         Second Generation

                                     Percent of Population                   Percent of Population
                                     in Neighborhood That                    in Neighborhood That
                                              is:                                     is:
                       Percent of
                      Population in 1st or 2nd Of Same Sample                 1st or 2nd     Of Same Sample
National Origin          Group       Generation Ethnicity          Size      Generation Ethnicity            Size
Austria                   0.6            34.5          2.0           883          30.1          2.1          6007
Azores                    0.04           37.1          8.0           184          30.5          3.5            320
Belgium                   0.07           28.9          0.4          250           21.8          0.7            573
British West Indies       0.03           24.8          0.8          175           24.0          0.8            188
Canada                     1.8           25.7          6.2         6843           24.8          7.4          13085
Cuba                       0.3           48.7        21.3          3119           27.6          4.7            270
China                      0.2           38.5         9.2           1617          33.5          6.2            635
Czechoslovakia             0.5           34.6         2.3           797           25.6          2.9           4571
Denmark                    0.2           24.9         0.5           289           20.2          0.9           1608
England                    0.8           24.3          1.5         3113           23.5           1.5          6367
Finland                    0.1           29.1          1.5           194          25.5          3.9           1200
France                     0.2           28.7          0.4           811          23.8          0.3           1184
Gennany                    1.7           27.2          2.9         5930           21.9          3.2          13089
Greece                     0.3           38.3          2.6         1147           28.3           3.1          1913
Hungary                    0.4           34.3          2.6         1020           28.0           1.9          3472
Ireland                    0.8           36.2          4.6         1434           31.3          3.3           7137
Italy                      2.8           37,7         15.3         5193           32.0         12.1          26476
Jamaica                    0.06          28.4          2.2          507           22.3           1.5           163
Japan                      0.2           26.1          3.2         1020           33.7         12.6           1716
Larvia                     0.04          27.0          0.2          245           "3.1          0.1            260
Lebanon                    0.05          27.0          0.3           118          23.7          0.4            476
Lithuania                  0.2           36.2          3,7           325          30.6           3.5          2128
Mexico                     1,3           35,4         22.6          5746          27.8          18.1          8412
Netherlands                0.2           23.9          1.8           689          21.5          3.9           1725
Northern Ireland           0.1           29.4          0.3           233          28.1          0.2            573
Norway                     0.3           28.5          1.8           422          22.1          3.0           3203
Other West Indies          0.04          28,8          2.5           254          25.5           1.3           250
Philippines                0.2           31.0          5.9          1477          30.1           6.5           606
Poland                     1.7           40.2          9.1          2846          32.0           7.8         15182
Portugal                   0.1           40.9         11.2           654          32.7           6.8          1030
Romania                    0.1           38.6          0.8           373          34.5           0.7          1150
Scotland                   0.3           27.5          0.7          1013          24.4           0.7          2517
Sweden                     0,4           29,1          3.4           445          22.3           1.7          4284
Switzerland                0.1           26.7          0.6           315      .   20.3           0.8           947
Syria                      0.04          30.9          1,7           103          27.9           0.8           387
Turkey                     0.06          36.6          0.2           251          33.0           0.3           459
USSR                       1.2           38.8          7.0          1738          34.9           7.8         12067
Wales                      0.1           23.7          0.1            99          21.3           0.3           529
Yugoslavia                 0.3           31.9          2.7           930          25.1           2.4          2309

Sample of 39                             32.9          8.3         52802          28.3           6.6     148468

Note: The residential segregation measures give the percent of the population in the neighborhood that belongs to
the specified ethnic group for the average person in the sample.
                 TABLE 3. RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION TN 1970 CENSUS,
                        BY DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS

                              Percent of Population in Neighborhood that is:

Neighborhood Characteristics 1st or 2nd                               Of Same
of Average Person in:        Generation    Black       Hispanic       Ethnicity Sample Size
1st Generation
   Age:
    18-34                      31.7          7.9         11.9            8.7       21.532
    35-64                      33.2          6.3          9.3            8,2       41,567
   Education:
    Less than 12 years         35.5          7.3         13.3           11.7       30,590
    12 years                   30.8          6.6          7.8            5.8       17,000
    13-15 years                29.5          6.1          7.4           4.6         7,959
    16 or more years           29.1          6.4          5.7            3.4        7,550
   Year Moved to House:
    Before 1960                32.5          6.3          7.4            7.7       13,623
    1960-1966                  33.9          6.3         10              8.8       18,690
    1967-1970                  32.1          7.4         11.6            8.3       30,786
2nd Generation
  Age:
    18-34                      27.4          4.9          7.6            6.6       31,824
   35-64                       28.5          4.1          4.6            6.5      124,310
  Education:
   Less than 12 years          28.7          4.8          6.7            8.4       61.896
   12 years                    28.1          3.9          4.4            6.0       56,725
   13-15 years                 27.4          3.9          4.6           4.7        19,311
    lóor more years            27.8          3.8          3.3           4.2        18,212
  Year Moved to House:
   Before 1960                 29.4          4.4          4.3            7.4       65,585
   1960-1966                   28.5          3.9          5.4            6.5       b,926
   1967-1970                   26.3          4.3          6.2            5.4       44,623
3rd Generation
  Age:.
   18-34                        14.5        11.4          4.1                     425,477
   35-64                        13.2        11.9          3.7                     479,736
  Education:
   Less than 12 years           11.5        16.5          4.3                     .346,392
   12 years                     14.5         9.4          3.6                      334,888
   13-15 years                  15.9         8.1          3.9                      129,884
   16 or more years             17           6.7          3.3                       94,049
  Year Moved to House:
   Before 1960                  13.9        11.4          3.3                     242,945
   1960-1966                    13.6        12.3          3.8     .
                                                                                  255,798
   1967-1970                    13.9        11.4          4.3                     406,470
 TABLE 4. RESIDENTIAL SEGREGATION IN NL SY, BY NATIONAL ORIGIN GROUP


                      Percent of     Percent of Population in
                     Population in   Neighborhood with Same
Ethnicity               Group          Ethnic Background        Sample Size
American                  7.6                  18.2                 743
American Indian           5.9                  12.9                 624
Asian Indian              0.2                   2.0                  22
Black                    14.9                 63.4                 3055
Chinese                   0.2                   3.5                  26
Cuban                     0.4                  33.3                 117
                         18.9                  23.9                1587
English
                          0.4                   5.0                  44
Filipino
French                     3.5                  5.6                 316
German                    17.4                 25.7                1420
Greek                      0.4                  7.2                  31
Hawaiian                   0.1                  0.2                   20
Irish                     11.0                 14.3                  956
Italian                    6.2                 16.3                  498
                           0.2                  0.0                   20
Japanese
Korean                     0.1                  0.0                    6
Mexican                    4.1                 50.3                 1174
Other Hispanic             0.9                  9.3                 214
Polish                     3.1                 12.8                 242
Portuguese                 0.6                 19.7                  97
Puerto Rican               1.2                 29.8                 328
Russian                    0.6                  0.3                  47
Scottish                   1.5                  4.6                  122
Vietnamese                 0.0                  0.0                       1



Welsh                      0.5                   1.0                  3:

All                                            30.4                11745
     TABLE 5. SKILLS OF IMtVIIGPANT AND SECOND GENERATION WORKERS

                         Immigrants in 1940 Census           2nd Generation in 1970 Census

                      Educational                 Sample   Educational             Sample
Country of Origin:    Attainment Log Wage          Size    Attainment Log Wage      Size
Austria                   6.7      -0.349           1210       11.9      1.550      2134
Azores                    5.0      -0.672            63         9.6      1.232         104
Belgium                   7.8       -0.483          138        11.4      1.475         197
British West Indies       8.1       -0,810           58        12.2      1.368         68
Canada                    9.2       -0.427         2741        12.0      1.431       4720
China         ,           6,3       -1.176          139        13.6      1.447        206
Cuba                      8.6       -0.655           42        12.0      1.372         82
Czechoslovakia            6.8       -0.345          817        11.3      1.453       1749
Denmark                   9.2       -0.392          327        12.0      1.405        553
England                   9.5       -0.313         1656        12.5      1.508       2255
Finland                   6.5       -0.539          244        11.3      1.457         390
France                    9.0       -0.430          248        12.3      1.450         381
Germany                   8.8       -0.467         2943        11.7      1.463       4558
Greece                    6.9       -0.737          518        12.7      1.484         694
Hungary                   7.1       -0.378          809        11.7      1.509       1298
Ireland                   8.3       -0.445         1326        12.3      1.508       2645
Italy                     5.4       -0.475         4784        11.2      1.454      10148
Japan                     9.5       -0.849          141        12.5      1.476         662
Lithuania                 4.5       -0,479          451        12.0      1.511         766
Mexico                    4.4        -1.120        1192         9.2      1.133       2959
Netherlands               8.8        -0.557         292        11.7      1.487         623
Northern Ireland          8.3        -0.401         280        12.8      1.533         200
Norway                    8.6        -0.441         606        12.0      1.457         987
Other West Indies         8.3        -0.821   .     119        11.9      1.353          87
Philippines               7.8        -1.009         233        11.9      1.268         188
Poland                    5.4        -0.407        2610        11.3      1.492       5769
Portugal                  4.7        -0.577         212        102       1.357         383
Romania                   7.4        -0.339         300        13.2      1.647         428
Scotland                  9.6        -0.326         862        12.4      1.511         901
Sweden                    8.6        -0.378        1038        12.3      1.503        1534
Switzerland               9.5        -0.461         242        12.0      1.488         329
Syria                     6.7        -0.547         105        12.5      1.576         131
Turkey                    7.2        -0.523         211        13.7      1.644        144
USSR                      7.0        -0.363        2418        13.1      1.654       4313
Wales                     9.4        -0.426         10')       12.4      1.441        189
Yugoslavia                5.4        -0.340         512        11.7      1.499        928
     TABLE 6. ESTIMATES OF INThRGENERATIONAL CORRELA'ION IN 1970 CENSUS

                                                                                           Regressions Using
                                Regressions Using Neighborhood File                        County Group File

                                 (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)
Variable
A. Education:
                                              —        0.1707       0.2670         0.3628         ---       0.3316
Mean of Group in 1940         0.3649
                             (0.0828)                 (0.0457)     (0.0557)       (0.0833)                 (0.0709)
                                 No           —          Yes          No              —            —-
Includes Neighborhood
   Fixed Effects                                                                                   ---
                                                                                     No                        Yes
Includes County Fixed
   Effects                                                                                         —
                                  No          —           No          Yes            No                        No
Includes Neighborhood
   Characteristics

B. Log Wage

                               0.4549      0.3974       0.2191      0.2474         0.4607       0.3710      0.3938
Mean of Group in 1940
                              (0.078 1)   (0.0662) (0.0578) (0.0362)              (0.0874) (0.0694) (0.0772)
                                  No         Yes          No          Yes             No          Yes          No
Includes Skill-Adjusted
   Wage Level
Includes Neighborhood             No          No          Yes          No
   Fixed Effects
                                                                                      No           No          Yes
Includes County Fixed
    Effects
                                  No          No           No          Yes            No           No           No
 Includes Neighborhood
     Characteristics

  C. Log Wage, Adjusted for Education

                                            0.1767       0.1101      0.1020         0.2132    0.1589  0.1701
 Mean of Group in 1940          0.2038
                               (0.0400) (0.0321) (0,0413)           (0.0193)       (0.0511) (0.0352) (0.0440)
                                  No          Yes          No          Yes            No        Yes     No
 Includes Skill-Adjusted
    Wage Level
 Includes Neighborhood            No           No          Yes          No
    Fixed Effects
                                                                                       No           No          Yes
 Includes County Fixed
    Effects
                                   No          No           No          Yes            No           No          No
 Includes Neighborhood
     Characteristics
                                                                                                            second-
 Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses; the sample size is 53,703. All regressions include a
 order polynomial in the worker's age. The neighborhoods characteristics included in column 4 arc: the fraction of
 persons in the neighborhood with at least 12 years of schooling, the fraction with at least 16)/ears of schooling, the
 labor force participation rates of men and women, the unemployment rate, the fraction of persons working in
 professional occupations, the fraction of families below the po' c ty line, and the fraction
                                                                                              of families that earn at
  least $15,000 annually. The rcgressions use a random-effects estimtor.
                      TABLE 7. SKILLS OF ETHNIC GROUPS IN NLSY


                       Educational Attainment of:              Log Wage of:

                     NLSY         NLSY       Census     NLSY        NLSY      Census   Sample
National Origin:   Respondents    Fathers       Men   Respondents   Fathers    Men      Size

American             12.4          10.9        11.2    2.099        1.292     1.945      480
American indian      12.1          10.2        11.2    1.977        1.285     1.904      429
Asian Indian         14.0           11.9       16.7    1.684        1.464     2.180        7
Black                12.8           10.1       11.0    1.948        1.177     1.852     1795
Chinese              15.2           10.0       13.8    2.403        1.146     1.955       16
Cuban                13.4           11.0       11.3    2.403        1.293     1.876        69
English              13.0           11.9       12.9    2.085        1.353     2.093      1125
Filipino             13.9           13.0       13.8    2.471        1.388     2.009       21
French               12.8           11.7       11.7    2.074        1.329     2.123      203
German               13.4           12.2       12.9    2.167         1,317    2.115     1009
Greek                14.3           12.4       12.8    2.330        1.404     2,081       21
Hawaiian             12.7            9,5       12.1    2.470        1.282     2.006        6
Irish                13.4           12.6       12.8    2.219        1.401     2.098      651
Italian              13.4           12.3       12,6    2,345        1.375     2.141      347
Japanese             13.4           11.9       14,1    2.093        0.907     2.194       13
Korean               15,5           13.5       14.9    1.982         1.058    2.007            4
Mexican              12.3            7.4        9.0    2.015        1.114     1.808      723
Other Hispanic       13.1           10.5       11.4    2.217         1.254    1.893       102
Polish               13.4           11.8       13.0    2.242         1.389    2.164       Ill
Portuguese           12.0            8.8       10.5    2.159         1.267     1.984       59
Puerto Rican         11.9            7.9        9.6    2.249         1.156     1,798      170
Russian              15.0           13.6       15.3    2.666         1.486    2.324        39
Scottish             14.4           13.5       13.8    2.224         1.458    2.158        86
Welsh                14.8           14.5       13.8    1.987        1.542     2.150        23
               TABLE S. ESTIMATES OF ETHNIC CAPITAL MOEL IN NLSY

                                                                         Regression

Variable                                             (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)
A. Education

Parental Skills                                     0.2404           0.2005          0.1745           0.1784
                                                   (0.0666)         (0.0669)        (0.0718)         (0.0849)

Ethnic Capital                                      0.2004           0.1356          0.0376           0.1480
                                                   (0.0465)         (0.0301)        (0.0288)         (0.0504)
Includes County Fixed Effects                          No              Yes               No               No
Includes Neighborhood Fixed Effects                     No              No              Yes               No
Includes Neighborhood Characteristics                   No              No               No              Yes

B. Log Wage Rate

Parental Skills                                     0.3774           0.2645          0.2500           0.2460
                                                   (0.0371)         (0.0398)         (0.0418)        (0,0480)

Ethnic Capital                                      0.3 190          0.3 107         0.0458           0.0229
                                                   (0.1559)         (0.1116)         (0.1331)        (0.1636)
Includes County Fixed Effects                           No              Yes              No               No
Includes Neighborhood Fixed Effects                     No               No             Yes               No
Includes Neighborhood Characteristics                   No               No              No              Yes

C. Log Wage, Adjusted for Education

Parental Skills                                      0.1765          0.1158           0.1214          0.1221
                                                    (0.0369)        (0.0394)         (0.0410)         (0.0476)

Ethnic Capital                                       0.0759          0.1581          -0.0231           0.0584
                                                    (0.1571)        (0.1141)         (0.1289)         (0.1621)
Includes County Fixed Effects                            No             Yes               No              No
Includes Neighborhood Fixed Effects                      No              No              Yes              No
Includes Neighborhood Characteristics                    No              No               No             Yes

 Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The sample size is 7,569 for the educational attainment
 regressions and 4,261 for the log wage regressions. All regressions includc variables indicating the worke?s age.
 gender, whether the person is first- or second-generation, and whether the person is enrolled in school in 1990.
 The neighborhood characteristics included in column 4 are the average educational att.airnnent and the avenge log
 wage of parents in the neighborhood. The regressions usc a random-effects estimator.
            TABLE 9. ESTIMATES OF INTERGENERATIONAL CORRELATION,
                   BY ETHNIC COMPOSITION OF NEIGHBOMIOOD

                                       Education                                            Log Wage

                             (I)                       (2)                        (1)                        (2)
Ethnic
Composition of Parental            Ethnic    Parental        Ethnic    Parental         Ethnic    Parental         Ethnic
Nei2hborhood:       Skills         Capital    Skills         CaDital    skIlls          CaDital    Skills          Capital

 A, 1970 Census

Percent th
Same Ethnicity:

0 Percent                          0.2458          —         0.1467       -—            0.2567       ---           0.1322
                               (0.1195)                  (0.0781)                   (0.1020)                   (0.0447)

Between 0 and         ---          0.3206          —         0.2261       -—            0.4702       ---           0.2920
15 Percent                     (0.1410)                  (0.0930)                   (0.1320)                   (0.0653)

Greater Than          .--          0.5325          —         0.2711       ---           0.6769                  0.3782
15 Percent                     (0.2338)                  (0.2166)                   (0.1496)                   (0.1091)

 B. NLSY

Percent sith
Same Ethnicity:

Less Than          0.2748          0.1482    0.2071          0.0491    0.4636           0.1850    0.3 178          0.0290
5 Percent         (0.0126) (0.0791)          (0.0131) (0.0257)         (0.0719) (0.2085)          (0.0758) (0.1422)
Between 5 and      0.2933          0.2699    0.2014          0.0439    0.4 198          0.2189    0,3292           0.0152
33 Percent        (0.0116) (0.0863)          (0.0125) (0.0267)         (0.0654) (0.2092)          (0.0737) (0.1440)
Greater Than       0.1965          0.2998    0.1311          0.1188    0.3828           0.2958    0.2586           0.1429
33 Percent        (0.0105) (0.0848)          (0.0105) (0.0268)         (0.0575) (0.2094)          (0.0618) (0.1253)
hcludes                      No                        Yes                       No                         Yes
Neighborhood
Fixed Effects

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The Census regressions include a second-order poiynomial in
the worker's age. The NLSY regressions control for the workefs age, gender, whether the person is iirst- or
second-generation, and whether the person is enrolled in school in 1990. The Census regressions have 53,703
observations; the NLSY education regressions have 7,569 observations, and the NLSY log wage regressions have
4,261 observations. The regressions use a random-effects estimator.
                       TABLE 10. INSTRUMENTAL VARIABLE ESTIMATES OF
                          INTERGENERATIONAL CORRELATION IN NLSY

                                        Education                                           Log Wage

                               (1)            ________________                     (1)                       (2)


                    Parental     Ethnic       Parental     Ethnic       Parental     Ethnic       Parental         Ethnic

Model:               Skills      Capital        Skills     Capital       Skills      Capital       Skills      Capital
All Workers         0.2781       0.1772        0.1984      0.0885       0.4776       0.3000       0.1366       0.4433
                    (0.0111) (0.0658)         (0.0129) (0.0510)         (0.0764) (0.2879)         (0.0978) (0.2723)

Interactions with
Percent of Population
that Has Same Ethnicity

LessThan            0.3360       0.1230        0.2912      0.0090       0.5384       0.2516       0.1460           0.3955
5 Percent           (0.0210) (0.0675)          (0.0242) (0.0546)        (0.1435) (0.3010)         (0.1623) (0.2852)

Between Sand        0.3378       0. 1076       0.2387      0.0765       0.4209       0.2794       0.1439           0.5579
33 Percent          (0.0202) (0.0670)          (0.0224) (0.0533)        (0.1379) (0.2977)         (0.1785) (0.2465)

GreaterThan         0.1963           0.2357    0.1350          0.1677   0.4744           0.3248    0.2848          0.3436
33 Percent          (0.0168) (0.0660)          (0.0176) (0.0532)        (0.1154) (0.2929)         (0.1354) (0,2805)

Includes                       No                        Yes                       No                        Yes
Neighborhood
Fixed Effects

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The Census regressions include a second-order polynomial in
the worker's age. The NLSY regressions control for the workefs age, gender, whether the person is lint- or
second generation, and whether the person is enrolled in school in 1990. The instiuments used in the regression
include the avenge skills of the ther (either educational attainment or the log occupational wage) as reported by
the other siblings in the data; and the average of a set of dummy variables indicating the ethnic background
reported by the other siblings. The NLSY education regressions have 3,157 observations; the N'LSY log wage
regressions have 1,978 observations. The regressions use a random-effects estimator.
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NUER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.han'ard.edu.

Number         Author(s)                       Title                                           Date

4856           Hans-Werner Sinn                A Theory of the Welfare State                   9/94

4857           Niko Canner                     An Asset Allocation Puzzle                      9/94
               N. Gregory Mankiw
               David N. Well

4858           James Dow                       Noise Trading. Delegated Portfolio              9/94
               Gazy Gorton                     Management, and Economic Welfare

4859           Francis X. Diebold              Job Stability in the United Stales              9/94
               David Ncumark
               Daniel Polsky

4860           Michael D. Bordo                The Specie Standard as a Contingent Rule:       9i94
               Anna J. Schwartz                Some Evidence for Core and Peripheral
                                               Countries. 1880-1990

4861           David Genesove                  Equity and Time to Sale in the Real             994
               Christopher J. Mayer            Estate Market

4862           Don Fullerton                   Distributional Effects on a Lifetime Basis      9/94
               Diane Lim Rogers

4863           G. William Schwert              Mark-Up Pricing in Mergers and Acquisitions     9/94

4864           Enrique U. Mendoza              Effective Tax Rates in Macroeconomics:          9i94
               Assaf Razin                     Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates
               Linda L. Tesar                  on Factor Incomes and Consumption

4865           Jeffrey A. Frankel              A Survey of Empirical Research                  9/94
               Andrew K. Rose                  on Nominal Exchange Rates

4866           George   J. Eorjas              Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality      9/94
                                               Revisited: What Happened to Immigrant
                                               Earnings in the 1980s?

4867           Joel Stemrod                    The Seesaw Principle in International           9/94
               Carl Hansen                     Tax Policy
               Roger Procter

4868           Louis Kaplow                    A Note on Subsidizing Gifts                     9194

4869           Many Gnibert                    The Effect of Taxes on Investment and           9i94
               Joel Slemrod                    Income Shifting to Puerto Rico

4870           Dani RodrLk                     What Does the Political Economy Literatwt       9/94
                                               on Trade Policy (Not) Tell Us That We
                                               Ought to Know?
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NUER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher atnber.barvard.edu.

Number          Author(s)                        Title                                               Date

4871            Lars E. 0. Svensson              Estimating and Interpreting Forward                 9194
                                                 Interest Rates: Sweden 1992-1994

4872            George J. Borjas                 Immigration and Welfaze. 1970-1990                  9194


4873            José IDe Gregorio                Credit Markets and the Welfare Costs                10j94
                Federico Sturzenegger            of Inflation

4874            Brandice J. Canes                Following in Her Footsteps? Women's Choices      10)94
                Harvey S. Rosen                  of College Majors and Faculty Gender Composition

4875            Raghuram G. Rajan                What Do We Know about Capital Suucture?             10)94
                Luigi Zingales                   Some Evidence from International Data

4876            Gene Grossman                    Foreign Investment with. Endogenous Protection      10j94
                Elhanan Helpman

4877            Gene Grossman                    Electoral Competition and Special Interest          10j94
                Ethanan Helpman                  Politics

4878            C. Keith Head                    The Attraction of Foreign Manulhcturing             10)94
                John C. Ries                     Investments: Investment Promotion and
                Deborah L. Swenson               Agglomeration Economies

4879            David M. Cuiler                  Market Failure in Small Group Health Insurance      10j94

4880            Douglas Holtz-Eakin          -   Health Insurance and the Supply of                  10)94
                John R. Penrod                   Entrepreneurs
                Harvey S. Rosen

4881            Nouriel Roubini                  Taxation and Endogerious Growth in Open             10)94
                Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti       Economies

4882            Nouricl Roubini                  Optimal Taxation of Human and Physical Capital i094
                Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti       in Endogenous Growth Models

4883            Raquel Fernandez                 Public Education and Income Distribution: A       10i94
                Richard Rogerson                 Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform

4884            R. Glenn Hubbard                 Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance           10,94
                                        -
                Jonathan Skinner
                Stephen P. Zeldes

4885            Marlin Feldstein                 Fiscal Policies, Capital Formation and Capitalism    10)94

4886            Oliver Hart                      Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role          10)94
                John Moore                       of Hard Claims in Constraining Management
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end or the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see Instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list or NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.ban'ard.edu.

Number         Author(s)                       Thle                                              Date

4887           Ricaitlo J. Caballero           Explaining Investment Dynamics in J.S.            10,94
               Eduardo M.R.A. Engel            Manufacturing: A Generalized (54 Approach

4888           Marlin Feldstein                Measuring Money Growth When Financial             10,94
               James H. Stock                  Markets Are Changing

4889           Mark Hooker                     Unemployment Effects of Military Spending:        10,94
               Michael Knetter                 Evidence from a Panel of States

4890           John K. Graham                  Market Timing Ability and Volatility              10/94
               Campbell R. Harvey              Implied in Investment Newsletters'
                                               Asset Allocation Recommendations

4891           W. Kip Viscusi                  Cigarette Taxation and the Social
                                               Consequences of Smoking

4892           Alan M Taylor                   Domestic Saving and International                 10/94
                                               Capital flows Reconsidered

4893           Maurice Obstfelcl               The Intertemporal Approach to the                 10/94
               Kenneth Rogoff                  Cwrent Account

4894           Michael M. Knetter              Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?:          10194
                                               Evidence from German Export Prices

4895           Peter Diamond                   Insulation of Pensions from Political Risk        10194

4896           Lawrence H. Goulder             Environmental Taxation and the 'Double            10194
                                               Dividend': A Reader's Guide

4897           A. Lans Bovenberg               Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence    10,94
               Lawrence H. Goulder             of Other Taxes: General Equili&ium Analyses

4898           Barry Eichengreen               Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange Rates:     10,94
               Andrew K. Rose                  An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference
               Charles Wyplosz                 to the European Monetary System

4899           Shane Greenstein                From Superininis to Supacomputers: Estimating     1094
                                               Surplus in the Computing Market

4900           Orazio P. Attanasio             WAs and Household Saving Rsviiiled                10/94
               Thomas C. DeLeire               Some New Evidence

4901           Timothy F. Bresnahan            The Competitive Crash in Large-Scale              1094
               Shane Greenstein                Commercial Computing
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
'Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.hanard.edu.

Number           Author(s)                           Title                                                 Date

4902             Joel Slemrod                        Free Trade Taxation and Protectionist Taxation        10i94

4903             Assaf Razin                         Resisting Migration: The Problems of Wage              10,94
                 Efraim Sadka                        Rigidity and the Social Burden

4904             Ernst R. Bcrndt                     The Roles of Marketing. Product Quality and            10j94
                 Linda Bui                           Price Competition in the Growth and
                 David Reiley                        Composition of the U.S. Anti-Ulcer
                 Glen Urban                          Drug Indusuy

4905             Thomas C. Kinnaman                  How a Fee Per-Unit Garbage Affects                     1q94
                 Don Fullerton                       Aggregate Recycling in a Model with
                                                     Heterogeneous Households

4906             Daniel S. Hamermesh                 Aging and Productivity, Rationality and                10,94
                                                     Matching: Evidence &orn Economists

4907             Kooyul Jung                         Investment Opportunities, Managerial                   10/94
                 Yong-Cheol Kim                      Discretion, and the Security Issue
                 René hi. Stulz                      Decision

4908             .lun-Koo Kang                        How Different is Japanese Corporate                   10/94
                 René M. Stutz                        Finance? An Investigation of the
                                                      Information Content of New Security Issues

4909              Robert J. Bairn                     Demociacy and Growth                                  10/94

4910              Richard B, Freeman                  Crime and the Job Market

4911              Rebecca M. Blank                    The Dynamics of Part-Time Work                        11,94

4912              George 3. Borjas                    Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital           11)94
                                                      Externalities



         Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $510 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for
postage and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge. MA 02138-5398. Advance payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check
or credit card. Checks should    be   made payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If
paying by credit card, include the cardholder's name, account number and expiration date. For all mail orders, please
be sure to include your return address and telephone number. Working papers may also it ordered by telephone
(617-868-3900), or by fax (617-868-2742).
                                National Bureau of Economic Research




                                                          Donsestie                       Foreign°
                                                              Academic Libraj'iesf                 Academic Libraries!
                                                   Standard Fondly Members              Standard    Facility Members

0 Full subscrlptioflC                              $1300               $650             $1625             $975
Partial subscriptions
                                                        300              75               350              110
 OCorporate Finance
                                                        300              75               350              110
 o Stocks, Bonds, and Foreign Currency
 0 International Finance and Macroeconomics             270             135               350              210
 o International Trade and Investment                   270             135               350              210
 o Monetary Economics                                   ISO              75               200              110
 o EconomIc Fluctuations                                270             135               350              210
                                                        150              75                200             110
 OLong-RunEconomicGrOwth
 o Sources ol Productivity Growtfl                       70              35                 85              50
 0 TaxatIon                                             270             135                350             210
 DL.aborStudles                                         270             135                350             210
 DEconomlcsofHealthandHealthCare                        150              75                200             110
 OEconomlcsoftheElderly                                  70              35                 65              50
                                                         70              35                 65              50
 OlndustrtalOrganlzation
 o Technical Working Papers                       70                     35                 85              50
 o HistorIcal Development ol the American Economy 70                     35                 85              50

• A lull subscriptIon Includes all topics listed under pafllal subsc4tionc except for Technical Working Papers and papers
   on the HistorIcal Development of the American Economy. These must be ordered In addition to the full subscription.
  Please InquIre about subscription prices for Africa and Australia.



                                             PAYMENT OPTIONS
  o YES! Please begin my subscription to the NBER Working Paper Series. I have indicated above which papers 1
  would like to receive.
                                                                Please mail   my papers to this address
  By Phone (617) 868-3900
                                                                Name ______________________________
  By FAX       (617) 868-2742
  By Mail:     Publication. Department                           Address       _______________________
               National Bureau of Economic Research
               1050 Massachusetts Ave.
               Cambridge, MA 02138                              ___
  0 Payment in the amount of                enclosed.
  o Please charge mny C VISA 0 MasterCard
   Card Number: ________________
                                                                 Phone
   Card expiraboit
                                                                 FAX
   Signature
