                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          WHO LEAVES? THE OUTMIGRATION
                               OF THE FOREIGN-BORN




                                       George J. Borjas
                                       Bernt Bratsberg




                                   Working Paper No. 4913




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1994




We are grateful to Robert Warren for providing us with a number of unpublished INS statistics,
and to two anonymous referees for helpful suggestions. This research was supported by the
National Science Foundation. This paper is part of NEER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

   1994 by George J. Borjas and Berm Bratsberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                  NBER Working Paper #4913
                                                                            November 1994


                           WHO LEAVES? THE OUTMIC3RATION
                                OF THE FOREIGN-BORN


                                         ABSTRACT


       This paper analyzes the return migration of foreign-born persons in the United States. We
argue that return migration may have been planned as part of an optimal life cycle residential
location sequence. Return migration also occurs because immigrants based their initial migration
decision on erroneous information about opportunities in the United States. The study uses the
1980 Census and administrative data from the immigration and Naturalization Service.
Immigrants tend to return to wealthy countries which are not too far from the United States.
Moreover, return migration accentuates the type of selection characterizing the immigrant
population left in the United States.




George J. Borjas                                                  Bernt Bratsberg
Department of Economics, 0508                                     Department of Economics
University of California. San Diego                               Waters Hall
9500 Gilman Drive                                                 Kansas State University
La Jolla. CA 92093                                                Manhattan, KS 66506
and NBER
           WHO LEAVES? THE OUTMIGRATION OF THE FOREIGN-BORN

                                George J. Borjas and Bent Bratsberg
I. Introduction

       Migration decisions are reversible. Studies of internal migration within the United States

indicate that recent migrants have a high probability of returning to their origin or of moving onto

other locations (DaVanzo, 1973; Fields, 1979). Studies of international migration flows also

suggest the presence of large numbers of return migrants. Warren and Peck (1980) and Warren

and Kialy (1985) estimate that perhaps 30 percent of the foreign-born persons in the United

States leave the country within a decade or two after their arrival.'

       The fact that large numbers of immigrants choose not to remain in the United States has

important implications. In fact, much of the empirical evidence about the economic impact of

immigration reported in the literature is contaminated by the nonrandom nature of the

outmigration decision. Consider, for instance, the cross-section finding that recently arrived

immigrants have lower earnings than earlier immigrants. Although this result can be interpreted

as evidence of rapid economic assimilation, it can also be explained through outmigration

behavior. In particular, suppose that immigrants who fail in the U.S. labor market leave the

country. In any given cross-section, early immigrant waves have been "weeded out," and have

higher average earnings than the more recent waves (which include future outmigrants).2




       'It is unknown if these outmigrants are return migrants (in the sense that they are returning to their
       country of birth), or if they are remigratihg to a third country. Throughout this paper, therefore, we use
       the terms return migrants and outinigrants as synonymous, even though we do not know the final
       destination of these flows. For additional estimates of return migration rates in the immigrant
       population. see Jasso and Rosenzweig (1982) and Lam (1987).

        tIt is important to note that the biases introduced by nonrandom outmigration remain even i-f
        immigrants waves are tracked across Censuses (as in Boijas, 1985). Later censuses enumerate only
       Despite the practical importance of return migration, little is known either conceptually or

empirically about the selection process guiding the outmigration decision of the foreign-born.

Two recent studies, by Borjas (1989) and Jasso and Rosenzweig (1988), begin to address these

issues. In the Sodas study, outmigration behavior is inferred from sample attrition in a

longitudinal data set of foreign-born scientists and engineers. He finds that the least successfiul

scientists and engineers are most likely to drop out from the sample, and concludes that the

outmigration process is one in which "failures" leave the United States. In contrast, Jasso and

Rosenzweig observe the naturalization decision of immigrants, and infer that those who do not

naturalize are most likely to leave the country. In their study, it is the most skilled workers who

do not naturalize, and are most likely to be outmigrants.3

       This paper presents a conceptual and empirical analysis of the return migration behavior of

foreign-born persons in the United States. We argue that outmigration can arise for two reasons.

First, the return migration may have been planned as part of an optimal life-cycle residential

location sequence, wherein some immigrants migrate to the United States for a few years,

accumulate financial resources or other types of capital, and then return to the source country.

Alternatively, return migration occurs because immigrants based their initial migration decision on

erroneous information about economic opportunities in the United States.




        those immigrants who reside in the United States, and hence much of what is measured as assimilation
        by the tracking procedure may be due to the changing composition of the immigrant cohort.

        3A study by Lam (1987) also attempts to analyze outmigration behavior, and presents some estimates of
        outmigration rates, but does not address the questions about the self-selection underlying the
        phenomenon. Tunali (1986) addresses selection issues with respect to the remigration process of
        persons in Turkey. Finally, Pessino (1991) constructs a model of remigration based on the hypothesis
        that outmigration can be mainly attributed to forecasting errors.
                                                    3



         The empirical analysis relies on the 1980 Public Use Sample of the U.S. Censusand on

administrative microdata from the Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). By combining

these   data, as well as by bringing in outside information on such factors as the number of illegal

aliens, we calculate outrnigration rates for immigrants from 70 source countries. These

outmigration rates indicate that immigrants tend to return to wealthy countries that are not too

distant from the United States. In addition, the empirical evidence suggests that the return

migration process accentuates the type of selection characterizing the immigrant population left in

the United States.



H. Theory
         There are two alternative approaches to modeling the return migration decision. The first

views return migration as part of an optimal residential location plan over the life cycle (as in the

occupational mobility model of Rosen, 1972). In other words, some workers consciously decide

to immigrate to the United States for a few years, and then return to their home countries after

accumulating sufficiently large levels of capital or wealth. Alternatively, return migration flows

may result from "mistakes" in the initial migration decision. Potential migrants in the source

country are uncertain about the economic conditions they will face in the United States. As long

as return migration costs are relatively low, workers who experience worse-than-expected

outcomes in the United States may wish to return to their home country.

          We begin by presenting a model that incorporates both motives for return migration.

Suppose individuals originate in country 0 and consider the possibility of immigrating, either
                                                        4


temporarily or permanently, to country 1 (for concreteness, the United States). The logearnings

distributions in the source country and in the United States are described by:4




(1)             w0=l.L0+nv,

(2)




where is is the mean income in the source country, and i. is the mean income that would be

observed if all persons in the source country migrated to the United States. The random variables

v and c measure deviations from mean incomes, have zero means and finite variances, and are

assumed to be independent. We also assume that v is known to the individual, while s remains

unknown unless the individual migrates to the United States. We interpret v as reflecting ability

or skills that are transferable across countries, while a reflects an uncertain component (perhaps

due to misinformation or luck) in U.S. earnings. The parameter r can be interpreted as the rate of

return to skills in the source country relative to that in the United States.3

        Upon arrival to the United States, the immigrant makes a draw from the known density

g(c), and if the value of the random draw is sufficiently negative chooses to return to the source

country immediately. The immigrant also knows, however, that a temporary stay in the United

States might improve the economic options he faces in the source country. The simplest way of



        'The model presented below generalizes the Roy model framework (Roy, 1951; Boijas, 1987) to include
         the option of return migration.

        5Note that the model assumes a perfect correlation between the skill components of earnings in the two
        countries (i.e., between v and nv). Obviously, this asswnption restricts the types of migration flows that
        can be generated. Bosjas (1987) shows that if the correlation coefficient were sufficiently small or
        negative, the migration flow would resemble a refugee sorting: The immigrant flow is then composed of
        persons who do badly in the source country, but who have skills which are useful in the United States.
                                                           5



modeling the gains to the immigrant's investment is to assume that after spending a fraction it of

the working life in the United States, immigrants can increase their earnings in the sourcecountry

by K percent. We assume that the parameter it is constant, and that the individual's temporary

stay in the United States, if it occurs at all, occurs at the beginning of the working life.'

        Workers in the source country, therefore, have an additional option: residing in the

United States for a fraction of the working life, followed by a permanent return to the source

country. Ignoring discounting and using a first-order approximation, the log earnings associated

with this choice are given by:




(3)



We assume that the (percentage) gain to a temporary stay in the United States, it, is constant

among individuals.7

        Workers choose the sequence of residential choices that maximizes their expected

earnings, net of migration and remigration costs. Let Mbe a "time-equivalent" measure of the

costs of migrating to the United States (IvI=C,,/w0, where           C are the dollar costs of migration); R
be a time-equivalent measure of the costs of remigrating to the source country (R=C,1w0, where

Cr are the dollar costs of rernigration). Further, assume that the time-equivalent costs of

migration and remigration (M' and fl) are constant in the population.8



              more general model would allow for the endogeneity of the length of time spent in the United States.

        7Most of our findings are unaffected by a correlation between p and x as long as this correlation is not
        excessive.

        81tis easy to generalize the model to allow for variable migration costs. The qualitative nature of the
        results does not change as long as the correlation between migration costs and v is not excessive.
                                                        6


       Assuming risk neutrality, a person migrates to the United States if




(4)             max[EwL     -M,Ew10-M-R]>w0,


and a person migrates to the United States and then returns to the source country if:



(5)             max[Ew1 -Ad', Ew10 -Ai'- RI> w0 ?i4 max[w0 -R, w10 -Ri> w1.



Equation (4) states that a person in the source country migrates if either the expected wage from

permanently migrating to the United States, or the expected wage from "investing" in a short stay

in the United States exceeds the wage in the source country, net of the relevant migration and

remigration costs. Equation (5) states that the sample of return migrants is generated from the

subsample of persons who were migrants in the first place, and who have better opportunities in

the source country (either in terms ofw0 or w10) than the actual income available in the United

States (w1).9

       For the investment motive to be relevant for return migration, we need to assume:'°



       9We do not distinguish between persons 'ho outmigrate immediately upon making a draw from the
       density g(s), and persons who remain in the United States for a fraction it of the work cycle and then
       return to the source country.

        t0This condition is necessary if anyone is to migrate to the United States as part of a planned life-cycle
        mobility pattern which includes remigration to the source country. To see why, note that for a worker to
        expect to return to his source country, it must be the case that Lw10 -Al- R > Lw1 -A-land Lw10 -Al- R
        > w0. The first of these conditions implies that:

                                              R
                 (1—   )v <t0 — + K —
        while the second condition implies:
                                                        7


(6)




In effect, the returns to spending a fraction of the working life in the United States must be

sufficiently greater than the expected costs of migrating to and from the United States. Using this

condition to compare the terms inside the max(-) expressions in equations (4) and (5) generates

the following equilibrium sorting of persons among alternatives:



                                                                          M+R—,c
(7) Stay in Source Country:                (1— q) vS (p0 — p1 + ic) ÷




(8) Migrate to United States:                                             M-1-R-K
                                           (1—n) v> (s —         + K) +
                                                                             It



                                                            M÷R—x
(9) Return to Source Country: (M3—p1 ÷ic)+                        <O—n)v<O.I —p
                                                              It                                  1—it




       It is instructive to examine the characteristics of the migration flows when the distribution

g(c) degenerates at c = 0, so that there is no uncertainty in the migration decision. Return

migration can then only arise because a temporary stay in the United States increases the worker's




                                          Al + R — K


       Combining these two conditions yields the restriction given by equation (6) in the text.
                                                    8



earnings in the source country. The implications of the sorting summarized by equations (7)-(9)

are illustrated in Figure 1 for the case where < 1, and in Figure 2 for the case where r> 1.

       Suppose initially that C    1.   The immigrant flow is positively selected (i.e., it is composed

of workers with higher-than-average skills). Figure 1 also shows that the return migrant flow is

composed of the least skilled immigrants. Intuitively, it is the highly skilled who gain the most by

residing in the United States. The most skilled in this self-selected sample will wish to remain in

the United States even if their economic opportunities improve in the source country. The least-

skilled persons in this sample are the "marginal" immigrants. They are most responsive to

changing economic conditions in the source country, and they will become return migrants in

order to collect the returns on their investment.

       Suppose instead that i > I. The immigrant flow is now composed of workers

of below-average skills. Because the rate of return to skills is higher in the source country, the

most skilled have little incentive to immigrate to the United States. As Figure 2 shows, even

though the immigrant flow is relatively unskilled, it is the most skilled in this self—selected sample

who find it optimal to become return migrants. Intuitively, workers with the lowest skill levels

find it optimal to reside in the United States, regardless of whether or not there are gains to be

made by migrating back to the source country. The sample of return migrants will be composed

of marginal immigrants, who in this case happen to be relatively more skilled than the typical

immigrant.

        Therefore, the return n'iigtation process intensifies the selection that characterizes the

immigrant population in the United States. Because it is the marginal immigrants who leave, the

immigrants who remain in the United States are the "best of the best" if there is positive selection,

and the "worst of the worst" if there is negative selection.
                                                    9

       The conditional probability of return migration, q, equals:



                      (                   M-i-R-ic                            R

(10)
                 —
                                  I
                                                                             lit
                                                        <Ø—)vc(p0—j.i1 +ic)————-

                                                    —             +
                                                                    M+R-ic
                                Pri (1—                 l1 tic)       It



The qualitative effects of the various exogenous parameters on this probability are given by:




(Ii)           <o
               3M
                  -<o, 1L>
                        ôic
                          31?




In addition, if the density function of skillsfiv) is log-concave (see Heckman and Honoré, 1990),

we obtain:




(12)            gq_>0 >0              ifrjcl, L<0         if>I.
                           &                  cr1




        The derivatives in (11) indicate that the return migration rate (the proportion of U.S.

immigrants who leave the country) depends negatively on migration costs, M and B. In addition,

it is easy to show that if both M and 1? are increasing functions of a common variable D, such as

distance, the derivative 3q/ÔD is negative. The outmigration rate also depends positively on ic.

        If the earnings distributions are log-concave, a number of additional implicationscan be

derived. For instance, the outmigration rate depends positively on mean income in the source
                                                        10


country.U Return migrants would rather return to rich than to poor countries. Further,the

outrnigration rate is first an increasing fUnction and then a decreasing fUnction of. Intuitively,

the larger the difference between the rates of return to skills in the source country and the United

States, the more that immigrants have to gain by staying in the United States, and the lower the

outmigration rate.

       The empirical analysis presented below indicates that our estimated return migration rates

differ across source countries in ways that are generally consistent with these theoretical

implications. Perhaps the most novel implication of the theory, however, is that return migration

accentuates the type of selection that originally characterized the immigrant flow. Obviously, this

result could be directly tested by comparing the earnings of the return migrants with those of the

permanent immigrants, and determining if the differences between the two groups vary

systematically among source countries according to the parameter . Unfortunately, currently

available data do not generally allow this type of systematic analysis. Instead, we will use an

indirect implication of the theory to test its predictive power. In particular, Figures 1 and 2

indicate that holding constant the fraction of the source country's population that migrates to the

United States, larger outniigration rates are associated with higher mean earnings for immigrants

remaining in the United States if there is positive selection, and with lower mean earnings if there

is negative selection.

        As noted earlier, return migration can also arise as immigrants attempt to correct mistakes

in the initial migration decision. As shown in the Appendix, allowing for uncertainty in the




        ttThe prediction that Oq/Op.0> 0 is not affected by the possibility that an increase in   also increases t
        (presumably because skills are more easily transferable across advanced economies), as tong as
        <1.
                                                  II

migration decision introduces a number of complexities which require additional restrictions on

the joint density h(v, c). Nevertheless, the analysis suggests that both the human capital and the

uncertainty models lead to the same key insight: Return migration intensifies the selection that

characterized the original immigrant flow. Given this similarity in the implications of the two

models and the scarcity of data on return migration flows, it is unlikely that a simple test can be

devised to distinguish between the competing hypotheses.




m. Data

       We begin the empirical analysis by briefly describing the construction of our measures of

outmigration rates for a large number of source countries. A detailed discussion of the data and

the sensitivity of the estimates to alternative assumptions is given in Bratsberg (1991).

       A generic definition of the outmigration rate is:




(13)            qQ1t)=JO)RQ)



where 1(1) is the number of persons who immigrate to the United States in time period! (where!

could be a single year, or an interval such as 1975-1980); and R(t') is the number of those

immigrants who remain in the United States as oft' (t'> r). Throughout the analysis, we define 1'

to be the census date, April 1, 1980. To estimate the size ofl and .1?, we use two basic data

sources: the microdata on Aliens Legally Admitted for Permanent Residence in the U.S.,

available from the Immigration and Naturalization Service, and the Public Use File of the 1980

U.S. Census.
                                                        12


       The INS rnicrodata contain a record for every legal immigrant admitted into the country

between July 1, 1971 and September 30, 1986. Each record contains limited information on the

demographic characteristics of the immigrant, as well as the date of entry into the United States.

It is important to stress that these data QthM contain observations on aliens legally admitted into

permanent residence during that period. Therefore, the INS data do not include any persons who

entered the United States illegally, or who entered by using a student visa, a business visa, or a

visitor's visa, unless these persons eventually adjusted their status to permanent residence. If they

did adjust their status, however, the INS includes them in the file, and reports both the date of

their initial entry into the United States and the date in which the status change took place. Hence

the INS microdata can be used to estimate the number of foreign-born persons who should have

been present in the United States on April 1, 1980.12

       To calculate the size of the legal immigrant flow, 1(t), we make one adjustment on the INS

data. Because the INS reports each immigrant's age, sex, and country of birth, we use age and

sex to construct mortality-adjusted immigrant counts for each of 70 source countries, and for each

of the continents.'3

       The data on R('/), the number of immigrants who remain in the United States, is drawn

mainly from the 1980 Census. The Census enumerated all foreign-born persons whose usual

place of residence was in the United States as of April 1, 1980. This enumeration, however,




       120f course, because our This data stops at the end of fiscal year 1986, it is possible that some persons
       who entered the country prior to 1980 do not appear in the INS data at all because they changed status
       in 1987 or beyond. By 1986, however, it is unusual to find adjustments ofstatus for persons who
       actually arrived in the counuy prior to 1980.

       131n particular, we use age/sex specific mortality rates to calculate the probability that an immigrant is
       alive as of April 1, 1980.
                                                       13



included many foreign-born persons who are absent from the INS counts, such as illegalaliens

and "nonimmigrants" (e.g., foreigii students and visitors to the United States for lengthier

business stays) who did not eventually adjust their status to permanent residence.'

       Jn   order to make the Census count of immigrants who remained in the United States

compatible with the official INS count of who should have been present in the country, we adjust

the Census data for the presence of these groups. Warren and Passel (1987) report that the 1980

Census enumerated 2. 1 million foreign-born persons who were not legally admitted into the

country. They also estimate the number of illegal aliens who originated in each of a large number

of source countries, with about     1.1   million of the illegal aliens originating in Mexico.

       We use the Warren-Passel counts to adjust the 1980 Census data. In particular, for each

source country we subtract their estimates of the illegal population from the Census enumeration.

This procedure has the potential problem that the Warren-Passel estimates are based on their own

set of assumptions. Hence, our calculations may simply give us back some of the assumptions

underlying the Warren-Passel analysis.

        We do not believe, however, that this presents a serious problem for our study. Various

data sources, including mortality statistics of the foreign-born residing in the United States and

counts from the Mexican census) suggest that the number of illegal aliens in the United States is in

the range suggested by the Warren-Passel estimates.'5 Moreover, an alternative (and

independent) source of data on illegal immigration can be obtained from the size of the population




        14The INS data also omits refugees who do not adjust status to permanent residence. This population,
        however, is very small compared to those of illegal aliens and non-immigrants. Our estimated
        outsuigration rates do adjust the Census data for these uncounted refugees. For details, see Bratsberg
        (199!).

        15The evidence is reviewed in Passe! (1986) and Borjas, Freeman, and Lang (1990).
                                                     14


that applied for amnesty under the provisions of the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act.

About I S million persons who entered illegally prior to 1982, as well as an additional 1.3 million

workers who worked in certain agricultural jobs during the mid-1980s, applied for amnesty. The

Wax-ren-Passel counts, therefore, are not far off the max-k. To check the sensitivity of our

estimates, we used the source-country distribution in the amnesty data, and applied it to the 2.1

million Warren-Passel illegal count so as to obtain a different series of illegal persons enumerated

by the Census. The correlation between the two series was very high (over .97). Hence we use

the simpler, and perhaps more reliable, Warren-Passel estimates throughout the paper.

       A second problem with the Census data is that it contains a number of foreign-born

students who are not legal immigrants (i.e., who have not adjusted status into permanent

residence). Over 100,000 students entered the country annually during the 1970s. Internal INS

calculations--obtained from the 1-53 forms that aliens residing in the United States were required

to complete annually prior to 1980--report that 170,000 foreign students were present in the

country in 198016 We use the source country distribution of foreign students admitted in the

United States during the 1970s to allocate these students to particular national origin groups, and

then subtract out the estimated number of foreign students from the Census counts.

        Finally, the Census data enumerated some persons who entered the United States for

lengthy business stays. Although the flow of business entrants is substantial, it has received little

attention in the literature. During the 1970s, for instance, approximately 560,000 business visitors

entered the United States per year (most of them for short-term visits). According to the INS.

approximately 186,000 business aliens filled out the 1-53 forms in 1980, and can be presumed to




        16Tbese counts were made available to us by Robert Warren.
                                                        15



be residing in the United States for lengthier periods.'7 Using the source-country distribution of

business aliens in published JNS statistics, we allocate these persons to the various source

countries, and again subtract the resulting estimates from the Census population counts.

        Using these adjustments, the 1980 Census allows us to estimate the number of legal

immigrants who arrived prior to 1980 and who were present in the United States on April 1,

1980.   We calculate this number for two cohorts: 1975-1980 and 1970-1974 arrivals.19 To

estimate the emigration rate, we contrast these data with the counts provided bythe INS data of

who should have been present in the United States. Note, however, that for the earlier

cohort, the INS counts only persons who arrived between July 1, 1971 and December31, 1974.

Hence we adjust the INS counts to make them a frill five-year Census interval)9

        The estimated outmigration rates are reported in Table 1, by continent and country of

origin. The table also reports our estimate of the number of legal immigrants (after adjusting for

mortality), and the Census count of these immigrants (after adjusting for the presence of illegal

aliens and nonimmigrants). Of the 2 million legal immigrants who arrived in the U.S. between

1970 and 1974, approximately 1.6 million were enumerated in the 1980 Census, thus the earlier

cohort has an outmigration rate of 21.5 percent. Of the 2.6 million immigrants who arrived

between January 1, 1975 and April 1, 1980, about 2.1 million were enumerated by the 1980




        17These include 'exchange aliens" and "all other aliens.'

              allocate illegal aliens, students, and business migrants to the two cohorts based on the proportions
        reported in the original data sources.

               adjustment is actually a bit more complex. We use the actual number of immigrants admitted
        between 1970 and June 1, 1971 (as reported by the published INS statistics) to "blow up' the statistics
        for the earlier cohort.
                                                       16



Census, leading to an outmigration rate of 17.5 percent. The data thus suggest that outtnigration,

if it occurs at all, typically occurs soon after immigration.2°

        Table I also shows that the outrnigration rate varies significantly across the various source

countries. Typically, outmigration rates are lowest for immigrants originating in Asia. Only 3.5

percent of Asian immigrants who arrived in the United States after 1975 had left the country by

1980, as compared to 18.4 percent of European immigrants, 24.8 percent of South American

immigrants, and 34.5 percent of North American immigrants. We note that for some immigrant

groups (e.g., Japanese immigrants in the late 1970s), the estimated outmigration rate is negative.

In other words, even after the various corrections, the Census enumerated many more Japanese

immigrants than were legally admitted by the INS. This problem probably arises because our

correction for the presence of Japanese business persons in the Census counts was not sufficiently

large. It is worth noting that this problem tends to disappear in the analysis of the earlier (1970-

1974) cohort, and that with the exception of Japan and Taiwan, most of the countries with

negative outmigration rates are relatively unimportant sources of immigration. lathe empirical

analysis reported below, we set the negative outmigration rates to a value of .0001.

        We conclude this section by noting that our estimates are generally consistent with other

studies addressing outmigration among immigrants. For example, Jasso and Rosenzweig (1982)

estimate upper and lower bounds on outmigration as of January 1979 among immigrants who

arrived in the United States during the fiscal year 1971. While Jasso and Rosenzweig's estimates

in general are higher than ours, the across country distribution of outmigration rates is very




        20This finding is consistent with that of Warren and Peck (1980), who estimate that 18.0 percent of
        recently admitted (1960-1970) immigrants and 5.2 percent of the 1960 stock of immigrants left the
        United States between 1960 and 1970.
                                                        17


consistent with that in Table    1.   For the countries that overlap between the two studies, the simple

correlation coefficient between Jasso and Rosenzweig's upper bound estimates and our figures for

the 1970-74 cohort is .71. This lends additional credence to our analysis below, where we exploit

the variation in outmigration rates across countries to test some of the predictions of our model.



IV. Determinants of the Outmigration Rate

       Our estimates of the outmigration rate are obviously measured with substantial error.

Nevertheless, we now show that the variation in these rates across national origin groups can be

understood in terms of the basic economic characteristics that guide the outmigration decision.

       Table 2 presents regressions of the outmigration rate on various source country

characteristics, including the source country's log per-capita GNP; the country's distance from

the United States; whether the country has a communist regime; whether the country has recently

experienced a coup or a revolution; and a measure of inequality in the source country's income

distribution (which we interpret as a proxy for the rate of return to skills in the source country).2'

To minimize the measurement problem, these regressions are estimated on the set of national

origin groups and cohorts that had at least 125 persons enumerated in the 5/100 sample of the

1980 Census. The regression, therefore, only contains 119 observations (53 observations from

the 1970-1974 cohort, and 66 observations from the 1975-1980 cohort). Table 2 presents both

weighted and unweighted regressions (where the weight is given by the size of the immigrant flow




        21Thc per-capita GNP data is reported in U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (1982); the
        distance variable is obtained from Fitzpatrick and Madlin (1986); the political variables are reported in
        Taylor and Jodice (1983); and the income inequality measure is computed from Jam (1975), Taylor and
        Jodice (1983), and the World Bank (various issues).
                                                       Is


in the out-migration equation), as welt as regressions using both the linear probability modet and a

grouped probit specification.22

       Regardless of which specification one considers, a key variable determining the

outmigration rate is the per-capita GNP in the source country. Immigrants tend to return to rich

countries, not to poor countries. This is precisely the implication of the theoretical model

presented earlier. This effect is also numerically important: in the unweighted linear probability

model regression, for example, a doubling of per-capita GNP increases the outmigration rate by

4.9 percentage points (using the specification in colunm 2). We use distance from the source

country to the nearest major port in the United States as a proxy for migration costs. The

regressions in Table 2 indicate that distance has a strong negative impact on the outmigration rate.

Not surprisingly, an immigrant is more likely to return to a nearby country than to a distant one.

Every 1000-mite increase in distance between the United States and the source country reduces

the outmigration rate by 1.2 percentage pointsP

        The regression also includes a measure of income inequality in the source country (defined

by the ratio of income accruing to the top 10 percent of the households to the income accruing to

the bottom 20 percent of the households). It is interesting to note that these data are highly

correlated with the rates of return to schooling estimated by Psacharapoulos (1973)24 The



        22Although we prefer the weighted specifications (because the weights partially correct for the
        heteroscedasticity introduced by the fact that outinigration rates are likely to be measured with
        substantial error particularly for countries with small immigrant flows), we report the unweighted
        regressions for comparison purposes.

        This and other results reported in Table 2 are robust to the exclusion of Mexico and Canada from the
        sample. For example, in the specification reportcd in column 2. the coefficient on distance is -.0 130 and
        the t-statistic is -2.35 when Mexico and Canada are removed from the sample. In other words, our
        results are not driven by "border effects".

        24Among the countries common in our analysis and in the Psacharapoulos study, the correlation
        between the two measures is over .7.
                                                   19


theoretical model predicted that the relationship between the outmigration rate and the rate of

return to skills should have an inverse-U shape with the peak occurring at the U.S. rate of return.

The regressions reveal that the outmigration rate first increases and then decreases with the

inequality measure (though this pattern is statistically insignificant in the unweighted regressions).

The estimated coefficients suggest that the peak of this relationship occurs at a value of about 30,

even though the sample mean is only 9.0, and the U.S. value of the inequality measure is 5.9.

       The additional variables in the regression characterize the source country's political

structure, which are presumably an important component in the calculation of return migration

costs. The presence of a communist regime in the source country has a strong negative impact on

the outmigration rate. Holding other factors constant, the return migration rate of communist

countries is about 18 percentage points lower than that of other countries.

       Table 2 also presents analogous regressions using the in-migration rate—defined as the

fraction of the source country's population that migrated to the United States—as a dependent

variable. Although the two regressions are somewhat similar, they differ in one very striking way.

In particular, the source country's per-capita ON? has a negative (though sometimes insignificant)

impact on the in-migration rate, but a positive impact on the outmigration rate. This is precisely

what one would expect if migration decisions are strongly affected by economic conditions in the

source country (relative to those in the United States). The in-migration rate, like the

outmigration rate, depends negatively on migration costs, as measured by distance. The impact of

the political variables on the in-migration rate is harder to interpret, because local political
                                                      20


conditions may prevent certain types of persons from leaving the country, and hence are not

simply a reflection of the benefits and costs of immigration23



V. Self-Selection and Outmigration

       The model presented in Section II predicts that return migration tends to accentuate the

selection that originally characterized the immigrant flow. In other words, if the immigrant flow is

positively selected, the outmigrants will be less skilled (on average) than the immigrants who

remain in the United States. Alternatively, if the immigrant flow is negatively selected, the

outmigrants will be more skilled than the immigrants who remain in the United States. Given the

nature of Census-type data, it is not generally possible to conduct a direct test of this theoretical

prediction because we have no direct measures on the skill composition of the return migration

flow. Nevertheless, the Census data do allow an indirect test of the key theoretical insight.

        The Public Use Sample of the 1980 Census reports earnings for persons residing in the

United States as of the Census date. To determine the relative performance of immigrants in the

U.S. labor market, we pool the samples of immigrants who arrived in the United States after 1970

and natives, and estimate the regression:




(14)             logw = X13÷X51C ÷e,,




        "The regression also indicates that the in-migration rate is first an increasing and then a decreasing
        function of the income inequality variable. These results contradict the predictions of the model.
                                                   21


where w. is the wage rate of individual I; X1 is a vector of socioeconomic characteristics (defined

below); and C is a dummy variable indicating if individual i is an immigrant born in countryj.

Equation (14) is estimated on the sample of working men aged 24-64 using the immigrant extract

obtained from the 5/100 A File of the 1980 Public Use Sample, and a 1/1000 random sample of

natives.

        The coefficient vector 3 gives the immigrant wage (relative to that of natives) in the 1980

cross-section for the various national origin groups. We estimate these relative wages separately

for each of the two immigrant cohorts under analysis (by interacting all variables in the regression

with a cohort dummy). We also use two alternative specifications of the vectorA. First, we

calculate the wage differentials without controlling for differences in demographic characteristics

(giving the unadjusted relative wage of immigrants). We also estimate the wage differentials after

controlling for differences in education, age (and age squared), marital status, health, and

metropolitan residence. The resulting wage differentials among national origin groups are

reported in Table 3, and reveal the sizable variation that exists in U.S. labor market performance

among immigrant groups and cohorts.

           Consider the following regression model:




(IS)              3,   a0 + a1t1+ a2tp1+ a3 (1-ti) pf+a4x/qf+ a5O-t,)q+w1



where       is the relative wage of national origin groupj; t1 is a dummy variable set to unity if the

source country has a higher rate of return to skills than the United States;p1is the fraction of the

source country's population that migrated to the United States; and        is the fraction of the

immigrant flow that returned to the country of origin.
                                                         22


        The specification in (15) captures the basic implications of our model of outmigration

behavior. An increase inp, the fraction of the source country's population that migrated to the

United States, should have a negative impact on immigrant earnings if the flow originates in a

country with a lower rate of return to skills than the United States (i.e., a.3 <0). This occurs

because the largerp, the more diluted the quality of the typical immigrant in a flow that is

positively selected. By analogy, the coefficient a2 should be positive because the higherp, the

greater the skills of the typical immigrant in a flow that is negatively selected.

        The model also indicates that for given p, a higher outmigration probability increases the

intensity of the selection characterizing the group of immigrants who remain in the United States.

Holding p constant, therefore, an increase in q increases the earnings of"stayers" if the immigrant

flow originated in a country with a low rate of return to skills, and decreases the earnings of

stayers if the flow originated in a country with a high rate of return to skills. This implies that a4

<0 and a3 >0.

        To proxy for the rates of return to skills in the source country, we use our constructed

measure of income inequality in the source country. We define a dummy variable r indicating if

the source country has a higher rate of return to skills than the United States by comparing each

country's value to the US. value (which is 5.91)26

        As before, we restrict the regression analysis to immigrant flows that are well represented

in the 1980 Census. Therefore, the regressions use only those national origin groups (and




        26We also estimated a model where the difference in income inequality between the source country and
        the United States is interacted with the in- and out-migration probabilities (rather than the dummy
        indicating if this difference is positive or negative). Although the results tend to be similar, we report
        the simpler specification because of the large amount of measurement error implicit in the income
        inequality measures.
                                                       23


 'horts) that have 125 or more observations in the 5/100 Census file. We estimate equation (15)

by pooling the two cohorts, giving us 119 observations that satis& the sample size restriction.

       Table 4 reports generalized least squares estimates for a number of alternative

specifications of the regression model.27 In particular, the regression is estimated using both the

unadjusted and adjusted relative wages of national origin groups. Because of potential

endogeneity of the variables p and q, the table also reports estimates based on two stage least

squares.28 In addition, the regression specification is expanded to include the log per-capita GNP

in the source country (relative to that in the U.S.), so as to control for the possibility that the skills

obtained in industrialized economies are better valued by U.S. employers. This variable has been

found to have a strong positive impact on immigrant earnings (Boijas, 1987), and it remains

positive in the specifications reported in Table 4.

        The empirical evidence indicates that an increase in the in-migration rate, p, from countries

with low rates of return to skills lowers the average earnings of immigrants in the United States.

The regressions, however, do not always indicate that an increase in migration from countries

with high rates of return to skills increases the average earnings of immigrants. However, when

this coefficient is negative, it is insignificant, and is much lower (in absolute value) than the

respective coefficient for countries with low rates of return.




        27Because the dependent variable is an estimated coefficient from a first-stage regression, the
        disturbance in the regression is heteroscedastic, with the variance of the error term depending on the
        standard error of the regression coefficient. To correct for this problem, we used a generalized least
        squares estimator. For details, see Borjas (1987).

        28The instruments are predicted values from reduced form regressions on per-capita GNP, r, distance
        from the United States, whether the source country has a centrally planned economy, whether the source
        country experienced irregular executive transfers (i.e., a non-constitutional transfer of power in the
        executive branch), a dummy variable for the cohort, and dummies for the continent of origin.
                                                  24


        Table 4 shows that the impact of the outmigration rate on the earnings of immigrants who

remain in the United States is precisely as suggested by theory. An increase in the outmigration

rate increases average earnings if the immigrant flow is positively selected (i.e., originates in

countries with low rates of return to skills) and decreases average earnings if the flow is

negatively selected (i.e., originated in countries with high rates of return to skills). Outmigration

behavior, therefore, accentuates the selection that characterized the immigrant flow.

        As final evidence of the predictive power of our approach, we summarize evidence

reported in Ramos' (1992) study of Puerto Rican return migration. By exploiting the information

in both the 1980 U.S. Census and the Puerto Rican Census, Ramos can compare the education

levels of three groups of persons: Puerto Ricans (i.e., persons born in Puerto Rico) who never

migrated to the United States; Puerto Ricans who migrated to the U.S., but eventually returned to

Puerto Rico; and Puerto Ricans who migrated to the U.S. permanently. The Census data indicate

that Puerto Ricans who remained in Pueno Rico have an average education level of 10.8 years;

Puerto Ricans who moved permanently to the U.S. have 9.5 years of schooling; and Puerto

Ricans who moved to the U.S. but returned to Puerto Rico have 10.1 years of schooling. This is

precisely the pattern in conditional means predicted by our model as long as Puerto Rico has a

higher rate of return to skills than the United Sta;es. In fact, the rate of return to education in

Puerto Rico is about 1.5 times the rate of return to education in the United States. It is not

surprising, therefore, to observe the least skilled Puerto Ricans migrating to the United States,

and to observe the most skilled among these workers eventually returning to their birthplace.




VI. Summary
                                                  25


        This paper presented a theoretical and empirical analysis of return migration behavior.

Our theoretical model of return migration generates surprisingly strong predictions regarding the

size and skill composition of the population flows. Perhaps the most striking implication is that

return migration intensifies the type of selection that generated the immigrant flow in the first

place. In other words, if the immigrant flow is positively selected, so that immigrants have above-

average skills, the return migrants will be the least skilled immigrants. In contrast, if the

immigrant flow is negatively selected, the return migrants will be the most skilled immigrants.

        A second contribution of our analysis is the construction ofa series ofoutmigration rates

for 70 source countries. We constructed these statistics by combining two data sources: the

1980   U.S. Census, and a recently available microdata set constructed by the Immigration and

Naturalization Service which reports a number of demographic characteristics for every legal

immigrant admitted into the United States since 1972. Our estimated outmigration rates exhibit

substantial variation across national origin groups, and indicate that immigrants tend to return to

countries that are not distant and that are not poor.

        Finally, our empirical analysis confirms the theoretical prediction that the skill composition

of the return migrant flow depends on the type of selection that generated the immigrant flow in

the first place. Because of the selective nature of return migration, the skill composition of the

immigrant pool left behind in the United States is substantially different from than of the original

immigrant flow. This finding has significant implications for studies of the economic impact of

immigration and for immigration policy. In view of the growing importance of immigration as a

component of demographic change in the United States, it is clear that the economic and social

impacts of nonrandom return migration flows will need to be explored intensively in ffiture

research.
                                                 26


                                            APPENDIX

       In the general formulation of our model, return migration may arise both because a

temporary stay in the United States enhances earnings in the source country, and because a

component of U.S. earnings cannot be observed from abroad. To understand the implications of

the decision rules in equations (7)-(9), it is instructive to consider Figures A-I and A-2. Figure

A-I illustrates the various migration choices when q C 1, and Figure A-2 illustrates the outcomes

when> I.
       As implied by equation (8), the initial immigration decision is entirely determined by a

truncation of the random variable v. In particular, if1 C 1, the migrant flow is positively selected,

while if1> I, the migrant flow is negatively selected. The introduction of uncertainty in U.S.

economic opportunities does not alter the type of selection that characterizes the immigrant flow

because individuals migrate in order to maximize the expected value of income.

       After arrival in the United States, the immigrant makes a random draw from the gfr)

density, and reconsiders the profitability of his original decision. Obviously, the decision of

whether to return to the source country depends on whether the draw is favorable or unfavorable.

As Figures A-I and A-2 indicate, only those persons who have relatively unfavorable draws

become return migrants (regardless of whether there is positive or negative selection). Some

workers who expected to migrate temporarily to the United States now will settle permanently

because they receive particularly favorably draws. Others who expected the move to be

permanent will return to the source country because of unfavorable draws.
                                                 27


        As long as p(v, c) = 0, it is easy to show that the skill composition of the return migration

flow in this model is identical to the sorting implied by the human capital model presented above.

In particular:




(A-I)            E(v I Migrate and Stay)> E(v I Migrate and Return),     for ii <



(A-2)            E(v I Migrate and Stay) <E(v I Migrate and Return),     for 1> 1.



If C 1, return migrants are relatively unskilled workers (selected from a skilled immigrant flow),
while if > I, return migrants are relatively skilled workers (selected from an unskilled immigrant

flow) As before, return migration accentuates the selection that characterizes the original

immigration. These results are trivially implied by Figures A-I and A-2 because the random

variable v for return migrants is truncated from above when     < I, and from below when i> 1.
        Although these insights exactly parallel those obtained earlier, they do not completely

describe the economic experiences of immigrants and return migrants in the United States. In

particular, U.S. earnings now depend not only on skills, but also on the particular draw from the

densityg(e). Because only those immigrants who have relatively low values of s return to their

home countries, the comparison of actual earnings (determined by the sum v + c) between those

who stay and those who go back may lead to different results.

        If1 < 1, it is easy to show that:




(A-3)            E(v + I Migrate and Stay) > E(v + a Migrate and Return).
                                                  28



As before, the actual earnings of return migrants are lower than the actual earnings of inunigrants

who remain in the United States. This follows from equation (A-i) because the return migrants

are less skilled than the "stayers," and the conditional expectation of v is higher for stayers than

for the return migrants.

       This implication, however, cannot be derived when r> I unless more structure is imposed

on the joint density h(v, c). The problem is that the immigrants who stay in the United States

have the lowest v's and the highest c's. One possible restriction on h(v, a) is that the random

variable v has a sufficiently larger variance than the random variable c. It can then be shown that

the earnings of those who stay in the United States are lower than the earnings of those who

return home.
                                               29


                                        REFERENCES

Boijas, George J.," Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings ofImmigrants,"
       Journal ofLabor Economics 3 (October 1985), 463-489.

_______ "Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants," American Economic Re view 77
       (September 1987), 53 1-553.

        "Immigrant and Emigrant Earnings: A Longitudinal Study," Economic inquiry 27
       (January 1989), 21-37.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Kevin Lang, "Undocumented Mexican-Born Workers
       inthe U-S.: How Many, How Permanent?" in John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman
       (eds.), Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
       1991).

Bratsberg, Bernt, Return Migration and Self-Selection: The Exodus of Foreign-Born from the
       United States, Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Santa Barbara,
       1991.

DaVanzo, Julie, "Repeat Migration in the United States: Who Moves Back and Who Moves
      On?" Review of Economics and Statistics 65 (November 1983), 552-559.

Fields, Gary S., "Place to Place Migration: Some New Evidence," Review of Economics and
        Statistics 61 (February 1979), 21-32.

Fitzpatrick, Gary L. and Marilyn J. Madlin, Direct Line Distances, U.S. Edition (London: The
        Scarecrow Press, Inc., 1986).

Heckman, James J. and Bo E. Honoré, "The Empirical Content of the Roy Model,"
     Econometrica 58 (September 1990), 1121-1150.

Jam, Shail, Si:e Distribution of Income (Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1975).

Jasso, Guillermina and Mark R. Rosenzweig, "Estimating the Emigration Rates of Legal
        Immigrants Using Administrative and SurveyData: The 1971 Cohort of Immigrants to
        the United States," Demography 19 (August 1982), 279-290.

______ "How well do U.S. immigrants do? Vintage Effects, Emigration Selectivity, and
      Occupational Mobility," Research in Human Capital and Development 6 (1988), 229-
      253.

Lam, Kit-Chun, An analysis of the Outmigration of Foreign-Born Members in a Population,
      Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, Harvard University, 1987.
                                                30


Passel, Jeffrey, "Undocumented Immigration," The Annals ofthe       American Academy      ofPolitical
        and Social Science 487 (September 1986), 181-200.

Pessino, Carob, "Sequential Migration Theory and Evidence from Pew," Jour;zal        of

       Development Economics 36 (July 1991), 55-87.

Psacharopoutos, George, Returns to Education: An International Comparison (San Francisco:
       Jossey-B ass, 1973).

Ramos, Fernando. "Out-Migration and Return Migration of Puerto Ricans," in George J. Borjas
      and Richard B. Freeman (eds.), Immigration and the Work Force: Economic
      Consequences for the United States and Source Areas (Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press, 1992).

Rosen, Sherwin, "Learning and Experience in the Labor Market," Journal of Human Resources 7
       (Summer 1972), 326-342,

Roy, Andrew D., "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings," Oxford Economic          Papers 3
          (June   1951),   135-146.


Taylor,   Charles Lewis and David A. Jodice, World Handbook of Political      and Social Indicators,
          ThirdEdition (New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1983).

Tunati, Insan, "A General Structure for Models of Double-Selection and an Application to a Joint
        Migration/Earnings Process with Remigration," Research in Labor Economics 8 (1986,
        Part 8), 235-282.

U.S. Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, WorldMilitaiyExpendituresandArms Transfers
       (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1982).

U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service, Statistical Yearbook (Washington, D.C.:
       Government Printing Office, various issues).

Warren, Robert and Ellen Percy Kraty, "The Elusive Exodus: Emigration from the United
      States," Population Trends and Pith/ic Policy (March 1985, no.7).

Warren, Robert and Jeffrey Passel, "A Count of the Uncountable: Estimates of Undocumented
      Aliens Counted in the 1980 Census," Demography 24 (August 1987), 375-393.

Warren, Robert and Jennifer Marks Peck, "Foreign-Born Emigration from the United States:
      1960-1970," Demography 17 (Februaiy 1980). 71-84.

World Bank, World Development         Report (New   York: Oxford University Press, various issues).
                         TABLE 1: ESTIMATED OUTMIGRATION RATES

                                  1975-80   Cohort                         1970-74 Cohort

                      INS Count      Census          Out-      INS Count        Census     Out-
                       of Legal     Count of Migration of Legal                Count of Migration
                      Immigrants Immigrants Ea                Inimierartts    Immi2rants 8as
TOTAL                   2591680       2136994        0.175      1985274        1557477      0.215
EUROPE                   416490        339652        0.184       451324         343174      0.238
       AUSTRIA             2014          2484        -0.234         2380          2427      -0.020
       BELGIUM             1985          1145         0.423        1941           1207       0.378
CHECKOSLOVAXIA             3824          3433         0.102        6170           5016       0.187
       DENMARK             2145          1592         0.258        2303           1355       0.412
       FINLAND             1524          1853        -0.216        1722           1224       0.289
        FRANCE             8380          1684         0.799        9085           5920       0.348
       GERMANY            34586         28455         0.177       37406          34109       0.088
        GREECE            35686         22536         0.368       60867          39046       0.359
       HUNGARY             4448          4487        -0.009        6989           6609       0.054
       IRELAND             5446          4407         0.191        8417           5301       0.370
         ITALY            37006         25996         0.298       95692          69840       0.270
   NETHERLANDS             5333             1793      0.664        5480           3712       0.323
        NORWAY             1825          1137         0.377        2022           1015       0.498
        POLAND            22651         22426         0.010       22108          21930       0.008
      PORTUGAL            49293         41622         0.156       55174          51125       0.073
       ROMANIA            11773         11605         0.014        7407           7106       0.041
         SPAIN             9515          6637         0.302       15731          16571       0.074
        SWEDEN             3168          2153         0.320        3017           1532       0.492
   SWITZERLAND             3210          2243         0.301        3355           1857       0.647
          USSR            89542         89306         0.003       10491          10388       0.010
UNITED KINGDOM            68008         46202         0.321       55339          38086       0.312
    YUGOSLAVIA            12631          9091         0.280       31191          23037       0.261

ASIA                    1124026       1085239         0.035       587844        519994       0.115
        BANGLADESH         2915          3146        -0.079         1092          1825      -0.671
             CEIINA       81308         80960         0.004        60777         57964       0.046
         HONG KONG        26713         24506         0.083        21774         20493       0.059
             INDIA        92900         91654         0.013        68658         64224       0.065
         INDONESIA         3952          5702        -0.443         2747          2733       0.005
              IRAN        62430         35921         0.425        13780          8092       0.413
              IRAQ        16181         14840         0.083         7741          6937       0.1.04
            ISRAEL        15411         12777         0.171        10942          8951       0.1.82
             JAPAN        19858         33017        -0.663        25713         19322       0.249
             KOREA       157294        157816        -0.003        98723         96585       0.022
           LEBANON        24691         24120         0.023        10524          8938       0.151
          MALAYSIA         3215          5722        -0.780         1610          1719      -0.068
          PAKISTAN        17615         15179         0.138        12601          9632       0.236
       PHILIPPINES       197092        181262         0.080       146422        152430      -0.041
         SINGAPORE         1567          2356        -0.503          827           800       0.032
         SRI LANKA         2011          2727        -0.352         1969          1303       0.338
            TAIWAN        34006         36892        -0.085        18412         17543       0.047
          THAILAND        23903         23018         0.037        21360         19329       0.095
            TURKEY         9623         10614        -0.103         8974          7380       0.178
                                       TA3LE I (CONTINUED)


                                    1975-80   Cohort                       1970-74 Cohort

                      INS Count        Census          Out-    INS Count       Census        Out-
                       of Legal       Count of Migration        of Legal      Count of Migration
                     Irnn,izrant$    Innigrants Ba             Immigrants     Immigrants

AFRICA                     59710         43962         0.264      39122          23747      0.393
          EGYPT            13748          7607         0.447      13180           6958      0.472
          KENYA             2792          2240         0.198       1951           1258      0.355
        MOROCCO             2234          1270         0.432       2208           1197      0.458
   SIERRA LEONE              863           407         0.528       1104            794      0.281
   SOUTH AFRICA             8721          4397         0.496       2579           1055      0.591
       TANZANIA             1503          1021         0.321       1527            856      0.440
         UGANDA             1296          1024         0.210       2541           1401      0.449
         ZANEIA             1072           613         0.428         329           114      0.653

NORTH AMERICA             797604         522468        0.345      773743        572834      0.260
         CANADA            66795          59465        0.110       51628         40421      0217
     COSTA RICA             7728           3615        0.532        5428          4806      0.115
           CUBA            42531          40929        0.038      136654        136342      0.002
 DOMINICAN REP.            80984          55922        0.309       66829         49178      0.264
    EL SALVADOR            22541          18727        0.169       10693         10613      0.008
         GUATEMALA         15994          12403        0.225        9835          9244      0.060
            HAITI          31598          15288        0.516       30425         13107      0.569
         HONDURAS          10346           5945        0.425        7906          6147      0.222
          JAMAICA          80102          56725        0.292       66380         39676      0.402
           MEXICO         328215         192141        0.415      309895        229611      0.259
            PMcANA         14189           8486        0.402        8372          6027      0.280
 TRIM. & TOBAGO            28692          13993        0.512       35011         17619      0.497

SOUTH AMERICA             173468         130497        0.248      118628         88857      0.251
      ARGENTINA            14827          11810        0.203       11878         10011      0.157
         ZRAZIL             7929           5722        0.278        6693          3372      0.696
          CHILE            12486           8234        0.341        6563          6063      0.076
       COLOMBIA            46136          34745        0.247       34051         28254      0.170
        ECUADOR            26132          20874        0.201       24436         21208      0.132
           PERU            20644          14284        0.308       10593          9289      0.123
        URUGUAY             4747           3413        0.281        3482          2647      0.240

OCEANIA                    20382          15176        0.255       14613          8272      0.434
      AUSTRALIA             7241           3229        0.554        6810          3944      0.421
    NEW ZEALAND             3000              1852     0.383        2321           802      0.655
                                             TABLE       2
                                                          *

                  DETERMINANTS OF OUTMIGRATION AND IN-MIGRATION RATES


                           Outmigration Rate                                In-Migration Rate1
                            OLS                Grouped                          OLS                   Grouped
Variable          (1)       (2)        (3)      Probit               (1)         (2)          (3)      Probit

Intercept      .3900        .2371     .3283     -   .6721       3.6580      2.2680       4.5401 -2.7700
              (13.L8)       (4.30)    (5.43)    (-2.39)          (6.41)      (2.42)          (2.08) (-38.16)

Log(Per-     .0249          .0488     .0443         .2960       -   .3004   -   .2266    -   .4904     -   .0173
 Capita ON?) (2.07)         (3.82)    (3.07)        (6.22) (-2.04)          (-1.44) (-0.94)            (-0.76)

Distance   - .0277 - .0121  -.0140  - .1136 -.5678  - .5412 -1.0723   .1117
 (in bOOs) (-5.79) (-2.03) (-2.02) (-5.45) (-5.10) (-433) (-4.28) (-13.84)

Communist     -.2122       -.1148    -.1620     -.9841          -.7519      -.2806       -.6731        -.1687
 Regime       (-6.10) (-2.66) (-3.60) (-6.06) (-2.53) (-0.68) (-0.26) (-3.99)
            - .0089 -.0183   - .0564            -   .0721           .0505  -.1813 -2.0419
Coup or                                                                                     -.0095
 Revolution (-0.26) (-0.50) (-1.48)                 (-   .58)       (0.09) (-0.30) (-1.69) (-0.19)

Income            -   --    .0177     .0084         .0649            ---        .3053        .5527         .0272
 Inequality                 (2.52)    (0.93)        (2.28)                      (2.07)       (1.69)        (2.40)

Income            ---      -0003     -.0001     -.0013               ---    -.0109       -.0167        -.0007
 Inequality                (-1.37) (-0.36)      (-1.41)                     (-2.22) (-1.69) (-2.03)
 Squared

1970-1974     -.0349  - .0257  - .0297              .0443   .0333
                                                                -   - .0693                  .2205         .0290
 Cohort       (-1.50) (-1.17) (-1.05)               (0.58) (-0.12) (-0.25)                   (0.22)        (0.85)


                  .439       .512     .310           ---            .242        .276         .242


Weighted          Yes        Yes      No            Yes             Yes         Yes          No            Yes


*The c-ratios are reported in parentheses. The weighted regressions weigh the
observations by the size of the immigrant flow in the outmigration equation,
and by the size of the source country's population in the in-migration
regression. The regressions have 119 observations.

1The in-migration rate is constructed as the ratio of the size of the immigrant
flow to the size of the source country's population. In the CLS regressions, the
in-migration rate is multiplied by 1000.
                                     TAZLE 3

    Log Wage of Immigrants in 1980, By Cohort and National Origin Group
                             (Relative to Natives)

                          1975-80 Cohort           1970-74 Cohort

                      Unadjusted   Adjusted    Unadjusted    Adjusted
                         Wage        Wage         Ware         Wage

EUROPE:
         AUSTRIA        -0.027       -0.058       0.193        0.115
         BELGIUM         0.414*       0.274*      0.154        0.001
  CHECKOSLOVAXIA         0.051       -0.067      -0.009       -0.102
         DENMARK         0.414*       0.387*      0.048        0.032
         FINLAND         0.183        0.135       0.141        0.175
          FRANCE         0.219*       0.152*      0.143*       0.086
         GERMANY         0.275*       0.182*      0.226*       0.152*
          GREECE        .0.330*      .0.220*     .0.322*      .0.237*
         HUNGARY        .0.167*      .0.167*     -0.086       .0.129*
         IRELAND        .0.188*      .0.186*     -0.049       -0.038
           ITALY        .Qjj9*       -0.057      .0.121*      -0.000
     NETHERLANDS         0.329*       0.218*     -0.097       .0.169*
          NORWAY         0.239*       0.203*      0;425*       0.278
          POLAND        .0.346*      .0.343*     -0.039       -0.045
        PORTUGAL        .0.296*      -0.046      .0.210*      -0.011
         ROMANIA        .0249*       .0.299*      0.136*      -0.024
           SPAIN        .0.194*      .0.199*     -0.058       -0.029
          SWEDEN         0.189*       0.097       0.218        0.163
     SWITZERLAND         0.245*       0203*       0.211        0.161
            USSR        .0.245*      .0.360*      0.003       -0.035
  UNITED KINGDOM         0.204*       0.111*      0.218*       0.111*
      YUGOSLAVIA        .0.125*      -0.039      -0.031        0.011

ASIA:
         BANGLADESH     .0206*       .0.275*      0.065       -0.094
              CHINA     .0.491*      .0.469*     .Q3Q9*       .0364*
          HONG KONG     .0.371*      .0.325*     .0215*       .0.192*
              INDIA     .0176*       .0.288*      0.204*      .0.040*
          INDONESIA     .0163*       .0.265*     -0.062       -0.150
               IRAN     .0.192*      .0.216*     -0.018       OO94*
               IRAQ     .0296*       .0.242*     -0.060       -0.085
             ISRAEL     .0.197*      .0.224*     .0.099*      .0.109*
              JAPAN      0.175*       0.068*      0.072        0.004
              KOREA     .0.291*      .0369*       0.010       .0.171*
            LEBANON     .0.191*      .0.130*     .0.122*      .0144*
           MALAYSIA     .0.350*      .0.347*     -0.045       -0.106
           PAKISTAN     -0.283*      .0314*       0.028       .0.094*
        PHILIPPINES     .Q339*       .Q373*      .0.050*      .0.169*
          SINGAPORE      0.052       -0.012       0.420*       0.229
          SRI LANKA     -0.010       -0.146       0.183       -0.050
             TAIWAN     .0.295*      .0.328*      0.066       .Øj34*
           THAILAND     .0.464*      .0.450*     .0.191*      .0.232*
             TURKEY     .0.195*      .0.182*      0.013        0.016
                                 TABLE 3 (CONTINUED)


                        1975-60 Cohort                  1970-74 Cohort

                    Unadjusted       Adjusted    Unadjusted      Adjusted
                       Wage           Wan          Wan            Wan
AFRICA:
           EGYPT      .0.253*         -0.348*       0.115*         -0.104*
           KENYA      -0.161          .0.241*       0.144           0.019
         MOROCCO      -0.147          -0.164        0.015          -0.069
    SIERRA LEONE      -0.023           0.006       -0.222          -0.315*
    SOUTH AFRICA       0.255*          0.058        0.293*          0.097
        TANZANIA      -0.181          .0.264*       0.064          -0.072
          UGANDA      .0.317*         .0.461*      -0.021          -0.053
          ZAMBIA       0.676*          0.720*          0.030        0.069

NORTH AMERICA:
          CANADA       0.187*          0.130*       0.116*          0.064*
      COSTA RICA      -3437*          -0.307*      .0.322*         .0.234*
            CUBA      .0.496*         .0.488*      -0.266*         .0.271*
  DOMINICAN REP.      .0.643*         .0.446*      .Q•449*         .0.287*
     EL SALVADOR      .0.606*         .0358*       -0.430*         .0.281*
       GUATEMALA      .0,568*         .0353*       .0.332*         0.180*
           HAITI      .3,599*         .0.467*      .0.368*         -0.373*
        HONDURAS      .3474*          .0.326*      -Ø435*          -0.319*
         JAMAICA      .0.331*         .3275*       -0.179*         .0.127*
          MEXICO      .0.623*         .0.299*      .0.417*         .0.128*
          PANAMA      .0384*          .0.342*      -0.128*         ,0.088
  TRIN. 6 TOBAGO      .0.372*         .0.292*      .0,186*         .0.144*

SOUTH AMERICA:
       ARGENTINA      -0.075          .0,111*      .0.138*         .0.150*
          BRAZIL       0.061           0.021       -0.084          -0.116
           CHILE      .0.230*         .0.258*      -0.041          .0.106*
        COLOMBIA      .0401*          .0.328*      -0.268*         .0.219*
         ECUADOR      .0.486*         .0,377*      .0.276*         .0.220*
            PERU      .0,400*         .0.411*      .0,184*         .0.224*
         URUGUAY      .0.372*         .0.365*      -0.244*         .0.247*

OCEANIA:
       AUSTRALIA       0.144*          0,060           0.302*      0.176*
     NEW ZEALAND      -0.001          -0.052           0.130       0.090



*The coefficient is significant in a two-tail test at the 5      percent level of
significance.           -
                                                                 *
                                                    TABLE 4


                Relationship Between Conditional Wage of Immigrants
                    in the United States and Outmigration Rates


                              lJnadiusted ¶Ja2e                                     Adjusted i-laze

                             CL.S                                                 CLS
Variable              CD                     (2)          2SLS             (1)                (2)         2SLS

Intercept       -.1494              -.0210            -.0597         -.2232             -.0608        -   .1160
                (-3.62)              (-.42)            (-.83)        (-7.19)            (-1.87)       (-2.51)

r               - .1289             -   .1104             .0009      -   .0064              .0178         .0773
                (-2.11)             (-1.92)                (.01)         (-.14)              (.48)        (1.05)

r*p             -   .0022           -   .0021         -   .0101      -   .0011          -   .0010         .0469
                    (-.68)              (-   .70)         (-.35)         (-.47)             (-.55)        (2.45)

(I.r)*p         -.0264              -.0278            -.1462         -.0167             -.0185        -.0975
                (-3.16)             (-3.55)           (-2.28)        (-2.65)            (-3.66)       (-2.37)

r*q             -.2482              -.3180            -.4056         -.0826             -.1675        -.5462
                (-1.43)             (-1.95)           (-1.10)        (-.63)             (-1.58)       (-2.30)

(l_r)*q             .4698               .2972         1.0220             .5234              .3053     1.0559
                    (3.27)              (2.10)            (3.76)         (4.85)             (3.35)     (6.09)

1970-1974           .1223               .1269             .1126          .0977              .1038         .0820
  Cohort            (3.36)              (3.70)            (3.11)         (3.55)             (4.69)        (3.52)

log(Per-                                .0646             .0704                             .0820         .0872
  Capita CNP)                           (4.00)            (3.76)                            (7.87)        (7.27)


                    .401                .476              .502           .325               .567          .592



*
 The t-ratios are reported in parentheses. The dummy variable r is set to
unity if the source country has more income inequality than the United States;
p gives the fraction of the source country's population that migrated to the
United States; and q gives the fraction of the immigrant flow that returned to
the source country. The regressions use a generalized least squares estimator
to correct for the heteroscedasticity in the dependent variable. The
regressions have 119 observations.
                Stay in the
              Source Country
                                                     Migrate to U.S.
                                                     Pennancntly


                                                                 V




Figure 1. Skill Sorting in Human Capital Model when 1 < 1.
                                 Stay in the
                                Source Country
to U.S-




                                                              V




  Figure 2. Skill Sorting in Human Capital Model when 1> 1.
                            C        V = (M — + K)/(1—fl)
                                       + (NI + It -ic)/Dt(1—ti)I




£ =J0 +$.Lj +K)
                /
 - P1(1—it)— (l—rt)i
                                                  Remain in U.S.




                                                                         V




                                           Return to Source Country




             Figure A-I. Skill Sorting in Uncertainty Model when 11< 1
          =      —
                      + K)/(17i)    S
          + (NI + R -x)/(it(1—))




    Remain in U.S.                              C=     —+)
                                                 - R,(I—iQ— (I—n) V




                                                               V




Return to Source Country


Figure A-2. Skill Sorting in Uncertainty Model when < 1
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list of PIKER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.

Number         Author(s)                       Title                                               Dale

4871           Lan E. 0. Svensson              Estimating and Interpreting Forward                 994
                                               Interest Rates: Sweden 1992-1994

4872           George J. Borjas                Immigration and Welfare. 1970-1990                  9/94

4873           José De Gregorio                Credit Markets and the Welfare Costs                10,94
               Federico Stunenegger            of Inflation

4874           Brandice I. Canes               Following in Her Footsteps? Women's Choices      10,94
               Harvey S. Rosen                 of College Majors and Faculty Gender Composition

4875           Raghurarn 0. Rajan              What Do We Know about Capital Structure?            10,94
               Luigi Zingales                  Some Evidence 1mm International Data

4876           Gene Grossman                   Foreign Investment with Endogenous Protection       t0194
               Ellianan Helpman

4877           Gene Grossman                   Electoral Competition and Special Interest          10j94
               Elhanan Helpman                 Politics

4878            C. Keith Head                  The Attraction of Foreign Manufacturing             10,94
                John C. Ries                   Investments: Investment Promotion and
                Deborah L. Swenson             Agglomeration Economies

4879            David M. Cutler                Markct Failure in Small Group Health Insurance      10j94

4880            Douglas Holtz-Eakin            Health Insurance and the Supply of                  10,94
                John R. Penrod                 Entrepreneurs
                Harvey S. Rosen

4881            Nouriel Roubini                Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open              10,94
                Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti     Economies

4882            Nouriel Roubini                Optimal Taxation of Human and Physical Capital      10j94
                Gina Maria Milesi-FerreW       in Endogenous Growth Models

4883            Raquel Fernandez               Public Education and Income Distribution: A        1Q94
                Richard Rogerson               Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform

4884            R. Glenn Hubbard               Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance           10j94
                Jonathan Skinner
                Stephen P. Zeldes

4885            Martin Feldstein               Fiscal Policies, Capital Formation and Capitalism   194

4886            Oliver Hart                    Debt and Seniori . An Anajysis of the Role          10,94
                John Moore                     ol Haiti Claims in Constraining Management
To order any or these papers, see instructions at the end or the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.han'ard.edu.

Number         Author(s)                       Title                                             Dale

4887           Ricardo J. Caballero            Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.            l094
               Eduardo M.R.A. Engel            Manufacturing: A Generalized (5,4 Apprcnch

4888           Martin Fcldstein                Measuring Money Growth When Financial             10,94
               James H. Stock                  Markets Are Changing

4889           Mark Hooker                     Unemployment Effects of Military Spending:        10,94
               Michael Knetter                 Evidence from a Panel of States

4890           John R. Graham                  Market liming Ability and Volatility              10,94
               Campbell R. Harvey              Implied in Investment Newsletters'
                                               Asset Allocation Recommendations

4891           W. Kip Viscusi                  Cigarette Taxation andthe Social                  10,94
                                               Consequences of Smoking

4892           Alan M. Taylor                  Domestic Saving and International                 10,94
                                               Capital flows Reconsidered

4893           Maurice Obstfetd                The Intertemporal Approach to the                 10,94
               Kenneth Rogoff                  Current Account

4894           Michael M. Knetter              Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?:          10,94
                                               Evidence 1mm German Export Prices

4895           Peter Diamond                   Insulation of Pensions from Political Risk        10,94

4896           Lawrence H. Goulder             Environmental Taxation and the "Double            10,94
                                               Dividend: A Reader's Guide
4897           A. L.ans Bovenberg              Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence    10,94
               Lawrence H. Goulder             of Other Taxes: General Equilitzium Analyses

4898           Barry Eichengreen               Speculative Attacks on Pegged Exchange Rates:     10j94
               Andrew K. Rose                  An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference
               Charles Wyplosz                 to the European Monetary System

4899           Shane Greenstein                From Superminis to Supercomputers: Estimating     10i94
                                               Surplus in the Computing Market

4900           Orazio P. Attanasio             IRAs and Household Saving Revisited:              10i94
               Thomas C. DeLeire               Some New Evidence

4901           Timothy F. Bresnahan            The Competitive Crash in Large-Scale              1094
               Shane Greenstein                Commercial Computing
To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at izberiiarvard.edu.

Number           Authcgfs)                               Tide

4902             Joel Slemrod                            Free Trade Taxation and Protectionist Taxation   10194


4903             Assaf Rain                              Resisting Migration: The Problems of Wage        10i94
                 Efraim Sadka                •
                                                         Rigidity and the Social Burden

4904             Ernst R. Berndt                         The Roles of Marketing. Product Quality and      10i94
                 Linda Bui                               Price Competition in the Growth and
                                                 •
                 David Reiley                            Composition of the U.S. Anti-Ulcer
                 Glen Urban                              Drug Industry

4905             Thomas C. Kinnarnan                     How a Fee Per-Unit Garbage Affects               10194
                 Don Fullerton                           Aggregate Recycling in a Model with
                                                         Heterogeneous Households

4906             Daniel S. Hamermesh                     Aging and Productivity. Rationality and          1094
                                                         Matching: Evidence from Economists

4907             Kooyul Jung                             Investment Opportunities. Managerial             10194
                 Yong-Cheol Kim                          Discretion, and the Security Issue
                 René M. Stulz                           Decision

4908             Jun-Koo Kang                        •   How Different is Japanese Corporate              10j94
                 René M: Stulz                           Finance? An Investigation of the
                                                         Information Content of New Security Issues

4909             Robert 3. Bairn                         Democracy and Growth                             I94
4910             Richard B. Freeman                      Crime and the Job Market                         l094

4911             Rebecca M. Blank                        The Dynamics of Part-Time Work                   11194


4912             George .1. Borjas                       Ethnicity. Neighborhoods, and Human Capital      11/94
                                                         Externalities

4913             George 3. Borjas                        Who Leaves? The.Outmigration of the              11194
                 Bemt Bratsberg                          Foreign-Born


        Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per outer for
postage and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers. NBER. 1050 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge. MA 02138-5398. Advance payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check
orcreditcard. ChecksshouldbemadepayabletotheNsEgandmustbemdollarsdrawflOnaU.S.baflk. If
paying by credit card, include the cardholdefs name, count number andexpiration date. For all mail orders, please
be suit to include your return address and telephone number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone
(617-868-3900). or by fax (617-868-2742).
                                National Bureau of Economic Research




                                                          DomSic
                                                                 Academic Librarj cxl               Academic Librariesi
                                                      Standard    Faculty Members        Standard    Faculty Members
 O Full subscriptions'                                $1300            $650              $1625            $975
Partial subscriptions
 0 Corporate Finance                                    300               75               350              110
 o Stocks, Bonds, and Foreign Currency                  300               75               350              110
 o International Finance and Macroeconomics             270              135               350             210
 o International Trade and Investment                   270              135               350             210
 o Monetary Economics                                   150               75               200              110
 0 EconomIc Fluctuations                                270              13$               350             210
OLong-RunEconomlcGrowth                                 150               75               200              110
O Sources ol Productivity Growlh                         70               35                85               50
0 TaxatIon                                              270              135               350             210
o labor StudIes                                         270              135               350             210
O EconomIcs of Health and Health Case                   150               75               200              110
DEconomlcsoftheElderly                                   70               35                85               50
o Inctustrlal OrganizatIon                               70               35                85               50
DrechnlcalWortdngPapers                          70                       35                 85              50
o HIstorical Development of the American Economy 70                       35                 85              50
• A full subscription Includes all topics listed under partial subscripth nC except for Technical Worfdng Papers and papers
   on the HIstorIcal Development of the American Economy. These must be ordered hi addition to the full subscrIpllon.
  Please Inquire about subscriptIon prices for Africa and Australia.



                                               PAYMENT OflIONS
  o YES! Please begin my subscription to the AIDER Working Paper Series. 1 have indicated above which papers 1
  would like to receive.
                                                                 Please mail nw papes to this address
  By Pbone (617) 868-3900
                                                                 Name _________________________________
  By FAX       (617) 868-2742
  By Mail:     Publications Department                           Address _________________________
               National Bureau of Economic Research
               1050 Massachusetts Ave.
               Cambridge, MA 02138                               _____
  o Payment In the amount of________ enclosed.
  C Please charge reT 0 VISA 0 MasterCard
                                           -
  Card   Numba
                                                                 Phone:
  Card expiratloit   ________________
                                                                 FAX
  Signsture          _____________________
