NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CADILLAC CONTRACTS AND UP-FRONT
PAYMENTS: EFFICIENT INVESTMENT
UNDER EXPECTATION DAMAGES

Aaron S. Edlin

Working Paper No. 4915

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994

This paper expands upon Edlin [1993. section 3.3]. 1 thank Tai-Yeong Chung for his extensive
comments as well as Eric Emch. Mario Epelbaum, Benjamin Herrnalin, Stefan Reichels;ein,
William Rogerson, Joseph Stiglitz, Robert Wilson and the participants of the 1994 American Law
and Economics Association Meetings at Stanford for helpful conversations or comments. The
paper was presented at the 1994 meetings of the American Law and Economics Association, and

at Northwestern University's 1994 Micro Week Conference. This paper is part of NBER's
research program in Law and Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Aaron S. EdEn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit. including
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4915
November 1994

CADILLAC CONTRACTS AND UP-FRONT
PAYMENTS: EFFICIENT INVESTMENT
UNDER EXPECTATION DAMAGES

ABSTRACT

This paper shows that up-front payments can play a crucial role in providing efficient
investment incentives when contracts are incomplete. They can eliminate the overinvestment
effect identified by Rogerson [1984] and Shaven [1980] when courts use an expectation damnge

remedy. This method extends to complex contracting situations if parties combine up-front
payments with what we call "Cadillac" contracts (contracts for a veiy high quality or quantity).
This combination provides efficient investment incentives in complex contracting problems when

an expectation damage remedy is accompanied by a broad duty to mitigate damages. This
indicates that an expectation remedy is well-suited to multidimensional, but one-sided, investment

problems, in contrast to specific performance, which Edlin and Reichelstein [1993] showed is
well-suited to two-sided, but unidimensional, investment problems.

Aaron S. Edlin
Department of Economics
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page

1

1. Introduction
Up-front payments are common enough. One may wonder, though. why one party to
a contract sometimes pays the other before the other performs? This essay identifies a
new purpose for this practice: Up-front payments, combined with what we call "Cadillac"

contracts, can provide a simple solution to the incomplete contracting problem, a solution

that incorporates the traditional remedy of expectation damages with a broad duty to
mitigate damages. This solution is remarkably robust, working nor only in the simple

contractual settings of Rogerson [1984] and Shavell [1980], but in settings where the
investment decisions are complex, though made by only one party.

Up-front payments are often associated with special orders, custom goods, or other

contracts involving specific investments. This is probably no accident. Whenever investments are relationship—specific, the investor risks a 'holdup"—i.e.. he risks losing

the returns to his investments in negotiations after the investments are s'ink Adequate
protection must somehow be provided, and Williamson [1983] has argued that if courts

are an impractical option, then up-front payments serve to protect investment returns
against the holdup problem."2

We ask here whether such payments are useful in the polar case when courts ate
effective. The initial response of those familiar with law and economics might be "no"—

at least for the extreme case where courts can costlessly enforce contracts. After all,
Rogerson [1984] and Shavell [1980] showed that enforceable fixed-price contracts not

only protect investment returns, but can overprotect them and cause overinvestrnent.
twilhian..son [19831 calls such up-front payments "hostages," and develops a model of "private ordernc in which a hostage is paid to the investor—seller up front. This payment serves to bind the buyer,
substituting for an enforceable contract.
2High legal fees can make court an impractical option; alternatively, courts can be ineffective if one
party is unreliable and may flee from the court's jurisdiction, or become judgment-proof from insolvency.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 2

If such contracts by themselves can overprotect investment, then why add an up-front
payment?

This paper argues that up-front payments can play a richer role. They are important
even in models where courts are costless and there is no fear of a judgment-proof defen-

dant. They control which party chooses to breach the contract, thereby eliminating the
Rogerson—Shavell overinvestment problem and providing efficient breach and investment

incentives under a breach remedy of expectation daniages.3

Consider, for instance, the not-so-fictional story of an economics department near
Chicago. The department's building is undergoing substantial remodeling, remodeling

that will definitely be completed in a year, perhaps even earlier. In the meantime, the
department rents space in a commercial district on a 1-year lease. Although the landlord

sets the rent high, he provides an up-front payment as an inducement to tent the space:
the first two months are free. Given the high rent, the landlord has no desire to terminate

the tenancy (after the first two months) since no one is offering higher rent. However,
the department may desire to breach the contract and move out of the office space, if the

remodeling nears completion before the lease terminates. In fact. the department will

move out at the very time moving is efficient, assuming that it must pay the landlord
damages calculated to compensate him for the breach (expectation damages). Moreover,

the department will make efficient (multifaceted) ex-ante investment decisions. For in-

stance, it will invest optimally in hastening the remodeling, and will also "settle into"

the downtown building to just the right extent (making appropriate expenditures to decorate, move books, and buy new business cards and stationery; expenditures that take
3The reader familiar with ShaveN (1980, p. 412j may be skeptical of this claim since his fourth
conclusion is that "There does not exist a damage measure which leads to Pareto efficient decisions
concerning both breach and reliance 'independent of the type of contractual situation Moreover, Shavell
(1980, p 41TJ does not neglect the possibility of up-front payments, and indeed assumes, "without loss

of generality that the contract price k ii paid when the contract is made." However. Shavell is only
considering up-front payments made by the investor to the non-investor instead of the other way around.
His conclusion arises from this restriction.

Cadillac Contracts and tip-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 3

into account the likely lengths of stay).
The combination of the expectation damage remedy, the up-front payment, and the

high rent is critical to the efficiency of this contract. The up-front payment induces the

department to accept the high rent. The high rent, in turn, ensures that the alternativerental value of the office space stays below the rent. Otherwise, the department might
not unilaterally move even though moving were efficient: since the department has the

right to stay under the lea.se, the landlord would then have to bribe the department to

move. The more settled" it is, the larger the bribe would generally be: this means the
department would have a (bribe—seeking) incentive to "overrelf on the tease; i.e., to
overinvest in the specific investment of settling in. The overinvestment problem would

turn out to worsen if the landlord could unilaterally breach, terminating the tenancy and
paying the tenant expectation damages.
Such an overinvestment (overreliance) problem from expectation damages has become

a textbook result in law and economics. Polinsky [1989, 31, br example. writes:
The

e.rjctation remedy generally leads to too much reliana btcause it

git'es the relying party the value that would have been created by (he reliance
incest rnent if the contract had been performed.

Recent work indicates that the overinvestment problem is not so general as was
thought when Polinsky wrote this passage. Rogerson (1984] and Shavell (1980] stud-

ied indivisible trade—trade either happened or it didn't. In contrast, when the quantity
the parties contract to trade is a continuous variable as in the lease example, Edlin and
Reichelstein [1993] have now shown that simple fixed—price contracts can induce an ef-

ficient level of investment for one party under an expectation damage remedy. (Under
specific performance, see also Aghion, Dewatripont, and Rey [1994] and Chung 119911.)

However, in the Rogerson—Shavell discrete—trade context, the balancing approach of Edlin

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 4

and Reichelstein [19931 requires random contracts.4 Moreover, these approaches do not

create appropriate incentives when the investment problem is multifaceted, as when the

economics department above needs to decide its expenditures to speed the remodeling
and also to settle into the downtown offices.

This paper begins by returning to the Rogerson—Shavell context and showing that
up-front payments to the investor provide efficient investment incentives tinder an ex-

pectation damage remedy without random contracts. This result furthers the argument
that standard legal remedies do not necessarily cause overinvestment: the conventional
wisdom embodied in the Polinsky quotation stems from the particular contracts Roger-

son and Shavell considered. Our efficiency results remove the impetus to restrict the
expectation damage remedy, as proposed by Cooter and Eisenberg 11985. p. l467]; in
fact, unrestricted expectation damages is a better "problem—solvin& default rule than

specific performance when only one party invests. (See Schwartz 1993] for a helpful
taxonomy of default rules.)

The intuition behind combining up-front payments and expectation darnage is situpie.

The party that makes a sufficiently large up-front payment will not want to breach.

since finishing performance requires only a commensurately small subsequent payment.6

Therefore, the other party will commit any breach. Controlling who breaches is critical

under an expectation remedy, because the breacher gets the residual left after paying

the victim compensatory damages. If the breacher is also the investor he will invest
4ilermalin and Katz 119931 develop a non-random solution for the discrete context; their fill-in-theprice contract is elegant, but is-somewhat more complex than a fixed-price contract and requires that
renegotiation be ruled out in the 'syinznetric information" cases considered here. (For general abstract
mechanisms see Rogerson (19921; for the use of liquidated damages see MacLeod and Malcomson (1993]
or Spier and Whinston [1994J.)
Cooter and Eisenberg (19851 argue that overreliance will not occur if expectation damages protect
only the expectancy conditional upon efficient (or reasonable) investment. Spin and Whinston (19941
make the same argument.
lznplicit in this comment is the assumption that the breaching party cannot sue. This assumption
is central and the paper will provide examples where it holds and where it doent. Where it doesn't,
policy conclusions tollow.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 5

efficiently, maximizing this residual.

In Rogerson [1984] and Shavell's (1980] models, breach is committed by the party with
the uncertain valuation of trade. If the breacher is not the investor, overinvestment results

for the reason Polinsky described.7 In contrast, when the investor breaches, he invests
efficiently, just as in the "second case" in Shavell [1980, 484—Si], where the investor has

the uncertain valuation and so is the party to breach. Section 2 simply observes that upfront payments allow the parties to control who breaches, so that the overinvestment effect

from expectation damages is not mandated by the potentially exogenous arrangement of

who must invest and who experiences uncertainty. The parties control their fate, and
can avoid overinvestment by choosing an appropriate contract.8

Section 3 explains that the court does not have to observe damages for the approach
in Section 2 to provide efficient investment incentives; the court need only make an un-

biased damage judgment. Section 4 shows that this approach works in quite general
settings where both parties' valuations are uncertain, and where one party makes multidimensional choices about investment and trade. Allocating all "decision rights" both

cc ante and ex post to one party is important, and to do this, we argue that the law (or

perhaps the parties) should incorporate a broad duty to mitigate damages. a duty that
includes accepting non-conforming performance. When the investor cannot be given a

decision right over production, a good substitute is for the contract to be "divisible,"

which allows the investor to breach one part of the contract without discharging the

other party's duty to perform other parts of the contract. It is also important to the
approach we outline to avoid situations with holdups where both parties must come to

an agreement in order to trade aciently. The parties may do so by signing a "Cadil'See Shavell's 11980, pp. 473-83j first case and also Itogerson

119841.

'Contrast this viewpoint with Shavell (1980, 4731, who did not consider up-front payments being made
to the investor, and who therefore described the situation in his "fiat case" as follows: 'tiotice here that
the party who chooses reliance does not face uncertainty in a direct way and that the other party does.
This means that the party who decides about reliance is not the one who decides about breach."

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 6

lac" contract—a contract to trade as high a quantity and quality as they are likely to
want. Such a contract ensures that all adjustments of trade are "downward," and can
be achieved with unilateral breach. Hence, Cadillac contracts and either divisibility or

a broad duty to mitigate damages combine to extend the results in Section 2 to quite
general contexts.

It should not he too surprising that efficient contracts exist, even in the genera!
contexts of in Section 4. After all, the first-best should be attainable if one party is
risk-neutral and can feasibly make all decisions. Compare the situation to a standard
principal—agent framework where the solution would be to have the agent buy the firm.

The solution presented here is interesting for at least three reasons. First it is liistorical: it shows that earlier overinvestment results stemmed from restrictions on the foriti
of contract. Second, it illustrates how fixed-price contracts can interact with legal doc-

trines such as expectation damages, a broad duty to mitigate damages, and contractual

divisibility, to effectively give all decision rights and the residual to one party. This
suggests

a variety of guiding principles for parties writing contracts or for courts con-

structing problem—solving default rules. Third, it incorporates up-front payments made

to the party that undertakes investment, a common phenomenon that differs from the
investor buying out the other party. (Our agent, instead of buying out the firm, is paid
a significant up-front sum in return for promising to deliver the maximum output.)

The paper has four remaining sections. Section 2 explains the importance of upfront payments in the discrete context of Rogerson and Shavell. Section 3 relaxes the
informational requirements of the court. Section 4 generalizes the contract solution to a
context where investment and deployment of assets are multidimensional decisions, and
where both parties place unknown value upon trade. Section 5 discusses implications.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 7

2. Discrete Trade Revisited
2.1. The model
This section lays out a model of discrete trade like those in Rogerson [1984] and Shavell

[1980). A risk-neutral buyer and seller contract to trade a good, and one party, in our
case the seller, must invest S E [o.3] before the other's trade valuation is known. If the
good is produced ex post, the seller must later incur the variable cost c(S).9 If the good

is not produced, the investment may be redeployed to earn an alternative use value, or

salvage value, a(S), where (0) = 0. The traded good has a random value v(O) to the
buyer, where B denotes the realized contingency. We assume that both parties observe the
values ii and c ex post, after the investment and contingency are determined. Production

and trade are efficient ex post if and only if the value to the buyer is sufficiently high

that

v(9)—c(S) 5(S) .

(1)

Otherwise it is better to sell the investment as salvage for a(s).
We assume some optimal investment level or levels exist. Since both buyer and seller

are risk-neutral, any first-best level of investment satisfies

8 e argmaxf ma4v(O) — c(S),(S)1dF— 5,

ç2)

where F (0) is the cumulative distribution for contingencies 8. The Liming of events is
summarized below.
91n Rogerson (1984] and Shavell [1980] the buyer invests and the seller has uncertain costs. This
difference is unimportant here. However, when trade is not discrete, as in Section 4, it becomes important.

There we explicitly present a solution method involving a broad duty to mitigate damages. On the other
hand, if the buyer invests, & parallel analysis would involve the contract being TMdivisible," a concept we
elaborate later.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 8

Time Line
Date

I

Date 2

Date 3

Date 4

' Court or Settlement
Contract

Investment

8

Breach or

Negotiated

Chosen

Realized

Delivery

Figure 1:

2.2. Efficient investment from up-frént payments
We show below that when an up-front payment is possible, the parties can sign a fixedprice contract that provides optimal investment incentives. The parties should sign such

a contract since it maximizes joint surplus, and this surplus can be divided arbitrarily
with the up-front payment.
We begin by defining up-front payments.

Definition 1. An up-front payment is anything valuable delivered at the time a contract is signed (other than the promise of payment for the goods). It might represent
money paid, another profitable trade, or the signing of a separate profitable agreement.

We consider a fixed-price contract to trade the good at a price p to be paid at the
time of trade. The buyer also pays the seller an amount T up front, which may be viewed

as compensation for the seller's investment. This up-front payment plays a critical role
in creating efficient investment incentives.

We assume that if either the seller or the buyer breaches the contract, the other
party may choose to sue to get an expectation damage remedy imposed. In contrast, the

breaching party cannot sue on a "breach of contract" theory since the other party has

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 9

breached no contractual duty. We also assume that the breaching party cannot sue in
what is called "quasi-contract," and that the court will find no other reason to assist the

breaching party.'° This latter assumption does not accurately reflect the legal system

in some jurisdictions and cases. For instance, the doctrine that a "willful" contract
breacher cannot sue is common but not universal." Where the assumption does not
presently apply, our analysis will generate a legal policy recommendation as well as a
contracting recommendation. The policy recommendation is that courts should become

increasingly skeptical of such suits in quasi-contract; but until they do, the contracting
prescription is that parties pay the up-front payment in a Separate contract with separate

consideration. These prescriptions eliminate a race to breach,'2 and allow the parties to
neatly overcome the overinvestment problem by controlling who breaches.

To be concrete about the sort of unjust enrichment suit that will prevent the parties
from solving their contracting problem, consider the lease example in the introduction,

Suppose that while the economics faculty is attending the Winter AEA meetings, the
landlord removes their belongings and re-rents their offices. They can site for breach
of contract to recover any damages they suffer, but they may suffer no damages: They
'°The poasibility of suing "in quantum meruit," one type of "quasi-contractual" suit, is a longestablished way to recover benefits conferred on another who the court deems would otherwise be
unjustly enriched. Even where there is a contract, and bne party has clearly breached the contract,
courts have often allowed that party to recover the value of benefits he conferred upon the victim of the
breach. (See, e.g.1 Britlon v. Turner[1834], where the plaintiff breached a twelve-month labor contract
by working only nine and one-half months, but was allowed to recover nine and one-halt month's wages.)
However1 courts sometimes refuse to allow such recoveries. See BerL-c 8' Co. v. Griffin, Inc. [1976, 7641

where the court note that, generaIly quantum meruit recovery will not be awarded where the conduct
has been 'wilful' [sic]."
ttSee the comment later regarding Berke & Co. it. Griffin, Inc. (1976]. Some commentators argue
that even a willful breacher should be accorded relief. See Nordstrom and Woodland [1959, 211—14].

Ijf quantum meruit recovery is allowed for the breather, extreme perversities may result. Suppose
that unjust enrichment means receiving more than one's expectancy resulting from another's breach, and
suppose further that a contract breather can always sue to prevent unjust enrichment. Then both buyer
and seller will be in a race to breach when tiade is inefficient. Each will attempt to make announcements
of his refusal to perform in advance of the other's announcements. More peculiar still, each wilt assert

in court that the announcement of the other did not amount to an anticipatory repudiation or breach!
These Alice-in-Wonderland phenomena occur if the breacher can always "pin" the other party to his
expectancy by suing for disgorgement of any surplus from not trading when that is efficient.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by AS. Edlin

Page 10

may find other accommodations for less rent and not be much inconvenienced. Would
the landlord, then, be able to sue them to recover the rent for the two free months they

enjoyS at the beginning of their lease, or for their rental savings from their involuntary
relocation? Were they "unjustly enriched"? In this paper, we assume the answer is no

The landlord who breached has no cause of action. This assumption is probably realistic
in this example, however, in other examples where the structure of the contract and
flavor of the breach differs, some jurisdictions will allow the breacher to sue. This paper
provides reasons not to. We will return to these issues later.
Since we follow Rogerson [1984) and Shavell [1980] in ignoring litigation costs, a breach

victim will sue whenever damages are positive. Although abstracting from litigation cost

necessarily limits the descriptive power of this paper, it allows us to further develop
the influential benchmark case they considered. For now, we assume that the court
has sufficient information to properly calculate damages. As Shavell [19S0J emphasizes.

this requires the court to observe the value v(9), but not the state 0 nor the functional
relationship v (.). Section 3 of this paper considers imperfectly informed courts that can't
observe even u.

Damages will be calculated using the expectation formula; this formula compensates
for economic damages, and is defined as follows:

Definition 2. Expectation damages are the amount that makes the victim of a breach
exactly as well off as she would have been if the other party had performed.

Expectation damages give the victim what lawyers call her "expectancy." Accordingly, if the seller breaches, he will have to pay the buyer
max[O,v(O)—pJ .

(3)

If the buyer's damages v(O)—p are positive, the buyer gets the same payoff as perfonnance.

She can bring an action to recover t'(O) — p, or equivalently, since they anticipate the

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 11

result, the parties may simply settle out of court, If v(O) — p were negative, the buyer
would not sue, so the seller pays 0. If the buyer breaches, she must likewise pay the seller
max(O,p — c(S) — a(S)] ,
assuming

(4)

that the buyer notifies the seller of the breach before he incurs the variable

costs c(S). Again the "max" takes into account the fact that no one forces the seller
to sue. The seller's expectancy is p — c(S), but i(S) is deducted because the seller is
obligated to "mitigate" his damages by selling the investment at its salvage value,'31'
Although the duty to mitigate damages can induce efficient actions ex post, this feature

is inconsequential in a symmetric information context where renegotiation is possible.

The duty to mitigate damages is nonetheless quite important for efficient investment
incentives, and Section 4 explains that in a more general setting, the duty to mitigate
damages should be broader than the law often recognizes.

When contractual quantity is not an available instrument, the key to inducing efficient investment is to set the price low so that the seller—investor commits any breach.
(Compare with Edlin and Reichelstein (1993], where quantity is used as an instrument.)

Proposition 1. Let p E infu(9). Then the seller invests and breaches efficiently, flowever, unless trade is always efficient, the seller must be paid an up-front payment, or he

will not agree to such a low price.
13[f the buyer wants to breach, she should announce her intention early, repudiating the contract.

Otherwise her damage payment might increase by c(S) (if the seller produced) or even c(S) + a(S) (if
the seller produced and lost his opportunity to salvage his investment).
"The duty to mitigate generally bars a plaintiff from recovering costs incurred after cancellation of the
contract. A canonical example l found in Rockingham County v. Luten Bridge Co. [1929), where Luten
Bridge Co. continued building a bridge after notice of cancellation was given by Rockingham County.
Rockingharn successfully argued that it owed Luten only the "damages which the company would have
sustained, if it had abandoned construction at that time." Note, however, that some expenses incurred
after cancellation are recoverable. For Instance, advertising expenses are generally recoverable when they
might reasonably increase salvage value; in a typical view, such expenses are recoverable even "where
the result is an aggravation of the damages rather than a mitigation1" if "expenses are the result of a
prudent attempt to mininte damages." (Air. Eddie, inc. a. Ginsberg [1968), a breach of contract
case, where a wrongfully dismissed employee under a three-year employment contract spent $1,340 in
an unsuccessful job search.)

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 12

Proof: Suppose the buyer does not breach, but stands ready, willing, and able to buy.
Then either the seller performs and the buyer pays p and enjoys v(O) from consuming

the good, or the seller breaches and must pay v(O) — p in damages. Either way,the buyer
infv(O). Performance is therefore a

has payoff v(O) —p, which is non-negative since p

weakly dominant strategy, since breach would yield the buyer at best 0, and even less if

the seller sued. (Recall that we assumed the buyer cannot breD.ch and sue.)

If the seller breaches, he will be sued. His payoff will be

the salvage value minus

damages, i.e., i(S) — (t40) — p]. If the seller performs, he receives p — c(s), so he breaches

if and only it"5

a(S) — v(8) —c(S) -

(5)

This inequality matches inequality (1), so the parties trade if and only if trade is efficient

cc post. Since expectation damages is a liability rule allowing unilateral breach, no
renegotiation is necessary for efficient trade.

The seller's investment problem is to choose

S E arg maxf maxp — c(S),(S)

—

v(9) + pJdF — S

.

(6)

This optimization differs from the social optimization given by (2) only by adding p—v(O)

in each contingency. Investment incentives are unaltered, so we have shown that choosing

p = mt u(O) induces efficient investment and breach.
Nonetheless, the buyer must pay the seller an up-front payment to induce him to
sign such a contract unless .trade is always efficient. That is, consider a case where trade
is sometimes inefficient: Le., for some 0', v(O') — c(S)

c a(5).

Since by construction

p v(O'), substitution yields p— c(5) <(S). Without an up-front payment, the seller
would be better off avoiding the contract, investing 5 and selling it as scrap.'80
"Tin where v(9) = c(s) leave the seller indifferent.
"If the optimal investment S is not unique, read 5

as

the seller's choice from among the optima.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 13

Thus, the seller invests efficiently if the buyer and seller agree to tradeat the favorable

price given in Proposition I. However, the buyer must often pay the seller some up-front

payment T to convince him to sign the contract under these favorable terms. In fact, an
up-front payment is necessary in cases where Rogerson—Shavell overinvestment occurs,

i.e.. in cases where trade is sometimes inefficient. (Note that the up-front payment might
not be necessary if costs were uncertain as well.)
A similar efficiency result holds if the buyer invests before the sellefs costs are known.

Proposition 2. Suppose the buyer invests, and let the valuations be u(S) and c(9).
Then if p supc(O), the buyer invests and breaches efficiently.

Proof: The proof is left to the reader, since it is essentially the same as when the
seller jnvests.O

Our anumption that the contract breather cannot sue may at times appear punitive
to the breather. For instance, if the buyer invests and the seller fails to deliver, the buyer

keeps any up-front payment. Possibly, the buyer gets more than her expectancy out of
the deal. We previously pointed out that in cases such as our lease example, it is realistic

to think that the party who made the up-front payment has no recourse if she breaches.

Another example is a record club whose membership consists of an initial enrollment
purchase of twelve records for one cent together with the promise to pay a high price for

some number of additional records at a later date. If the club later refused to sell the
additional records (even at the high price), it is doubtful that the initial discounted sale
would be voided, or that the buyer would owe additional money.
On the other hand, suppose a buyer puts down a deposit on a couch. only to cancel her

purchase subsequently. If the deposit is unreasonably large "in light of the anticipated or

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 14

actual harm caused by the breach, the difficulties of proof of loss, and the inconvenience
or nonfeasibility of otherwise obtaining adequate remedy,"

a court may insist that some

of it be returned under the Uniform Commercial Code Section

2—718. Yet,

suppose the

couch were custom-made and that the maker had to order special fabrics and foams with

lovi resale value, In consideration of this specific investment, the customer makes what
we call an up-front payment; or, perhaps she simply buys the materials from the maker,

and a separate contract is written to build the couch, so that if the buyer cancels the
construction (breaching), she should be entitled to no refund on her purchase of materials

(or payment for investment). When the buyer is seen to be purchasing the investment

in a separate deal, the up-front payment will not be refundable to a breaching buyer
unless the investment were not made. If the up-front payment were made in a separate
agreement. the penalty doctrine might not apply across the agreements.
Again, we remind the reader that the above analysis is valuable even in those cases or

jurisdictions where the breacher could sue. Then, the analysis provides a policy reason

why a breacher should not be able to sue. Allowing an up-front payment to stand
even when it appears punitive lends the parties considerable contracting power. Notice.
though, that efficiency is not driven simply by allowing what in some cases is tantamount

to high stipulated damages; rather, efficiency results from the combination of these "high

damages" preventing one party from breaching, and the expectation remedy giving the
other party appropriate breach and investment incentives.

2.3. No up-front payrnints: Overinvestment
For the sake of contrast, we show below that if up-front payments are impossible (say,
because of liquidity constraints), then the Rogerson—Sliavell overinvestment problem re-

turns. As the introduction discussed, Shavell [1980J considers
up-Front payments but
only payments made to the non-investor. Without an up-front payment made to the

Cadillac Contracts and Up.Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 1.5

investor—seller, he will not agree to the low price that drives Proposition 1; instead, lie
will demand a price p such that
(7)

where . is whatever investment the seller chooses given the contract. (If the inequality
were violated, the seller would always lose money.) With such a "high' price, as we shall

see, the seller always performs and the buyer becomes the potential breacher.
In order to derive the Rogerson—Shavell overinvestment effect, we must impose addi-

tional structure on the model:
(Al) —e(S) — '(S) > 0;

(A2) 5 as defined by (2) is unique and 3 (0,3);
(A3)

/

Je:v(D)—cs•)ca(s•)

dF>O.

(8)

Assumption (Al states that marginal investment lowers production costs by more than

it increases salvage value.'7 Assumption (A2) is self-explanatory and (A3) states thai

when S = S., salvage is efficient with positive probability. These assumptions abo;.it.
functional form and the uniqueness of 5 were unnecessary to prove Proposition I, but
we need them here to replicate the traditional overinvestment result.

Proposition 3. Assume (Al), (A2), and (A3). Then, without an up-front payment to
the investor—seller, he overinvests. (This proposition is essentially like those of Shavell
fi980j and Rogerson [1984).)

Proof: As argued above, when up-front payments are impossible. the seller will only

agree to a price p such that p — c(S)

a(S), when evaluated at the investment level

This assumption corresponds to assumption 3 in Rogerson [1984] except that he wrote it as a weak
inequality, and proved weak overinvestment.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 16

he intends to take. Consequently if the buyer stands ready to perform, the seller also
performs and receives p — c(S). (The seller's other alternative is to salvage, which yields

a (S) if the buyer doesn't sue, and even less if the buyer sues.) lithe buyer breaches, the
seller will sue to recover
Damage3 = p — c(S) — a(S)

(9)

After salvaging his investment for a(s), his net payoff is his expectancy p — c(S), just as
when the buyer performs. The sellers investment problem is therefore

mgxp—c(S)—S.

(10)

To prove that the seller overinvests. compare this problem to the joint surplus maximizaLion problem

(2) and

(A) observe that (A3) guarantees that when S =

S, salvage is efficient with positive

probability;

(B) subtract the social planner's objective function from the seller's and observe that

the difference is strictly increasing in 5, because of observation (A) and assumption (Al):
and

(C) apply Milgrom and Shannon's [1994] Monotone Selection Theorem, which implies
that when comparing solutions to two (single—variable) optimization problems, if the first

problem has an objective function with higher returns to increases in the control than
the second, then maximizen for the first optimization problem (weakly) exceed those for
the second.

The above observations show that the seller's chosen investment weakly exceeds the

social optimum 5. Moreover, observations A and B together imply that the seller
strictly overinvests because his first-order necessary condition is not satisfied by 5..

(Recall that S is interior by assumption.) Intuitively, the seller is overcompensated
for his incremental investment by the expectation damage remedy, because when trade

Cadillac Contracis and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

is inefficient, he receives the full cost savings

Page 17

that incremental investment would yield

during production, —c'(S), instead of the lesser "social return" from salvage, u'(S). 0
Overinvestment results when up-front payments to the investor are impossible and

the value of trade to the non-investor is the source of uncertainty. However, as we
have seen, sufficiently large up-front payments to an investing seller combined with a
commensurately low subsequent price ensure efficient investment. Since the buyer has
already almost fully or even fully performed, she will not breach no matter what her value.

This leaves the decision to breach in the hands of the investor. Under an expectation
remedy, a combined breacher—investor gets the full residual surplus a post, and so has

the incentives a ante to invest to maximize this surplus. This principle applies to far
more general contexts than the Rogerson—Shavell model, as shown by the following two
sections.

3. Imperfectly Informed Courts
This brief section demonstrates that the analysis of Section 2 is essentially unchanged
when courts do not observe the true damages. What is critical is that the courts impose
an unbiased measure of damages. This point, which is made in Edlin [1993), has proved
sufficiently provocative to warrant further elaboration.

Suppose that when true damages are D, the court observes and imposes D, where
(11)

and c represents the court's error or misperception. Assume that the parties cannot
anticipate the direction of the courts bias (i.e., the expected value of Th is D).
Since we are ignoring litigation costs, if the seller breaches, the risk-neutral buyer will

still bring a case whenever the true damages D are positive. Given the low trading price

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 18

p, the buyer always brings the case. The seller's payoff from breach is

i(S) — =a(S)+p—v(9)—e,

(12)

p—c(S).

(13)

and from performance is

The risk-neutral seller breaches whenever the expected payoff from breach exceeds that

from performance. This leads to the same breach rule as when the court's decision is
predictable. Moreover, the seller's expected payoff is the same as before, so the seller
has the same investment incentives. Thus, the unpredictability of court outcomes does

not alter the analysis as long as the court imposes an unbiased judgement D of damages,
which establishes the following proposition:

Proposition 4. Proposition .2 holds even if the court does not observe true damages, as
long as the court (observes some in formative signal and) enforces an unbiased estimate

of damages.
Proposition 4 partially addresses the criticisms of Schwartz 11993, 406] about the

information requirements of other mechanisms that might be used as problem-solving

defaults. Of course, courts introduce a number of biases. Principal among these is
the "certainty" requirement. Courts will not guess at damages if their information is
woefully inadequate to the task. For instance, the new business rule "prohibits recovery

of lost profits resulting from a breach of contract that has prevented the plaintiff from

establishing a proposed new business, on the ground that profits in such cases are too

speculative" (Fuller and Eisenberg [1990, p. 267]). In parallel fashion, in Freund v.
Washington Square [1974], the Court of Appeals of New York found that Freund was
entitled to only nominal damages for Washington Square's breach of a contract to publish

his book; sales were unpredictable, so only token damages could be awarded. Such a

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 19

result biases damages downward. Therefore this model lends support to what Fuller and
Eisenberg [1990, p. 267] label a "definite trend toward abrogating" the new business

doctrine, and similarly to the flavor of the Official Comment in the Uniform Commercial

Code to Section 1—106, which states that "Compensatory damages are often at best
approximate: they have to be proved with whatever definiteness and accuracy the facts

permit, but no more..." For a case in line with these trends, see ['era v. Village Plaza
(19761, where the Michigan Supreme Court upheld a $200,000 jury verdict in favor of the

plaintiffs who had signed a ten-year lease in order to open a "book and bottle" shop.
(The plaintiffs were unable to take possession because the defendant subsequently leased

the space to a third party.)

4. General Settings and a Broad Duty to Mitigate
The principles developed in Section 2.2 are quite general, as this section reveals. This
generality gives the expectation remedy significant advantages over specific performance

in one-sided investment problems. To realize these advantages, a broad duty to mitigate
damages is a useful supplement to an expectation remedy when the seller invests. When
the buyer invests, a divisible contract is correspondingly useful.
Consider a more general setting where the seller may supply many goods and services

to the buyer, perhaps at different times and in different quantities or qualities. Let q
represent a list of the goods and services delivered, chosen from some set Q. Let v(q, 0)
represent the value to the buyer of q in contingency 9.

(Ri) Assume Q has a maximal element with non-negative value: i.e.,

3 s.t. YO,q,

v(q,O) v(,9),

and, v(,9) 0.

Definition 3. A Cadillac contract is a contract to trade a maximal element

(14)

.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 20

Cadillacs are large, luxurious cars, traditionally at the top of GMs line. Accordingly,

a Cadillac contract is a top-of-the-line contract for a larger quantity or more quality
than is generally efficient to trade. In fact, we have defined an extreme form of Cadillac
contract involving the most valuable trade possible. If the Department of Defense orders

,5O jet fighters of extraordinary capabilities, this may be & Cadillac contract. It will
function as one if any renegotiations will be for jets with fewer capabilities and/or for
fewer jets. Similarly, when a moving company promises to deliver all your belongings to

your new residence intact, this is as valuable as their performance could be. (Those who

have moved will know that many times their performanèe falls a touch below this high

standard.)
A Cadillac contract generalizes an important feature of any non- random contract to

trade in a discrete trade/no-trade context. It implies that any adjustments in trade are
"downward." This feature was subtly implicit in the contracts in Section 2.
In this section, we assume the seller can buy m assets, denoted by S e

R, which may

affect the cost of performing q. (Each of the nt assets may vary in scale or quality since

each is associated with a real number.) The assets cost I(S) , where

I R' ' R Let

the cx post cost of producing q be c(S,q,9). The costs c represent the most economical
method of producing q with S given 9. In some contingencies, this may involve selling

as salvage some of the assets embodied in S; in others, all of S may be fully used in

production. It is worthwhile keeping in mind that the function c is a reduced form,
which may capture sophisticated deployment decisions)8

Suppose the parties have written a Cadillac contract to "trad&'

with the entire

an example, let A E 20 m) represent the indices of the assets put to alternative use. (A can
be any subset of {1
m}.) Then the assets in alternative use can be represented as LEA
where
is the jUt element of S and e is the ith unit vector (0
1,..., 0). The value derived from the assets
put to alternative use is a(EIEA Seb9) . Suppose further that the costs of production of q using the
assets not in A i (LA Sej, q, 9). Then, we would have
c(S, q,9) a — max [ä(E,EA Sej, 9)—
S,eg, q.9)]

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

payment T made up front, so that no payment is required when

Page 21

is performed.1° Con-

sider the situation after the investment S is made and contingency U realized. What will

the seller supply? If the seller supplies q , the buyer can accept or reject the tender.
Regardless, the buyer will sue because by (BI), v(.9) v(q,O), so the buyer suffers
non-negative damages.2° If the buyer accepts q, her damages are

D=v(.9)—v(q,9).

(15)

lithe buyer rejects q, her damages depend upon the law's view of the duty to mitigate
damages. If mitigation requires accepting partial or inferior performance1 the buyer can

recover at most v(,9) — v(q,O), which motivates the following definition.

Definition 4. Suppose a buyer has paid up front and been promised . Under a broad

duty to mitigate damages, if offered q. the buyer can collect only u(.O) — v(q,6) in
damages.

Vithout a broad duty to mitigate, the breach victim may secure more than the benefit
of her bargain by threatening to refuse q unless the seller agrees to pay larger damages.
This duty to mitigate is broader than often obtains. For instance, in Parker u. Twentieth
Century-Fox [1970J, the California Supreme Court held that Shirley MacLame Parker did

not need to accept Twentieth Century's offer to star in a western titled "Big Country,
Big Man" to mitigate damages for Twentieth Century1s breach of the contract in which

she was to star in a musical titled "Bloomer Girl." Also, in the context of the sale of
goods, under the Uniform Commercial Code Section 2-601, the buyer has the right to
"reject the whole" if "the goods or the tender of delivery fail in any respect to conform
'91t is possible to have some payments made at performance, but that requires a detailed discussion
of the importance of a divisible contract.
20We assume that the non-conforming performance q call be accepted without compromising the
buyer's rights to her expectancy.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 22

to the contract.'21 Moreover, under Section 2-711 a "rightful" rejection by the buyer
leaves her with the same remedies as lithe seller had not performed at all. Nonetheless,
while a broad duty to mitigate may not presently obtain, the next proposition indicates
it would have some advantages.

Proposition 5. A Cadillac contract to supply

for an up-front payment T leads to

efficient investment and breach when an expectation damage measure is applied and the

buyer has a broad duty to mitigate damages.

Proof: Joint surplus is maximized by solving the fOllowing iterative program: Ex
post, given assets S, and the realized contingency 0, choose q to solve

Z(S,9) rnaxv(q,9) — c(S,q,9)

.

(16)

Ex ante, joint surplus is maximized by choosing S to solve

mg.xEEZ(S,Ofl—I(S)

(17)

where E denotes the expectation operator.

Under a Cadillac contract, with payment T made entirely up front, the seller solves

a nearly identical problem. Suppose the seller delivers q 4. Given the broad duty
to mitigate damages, the buyer's rights will be limited to damages of v(4, 0) — v(q, 0)
regardless of whether he rejects or accepts q. Since the contract is a Cadillac contract,
v(4, 9)— v(q, 0)

0, so the buyer will, in fact, demand, and if necessary sue for, payment

of v(4, 9) — v(q, 0). Therefcre, given S and 0, the seller chooses q ex post to solve

W(S,O)=rIaQx—D(q,9)_c(S,q,9) ,
where damages D(q,9) = v(q,9)

—

(18)

v(q,9).

31/is other sections in the Uniform Commercial Code make clear
these rights of rejection should not

be read overly broadly, but they do apply to non-conformities that go to "the heart of the agreement."

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 23

The seller's ex post objective function is the same as the joint surplus less u(,O), so
the seller's optimal choices of q match those from surplus maximization. The seller's ex
ante investment problem is to solve

mgxE[W(S9)]—I(S)
Since W(S,O)

(19)

Z(S,O) — v(, 0), the seller's cx ante choices of S similarly match those

under joint surplus maximization, and the Cadillac contract to trade

for a payment

made entirely up front leads to full first-best efficiency. 0
The expectation damage remedy allows us to find a contract that leads to efficient

choice of assets; efficient use of assets, and efficient performance or breach. Compare this

with specific performance. Under a specific performance remedy, when the investment
decision is a one-dimensional decision, fixed-price contracts can be efficient. These results

require a continuous contractible variable q and a number of assumptions about how investment affects valuations (see Aghion, Dewatripont, and Rey [1994], ('hung [19911, and

Edlin and Reichelstein [19931). None of these assumptions are needed for the approach

above. Moreover, even with those assumptions, the first-best can't be implemented under specific performance when the investment decision is multi-dimensional (Edlin [1993]

revealed, for instance, a bias toward investing in overspecialized assets instead of assets with higher values in alternative uses). No such biases exist under an expectation

damage remedy with up-front payments and a Cadillac contract. Provided the parties
can arrange for one party to make all the cx ante investment expenditures and decisions
together with ex-post breach decisions, expectation damages is an ideal remedy.

The intuition behind Proposition 5 is as follows. A large up-front payment by the
non-investing buyer to the investing seller ensures that the buyer performs the contract.

A broad duty to mitigate damages, including accepting non-conforming performance.
leaves the breach decision unilaterally in the hands of the investor. Otherwise some

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 24

renegotiation would be necessary because the buyer could refuse a non-conlorming tender;

such renegotiation would typically involve splitting the returns to investment, which
could distort investment incentives. The Cadillac contract eliminates contingencies where

overperformance is efficient. Such contingencies also require bilateral negotiations and

typically entail sharing the gains from extra performance, again distorting investment
incentives. (The seller cannot capture all the gains from performing q when u (q. 0) >

When the buyer invests, instead of the seller, the analysis proceeds similarly. For this

non•balancing' approach, we would then want the buyer to effectively dictate the level

of performance and capture the residual created beyond the seller's expectancy. Two
features are necessary. A Cadillac contract would ensure that the seller has a duty to
deliver performance at least as valuable as is efficient. Second, if the buyer decides he
wants to cancel (the inefficient) part of performance, this must not discharge the seller's
remaining duty to perform the non-cancelled parts of the contract. This requires that the

court construe the contract as "divisible"—essentially as a number of separate smaller
contracts. Such a construction allows the buyer to cancel inefficient parts of the contract

and still have the seller deliver the efficient parts or pay compensatory damages.22 It
thereby avoids negotiation and surplus—splitting, allowing the buyer—investor to capture

alt residual, just as the broad duty to mitigate allowed the seller-investor to capture all
residual in Proposition 5.
ln some cases where the buyer invests, a divisible contract is unnecessary. For instance, in our lease
has a property right to stay
needing any agreement from the
landlord (though it would owe damages). Thus the law allocates decisionrights over q to the lessee, (at
least when q <i), which means no divisible contract is needed.
example the economics department (the buyer) invests. The department
(or the duration of the tease; moreover, it can move out early without

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 25

5. Implications
The central result of this paper is that the expectation damage remedy need not lead to
overinvestment in relationship-specificassets. In fact, even in the very general context
of Section 4. we found that all decisions were first-best. The conventional wisdom in the
law and economics literature about distorted investment resulted from assumptions about

which party breached, a fact noted by Shavell [1980] in the simple discrete-trade context
of Section 2. Yet. even in that simple context, a major part of the puzzle was left out: If

up-front payments to the investor are possible, the party who breaches is not determined

exogenously by which party has uncertain valuations, as Shavell (19S0j assumed. Quite

the contrary. when such up-front payments are possible, the parties themselves control
who will want to breach in low-trade contingencies. When the non-investing party makes

a sufficiently large up-front payment, she will want to carry out the contract even if

her valuation proves unfavorable—any breach will be made by the investing party. This
arrangement provides efficient investment and breach incentives under the expectation
damage formula.

Thus when one party needs to make a specific investment, it is natural that the other
should make some payment early. An up-front payment is desirable even when neither

party will flee or become bankrupt and the legal system costlessly enforces contracts.

The payment determines who wants to breach, which is critical under an expectation
damage remedy.

From this analysis we learn a number of lessons about policy. Notice first that we
assumed that the breaching party could not successfully sue. This prevented the "race to
breach discussed in Section 2, allowing the parties to control who breached. This argues

that courts should be skeptical of unjust enrichment claims, or at least honor contracts
that give up the right to sue for unjust enrichment. Similarly, we provide another reason

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 26

why courts should not invoke the penalty doctrine to return deposits.
Another lesson is that the courts should take a broader view of the duty to mitigate—

or at least stand ready to take a broad view if requested in the contract. Such a view of
mitigation was critical to the efficiency of Cadillac contracts in Section 4. Correspondingly, when the buyer is the investor, the critical issue becomes the divisibility of the

contract.

A third lesson is that specific performance is not always the best remedy when specific
investments are involved. Edlin and Reichelstein [1993] argued that specific performance
is superior when both parties make investments (but wheie the investments were simplis-

tic). Vet when the investment and breach decisions can all be allocated to one party, the
expectation remedy is superior because multi-faceted investment can be efficient. There-

fore, when parties neglect to specify a remedy, as they often do, expectation damages is
a good default rule in one-sided investment problems. Its application implies that the ex

ante incentives of the contract breacher were appropriate (at least the incentives arising
from the given contingency). These first-best incentives may very vell be gotten at the

expense of incentives for the victim of breach (see Edlin and Reichelstein [1993]), but
this will not matter if the victim does not make substantial reliance decisions.
The victim of breach may seek specific performance, because she may use the threat of

forcing inefficient performance to increase her total payoff. The courts, however, should
be loathe to grant it unless she can show some reliance or specific investment of her own.

This proposal might be viewed as giving a new interpretation to the rule that specific
performance is only granted when the "legal remedy" of damages are "inadequate." The

inadequacy of damages is traditionally viewed as meaning that damages are difficult

to measure, such as with unique chattel. Section 3, however, showed that difficulty of
measurement per se is not particularly important. The model indicates that the victim of
breach should have to show that the remedy is "inadequate" because it does not provide

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlln

Page 27

partks in her position with appropriate incentives ex ante. Expectation damages

would

not provide appropriate incentives to the victim of breach (see Rogerson 11984], Shavell

[1980], and Edlin and R.eicbelstein 11993J). When the breach victim also must invest,
then, specific performance is better as it provides more balanced incentives (see Edlin

and Reicheistein (1993)).
Finally, we should ponder the implications of Section 3, which explained that the
accuracy of the expectation measure is not so important as its unbiasedness. This sug-

gests that it is worthwhile to consider the efficacy of certain legal rules that tend to bias
damages. One such rule is the rule that damages must be "certain".
Before closing, it is worth recalling some assumptions

that warrant examination in

future work. In particular, we have stuck to the Rogerson 11984] and Shavell [1980)
assumption that courts are costless. This allows a better understanding of their work, h,

relaxing the assumption would clearly be worthwhile to gain a more accurate descripi
theory. Relaxing the risk-neutrality assumption would also be a valuable exercise.

6.

References

Agion, P., M. Dewatripont, and P. Rey. 1994. "Renegotiation Design with Unverifiable Information?
Econometnca 64, 257—82.

Aghion, P, and B. Hermalin, 1990. "Legal Restrictions on Private Contracts Can Enhance Efficiency."
Jotgntai of Law1 Economics, .vnd Organization 6, 381-409.

Berke &f Co. v. Gnffln, Inc. [1976), 116 N.H. 760.
Rritton v. Thnicr (1834] 6 N.H.481, 26 Arn.Dec. 713.
Chung, T.-Y. 1991. "Incomplete Contracts, Specific Investments, and Risk Sharing." Review of Leonorn,c Studies 58, 1031—42.
Cooter, It, and M. A. Eisenberg. 1985. "Damages for Breach of Contract." California Law Review 73,
1432—89.

Edlin, A. S. 1993. "Specific Investments Holdups, and Efficient Contract Remedies!' Chapter 1 of

Aspecis of (he Efficient Recovery of Fixed Costs: A Colleclion of Essays. Ph.D. dissertation1 Stanford

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 2S

nomic Studies .58, 1031—42.

Cooter, R., and M. A. Eisenberg. 1985. "Damages for Breach of Contract." california Law Review 73.
1432—89.

Edlin, A. S. 1993. "Specific Investments, Holdups, and Efficient Contract Remedies." Chapter 1 of
Aspects of the Efficient Recorery of Fixed Costs: A Collection of Essays. Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford
University.

Edlin, A. S., and S. Reichelstein. 1993. "Holdups. Standard Breach Remedies, and Optimal Investment."
Unpublished manuscript.

Fuller, L. and M. A. Eisenberg 1990. Basic Contract Law. (West Publishing Co.: St. Paul, Minn.)
Fern v. Village Plaza, Inc. (1976]. 396 Mich. 639, 242 N.W. 2d 372.
Freund a'. Washington Square Press [1914J. 34 N.Y. 2d 379, 357 NY.S. 2d 857. 314 N.E. 2d 419.

Grout, P. 1984. "Investment and Wages in the Absence of Binding Contracts: A Nash Bargaining
Approach." Econometnca 52. 449—60.

Rermalin, B.. and M. Katz 1993. "Judicial Modification of Contracts between Sophisticated Parties:
A More complete View of Incomplete Contracts and their Breach." Journal of Law, Economics and
Organization 9, 230—55.

Konakaynma, A., T. Mitsui, and S. Watanabe. 1986. "Efficient Contracting with Reliance and a Damage
Measure." Rand Journal of Economies II. 450—57.

MacLeod, W. B,, and 3. M. Malcornson. 1993. investments, Holdups, and the Form of Market Contracts.TM American Economic Review 83, 811—37.

Milgrom, P. A. and C. Shannon. 1994. Irlonotohe Comparative Statics." Econo,netrica 62, 157-180.
AIr. Eddie, Inc. a'. Ginsberg, 430 S.W.2d 5 (Tex.Civ.App.1968).

Nordstrom, It. J. and I. F. Woodland. 1959. flecovery by Building Contractor in Default." Ohio St.
Law Journal gO, 193.

Polinsky, A. M. 1989. An Introduction to Law and Economics. Boston: Little Brown.
Rocking/sam County r. Luten Bridge Co., 35 F.2d 301 [1929J, 4th Cir.
Roserson, W. 1984. Efficient Reliance and Damage Measure for Breach of Contract.' Rand Journal of
Economics 15, 39—53.

Rç74erso W. 1992. "Contractual Solutions to the Holdup Problem." Review of Economic Studies 59,
Shavell, S. 1980. "Damage Measure for Breach of Contract." Bell Journal of Economics 11, 466—90.

Schwartz, A. 1993. "The Default Rule Paradigm and The Limits of Contract Law," Southern California
Interdtsciplunary Law Journal 3. 389-419.

Shirley MacLame Parker a'. Twentieth Century Fox [1970] 3 Cal. 3rd, 176, 89 Cal. Rpts. 731.

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments: by A.S. Edlin

Page 29

Spier, K. E., and M. Whinston. 1994. "Legal Restrictions for Breach of Contract:
Strategic Entry,
Reliance, and Renegotiation." Mimeo, Harvard University.
Williamson, 0. E. 1983. "Credible Commitments: Using Hostages to Support Exchange." American
Economic Review 73, 519—40.

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end or the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see Instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at .,ber.barvard.edu.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

4858

James Dow

Noise Trading, Delegated Portfolio

9j94

Gary Gorton

Management, and Economic Welfare

4859

Fiancis X. Diebold
David Neurn ark
Daniel Poisky

Job Stability in the United Stales

9)94

4860

Michael D. Bordo
Anna J. Schwartz

The Specie StandaM as a Contingent Rule:
Some Evidence (or Core and Peripheral
Countries, 1880-1990

9/94

4861

David Genesove
Christopher I. Mayer

Equity and Time to Sale in the Real
Estate Maitet

9/94

4862

Don Fullerton
Diane Lim Rogers

Distributional Effects on a Lifetime Basis

9/94

4863

0. William Schwert

Mark-Up Pricing in Mergers and Acquisitions

9/94

4864

Eruique 0. Mendoza
Assaf Razin
Linda L. Tesar

Effective Tax Razes in Macroeconomics:
Cross-Country Estimates of Tax Rates
on Factor Incomes and Consumption

9/94

4865

Jeffrey A. Fiankel
Andrew K. Rose

A Swvey of Empirical Research
on Nominal Exchange Rates

9/94

4866

George J. Borjas

Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality
Revisitet What Happened to Immigrant
Earnings in the 1980s?

9/94

4867

Joel Slemrod
Carl Hansen
Roger Procter

The Seesaw Principle in International
Tax Policy

9,94

4868

Louis Kaplow

A Note on Subsidizing Gifts

9194

4869

Harry Grubeit
Joel Slemrod

The Effect of Taxes on Investment and
Income Shifting to Puerto Rico

9i94

4870

Dani Rodrik

What Does the Political Economy Literature
on Trade Policy Q4ot) Tell Us That We

9/94

Ought to Know?

4871

LanE. 0. Svenssoru

Estimating Md Iiiterinting ForWard
Interest Ratet Sweden 1992-1994

9/94

4872

George J. Boijas

Immigration and Welfare, 1970-1990

9/94

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see Instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopber at uber.harvardadu.
Number

Author(s)

Title

4873

José De Gregorio
Federico Sturzenegger

Credit Markets and the Welfare Costs
of Inflation

4874

Erandice J. Canes
Harvey S. Rosen

Following in Her Footsteps? Women's Qiolces
10/94
of College Majors and Faculty Gender Composition

4875

Raghuram 0. Rajan
Luigi Zingales

What Do We Know about Capital Structure?
Some Evidence from International Data

10/94

4876

Gene Grossman
Ethanan Helpman

Foreign Investment with Endogenous Pxottion

l(W4

4877

Gene Grossman
Elbanan Helpman

Elcctoial Competition and Special Interest
Politics

10/94

4878

C. Keith Head
John C. Ries
Deborah L. Swenson

The Attraction of Foreign Manufacturing
Investments: Investment Promotion and
Agglomeration Economies

10j94

4879

David M Cutler

Market Failure in Small Group Health Inswance

10/94

Douglas Holtz-Eakin

Health Insurance and the Supply of
Enueprenews

10/94

4880

John R. Penrod
Harvey S. Rosen

10i94

4881

Nouriel Roubini
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti

Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open
Economies

10/94

4882

Nouriel Roubini
Gian Maria Milesi-Ferreui

Optimal Taxation of Human and Physical Capital
in Endogenous Growth Models

10j94

4883

Raquel Fernandez
Richard Rogerson

Public Education and Income Drslnbuu . A
10/94
Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform

R. Glenn Hubbard

Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance

1M4

4884

Jonathan Sbnner
Stephen P. Zeldes

4885

Martin Feldstein

Fiscal Policies. Capital Formation and Capitalism

l094

4886

Oliver Hart
John Moore

Debt and Seniori . An Analysis of the Role

10/94

Ricarclo J. Caballero

Explaining Investment Dynamics in US.
Manufacturing: A Generalized (S.,) Approach

4887

Eduardo M.RA. Engel

of Hard Claims in Constraining Management
10I94

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers In a single area, see lnstnictlous Inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at uber.harvard.edu.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

Martin Feldstein

James IL Stock

Measuring Money Growth When Financial
Markets Are Changing

10,94

4889

Mask Hooker
Michael Knetter

Unemployment Effects of Military Spending:
Evidence from a Panel of States

10,94

4890

John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey

Market Timing Ability and Volatility
Implied in Investment Newsletters'
Asset Allocation Recommendations

10/94

489!

W. Kip Viscusi

Cigarette Taxation and the Social
Consequences of Smoking

10,94

4892

Alan M. Taylor

Domestic Saving and International

10,94

4888

Capital Rows Reconsidered

4893

Mawice Obstfeld
Kenneth Rogoff

The Interteinporni Approach to the
Current Account

1M4

4894

Michael M. Knetter

Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?:
Evidence horn German Expat Prices

10/94

4895

Peter Diamond

Insulation of Pensions fran Political Risk

l094

4896

Lawrence H. Goulder

Environmental Taxation and the "Double
Dividend": A Reader's Guide

1094

4897

A. Lans Bovenberg
Lawrence H. Goulder

Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence
of Other Taxes General Equili&ium Analyses

10,94

4898

Bany Eicbengreen
Andrew K. Rose
Chazies Wyplosa

Speculative Atta*s on Pegged Exchange Rates:
An Empirical Expliration with Special Reference
to die European Monetary System

10,94

4899

Shane Greenstein

From Supenninis to Supercomputers: Estimating
Surplus in the Computing Market

10/94

4900

Orazio P. Attanasio
Thomas C. DeLeire

IRAs and Household Saving Revisiteth
Some New Evidence

10j94

4901

Timothy F. Bresnahaji
Shane Greenstein

The Competitive Crash in Large-Sale
Conunatial Computing

10,94

4902

Joel Slemrod

Free Trude Taxation and Protectionist Taxation

4903

Assaf Razin
Efraini Sadka

Resisting Mlgralion The Problems of Wage
Rigidity and the Social Burden

.!0i94
10,94

To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside Ike back cover. A complete list of NIIER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.
Number

Author(s)

Title

Date

4904

Ernst R. Berndt
Linda thai
David Reiley
Glen Urban

The Roles of Marketing, Product Quality and
Price Competition in the Growth and
Composition of the U.S. Anti-Ulcer

10/94

4905

Thomas C. Kinnaman
Don Fullerton

How a Fee Per-Unit Garbage Affects
Aggregate Recycling in a Model with
Heterogeneous Households

10/94

4906

Daniel S. Hamcrmesh

Aging and Productivity, Rationality and
Matching: Evidence from Economists

10,94

4907

Kooyul Jung
Yong-Cheol Kim
René M. Stulz

Investment Opportunities, Managerial
Discretion, and the Security Issue
Decision

10/94

4908

Jun-Koo ICang
René M. Stulz

How Different is Japanese Corporate
Finance? An Investigation of the
Information Content of New Security Issues

10,94

4909

Robert J. Barro

Democracy and Growth

10,94

4910

Richard B. Freeman

Crime and the Job Market

10,94

4911

Rebecca M. Blank

The Dynamics of Part-lime Work

11/94

4912

George J. Sodas

Ethnicity. Neighborhoods, and Human Capital
Externalities

Il94

4913

George J. Borjas
Bemt Bratsberg

Who Leaves? The Outmigration of the

1194

4914

Christopher J. Ruhm

Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems

11,94

4915

Aaron S. EdThi

Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments:
Efficient Investment Under Expectation
Damages

1194

Duag Industry

Foreign-Born

Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5M0 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for
postage and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER, 1050 Massachusetts
Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02138-5398. Advance payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check
or credit card. Checks should be made payable to the NBER and must be in dollars drawn on a U.S. bank. If
paying by credit card, include the cardholder's name, account number and expiration da For all mail orders, please
be sure to include your return address and telephone number. Working papas may also be ordered by telephone
(617-868-3900). or by fax (617-868-2742).

National Bureau of Economic Research

Domestic
Standard

ForSgn°

Aco4emlc Librari cxi

Faculty Members

Standard

Academic Libraries!
Faculty Members

$1300

$650

$1625

$975

300
300

75

110
110

270
270
ISO
270
ISO

135

70
70

135
75
35
135
135
75
35
35

350
350
350
350
200
350
200
85
350
350
200
85
85

70
0 TechnIcal Woilcing Papers
O HIstorical Development of the American Economy 70

35
35

85
85

O Full subscrlptlonC
Partial subsctlptlons
O Corporate FInance
O Stocks, Bonds, and Foreign Currency
o International Finance and Macroeconomics
O InternatIonal Trade and Investment
O Monetary Economics
O Economic FluctuatIons
0 tsng-Run Economic Growth
OSouptesol Pro.tctlvlty Growth
0 TaxatIon

75
135

75

70

OLaborStudles

270
270

o Economics ot Heath and Health Care

150

OEconomlcsoftheElderly
O lndustflai OrganIzation

210
210
110

210
110
50

210
210
110
50
50

50
50

• A lull subscription Includes all topics lisled under "partial subscriptlonc except tot Technical Woildng Papers and papers
on the Historical Developmenl of the American Economy. These must be ordered In addition to the lull subscriptIon.
Please Inquire about subscription prices for Africa and Australa.

PAYMENT OflIONS

o YES! Please begin ni subscription so the NBER Working Paper Series. I have indicated above which papers 1
would like to receive.
Plense mail my papers Jo this address:

By Phone (617) 868-3900

By FAX

(617) 868-2742

By Mail:

Publiations Department

National Bureau of Economic Research
1050 Massachusetts Ave.
Cambridge, MA 02138

Name ______________________________
Address

_____

O Payment in the amount of ________ enclosed.

O Please charge mny 0 VISA 0 MasterCard
Card Number:

________________

Phone

Card explratlorn ____________________________
FAX:

Signature

_____________________

-__________

