                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN
                         THE MARKETS FOR EDUCATION AND
                           HEALTH CARE: HOW AND WHY?




                                     James M. Poterba




                                  Working Paper No. 4916




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 1994


This paper was prepared for the NBER Conference on "Individual and Social Responsibility."
I am grateful to David Cutler, Martin Feldstein, Claudia Goldin, Jonathan Gruber, Roger Noll.
Julio Rotemberg, Richanl Zeckhauser, and .especially Victor Fuchs for helpful discussions on
these issues. This research was supported by the NSF and the Robert Woods Johnson
Foundation. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Health Care, Labor Studies and
Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by James M. Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4916
                                                                             November 1994

                           GOVERNMENT INTERVENTION IN
                          THE MARKETS FOR EDUCATION AND
                            HEALTH CARE: HOW AND WHY?

                                          ABSTRACT

       Education and health care are the two largest government expenditure items in the United

States. The public sector directly provides the majority of educational services, through the

public school bureaucracy, while most public support for health care is channelled through a

system of tax-supported government payments for services provided by private providers. The

contrast between public policies in these markets raises a host of questions about the scope of

government in a mixed economy, and the structure of policies for market intervention. This

paper examines how two st4ndard arguments for government intervention in private markets,

market failure and redistribution, apply to the markets for education and medical care. It then

considers the "choice of instrument' problem, the choice between intervention via price subsidies,

mandates, and direct public provision of services in these markets. Economic arguments alone

seem unable to explain the sharp divergence between the nature of public policies with respect

to education and medical care. Moreover, there is virtually no evidence on the empirical

magnitudes of many of the key parameters needed to guide policy in these areas, such as the

social externalities associated with primary and secondary education or the degree to which

adverse selection in the insurance market prevents private insurance purchase.


James M. Poterba
Department of Economics
M.I.T.
E52-350
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
       Education and health care are the two largest government expenditure items in

most developed economies. In 1991, total government spending on primary and

secondary education in the United States totalled $219 billion, and another $96 billion

was spent on public colleges and universities. Education outlays represent nearly

thirty percent of government purchases of goods and services. Direct government

health care spending totalled $316 billion, and another $60 billion of foregone revenue

was attributable to deductions and exemptions of health-related items under the
income tax.

      There are fundamental differences in the government's role in the health arid

education sectors of the United States economy. State and local governments are the

direct providers of the majority (92%) of primary and secondary educational services.

The service providers are government employees, with salaries set through a partly

potical process, and decisions about methods of production such as classroom

activities and curriculum are made by a quasi-political government bureaucracies.

Competition between alternative providers of educational services occurs largely

tl'.rough competition between communities for potential residents.

      In health care, although federal, state, and local governments ultimately pay for

more than forty percent of health outlays, they are direct providers of relatively Little

health care. While state and local governments operate some hospitals, and the

federal government administers the VA medical network, most health care providers

work in the private sector. Various government programs and policies nevertheless

substantially reduce the cost of medical care for many consumers. Medicare and

Medicaid, the federal government's programs to provide health care services to the
                                            2

elderly and the indigent, are essentially tax-supported systems of government
payments for services provided in the private market. In addition, the current income

tax code subsidizes medical outlays by households who are neither elderly nor poor,

thereby altering the price of health services.

      The contrast between public policies in these two markets raises a host of

qu'estions about the scope of government in a mixed economy. Even a cursory review

of current policies yields paradoxes. For example, why is most child care for pre-

schoolers in the United States provided through a system of family and private market

transactions, while primary and secondary education is provided directly by the

government? Why is the public sector's role in higher education substantially smaller

than its role in elementary education? Why did the GI Bill, which provided health care

and educational benefits for veterans of World War II, rely on a federal bureaucracy

(the VA) to directly provide health care, while relying on a variant of a voucher system

and private providers with respect to education? Why does the federal government

directly produce health care services for veterans, while relying on private providers

for those who receive benefits under Medicare and Medicaid? Why are there

substantial differences across localities in the degree of public vs. private provision of

some services?

      These questions relate broadly to the "choice of instrument problem," the

question of how government should intervene in a market if such intervention is

deemed necessary. Although public finance textbooks, such as Rosen 1992) and

Stiglitz (1 988), begin by explaining that market failure and redisiributive
                                           3

considerations can justify government intervention in a market economy, there is

remarkably little discussion of what types of policies are justified. Empirical evidence

on the importance of potential market failures, and the distributional consequences of

various interventions in the markets for education and health care services, is

particularly scarce. Moreover, economic factors alone are unlikely to explain the

observed structure of public policy, which is duo in significant part to historical and

political influences.

      This paper explores the "choice of instrument" problem with particular
application to the markets for education and health care. It is divided into five
sections. The first outlines the traditional market failure arguments that neoclassical

economists marshall to support of public intervention in private markets, and
discusses the application of these arguments to education and health care. Section

two explores the link between goals of redistributive justice and public policies in

these areas. Both education and health care have been described as "basic rights" in

some contexts, suggesting that these services should not be allocated on the basis

of ability to pay.

      The third section examines the comparative merits of three potential policy

interventions: price subsidies, including the special case of full public payment for

purchases in the private market, public mandates for private provision, and direct

government provision. It highlights conditions under which each of these potential

instruments will be successful in achieving particular policy objectives, as well as

situations in which each instrument may fail. Section four describes the current
                                           4
structure and historical evolution of public policies toward education and health care

in the United States, and considers the degree to which the market failure and

redistributive considerations described in the earlier sections can account for these

policies. The concluding section outlines areas of uncertainty where further work is
needed to evaluate alternative policy instruments.



1. Market Failures in the Markets for Education and Health Care

       Market imperfections may take many forms: the consumption of some goods

may impose external benefits or costs that are not reflected in their market prices,

informational asymmetries or other factors may lead to the non-existence of markets

for some products, or consumers may not have the information necessary to make

appropriate choices. This section considers the sources of market failure in markets

for education and health care.



1.1 Market Failures with Resoect to Education

      Many of the classical economists broke with their usual laissez faire view of the

appropriate role of government when confronted with questions of education policy.

In The Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argued that "The state derives no
inconsiderable advantage from [the education of the common people. If instructed

they arej ... less liable to the delusions of enthusiasm and superstition, which among

ignorant nations, frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders." (Book V. Part III,

article 2) This reference to society-wide externalities associated with the education
                                           5

of each individual is only one of the potential market imperfections that might warrant

government intervention in the market for schooling.

      The first, and most commonly alledged, source of market failure with respect

to education is the presence of externalities from schooling. This argument has been

made in many ways; Cohn and Geske (1990) provide an overview. Some claim that

an educated electorate is vital to a successful democratic society, for example

because it permits individuals to keep records, file tax returns, and evaluate canipaign

material. Others argue that an educated workforce is critical for the adoption of new

technologies and for improving not just an individual's productivity, but that of his or

her co-workers. Yet a third externality argument holds that there is a negative

relationship between education and crime, so that widespread education will reduce

crime and the associated social disruption.

      A related externality argument, that applied with particular force to the
nineteenth century United States, is that education assists in socializing many diverse

immigrant groups. This argument is probably specific to public education: providing

the same level of education, though various parochial schools, might have had a

smaller effect on social integration. Widespread public education during this period

probably helped the "melting pot" to function, and exposed groups from different
national backgrounds to the civic structure and related aspects of the United States.

       Each of these arguments suggests that private spending on education

contributes to a public good. If parents ignore the externalities associated with

education in deciding how much to spend on their child's education, education
                                            6

spending will fall below the socially efficient level. Public policies designed to increase

educational attainment therefore have some prospect for raising social welfare.

      A second potential rationale for government intervention arises because minors,

who are the usual recipients of education, are not responsible for deciding how much

schooling they will obtain. This responsibility falls to their parents, who also bear the

coats of education. Since the benefits of education accrue primarily to the children

who receive it, the level of spending on education depends critically on the degree of

parental altruism. if parents place a low value on improvements in their childrens'

future earning potential, then they may underinvest in their children, and government

intervention might be justified on the ground that it protects children from decisions

by their parents.1

      One difficulty with this argument is that it could be invoked to justify state

intervention in virtually all aspects of child rearing. Can parents be trusted to feed

their children properly? To provide the appropriate amount and type of playthings and

other stimuli to early development? It is not clear, as West (1970) notes, that the risk

of parental underprovision of education is any greater than the risk of underprovision

o many other important developmental inputs.

      A third market imperfection that may be relevant for education decisions



    11t is at least possible that some parents may be more concerned with their
children than a social planner would be. Parents may also misperceive the value of
spending on their children, measured in terms of the corresponding increment to
future income or utility, or be concerned primarily with the relative status of their
children, as discussed in Frank (1995). Any of these factors might lead to over-
provision of private education.
                                           7

involves capital market constraints. If some households face borrowing constraints

that limit their total access to credit or cause them to face borrowing rates above the

economy-wide marginal product of capital, then even parents whose altruism matched

that of the social planner might underinvest in their children. Because loans to obtain

education are not backed by tangible collateral, they are often difficult to obtain in
private credit markets.

       A fourth market imperfection, one that applies most strongly in small
communities with a limited number of children to educate, is the presence of fixed

costs in educational production. The marginal cost of adding another student to a

classroom is lower than the average cost of each student's education. Such economy

of scale arguments, which may also apply to consumption of some types of
specialized services in large school districts, provide an efficiency argument for group

consumption of educational services. This does not necessarily imply that the pubflc

sector must provide education.

      Although it is relatively easy to construct a list of imperfections in the market

for educational services, it is extremely difficult to quantify their importance. How

many parents, for example, would neglect their childrens' education? Moreover, while

there are undeniably some externalities associated with education, primary and

secondary education also yield very high private returns. The central question is

therefore whether there are externalities associated with education above the level

that parents would choose in a private market. Yet virtually none of the empirical

evidence on the economic returns to education is directed at this issue.
                                             8

       Optimal government policy must balance the gains associated with the partial

or complete correction of market failures against the costs of the policy and its

associated distortions. Virtually any government intervention, whether through price

subsidies or through public production of services, distorts behavior. Peltzman (1973)

and Sonstelie (1982) are among the small group of studies that have explored the

inetficiencies created by the current policy of free public provision of education.

Peltzman (1973) shows that free public schools distort parental choice, and lead some

parents who would otherwise have chosen schools better than their local public

schools to send their children to those schools. This is because lower quality, but

free, public schools may on balance be more attractive to parents than hipher quality

schools for which they must pay tuition.

       Sonsteiie (1982) also concludes that there is a significant efficiency cost to free

public schools, but his argument relies heavily on his assumption that private schools

are more efficient providers of educational services than their public school
counterparts.2 Neither of these studies considers the potential costs associated with

public rather than private production of education services. Further work on the

private demand for education is important for evaluating a number of current

educational reform proposals, such as those for school vouchers and other means of

introducing more competition into the educational marketplace.


    21t is difficult to control for the differences in the attributes of public and private
school students in making such efficiency comparisons. Even if private schools
appear to be more efficient when they are educating only a small and self-selected
part of the population, they could be no more efficient than exiting public schools if
their student input was the same.
                                           9

1.2 Market Failures with Respect to Health Care

       While potential market failures with respect to education center on externality

issues, those with respect to health care focus on information. Arrow's (19631

seminal analysis emphasizes several potential sources of market imperfection,

including asymettric information between consumers and providers of health care

services as well as uncertainty about current and future needs for medical services.

Uncertainty leads individuals to demand health insurance, and raises the question of

whether the insurance market satisfies the conditions of perfect competition. Health

care suppliers may also be imperfectly competitive, creating a further potential market

failure.

       The first potential difficulty with the health care market arises trom the IlmiteC

information that patients possess about the benefits associated with various medical

treatments. The effects of most treatments are random to some degree, and patients

are not well equpped to evaluate the relevant information on treatment effects.

Individuals rarely confront the same major illness several times, so there is little

opportunity to acquire information about the relative performance of different
treatment regimens. Moreover, since purchasing medical care typically involves

purchasing the services of an expert, quality evaluation is critical but very difficult.3

Combining information from many different patients is problematic because of

potential differences in their presenting conditions, so consumers may have no


   3Richard Zeckhauser also notes that most medical care is a 'preclusive good."
Choosing to have an operation performed by one physician effectively precludes other
physicians from performing this procedure.
                                          10

objective measures of physician quality. These factors suggest that patients may not

make rational choices about which health care services to consume.

       The unpredictable nature of many medical expenses, which leads to a demand

for insurance, gives rise to a separate set of market imperfections. Risk averse

individuals can raise their expected utility by purchasing actuarially fair medical
inurance. But once they have insurance that shares in the cost of their medical

outlays, their demand for medical care will be distorted because they no longer face

the full cost of their health care services. The resulting moral hazard problem can

impair the functioning of insurance market and leads private insurers to offer less than

full insurance.

       A related problem with the private medical insurance market turns on adverse

selection in purchasing population. Rothschild and Stiglitz (1976) and Wilson (1980)

have shown that when potential insurance buyers are heterogeneous, adverse

selection can lead to the disappearance of the markets for some types of insurance,

hence to market failure. The government has an important advantage relative to

private insurers in creating health insurance policies: it can compel individuals to

participate. Compulsion enables the government to insure everyone at the actuarially

fair rate for the entire population.

      There are other potential imperfections in the private health care market. Most

medical services are not supplied under perfectly competitive conditions. Many

hospitals and some specialized physicians may be monopolists in their local markets,

there may be collusion among the various doctors in an area, and there are a range
                                          11

of government subsidies to the production of health care professionals that cause

deviations from standard efficiency conditions. Externalities may also arise in the

consumption of medical care. Although small for most kinds of health care services,

such externalities are present with respect to innoculation against infectious diseases

and potentially with some other types of care as well.

      In the health care market, as with education, it is easier to list potential market

imperfections than to quantify their substantive importance or to link them to potential

market interventions. For example, while the 1994 Economic Reoort of the President

cites evidence that a non-trivial fraction of medical procedures are not medically

necessary, it is not clear that these procedures are the result of informational or other

problems. While many analysts agree that there are imperfections in the health

insurance market, and as Aaron (1994) notes, private insurers have evolved a variety

of devices such as experience rating, coverage waiting periods, and exclusions of pr-

existing conditions to address adverse selection problems, quantitative evidence on

the substantive consequences of adverse selection remains elusive.

       The vast majority of U.S. citizens currently obtain health insurance in prtvate

markets. A significant number of the uninsured have access to insurance, but choose

not to purchase it.4 Long and Marquis (1992) show that low-wage, part-time
workers are particularly unlikely to purchase employer-provided insurance. They


    4Adverse selection may lead insurers to offer some kinds of policies at very high
loads relative to their actuarial risk. Even if consumers could in principle buy such
policies, but do not, there may be a case for government intervention to improve the
workings of such markets. Thus the availability of an insurance policy per se does not
indicate that adverse selection is not a problem.
                                            12

 observe that one reason small firms with substantial numbers of such workers do not

 offer health insurance may be that their workers do not demand such coverage. There

is virtually no empirical evidence inking various types of market failure to the health
care utilization decisions of households.



2. Redistributive Arguments for Government Provision of Education nd Health Care

       While efficiency concerns are one rationale for public policies that intervene in

the markets for education and health care, they are not the sole or even the primary

rationale for existing programs.5 Redistributive concerns also play an important role.

With respect to both education and health care, many subscribe to what Tobin (1970)

labelled "specific egalitarianism:" the view that access to these services should not

be conditioned or income. This section explores the redistributive arguments for

government intervention in these markets in more detail.

      At the outset, one must ask why redistribution should be linked to particular

goods, rather than carried out with income transfers. Since the utility gain from

transferring a given bundle of goods to a recipient is always less than the recipient's

gain from receiving the cash value of these goods, there is a strong    priori argument

for separating redistribution from the provision of particular goods.

      While this argument applies for each recipient, it may not apply to a transfer



   5Zeckhauser (1986), in an essay that explores issues similar to those raised here,
concludes that "only a small portion of [the vast subsidies and direct payments for
health care and educationi can be justified primarily on the basis that they provide
public goods or remedy market failures.(p.47)"
                                          13
program as a whole. There are a number of reasons why in-kind programs or

subsidies to the consumption of particular goods can be more efficient than income

redistribution, even when the consumption of particular goods does not generate

externalities. First, in-kind transfers may be better than comparable cash transfers at

channelling resources to a target population. Nichols and Zeckhauser (1982 and

Besley and Coate (1991) argue that in-kind programs may help the government to

distinguish the truly needy from other potential program beneficiaries. Second, in-kind

programs may be attractive policies when policy-makers seek to impose their

preferences on individuals. In education, for example, public policies specify the

amount of schooling a child must receive.

      A fina' explanation for the use of in-kind rather than cash redistribution is

pohtical, rather than economic. More political coalitions support in-kind programs than

equivalent spending on cash transfers, because in-kind goods and services are

supplied by identifiable industries. Thus, there are interest groups that benefit from

in-kind redistribution. Teachers and health care professionals may support expanded

government transfers in their respective markets, even if they do not support

expanded income redistribution in general.6 West (1967, 1970) argues that even if

public provision of education was needed in the United States in the mid-nineteenth

century to overcome a lack of infrastructure for delivering educational services, it was

not needed for long. West (1967) identifies support from several organized interest



    Doctors, however, opposed the passage of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965, on
the grounds that these programs were the first steps to socialized medicine.
                                           14

groups, including teachers, as essential to the continued growth of public schools.



2.1 Redistributive Concerns and Education

       Providing "equal opportunity" is one of the objectives of current policies with

respect to education. Since parental resources are unequal, even if parents value their

children's lifetime utility in the same way as the social planner and face welt-

functioning capital markets, there will be differences in the level of education that

children would receive in a private market for education. Such differences may

translate into differences in lifetime earning opportunities, which some argue against

as unfair because they are beyond the childrens' control. The public sector must

therefore ensure access to adequate education for all, either by supplying a basic

educational services package, or through a system of income-linked subsidies of the

price of education. Zeckhauser (1986) notes that equality can be defined in many,

sometimes inconsistent, ways: equality of the price at which different households can

purchase a given service, equality of the quantity of service consumed by different

households, and equality of the outcome of service consumption are three examples.

      In the United States, public education has historically been a responsibility of

local government, although there has been a trend in the last half century toward

greater centralization of finance at the state rather than the local level. For the 1990-

91 school year, local revenue sources accounted for 46.5% of public spending on

primary and secondary education, compared with 47.3% from state governments and

6.2% from the federal government (Digest of Eductipnpl Statistics. 1993, Table
                                          15

156). In 1947-48, local governments provided 57.9% of the money, while two

decades earlier, in 1929-30, the local share was 82.7%.

      Local financing raises important qualifications to the redistributive power of

public spending on education. Because communities differ in their tax bases and their

willingness to impose taxes, there is substantial variation across places in spending

levels. Although a number of court decisions during the last three decades have

weakened the link between educational spending and property taxes on the grounds

that the property tax base is highly unequal across communities, disparities across

jurisdictions remain. Wealthy communities spend more on schools than poorer

communities, so the existing system of locally-provided education is not as
redistributive as it would be if a higher level of government were the primary service

provider.
      Since the incidence of local taxes is primarily on the residents of local
jurisdictions, at least when individuals are free to move, local public provision of

education is tantamount to taxing all residents of a jurisdiction to pay for the average

level of educational consumption in the community. This policy can redistribute
resources within a community, but it is a weak device for redistributing resources

between those in different communities. Milton Friedman 1962) argues that the

present combination of local government provision of education and reliance on local

property tax finance makes it more difficult for low-income families to purchase high-

quality education. This is because consuming high-quality public education usually

requires purchasing an expensive house in a school district with high-quality schools.
                                          16

This can require a much greater outlay of resources than simply purchasing higher

quality education.



2.2 Redistribution and the Government's Role in Health Care

      "Specific egalitarianism" also applies to universal access to health care. The

reôent health care debate provides many examples of policy-makers and political

leaders who believe that access to adequate health care should not be conditioned on

ability to pay, and there seems to be substantial popular support for this view.

Whether the stronger claim, that those with higher incomes should Li have access

to better care than those with low incomes, commands support is less clear. In any

event, redistributive objectives play a central part in the design of government health

care policy. Gornick et at. (1985) report that in 1963, on the eve of Medicare's

passage, only 56% of those aged 65 + had health insurance. The insurance rate for

younger age groups was substantially greater, even though the need for medical care

was greater among the elderly population, and this was one of the factors contributing

to support for Medicare.

      Government policies to subsidize health insurance and health care redistribute

along at least two dimensions. First, as with most redistributive programs, such

subsidies transfer resources to those with relatively low incomes. However, the with

respect to medical care one must also distinguish between the ex ante value of

government insurance, before learning about a household's medical needs, and the

     value of the insurance, after such needs are observed. The second aspect of
                                           17

redistribution within government health programs is a transfer from those who do not

require much medical assistance to those who do. Because health outlays are highly

concentrated, with estimates for 1994 suggesting that 20.3% of all health spending

will be accounted for by the 1.6% of the population with more than $30,000 in

spending, and 51.3% of spending will be done by the 8.1% of the population with

more than $10,000 iii health care outlays, the second form of redistribution can be

quite important.'
      Even if government subsidies to health insurance were not age-related, the age-

specific pattern of medical care demand would lead such subsidies to redistribute to

the elderly. The current structure of health care programs in the United States, with

eligibility for Medicare conditioned on reaching age 65, accentuates this redistribution.

Such policies both raise the standard of living of elderly households, and they also

may reduce the financial and other burdens on the children of the elderly who would

otherwise need to de/ote attention and resources to their care.8

      The intergenerational pattern of benefits associated with medical care for the

elderly is an important but relatively unexplored issue, and one that rriay be critical to




    7Economic Report of the President, 1994, p. 143. These statistics include all
medical care spending, including preventative, routine, and acute care. Spending on
acute caie is even more concentrated, with Aaron (1 995) reporting that five percent
of the population accounting for more than half of the outlays in a given year.

    Davis and Schoen (1978) explicitly mention reduced burdens on middle-aged
children of elderly households as one of the benefits of Medicare. Cutler and Sheirier
(1994) show that government provision of nursing home care displaces a substantial
amount of care that would otherwise have been provided by children.
                                           18

explaining the political support for these programs.9 Most individuals in middle-age

have surviving parents. For example, Himes (1994) shows that for a 35 year old

white woman in 1 987, the probability that she had two living parents was
approximately .60. The probability that she had at least one living parent was greater

than .90, substantially higher than the probability that she had at least one child (.81).

The probability that a white woman has at least one living parent does not fall below

one half until she reaches her early 50s. Thus altruism from children to parents can

explain political support among middle-aged individuals with respect to health care

policy for the elderly. It is also possible that part of the increased taxes required to

finance such benefits will be offset by higher bequests from parents who received

transfers and therefore did not have to spend-down their wealth during retirement.




3. The Choice of Instruments: Subsidies, Mandates. & Government Provision

      Why is the nature of government involvement in education and health care so

different? In the health care market the government plays a largely financial role,

purchasing health care services provided by the private market, while iii the niarket

for educational services, it is the single largest supplier of the service in question.

This section considers the structure of public sector interventions in private markets,

given that there is a market failure or redistributive justification for some market



    This question may be even more central to analyzing public support for provision
of nursing home care rather than medical care.
                                             19

intervention.

      The basic criterion that a social planner would use to choose a means of market

intervention is clear: select that policy which provides the highest level of social

welfare. In practice, policy choices involve important political aspects which may
dwarf direct social welfare concerns. Suppressing political considerations for the

moment, this section considers the factors that determine the relative merits of

different policy instruments.

      The choice among various alternatives depends not only on the market failure

that motivates government intervention in private markets, but also on the costs of

different methods of intervention and the capacity of government officials to obtain

the information needed for successful intervention. These latter concerns suggest

that even if there is a market failure, it may be optimal for the government aQI to

intervene because the cost of government action would exceed the gains from

remedying market failure. This possibility, "government failure," has been discussed

by McKean and Minasian (1966) and Wolf (1986).

      This section compares price subsidies, government mandates, and direct

government service provision. It discusses the advantages and disadvantages of

each. The next section describes actual polices toward education and h'lth cr in

the United States, and asks whether the various considerations described below cw

explain the structure of current policies.
                                            20

3.1 Price Subsidies

       The textbook remedy for externalities that are not reflected in private choices

is a "Pigouvian tax" that alters the price individuals face, so that their private choices

will yield the socially efficient level of consumption. In practice, a range of public

policies are available to alter the private cost of purchasing services such as education

and medical care. These include tax subsidies, direct subsidies such as Medicare that

involve government financing of most or all service consumption, and incentives to

the production of services, such as grants to medical schools or interest-free loans for

medical students.

      The efficacy of price subsidies depends critically on the price elasticity of
demand for the subsidized service. When this elasticity is low, when there is
uncertainty about this elasticity, or when there is a wide divergence across
households in this elasticity, then price subsidies may be an unattractive form of

market intervention. Weitzman (1974) develops an argument of this form in his

comparison of "prices vs. quantities" as alternative means of regulation.

      There is no consensus on the empirical magnitude of the price elasticities of

demand for education and medical care. Studies of the demand for education

typically compare local public spending in different towns, and invoke the median

voter model to argue that the each town's spending is the level demanded by the

town's median voter. There are many potential difficulties with this apptoach,

including the potential influence of political institutions such as Proposition 13 on local

spending, and the problem of modelling the choice of local spending when
                                           21

jurisdictions are imperfectly competitive. Studies of this type usually yield relatively

small estimates of the price elasticity of demand; Sonstelie's (1982) study of
California, for example, suggests a value -.16.

      In the medical care market, the central problem is the potential endogeneity of

health insurance, which has an important effect on the net price of medical care

services. Some of the most convincing empirical evidence to date on the price
elasticity of demand for medical care is based on the RAND Health Insurance

Experiment, a systematic social experiment that was conducted in four cities during

the mid-1970s.     In analyzing the resulting data, Keeler et l, (1988) report an
elasticity of demand for total medical care of -.22 for households facing copayment

rates of greater than 25 percent. The estimated demand elasticity for well-patient

care is greater, -.43, while the elasticity for hospital care is -.14.

      Specific egalitarianism with respect to health care does not imply that all

individuals should consume the same amount of medical care; some people need very

little care in a given year. Rather, it implies equality of access, so that conditional on

need, individuals have the same opportunity to receive care. This suggests that from

the standpoint of public policy, a key parameter is the price elasticity of insurance

demand rather than medical care demand. The demand for insurance is substantially

more price sensitive than the demand for health care. Gruber and Poterba (1994)

present evidence, based on changes in tax incentives for insurance purchase in the

1980s, suggesting that the price elasticity of insurance demand is hetw'n -1 ind -7

These estimates, which are based on the effects within several years around a tax
                                           22
reform that reduced the after-tax cost of insurance for the self-employed, may

somewhat overstate the long-run elasticity of demand for insurance. They are

nevertheless consistent with earlier studies using different methodologies, which also

suggest large price effects on insurance demand.

        These elasticity estimates suggest that price subsidies may have substantial

effects on the demand for health insurance, they are not likely to have large effects

on the consumption of education. This has direct implications for the choice of policy

instrument: price subsidies to education may not be very successful in altering the

quantity of services in the private market.

        The principal advantage of price subsidies is that they preserve individual choice

in selecting service providers and the level of services to be consumed. Such choice

permits individuals to search for goods and services with qualities or other attributes

that are weU suited to their needs. If there is substantial heterogeneity in household

tastes, then allowing individual choice can have a substantial positive effect on

consumer welfare.1° The difficult case arises when recognizing this heterogeneity

may exacerbate the market failures or inequality that public policy is designed to

address.

        One drawback with price subsidies is that they create incentives for households

to re-categorize non-subsidized expenditures in an attempt to qualify them for the

subsidy. This problem, the dual of the tax collection problem in which taxpayers


   °This argument presumes that consumers are capable of making rational demand
decisions, an assumption that may not hold with respect to some aspects of medical
care.
                                         23

redefine taxable income into non-taxable forms, has two consequences. First, it

means that the revenue cost of a price subsidy may be greater than the subsidy rate

times the actual amount of the subsidized activity. Second, and significantly if the

government's objective is to ensure that everyone consumes a minimal service level,

the private market may create "sham transactions" that qualify for the price subsidy

but do not achieve the government's goals.

      Education illustrates the potential problem with sham transactions. If parents

received subsidies for school spending, but "schools" were not well defined for this

purpose, one could imagine a range of service providers who would comingle services

for parents with educational services. Schools might, for example, organize family

field trips that were of value to parents as well as children, and include the cost of

these trips in tuition charges. The ease or difficulty of monitoring such sham
transactions affects the desirability of using price subsidies to encourage service

consumption.

      Two additional problems deserve mention when subsidies are enacted as part

of the tax system, as they are with some aspects of health care. First, because

marginal tax rates are progressive, a subsidy that operates by allowing individuals to

deduct certain expenditures from taxable income will have a larger marginal effect on

the price paid by high- than by low-income households. Second, the effective subsidy

rate in this case is affected by changes in the income tax system, changes which may

bear no relation to changes in the rate of subsidy that is suggested by market failure

considerations.
                                           24

 .2 Government Mandates

       One alternative to price subsidies is a government mandate of that aH

 households purchase a particular good or service. The recent discussion of "individual

mandates" in the health reform debate provides an example: individuals would be

required to purchase health insurance satisfying some criteria, but these policies could

be purchased in the private market. Current requirements that employers purchase

workers compensation insurance, and that children receive certain vaccinations before

beginning elementary school, are examples of goverment mandates.

       The primary advantage of mandates is that they ensure universal consumption,

and they can be tailored to directly control levels of consumption. By mandating that

all children in Certain age groups attend an accredited elementary or secondary school,

the government achieves at least one measure of equality in educational consumption.

When concerns about equity in outcomes rather than opportunity motivate policies,

mandates may be attractive policy instruments. Mandates can be open-ended,

requiring all individuals to consume at least a certain amount of a service, or they may

be closed-ended, specifying precisely the good or service that is to be consumed. The

latter achieves a greater degree of equality across individuals, at the welfare cost of

denying individual choice.

      It is important to contrast the effects of price subsidies with the effect of

government mandates in the framework suggested by Weitzman (1974). With price-

based instruments, at least ex ante, it is difficult to assess the quantity response to

a policy. This makes such instruments unattractive in situations where there are
                                         25

substantial benefits to particular levels of service consumption, as might be the case

with some levels of education or some types of innoculations. Mandates, with or

without public service provision, solve this problem because they specify the level of

service consumption, but they impose ex ante unknown costs on many individuals and

firms.

         A secondary advantage of mandates, which can be very important in the

political economy of policy design, is that they can be designed to impose costs on

individuals or firms without affecting government budgets. In times of fiscal

stringency, such as the present, mandates may be particularly attractive to
policymakers because they provide a mechanism for affecting real activity without

spending money. Some popular discussions of public policy appear to exhibit
confusion about the relationship between taxes and mandates, and there appears to

be more political opposition to new taxes than to new mandates with economically

equivalent effects. This is one of the reasons that mandates played a central role in

the recent discussion of health care reform.

         Mandates require a well-functioning private market for the mandated good or

service if they are to succeed. Mandating that consumers purchase a service that is

supplied under conditions of imperfect competition, for example, may have less

favorable effects on social welfare than mandating purchase of a service that is

competitively supplied. This issue arises with respect to health insurance mandates:

if one of the market failures in health insurance is that adverse selection leads to

missing insurance markets, a mandate without government insurance provision may
                                         26

be ineffective.

      The economic analysis of government mandates is not as well developed as the

analysis of taxes and price subsidies, but several points about the efficiency
consequences of mandates nevertheless deserve mention.           First, by mandating
minimum levels of consumption but not altering the price of services for those who

want to consume more than the mandate level, open-ended mandates avoid distorting

the behavior of higher-consumption households. Summers (1989) emphasizes this

point in his discussion of employer mandates. Second, assuming that individuals must

pay to satisfy the mandate either by purchasing the mandated good or service, or

through reduced wages if the mandate affects employers11, then a mandate is a

form of "benefit tax." The welfare cost of the mandate depends on the difference

between the amount the individual values the mandated good and the cost of

purchasing this good. At least in some cases, the efficiency cost of a mandate can

be substantially smaller than the efficiency cost of tax-financed government provision

of the service. Mandates may therefore be attractive in situations where total private

spending on a good is large, but the government wants to increase this spending

without transferring all of the initial outlays into the government sector.




   11Gruber (1994 summarizes previous work, and presents new evidence on, how
wages adjust to government mandates that firms provide certain benefits to their
workers. When mandates apply only to a sub-group of employees, wages may
decline for some workers who do not benefit from the mandate, and they may not
decline by the full amount of the mandate's cost for some workers who do benefit.
                                         27

3.3 Public Provision

      A third means of encouraging consumption of particular services involves direct

public production. This could be combined either with a regime in which service

recipients do not pay, arid costs of production are covered through tax revenues, as

with education, or with a regime in which consumers are charged when they purchase

government produced goods and services. The Government Printing Office and state

universities are examples of the latter system. Government production can be, but

need not be, coupled with a mandate for consumption.

      Public provision differs from price subsidies and mandates in that it gives

government greater control over the nature of the services individuals consume. This

can also be achieved in the other cases by regulating the product that is subsidized

or mandated, but in some cases the costs of regulation may make this an
unacceptable strategy.     ri the case of education, for example, one reason for

substantial government production may be the difficulty of specifying a required
school curriculum for non-government providers, although the existence of accredited

private schools raises some question about this explanation. Public provision can also

be a device for restricting potentially wasteful private competition among consumers,

which Frank (1995) suggests may apply to some extent with respect to educational

and other services consumed by middle- and upper-income households.

      Government control may also be important when distributional issues that might

be difficult to resolve in the private sector arise in the allocation of services. in

education, for example, there may be important externalities across children within a
                                          28
classroom or school.'2 How would the private market handle the disruptive child

who imposes negative externalities on other children? Possibly by excluding him from

the school, or by charging him a premium to attend school. If these responses seem

unacceptable to notions of justice or equal opportunity, it may be necessary for the

government to control the production process.

       A distinct reason for government provision of some services is that profit-

making enterprises may place their bottom lines ahead of concerns about quality or

appropriateness of service, undermining public confidence jr-i their services. In such

situations, non-profit providers may emerge or the public sector may assume
responsibility for service delivery.'3 At a time when public confidence in government

seems very low, however, it is difficult to know whether consumers would prefer a

for-profit hospital, which may deliver services they don't need but that generate

profits, or a public hospital, which may deliver low-quality versions of services they
do need.

      There are several arguments against public service provision. One is that the

government is characterized by "production inefficiency" as a service provider. There

have been numerous studies of the relative efficiency of public and private provision,



   '2The extent of peer group effects and within-classroom externalities in the
educational process is controversial. For example, Henderson, Mieskowski, and
Sauvageau (1978) find positive externalities from being exposed to high-achievement
students; other studies find weaker results.

   '3Non-profit providers avoid the charge of profit-maximization service delivery, but
they may also be subject to some of the production inefficiencies that may
characterize public production. Hansmann (1995) discusses the role of non-profits in
health and education, and outlines potential sources of inefficiency in their operation.
                                             29
 surveyed for example by Vining and Boardman (1993). These studies, while not

conclusive or uniform, suggest that government production is less efficient than

private production, although the comparison between government production arid non-

profit production, common in education and health care, is less clear. Bureaucrats

who do not face the discipline of a competitive market may make inefficient choices

with respect to factor inputs and their choice of output.

       A brief summary of the state of research comparing efficiency at public and

private health care facilities illustrates the lack of consensus. Lindsay (1976)

compares various measures related to productivity at VA and private hospitals. The

findings are mixed: lengths of stay for given procedures are longer at VA hospitals,

but the staff-to-patient ratios are also significantly lower, in contrast to the inefficient

input hypothesis. Becker and Sloan (1985) analyze data from the American Hospital

Association's 1979 Survey of Hospitals on for-profit, non-profit, and government

hospitals. They do not find any pronounced differences in hospital costs across forms

of ownership. Schulz, Greenley, and Peterson (1984) compare the costs of public and

private mental health services, and contrary to the earlier hospital studies, they find

substantially lower costs for private sector providers. The existing literature on

hospital costs is not conclusive, but it is far richer than the literature on the costs of

public versus private education. Further work on the relative efficiency of different

forms of ownership in both health and education is therefore is needed to judge the

costs of public production of services.

      A second disadvantage to public provision is the absence of any objective
                                           30
standard for which services should be provided. For a profit-maximizing firm, services

that generate profits will be provided. But for a tax-supported public institution, there

are no such guidelines, and there is a resulting risk of over-provision of services, or

providing the wrong services.

      A third disadvantage, which applies when publicly-provided services are tax-

financed, involves the efficiency cost of raising revenue. If total government spending

to provide a given set services is C, but this amount is raised through taxes, then the

cost imposed on the private sector is (1 +A)C, where A is the marginal deadweight loss

of raising tax revenue. For the current United States tax system as a whole,
estimates suggest a value of A near .30. Ballard, Ballard, Shoven, and Whalley (1985)

provide support for this estimate. This efficiency cost of taxation compounds the

efficiency lost in the production process.



4. Mixing & Matching Instruments: Current Policy Toward Education & Health Care

      Actual government intervention in the markets for education and health care

involves each of the three policy instruments described above. This section describes

the nature and evolution of government policies in both of these areas, and then tries

to evaluate whether efficiency considerations, redistributive objectives, or other

factors explain the nature of observed policies.



4.1 Government Involvement in Markets for Education

      Public provision as well as mandates and price subsidies are evident in the
                                          31

market for education. Local governments are direct suppliers of most primary and

secondary educational services. Yet with respect to pre-elementary education (child

care), the government's role as a provider is limited. There are some price subsidies

to consumers, and some regulations on private market providers, in higher education,

there are price subsidies through a variety of student loan programs, which also

alleviate capital market constraints, but state governments are also direct producers

of higher educational services.

      Before describing policies toward primary and secondary education, it is
important to note that it is difficult to separate child care and education on any ripri

basis. There is evidence that much of a child's performance in school is predictable

from his or her preparation for elementary school, i.e., from what would traditionally

be labelled "child care." This sub-section therefore describes government policies

toward child care as well as primary, secondary, and higher education.

      The vast majority of care for children under the age of 5 is provided in the home

and/or by relatives. In 1991, 30.3% of children were cared for at home by a relative,

5.7% at home by a nonrelative, 13.1% in another home by a relative, 17.9% in

another home by a non-relative, and 23% were cared for in an organized child care

facility.14 The majority (62%) of the 2.9 million children enrolled in nursery school

programs were in private sector programs. Thus the overwhelming majority of care

for children who are not yet old enough to attend elementary school was provided


    14The remaining children were cared for in a variety of other arrangements. Data
are based on the Survey of Income and Program Participation, as reported in the U.S.
Bureau of the Census, Current Population Reports P70-30.
                                          32
either by the private market, or through non-market transactions within families or

other social groups.

       Child care for children in families where both parents work, or where a single

parent works, is partly subsidized by the federal income tax code. The Child Care

Credit provides a credit of 30% of child care costs for families with Adjusted Gross

Incomes (AGIs) of less than $10,000, and phases down to a credit rate of 20% for

those with AGIs of more than $28,000. The maximum amount of expenditures to

which the credit can be applies is limited to $2400 for families with one child, and

$4800 for families with two or more children. There is also a federal tax provision

that allows employees to pay for some child care expenses using dependent care

accounts, which are offerred by some employers as part of cafeteria plan benefits.

These accounts are more valuable than the child care credit for high-income
households, but the total federal revenue loss associated with these accounts is small.

      There is a sharp contrast between government involvement in the markets for

child care and education. Most primary and secondary educational services in the

United States are publicly-provided. In 1991, 90.7% of elementary and secondary

school students were enrolled in public schools, and per student expenditure averaged

$4622. At the college level, the public sector role is weaker but still strong: 78.7%

of college students are enrolled in public colleges (see the 1993 Stptistical Abstract

of the United States, Table 228). Real public spending has increased during the last

three decades, due both to the rising real costs of educational inputs and to increased

inputs per student. Hanushek and Rivkin (1994) report that the pupil-teacher ratio in
                                           33

U.S. schools, for example, has declined from 26.3 in 1950 to 20.5 in 1970 to 15.4

in 1990.

       Table 1 presents data on the estimated cost of various government programs

that affect children, as compiled by the Congressional Budget Office, augmented with

information on state and local educational spending. The table includes information

on outlays for programs that are targetted only to preschoolers, such as Head Start

and other compensatory education programs, as well as the share of broader
programs, such as Food Stamps and Medicaid, that is received by children. The table

shows that with the exception of spending on primary and secondary education, most

of the programs targetted at children are relatively small. Moreover, most of these

programs are targetted at children in poverty. The child care tax credit and the
dependent care allowance are two of the few that are available to children in families

above the poverty line.15

      In light of the substantial flow of tax revenue to primary and secondary
education in the United States, it is natural to ask whether concerns about market

failure, a desire for redistribution, or other factors stimulated government support for

education. The start of public education in the United States can be traced to a 1647

law of the Massachusetts Bay Colony directing any town with at least fifty families

to hire a teacher, and any town with at least one hundred families to support a


   15This situation contrasts sharply with that in some European countries, where
governments provide child care to a substantial fraction of households. Ohlsson and
Rosen (1994) report that in Sweden, 57 percent of pre-school children were in public
day care in 1 992, while a very high fraction of the rest were home with parents who
were on paid parental leave.
                                         34
grammar school that could prepare young men to attend a university.               The

introduction of this law, reproduced in Johnson et al. (1986), does not suggest

concern with either market failure or redistribution:

      It being one chiefe project of y ould deluder, Satan, to keepe
      men from the knowledge of y Scriptures, ... evy towneship in this
      jurisdiction ... shall appoint one within their towne to teach all
      such children as shall resort to him to write and read ... (p.252).

While legislative language is not always a reliable guide to the factors that led to

passage of a law, it may nevertheless be informative. This passage suggests a

paternalistic desire to educate children. This was complemented by a concern that

without schools, the Massachusetts Bay Colony would not be able to ensure a future

supply of ministers.

      The Massachusetts law was a model for public school legislation in other New

England colonies, but it did not diffuse throughout the United States until the
nineteenth century. In the South, for example, with large plantations and few towns

with critical population mass, schooling for the children of wealthy planters was

usually provided by private tutors.      In the Middle Atlantic states, the school
environment in the years following settlement involved a collection of private schools,

many with religious affiliations. These states received many immigrants in the

nineteenth century, and the growth of public schools in these states was justified in

large part on the argument that such schools would facilitate assimilation of recent

immigrants. Redistributive concerns did not appear to play an important role. The

current concern about equality of access arose after public schools were well
                                          35
established in the United States.1

      The evolution of public high schools in the United States also suggests that

redistributive concerns were not central. When public high schools first became

popular in the late 1 800s, their incidence was regressive. Only the children of middle

and upper income families could afford to remain in school beyond the elementary

level, so they were the primary beneficiaries of these schools. Over time, the extent

of participation in these schools grew, but similar arguments about regressive benefits

have been applied to publicly-financed colleges and universities in the post-war

period.17

      The heavy reliance on local government provision of education in the United

States, which contrasts with the situation in many Western European democracies,

also undermines the importance of redistribution as an explanation for public provision

of education. Because local governments depended heavily on the local property tax

base for their revenue stream, different towns even within small metropolitan areas

have historically devoted very different levels of resources to their public schools.



4.2 Government Involvement in the Market for Medical Cpre

       Government involvement in the market for medical care is even more diverse



    16West (1 967, 1 970) describes the expansion of publicly-provided education in the
United States, emphasizing the role of a growing education bureaucracy in expanding
the public sector's role.

   17Hansen and Weisbrod (1 969) present evidence suggesting that the net benefits
of the University of California system are greater for high than for low-income
households.
                                          36

than that with respect to child care and education. The federal government's

Medicare and Medicaid programs involve substantial government financing for private

purchases of health care, while the Veterans' Administration and many state and local

governments operate a network of hospitals. Unlike teachers, however, most health

care professionals work for private firms or non-profit institutions, although they are

often subject to substantial government regulation.

      Direct government spending on health services and supplies totalled $368

billion in 1992, 45.5% of total health care outlays (Congressional Budget Office

(1 992)). The government's spending share was substantially greater for hospital care

and nursing home services. Government funds also represented more than sixty

percent of the costs of medical research and medical facilities construction.

      The government's share of the aggregate health care budget has grown

substantially in the last three decades. In 1965, government spending accounted for

24.7% of health care outlays in the United States, with state and local governments

accounting for more than half of this total (13.2%). Since the enactment of Medicare

and Medicaid in 1965, however, the federal government's role has increased. Federal

spending accounted for 31.3% of all health care outlays in 1992, compared with 28%

a decade earlier. Projections suggest even more rapid growth in the government's role

in the future, as a consequence of both demographic change and continued growth

in the relative cost of health care services.

      Table 2 reports direct government spending on health care, as well as foregone

revenue associated with several tax expenditures, for 1992. The single largest
                                           37
program supporting health care services is Medicare, which accounted tot inure tliii

$130 billion and is projected to increase to more than $250 billion by the end of this

decade. There are also substantial foregone revenues associated with the tax

expenditures for health insurance ($45 billion), as well as substantial tax expenditures

from the federal income tax deduction for medical expenditures in excess of 7.5% of

adjusted gross income, and deductions for charitable contributions to health care

institutions. Direct government spending on health care is substantially less important

than federal payments for health care from others. Federal outlays on the Veterans

Administration health system, for example, were $14 billion in 1992, or 6.3% of total

federal spending on health care.

       The Medicare program has two parts. The first, Medicare Part A, provides

hospital insurance for the elderly. This component of Medicare is funded with the

revenues from a payroll tax on most employed workers, so it involves explicit
intergenerational redistribution. Medicare Part B, or Supplementary Medical Insurance

(SMI), provides insurance for outpatient services at hospitals and the costs of
physician visits. SMI is an pDtional insurance program, and elderly individuals who

choose to participate pay premiums that represent roughly one quarter of the cost of

this insurance. The balance of the cost is financed from general revenues. Since all

elderly individuals are eligible for the same benefits under Medicare, this aspect of the

program redistributes from high- to low-income elderly households. However,

Medicare is financed with a regressive flat-rate payroll tax, which has an opposite

distributional effect.
                                         38

      Tax subsidies for the purchase of health insurance and health care are the

government provisions that affect the largest number of health care consumers The

exclusion of health insurance benefits from taxable income, and the tax rules allowing

households to deduct medical expenses in excess of 7.5% of Adjusted Gross Income

when computing taxable income, reduce the price of health care for most taxpayers.

The reduction in the after-tax price of insurance raises insurance coverage among

employed households. While the decision not to tax the value of employer-provided

health insurance was taken with the recognition that this would spur private insurance

coverage, some of the most rapid growth in employer-provision of such insurance

took place during the World War II, when wage controls made it difficult for employers

to raise compensation in other ways.

      Tax subsidies may encourage private spending, but they are weak instruments

for redistribution across households. Since marginal tax rates increase with household

income, high-income households receive the largest percentage subsidy to their

purchases of both health insurance and medical care.

      Medicaid, the other major government direct outlay program, pays for health

insurance for poor households. The program is administered by the states subject to

federal guidelines. Federal Medicaid spending is the most rapidly growing government

health care outlay, exhibiting an annual growth rate of 15% between 1987 and 1990,

and 28% between 1990 and 1992, although these growth rates are not expected to

persist. A substantial part of the rapid growth in the early 1 990s was due to state

gaming of federal reimbursement rules to maximize federal contribution to the state
                                          39
programs.

       The history of government intervention in the medical marketplace suggests

that redistributive concerns were the primary motivation for passage of the Social

Security Act Amendments of 1965, which created Medicare and Medicaid. There is

a long political history to the debate on public health insurance in the United States;

see for example Starr (1 982}. A number of European countries, notably Germany and

England, adopted universal health insurance laws in the late 19th and early part of the

20th century. There was active discussion of such proposals just before World War

I in the United States, as part of a battery of policies supported by the Progressives.

Their motivation appeared to be specific egalitarianism, the provision of health

insurance as a basic human right. The outbreak of World War I derailed legislative

interest in these proposals, however, and, facing some opposition from doctors who

did not want government to infringe their professional sovereignty, these proposals

did not attract much attention in the fifteen years after World War I.

      The next wave of interest in national health insurance occurred during the New

Deal, when President Roosevelt considered but rejected the idea of including health

insurance in the legislation that became the Social Security Act of 1935. Once again,

opposition from doctors was an important stumbling block. Although FDR never

embraced national health insurance as a critical policy goal, President Truman did, and

in 1948 he launched a major campaign to secure passage of a national health bill.

The American Medical Association, by then a well-organized lobbying group,
undertook an all-out campaign to block passage of this legislation. The debate took
                                         40
place during a penod of great concern about Communist influence in the United

States, and the AMA's labelling of the Truman proposals as "socialized medicine' and

linking these proposals to Leninism proved successful in defeating them. The Social

Security Amendments of 1950 did however stipulate that federal matching fjnd

would be provided for medical payments to health care providers for medical care to

those on public assistance. This was a first step toward federal provision of medical

care for the needy, and it was expanded ten years later in the Kerr-Mills Act (1960).

      The debate that led to passage of Medicare and Medicaid was joined in the mid-

1 960s, as part of the Great Society program. By this time concern about access to

health care for low-income and elderly households had become acute, in part because

rising health care costs made it more difficult for these groups to obtain care. Only

56% of the elderly had health insurance prior to the passage of Medicare. The critical

political manouever in the Medicare debate was limiting the discussion to health care

for the elderly. The evidence suggesting poorer access to health care for the elderly

than for other age groups was difficult to dispute, and by focusing the program.

objections from the AMA that this would lead to government control of doctors was

blunted. Representative Wilbur Mills combined a Democratic proposal for mandatory

hospital insurance (Medicare Part A) with a Republican proposal for a voluntary

outpatient and physician care program (Medicare Part B) and produced legislation that

was supported by a majority of Congress.

      The critical element in the debate leading to Medicare was a distributional

concern with access to health care among specific groups. On this dimension,
                                           41

Medicare achieved its objectives. Davis and Schoen (1978) present some evidence

that the ratio of physicians visits per year by those in high income and low income

categories was more equal in 1975 than in 1964, before the passage of Medicare and

Medicaid. The effect was less pronounced for the elderly than for younqer groups.

       To summarize this section, it is difficult to explain either the present structure

of public involvement in education in the United States, or the historical evolution of

the public sector's involvement, using either externality or redistributive arguments.

Redistributive concerns do appear to play a greater role in defining government policy

toward medical care. Concern about market failures in the medical marketplace does

not appear to have played an important role in the rise of publicly-financed medical

care in the United States.



S. The Research Agenda

       The questions of whether particular markets y fail, and whether
redistribution could in orinciole be carried out, receive far more discussion among

economists than the questions of whether markets actually fail, whether government

intervention in these markets improves or worsen matters, and whether various

redistributive programs are actually successful. Yet the choice amongst various

policies for government intervention depends on the actual performance of such

policies. This concluding section outlines several areas where further research will

yield high returns in informing the debate on choice of public policies in the fields of

education and health care.
                                          42
      First, because externalities are invoked to justify intervention in both of these

markets, there is a pressing need to document the magnitude of the externalities,

particularly those associated with consumption of education. It is important in this

regard to assess whether the generation of externalities changes as the level of

consumption changes, i.e., whether primary and secondary education yields laror or

smaller externalities than higher education. If most externalities are generated by

levels of educational input that individuals would choose to obtain without
government subsidy, then the case for public intervention in the educational
marketplace may be much weaker than is commonly believed. More generally, there

is a need to quantify the importance of various imperfections that are listed as

potential problems with the markets for education and health care, and to move

beyond the discussion of reasons that might justify public intervention to reasons that

   or do not.

      Second, the efficiency of public providers of services, as opposed to that of

private sector providers, requires further attention, since this is a key determinant of

whether governments should "make or buy" services. The range of organizational

forms in the medical care sector -- private hospitals, non-profit hospitals, as well as

state- and federal-government run hospitals -- provides a wealth of data for comparing

input choices and productivity.      While many studies of public versus private
production conclude that the public sector is a less efficient producer of various goods

and services, these studies are often contaminated by various selection biases in the

set of services provided by the government. Zeckhauser (1986) argues that in higher
                                          43
education, public institutions tend to function more like their nonprofit competitors

than like other government bureaucracies. Further evidence on this issue for primary

and secondary education, and for hospitals, would be valuable.

      A third important issue, more concerned with political economy than the

microeconomic analysis of government policy, concerns the basis of political support

for redistributive policies toward children and the elderly. Spending on education

represents redistribution to the young; spending on health care and health insurance

transfers resources to the elderly. A number of commentators, including Preston

(1984) and Kotlikoff and Gokhale (1993), have called attention to the rapid growth

of transfers to the elderly, and the relative decline in society's investment in

children.18 This may reflect more effective political activities of elderly voters than

those who are concerned with children, or it may reflect the fact that more middle

aged households are childless than without living parents. It is also possible that most

middle-aged individuals know that they can expect to live well into their seventies and

eighties, and to benefit from generous policies toward the elderly that are enacted

today. These factors may explain the political reality of growing redistribution toward

the elderly rather than children.

      The current policy debates in both education and health care, including the

discussions of school vouchers, increased state financing of schools, and a federal

mandate for health insurance, suggest that the nature of government intervention in



    '8This may be partly related to the nature of current policies toward children and
the elderly: education is provided by a public bureaucracy, medical care by the private
market with public subsidy. Voters may not like expanding the bureaucracy.
                                          44
these markets is subject to continuing evaluation and potential change. This
underscores the need for further investigation of both the arguments for government

intervention in these areas, and the merits and demerits of alternative instruments for

market intervention.
                                        45
                                   REFERENCES
Aaron, H. 1994. Issues Every Plan to Reform Health Care Financing Must Confront.
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 8: 31-43.

Aaron, H. 1995. Reforming the Financing of Health Care: The Clash of Goals, Facts,
      and Ideology. In Individual and Social Resoonsibility. V. Fuchs, ed. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Arrow, K. 1963. Uncertainty and the Welfare Economics of Medical Care. American
      coriomic Review 53: 941-973.

Ballard, C., J. Shoven, and J. Whalley. 1985. General Equilibrium Computations of
      the Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the United States. Americzrn Economic
      Review 75: 128-1 38.

Becker, E. and F. Sloan. 1985. Hospital Ownership and Performance. Economic
     Inquiry 23: 21-36.

Besley, 1. and S. Coate.       1991. Public Provision of Private Goods and the
      Redistribution of Income. American Economic Review 81: 979-984.

Cohn, E. and T. Geske. 1990. The Economics of Education, Third Edition. Elmsford,
      NY: Pergamon Press.

Cutler, D. and L. Sheiner. 1994. Policy Options for Long Term Care. In Further
      Topics in the Economics of Aging, D. Wise, ed. Chicago: University of Chicago
      Press.

Davis, K. and C. Schoen. 1978. Health and the War on Poverty. Washington:
      Brookings Institution.

Frank, R. 1995. Consumption Externalities and the Financing of Social Services. In
      Individual and Social Responsibility, V. Fuchs, ed. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Friedman, M. 1962. Capitalism and Freedom. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gornick, M., J. Greenberg,. P. Eggers, and A. Dobson. 1985. Twenty Years of
      Medicare and Medicaid: Covered Populations, Use of Benefits, and Program
      Expenditures. Health Care Financing Review, 1955 Annual Supplement.
      Washington: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

Gruber, J. 1994. The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits. American Economic
     Review 84; 622-641.
                                       46
Gruber, J. and J. Poterba. 1994. Tax Incentives and the Decision to Purchase Health
     Insurance: Evidence from the Self-Employed. Quarterly Journal of Economics
      109: 701-733.

Hansen, W. and B. Weisbrod. 1969. Benefits. Costs. and Finance of Public Hklher
     Education. Chicago: Markham Publishing Company.

Hansmann, H.     1995. Organization of Production in the Human Services. In
      Individual and Social Resoonsibility. V. Fuchs, ed. Chicago: University of
      Chicago Press.

Hanushek, E. and S. Rivkin. 1994. Understanding the 20th Century Explosion in
     U.S. School Costs. Mimeo, University of Rochester.

Henderson, J., P. Mieszkowski, and Y. Sauvageau. 1978. Peer Group Effects and
     Educational Production Functions. Journal of Public Economics 10: 97-106.

Himes, C. 1994. Parental Caregiving by Adult Women. Research on Aciinp 16:191-
     211.

Johnson, J., H. Collins, V. Dupuis, and J. Johansen. 19XX. Introduction to the
      Foundations of American Education. Boston: Allyn and Bacon.

Keeler, E., J. Buchanan, J. Roiph, et p1. 1988. The Demand for Episodes of
     Treatment in the Health Insurance Experiment. Report R-3454-HHS. Santa
      Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Kotlikoff, L. and J. Gokhale. 1993. The Equity of Social Services Provided to
      Children and Senior Citizens. Boston: Working Paper #20, Boston University
      Department of Economics.

Lindsay, C. 1976. A Theory of Government Enterprise. Journal of Political Economy
      84: 1061-1077.

Long, S. and M. Marquis. 1992. Gaps in Employment Based Health Insurance: Lack
      of Supply or Lack of Demand? In Health Benefits and the Workforce.
      Washington: U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and Welfare Benefits
      Administration.

McKean, R. and J. Minasian. 1966. On Achieving Pareto Optimality - Regardless of
     Cost! Western Economic Journal 5: 14-23.

Nichols, A. and A. Zeckhauser. 1981. Targetting Transfers Through Restrictions on
      Recipients. American Economic Review 72: 372-377.
                                        47
Ohlsson, H. and S. Rosen. 1994. Public Employment, Taxes, and the Welfare State
      in Sweden. Mimeo, University of Chicago.

Peltzman, S. 1973. The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private
      Expenditures: The Case of Higher Education. Journal of Political Economy 81:
      1-27.

Preston, S. 1984.     Children and the Elderly: Divergent Paths for America's
      Dependents. Democraphy 21: 435-457.

Ravitch, D. 1986. American Education: Public and Private Responsibilities. In
      American Society: Public end Private Responsibilities, W. Knowlton and R.
      Zeckhauser, eds. Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Company.
Rosen, H. 1992. Public Finance, Third Edition. Homewood, IL: Hicflard 1). IrwIn.

Rothschild, M. and J. Stiglitz. 1976. Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
     An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information. Quarterly Journal of
     Economics 90: 629-649.

Schulz, R., J. Greenley, and R. Peterson. 1984. Differences in the Direct Costs of
      Public and Private Acute Inpatient Psychiatric Services. Inguiry 21: 380-393.

Sonstelie, J. 1982. The Welfare Cost of Free Public Schools. Journal of Political
     Economy 90: 794-808.

Starr, P. 1982. The Social Transformation of American Medicine. New York: Basic
      Books.

Stiglitz, J. 1988. Economics of the Public Sector (2nd Edition). New York: W.W.
      Norton.

Summers, L. 1989. Some Simple of Economics of Mandated Benefits. American
    Economic Review 79 (May): 177-184.

Tobin, J.   1970. On Limiting the Domain of Inequality. Journal of Law and
      Economics 13 (October): 263-277.

U.S. Congressional Budget Office.    1992.     Proiections of National Health
      Expenditures. Washington: Congressional Budget Office.
Vining, A. and A. Boardman. 1992. Ownership vs. Competition: Efficiency in Public
      Enterprise. Public Choice 73: 205-239.
                                        48
Weitzman, M. 1974. Prices vs. Quantities. Review of Economic Studies 41: 447-
     491.

West, E. 1967. The Political Economy of American Public School Legislation. Journal
      of Law and Economics 10: 101-128.

West, E. 1970. Education and the States Second Edition. London: Institute for
      Economic Affairs.

Wilson, C. 1980. The Nature of Equilibrium in Markets with Adverse Selection.
      Journal of Economics (Spring): 108-1 30.

Wolf, C. 1986. Markets or Governments: Choosing Between Imperfect Alternatives.
      Working Paper N-2505-SF. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation.

Zeckhauser, R. 1986. The Muddled Responsibilities of Public and Private America.
     In American Society: Public and Private Responsibilities, W. Knowlton and R.
     Zeckhauser, eds. Cambridge: Ballinger Publishing Company.
                                       49

     Table 1: Government Spending Programs Directed Toward Children, 1990

Program Description                                     Spending ($ Billion)

Cash Transfers
      Social Security                                                8.9
      Supplemental Security Income                                    1.4
     Aid to Families with Dependent Children                         i 2.9
     Veterans Compensation                                            0.5
     Earned Income Tax Credit                                        4.0
In-Kind Transfers
      Food Stamps                                                    7.3
      Child Nutrition                                                7.1
      Medicare                                                       0.1
      Medicaid (mult by 1.755 to get 12.63)                          7.2
      Housing Assistance                                             7.5
      Low Income Energy Assistance                                   0.6
Federal Education Programs
      Compensatory Education                                         4.5
      Impact Aid                                                     0.8
      Education for the Handicapped                                  i .6
      Other Education Programs                                       i.
Other Federal Programs
      Child Support Programs                                         o.s
      Human Development (Head Start and Other)                       1.8
      Foster Care/Adoption Assistance                                1.6
      Maternal and Child Health & Immunization                       0.8
      Summer Youth Employment                                        0.7
      Other                                                          0.6
Revenue Loss from Tax Credits
     Earned Income Tax Credit                                        2.0
     Dependent Care Credit                                           2.4
     Exclusion of Employer-Provided Dependent Care                   0.5
     Exclusion of Benefits Provided Through Cafeteria Plans          3.1

State and Local Education Spending                                  194.0

Source: U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Ways and Means, 1993 Green
ook: Overview of Entitlement Prpnrams: Beckcirpund Material and Data on Prpcirpms
within the ,Jurisdictipn of the Committee on Ways and Means (U.S. Government
Printing Office: 1 993), pp. 1 566-7, and author's tabulations.
                                            50
                  Table 2: Government Spending on Medical Care, 1992


Direct Government Spending

        Federal                                                        $253
         - Medicare                                                    136
         - Medicaid                                                     70
         - Other (VA, NIH)                                              46

        State & Local                                                  115
         - Medicaid                                                    53
         - Other (Workers' Compensation, Public Hospitals)             62

Tax Expenditures on Health (Federal & State)

        Exemption of Employer-Provided Health Insurance                 45

        Untaxed Medicare Benefits                                       8

        Deductibility of Medical Expenses                               3

        Other (Tax-Exempt Debt, Charitable Deductions)                  4
Total                                                                  $428

Source: Author's tabulations based on information in CBO (1992), Tables 11 and 8-2.
