                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                HIGH WAGE WORKERS AND
                                    HIGH WAGE FIRMS




                                        John M. Abowd
                                        Francis Kramarz
                                       David N. Margolis




                                    Working Paper No. 4917




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  November 1994


We gratefully acknowledge the financial and computing support of INSEE. Abowd and Margolis
were also supported by the National Science Foundation (SBR 91-11186 and SBR 93-21053).
We are also grateful for the comments of David Card, Ronald Ehrenberg, Hank Farber, Robert
Gibbons, Guy Laroque, Stefan Lolliver, Bentley MacLeod, Olivia Mitchell, Ariel Pakes, Alain
Trognon and Martin Wells as well as for comments received during seminars far too numerous
to mention here. The data used in this paper are confidential but the authors' access is not
exclusive. Other researchers interested in using these data should contact the Centre de
Recherche en Economic et Statistique, ENSAE, 15, bd Gabriel P6I-i, 92244 Malakoff Cédex,
France. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by John M. Abowd, Francis Kramarz and David N. Margolis. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #49 17
                                                                               November 1994

                                HIGH WAGE WORKERS AND
                                   HIGH WAGE FIRMS

                                           ABSTRACT

       We study a longitudinal sample of over one million French workers and over 500,000

employing finns. Real total annual compensation per worker is decomposcd into components

related to observable characteristics, worker heterogeneity, firm heterogeneity and residual

variation. Except for the residual, all components may be correlated in an arbitrary fashion. At

the level of the individual, we find that person-effects, especially those not related to observables

like education, are the most important source of wage variation in France. Firm-effects, while

important, are not as important as person-effects. At the level of firms, we find that enterprises

that hire high-wage workers are more productive but not more profitable. They are also more

capital and high-skilled employee intensive. Enterprises that pay higher wages, controlling for

person-effects, are more productive and more profitable. They arc also more capital intensive

but arc not more high-skilled labor intensive. We also find that person-effects explain 92% of

inter-industiy wage differentials.


John M. Abowd                                                Francis Kramarz
School of Industrial and Labor Relations                     CREST/INSEE
Cornell University                                           Dpartement de Ia Recherche
Ithaca, NY 14853-3901                                        15, bd Gabriel Pen
and NBER                                                     92244 Malakoff C&lex
                                                             FRANCE
David N. Margolis
D6partement de Sciences Economiques
Univensite de Montreal
C.P. 6128 Succursale Centre Ville
Montreal H3D 3J7 Quebec
CANADA
 1 Introduction
 For several decades labor economists have lamented the lack of microeco-
 nomic data relating characteristics of firms to characteristics of their workers
 (see, for example, Rosen (1986) and Willis (1986)) because such data would
 permit researchers to begin to disentangle the effects of firm-level human re-
 source policies from the effects of external choices made by individual work-
 ers. Why do high-compensation firms pay more than the apparent going
 wage? Perhaps such a strategy delivers a gain in productivity or profitabil-
 ity that exceeds the incremental wage cost, as predicted by efficiency wage
 and agency models.' Perhaps high-paying firms select workers with higher
 external wage rates, thus sorting the workers into firms that have differential
 observed compensation programs.2 Although broadly representati 'e linked
surveys of firms and workers are not available in the U.S., there have now
been numerous studies that attempt to relate firm performance to the de-
sign of the compensation system.3 Furthermore, many have analyzed the
inter-industry wage differentials among individuals as they were the mani-
festation of differences in firm level compensation policies. 41n this paper
we present the first extensive statistical analysis of the individual- and firm-
level heterogeneity in compensation determination. We examine variation in
personal wage rates holding firm-effects constant and variation in firm wage
rates holding personal effects constant. Due to the longitudinal nature of our
data, we are able to control for both measured and unmeasured heterogeneity
in the workers and their employing firms.
    A high-wage worker is a person with total compensation higher than
expected on the basis of observable characteristics like labor force experi-
ence, education, region, or sex. A high-wage firm is an employer with :orn-
   'See Lazear (1979), Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984), Hart and Hölmstrom (1987) and Sap-
pington (1991) for concise statements of the theories generating these predictions. Tests of
these models have been performed by Abowd (1990), Abowd and Kramarz (1993), Cahuc
and Dormont (1992), Gibbons and Murphy (1990, 1992) and Hutchens (1987) Kahn and
Sherer (1990), Leonard (1990).
   2This view is espoused by Bulow and Summers (1976), Cain (1976), Jovatiovic (1979),
and Roy (1951). Some tests of these models include Dickens and Lang (1985), Flinn
(1986), Gibbons and Katz (1991) and Heckman and Sedlacek (1985).
   3See Ehrenberg and Milkovich (1987), Ehrenberg (1990), Ichniowski and Shaw (1993)
   4See Dickens and Katz (1987), Gibbous and Katz (1992), Groshen (1991), Krueger and
Summers (1988), Thaler (1989).


                                            9
pensation higher than expected given these same observable characteristics.
Until now all empirical analyses of personal and firm heterogeneity in coin-
pensation outcomes have relied upon data that were inadequate to identify
separately the individual-effect necessary to classify a worker as high-wage
and the firm-effect required to classify a firm as high-wage. Using a unique
longitudinal data set on firms and workers that is representative of private
French employment, we are able to estimate both components of compen-
sation determination, allowing for unrestricted correlation among them. In
the estimated models, we find that individual-effects are statistically more
important than firm-effects and that the two are not strongly correlated;
however, the economic interpretation of these statements is complicated by
the mobility patterns in the data. Although our statistical model allows
for the identification of both firm- and individual-effects, we show that for
many simple economic models, the structural heterogeneity of the workers
and employers is not identical to the statistical heterogeneity measured by
our descriptive model.
   We use the results of our individual-level data analysis to relate firm-
level outcomes and choices to the structure of the firm's compensation policy.
Specifically, we ask whether firms that hire high-wage workers are more prof-
itable (no), more productive per worker (yes), more capital intensive (yes),
more professional-employment intensive (yes), more skilled labor intensive
(no) and more likely to survive (yes). Second, we ask whether high-wage
firms are more profitable (yes), more productive per worker (yes), more capi-
tal intensive (yes), more professional-employment intensive (no), more skilled
labor intensive (no) and more likely to survive (maybe). Finally, we aggregate
our results to the industry level, where we find that high-wage workers and
high-wage firms are both explanations of the inter-industry wage differential
with high-wage workers being much more important empirically.
    The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our analysis data
set. Section 3 describes our methods for identifying and estimating the large
number of statistical effects that characterize worker and firm compensation
heterogeneity and provides several potential economic interpretations of the
descriptive model's parameters. Section 4 describes our results. Section 5
concludes. A Data Appndix describes our manipulation of the French data
in great detail. Finally, a Model Appendix gives details of the theoretical
calculations


                                     3
2 Data Description and Sampling Plans
Our sample of workers comes from the Declarations Annuelles de Salaires
(DAS), an annual survey of employer-reported earnings subject to French
social security taxes. We follow approximately one million individuals over
the years from 1976 to 1987. The sample is a 1/25th extract of the French
work force, excluding government employees (but including employees of
government-owned businesses). Our compensation measure is the real to-
tal annual compensation cost for the employee. This includes direct salary
and all benefit costs.5 The data source reports the number of days worked
per year. Part time workers were excluded. The total compensation measure
for part year workers was annualized on a base of 360 days per year. The
data included the individual's age, sex, location of job, occupation, and an
identifier for the employer. We supplemented these data with information
on the individual's education, available for ten percent of the sample and
imputed for the rest (see the Data Appendix). We followed workers and
employers across years and assigned a worker to the employer for which he
or she had the largest number of paid days in a given year. We refer to the
resulting analysis data file as the "individual data."
    Our sample of firms comes from the annual survey BCnéfices Industriels
et Commerciaux (BIC), which collects a large amount of income statement,
balance sheet, employment and flow of funds information in support of the
French national accounts. We use a probability sample of 20,000 of these
firms, followed from 1978 to 1988, constructed by INSEE to facilitate research
on firms (INSEE, 1989, 1990a-1990c). Our measures of firm performance
include value added per employee, operating income as a I)roPOrtiOfl of total
assets and sales per employee. As measures of factor inputs we calculated
total real assets and total year-end employment. We added detailed measures
of the firm's employment structure (professional, skilled and unskilled) from
the annual Enquête sur la Structure des Emplois (Survey of employment
structure). We refer to the resulting analysis data file as the "firm data."
    The worker and firm samples are linked using an identification number
(SIREN) for the employer that corresponds to a business unit—one or mimore
establishments engaged in a related economic activity. Thus, our analysis
   5Soiiie components of employer compensation costs were estimated by the Revenus
division at INSEE.


                                       4
of firm-effects is at the level of an enterprise and not at the level of estab-
lishments. We do not use the ownership structure of our firms. When the
enterprises change owners but remain in the same business, their SIRENs
do not normally change. Thus, we are able to follow the economic activ-
ity of our firms through most financial and ownership restructurations. We
use the linked individual-firm data to estimate the relation among various
compensation policies and firm-level economic variables.


3 A Statistical Model for Individual Com-
       pensation
The basic compensation equation for an individual is given by
                              Yit =   x/3 + O + 1I'J(i,)it + Ej                            (1)
where y is the compensation of individual i = 1,..., N, for time t = F1, ...,
F1 is the first year an individual appears in the data, L1 is the last year s/he
appears in the sample, and the function J(i, t) gives the identity j of the
employing firm for individual i at date t. The effect x1/3 is the predicted
effect of time varying, person-specific characteristics                  with 3 being a vector
of parameters to be estimated. The time-invariant individual-effect 0: S
decomposed as
                                 O1=Os.+Ui7                                 (2)
where u, is a vector of observable time-invariant person-specific characteris-
tics arid i is a vector of parameters to be estimated. The firm-effect 'J(i,t)it
is decomposed as
                                                                                  (3)
                         ?J(i,t) + 'Yi J(i,t)SJ(i,t)it •+• '12 J(i,t) Ti (sJ(1,t)1 — 10)
where cJ(i,t), 'YlJ(i,t) and '12J(i,t) are firm-specific parameters to be estimated,
SJ(j,t)It is individual i's seniority at date tin firm J(i, t) and the function Ti(z)
is the linear spline basis function6
                                        1 0 for z < 0 1
                                          zforz>0                                 (4)

   6The use of a linear spline at 10 years of seniority is a specification that we found better
suited to these data than a quadratic. As will become evident below, three parameters at
the firm level is already quite flexible and we did not find much to be gained by adding
additio- polynomial tems in seniority.

                                                5
Finally, the error term e is stochastically independent of all other effects
in equation (1) with E[EJ 0 and Var[egJ = o. The stochastic structure
of XtI9, 0, and          is unrestricted so that these effects may be cross-
correlated. The identification conditions imposed upon the model are
                                           =   0


and
                                Ijj2 ll)J(j) = 0.

3.1 Potential Interpretations of the Descriptive Model
We illustrate the relation between structural heterogeneity in the popula-
tions of workers (heterogeneous abilities or tastes) and firms (heterogeneous
efficiencies or technologies) and the statistical heterogeneity in equation (1)
using three economic models with very simple population structures. In each
case we derive the conditional expectation of individual compensation given
the identity of the employing firm and the individual. We then relate the
parameters of this conditional expectation to our statistical pararneterization
above.

3.1.1   A matching model with endogenous turnover
Suppose that workers are homogeneous. There are two types of firms, in and
n, and two periods. In type m firms a worker's marginal product and wage
rate are always w', and employment is always available in a type in firm. In
type n firms there is a matching process. Worker i's productivity is w + e
in both periods with       drawn from a binomial distribution B(—H, H, ).
The matching outcome, e,,, unknown to both the worker and the firm at the
beginning of the first period of employment, is realized at the end of the first
period and becomes public information. Workers are offered contracts at the
beginning of the first period of the form (w1, w2) and workers may leave firm
n at the end of the first period. All firms make zero profits. The equilibrium
contract for firms of type ri is (w —,w     + es,). All workers in type n firms
with a bad matching outcome (—H) quit to type in firms.
    To simplify the model, we consider a stationary situation with nine work-
ers who flve for two periods each, three born in period 0, three born in period

                                       6
1, three born in period 2. Two workers in each generation enter type n firms,
one worker in each generation enters a type rn firm. Of the two workers who
entered type n firms, let one draw a positive matching outcome and the other
draw a negative matching outcome. The worker with the negative match-
ing outcome leaves the type ii firm for a type m firm when the matching
parameter is made public.
   The structure of the data implied by this theoretical model is shown in
appendix Table Bi. This corresponds to the following parameter values in
our descriptive model:
                                       =W
where    is the overall mean;



where c is person i person-effect;

                                (cbm,"ym) = (0,0)

for the type in firm compensation policy; and
                                            H 3H
                            (qn,fn) = (—--,——)
for the type n firm compensation policy.

3.1.2   A rent-splitting model with exogenous turnover
Suppose there are four different individuals, two types of firms, in and n,
and two time periods. Each of the two firms earns quasi-rents of q7, and
the quasi-rents are split by negotiation so that the workers receive a share
s, of the quasi-rent in firm j. Suppose that each firm employs two workers.
With probability one, exactly one worker is randomly selected to separate
from the period one employer and be re-employed at the other firm in the
second period. All information about the workers and firms is known to
those parties but not to the statistician. All workers are included in the data
sample and the typical worker has wages of the form:

                                Yit   Xi   + sjq

                                       7
where xj is the measure of wage rate heterogeneity, i.e. the worker type,
q follows a binomial distribution B(—Q, Q, ), i = 1..., 4, j   in, n, and
 =
t 1,2.
    Table B2 shows the relation among the theoretical parameters, x, s3, and
Q, and the statistical parameters of equation (1) for each worker and each
period. The model cannot be solved exactly. Thus, we use these relations to
solve, by least squares, the moment equations that determine the relations
between the statistical parameters and the model parameters. This yields:

                                  (1 =

where    is the overall mean;

                    a1 = (—3smQ — sQ           —
                                                     x,) + xj


                    a2 = (—sQ — 3sQ —                x) + x2

                        = (smQ + 3sQ —              x1)   + x3


                        = (3smQ + sQ —              x) + X4
where the a are the four person effects;

                      ()         = ((Sn 5m)Q25Q)

and
                      ()        = ((Sn
                                             sT)Q
                                                    —2sQ)
are respectively the type m and type n firms' policies.




                                         S
 3.1.3 An incentive model with unobserved individual heterogene-
        ity
 Following Kramarz and Rey (1994), consider workers who are heterogeneous
 with respect to a parameter q E [0, 1], which is known to them but not known
 to the firms. Suppose, furthermore, that there are two types of firms, m and
 n, that differ according to their technology, and that there are two time
 periods. At type m firms, workers are hired for one period and have a level
 of productivity 11* regardless of their q. At type n firms, workers are hired in
 period one, produce y regardless of their q, and choose an effort level, either
 o or E, to exert during on-the-job training. At the end of the first period,
 workers in firm type n take a formal, verifiable test. If worker q exerts effort
 E, the test is passed with probability q. Otherwise, the test is passed with
 probablity kq, where (0 < k < 1). At the beginning of the second period,
 the firm decides which workers to keep and the workers may leave on their
own. Workers who exert effort E have a level of productivity in the second
period of y + Tq if they remain in a type n firm.
     There are many type rn firms and two type n firms, which compete for
workers in both periods. Workers in type in firms always receive a wage
w. Workers in type ri firms are offered a wage contract (w1(q), w2(q), b(q)),
where w1(q) is the first period wage, w2(q) is the second period wage, and
b(q) is the bonus paid to those who pass the test. In equilibrium all finns of
both types make zero profits because of the competition to attract workers.
Furthermore, if y + S(y + Tq) is convex in q (6 being the rate of discount of
future earnings), the equilibriumcontract will be such that w1(q) y—qb(q),
w2(q) = y -I- Tq, and
                            b(q) =
All workers with type q, q p, will choose to enter one of the type n firms
and will choose to exert effort E when b(p)
    To simplify the model, we suppose that rq =       r-
                                                   and that parameters are
such that p = We also suppose that there are nine workers, three of whom
are employed by type in firms and the remaining six work in type n firms.
   Appendix Table B3 shows the wage of every individual in each firm afl(l
in each period in terms of the theoretical model, as well as iii terms of the
  7Proofs of all these assertions can be found in Kramarz and Rey (1994).


                                         9
descriptive model. These equations can be solved in order to express each
parameter of the descriptive model using parameters of the theoretical model.
As in the rent-splitting model, the solution is not exact—we must use least
squares to express the function of the theoretical parameters that is closest to
the statistical parameter. To see why, consider the workers in type n firws.
Individual 7 passed the test and, consequently, received a bonus. This result
generates a seniority slope for individual 7. Individual 8 did not pass the test
and therefore received no bonus in period 2. Thus individual 8 has a diffeietii
seniority slope in the same firm. The statistical parameter -y,, measures the
average seniority slope in the firm n. Thus, the resulting estimated seniority
slope will be the least squares estimate of the average of the two slopes. We
illustrate these solutions for all the statistical parameters below.
    The overall mean, p, is given by the following:
                      6r '         q1        6r q w 2y
The individual effects, c, i = 4,5,6, 7 are:

           =            qj( —2) +5q(2 — qi) +        q],i = 4,5,6,7
                                                    j=8

and those for individual i = 8,9 are:

                         =
                             [qj(qj —2) + q — 5q]
where k = 8,9, i     k. Finally, the individual effects for i = 1,2,3 and the
firm effects for in are not separately identifiable, since there are no movements
between firms. We arbitrarily set:
                                  = O,i = 1,2,3

for these individuals, implying a firm effect of:

                       6r                           2w*     2y
                                                            3



                                        10
For type n firms we have:
                       £     7                 9              *
                       uT                            2                 1'
                   =
                       "    i=4
                                        —2)— 5•j:q1 —
                                               i=8           ---
                                                                   +

The seniority slopes are:
                                          =0
for firm in and                                          9
                                    7
                            =
                                  [>Jq(3q+2)+3qfl
for firm n.
    Notice that the a of the workers in the type n firm depend upon their
hidden characteristics qi as well as the characteristics of their fellow workers.
Note also that the intercept in type in firms is larger than that of type ri
firms. Finally, as mentioned above, the seniority slope,       in type n flims is
the least squares average of the career paths in the firm, depending on the
success or failure of the test.
    Although we do not attempt to recover the parameters of any particular
theoretical model from the estimates produced below, we will use the sim-
ple theoretical frameworks outlined in this subsection to comment upon the
results. No single economic model is likely to explain a large, diverse labor
market like the one we study. Nevertheless) it is important to keep in mind
that it is not always possible to make a direct interpretation of the statistical
parameters (for individual or firm) in terms of simple economic parameters.
In general, the interpretation of a given statistical parameter depends upon
all the elements of the economic model under consideration.

3.2 Computation and Identification in the Statistical
       Model
In the context of equation (1), our goal is to estimate the invariant parame-
ters /3 and 11 consistently in the presence of individual- and firm-effects that
may be correlated with the person-specific characteristics. Next, we want to
estimate 0, and J(i,t)it in a manner that allows us to use these estimates,
when averaged within a firm j, as potential explanatory variables for differ-
ences in firm productivity, profitability, factor utilization and survival. The

                                        11
computational problem we face is that the least squares design matrix implied
by equations (2) and (3) is enormous and cannot be simplified using any of
the standard techniques in linear models (as, for example, in Scheffe, 1959).
There are over one million individuals and 500,000 firms (of which 14,000
have at least 10 individual-year observations) represented in our data. Thus,
eliminating the individual-effects from (1) by deviations from person-means
leaves a high dimension, non-sparse, non-patterned least squares equation
system to solve for the time-invariant and firm-specific parameters. Siini-
larly, eliminating the firm-effects by deviations from firm-means (conditional
on seniority) leaves an equally complex least squares equation system to solve.
Finally, adopting Chamberlain's (1984) method of projecting the individual-
and firm-effects onto a set of person and firm characteristics, while permit-
ting consistent estimation of /9 and i, complicates our second goal by forcing
us to model the firm-level effects of compensation policies directly in (1).
   We adopt a variant of Chamberlain's method with a simplification first
proposed by Mundlak (1978). In our projection method we project the firm-
effect onto a vector of firm and person characteristics constructed so as to
allow the desired correlation among the individual-effects, observable individ-
ual characteristics and the firm-effects. This permits consistent estimation of
/9 and least squares estimation of 0. The resulting estimates are then used to
produce consistent estimates of the firm-effects and of the firm-level averages
of the individual-effects, which we use in our firm-level analysis.
    It is worth discussing why we rejected two potential computational sun-
plifications: sampling individuals and sampling firms, thus reducing the di-
mensionality of the person- and firm-effects to make the problem tractable.
The person effects are typically identified by repeated observations on the
same individual and the firm effects are typically identified by multiple em-
ployees in the same firm. When both types of effect are present in the same
model, firm-effects are identified by the presence in the sample of individuals
observed for multiple years and in multiple firms that employ other mem-
bers of the sample. Without some movement of the individuals among the
firms, neither firm- nor person-effects are separately identifiable. However,
a relatively small amount of mobility suffices to identify many firm- arid
person-effects. The identification of the person and firm effects for individu-
als with at least two observations occurs whenever these individuals work at
least once in a firm that has at some point employed a person who changed
employers. When sampling individuals, as the size of the sample increases,

                                     12
the representativeness of the estimated firm-effects improves because in small
samples of individuals the identified firm-effects are mostly from large firms,
whereas in larger samples the additional individuals increase the probability
that there will be a mover among the smaller firms. Furthermore, reducing
the size of the individual sample would have prevented us from estimating
firm-specific seniority returns because there are fewer and fewer firms with
adequate sample sizes as the sample of individuals is reduced. On the other
hand, when sampling firms we can estimate only selected firm-effects using
all the available individual observations, assuming that the firm-effects from
the nonsampled firms are zero. To obtain a representative, reasonably large
set of firm-effect estimates, this procedure would have to be repeated many
times (approximately 1,000 times to reproduce the firm-effects we have esti-
mated by our preferred method). It is not obvious that this procedure offers
any computational advantages.
    Regardless of the computational approach used, between-employer mo-
bility of the individuals is essential for the identification of our statistical
model. Table 1 examines the pattern of inter-employer movements among
all sample individuals. The rows of Table 1 correspond to the number of
years a person is in the sample. The columns, with the exception of column
(la), correspond to the number of employers the individual had. An indi-
vidual contributes to only one cell (again, excepting column (la)). Notice
that 59.4% of the individuals in the sample never change employers (column
(1)).8 Approximately one-fifth of the single employer individuals worked in
firms with no movers while four-fifths (47.9% of the overall sample, coluiiin
(la)) worked in firms that, at one time or another, employed a person who
changed employer. Thus, 88.5% of the sample individuals contribute to the
estimation of firm-effects. It is also interesting to notice the pattern of em-
ployer spells among the movers (columns (2)-(10)). The second line of each
cell shows the most frequent configuration of employer spells for individuals
in that cell. In almost every case, short spells precede longer spells, indicat-
ing that mobility is greater in the early career (as Topel and Ward (1992)
found for American men). It seems clear from Table 1 that the data should
allow us to separate the individual-effect from the firm-effect.
    8Notice that the cell (1,1) contains 318,627 individuals who appear in the sample during
a single year. Some of these individuals may represent coding etrors in the person identifier;
however, it is not possible to correct these errors.


                                             13
3.3 A Projection Method for Estimating Correlated
          Effects
Our proposed method allows us to estimate the parameters 3 consistently in
the presence of both individual- and firm-effects without adopting a step-wise
approach that imposes orthogonality among the different effects. We project
the firm-effect onto the firm and individual data according to the equation:

                j(,t) + 7i J(it)SJ(it)ti •+• 7 .J(i,) Ti (sj(1,t)It — 10)    =

          [fJ(,)t ® [i Sj(1,t)It Ti (sJ(1,t — 10) ] ® Xi] \ + 11J(i,t)it    (5)
where fJ(i, is a vector of time varying firm characteristics (firm size iii our
application), is the vector of person-averages of x:


                                           '1L
                                               t=F,

      L, — F1 + 1 \ is the parameter vector of the linear projection and VJ(,t)tt
                                                                                  (6)


is the stochastic error of the linear projection. Let

                             ® [1 SJ(jt)1 Ti (sJ(1,t) — 10)          ]
                                                                         ®        (7)

then
                           = xjj3 +   z     + 01 + E + UJ(it)it.
Restated as deviations from individual-averages, equation (8) becomes
                                                                                  ()

                          Yit = x1il3 + Zie)t + 61t + l1J(i,t)it                  (i)
where
                                     it     xii —                                (1(i)
and similarly for            and J(ii)it. Least squares estimation of fi and
yields:


            A                A                 z'x z'z
                                                                   asN
                                                                   )
                                                                                 (II)



                                            14
where



                  X1T1                 Z1T1
       X           ...                  ...          and   o Var + 1J(i,)it X, Z}
                  XN1                  ZN1




Estimates of     the individual effects 0 are recovered in the conventional manner
as
                                                                                    (12)
and the limit distribution of 0 is

                                                                                    (13)
                                         }Var[ ]             [] +)asN_-cx
We note that although the least squares estimate of the individual effect 0 is
not consistent as N —* co, this is not a problem when we estimate firm-level
models because the firm-average of 0, can be consistently estimated.
    Next consider the estimation of the firm effects J(i,t) + Yi J(i,)SJ(1,t +
72 J(i,)   Ti (sj(,t) -   10). Define

                  {j}     {(i, t) I J(i, t) = j} , a set with N, elements,          (14)

                                Y{2}          Y{j) —          — 0{},                (15)

                              Y{j} y ,V(n,s) E {j},                                 (16)


and similarly for X{} and O. Equations (14) and (15) group all ol the
observations on individuals employed by the same firm into the vector
which is expressed as a deviation from the x effects and the individual
effects. The firm-level equation is:

                                        =     F{2}        7i + c{,}                 (17)
                                                       72j

                                                     15
where

                           [1 s5 Ti(s3 —                 ,V(n,s)   {j}      (18)
                                                  10)]
and
                 c{}        e{} + X{j} (/3 —       +   (O{}                 (19)
Least squares estimation of (17) yields the estimator

                           / c6
                       5 —N                    ,,JI      asN—*cx            (20)
                       2j  \. 2j
where
                              (F;F)' + (F;}F{})' F}
  (X{,} Var [$]    + Var [o] + 2X{,} Coy [/3,O{.)J) F(,J (F)F{)J)' (21)
and o = Var [c].
   To recover the a1 and uir/ parts of the individual effect, estimate the
equation (2) by generalized least squares to obtain , which satisfies:

                 N (, (u'Diag(var[i])' u)') as N oo                         (22)

where
                                             U1
                                                                            (23)
                                          UN

and Diag (Var [J)is a diagonal matrix containing the variances of O from
equation (13). The estimator of a is

                                                                            (24)
and

      —+   N
                  [i
                       —
                                (u'Diag (Var [o1])'        u)' ]) , as N - oc
                                                                            (5)
                                        16
    Next we estimate the firm-level average a, defined as

                                                 >                                   (26)
                                          .7
                                               V(i,)E{j)

with asymptotic distribution:

                                                                                     (27)
where


                              [1          (u'Diag(var[iJ)' U)ui].
Similarly, the firm-level average education effect is given by

                                                                                    (28)
                                          I V(i,t)E{j)

with asymptotic distribution based upon (22).

3.4 Analysis of Firm-level Outcomes
We consider next the statistical relation between firm-level outcomes arid our


                                          j
measures of firm-level compensation policy. Our basic model is

                     =                                     qj ]   [] + j            (29)

where j = 1, . . .J, the total number of firms in the firm sample, p is any
firm-level outcome, [ ci 11,ij        y, 72j } is a vector of firm-level com-
pensation measures, r is a vector of parameters of interest, q is a vector
of other firm-level variables, p is a vector of associated parameters and
is a zero-mean homoscedastic statistical error. In the regression analysis,
firm-level outcomes and firm-level compensation variables were measured us-
ing data from two independently drawn samples. However, the firm-level
   91n all our asymptotic results we hold constant the distribution of firm sizes. Thus as
N, N5 —p oo,we assume that their ratio goes to a non-zero constant.


                                           17
 compensation variables derived from our individual sample are estimated re-
 gressors. Consequently, we must allow for the estimation errors in &,,  .,,
 5 and 2j in our assessment of the precision of the estimation of firm-level
 equations.'° Equation (29) becomes

          = [cxi     uj j 71i         'Y2j       q1    J
                                                               J
                                                                   +
              ([ o, iiji qj 71j 72j ]                        LXj Ujl/ j       'Yi3   72j   7! +
                                                                                                  (30)
 where
          ([ a 11i7 c5., 'n., 72 ] — { &                       I2J %
                                                             'Y2j ir is the error
 associated with the first-step estimation of the firm-level compensation measures.'1
 In order to derive the error covariance matrix for equation (30), let



 and
                       P'   ()      [ & ri3f               j           7     qj }

                                 = [&i       7  72
 Now, euation (30) can be re-expressed in a first order approximation around
    as:

                                                                                                  (31)
where
                             —
                                -
                             = (5 —    )              '-'2
                                                               i,
                                                               L"      +,
   '°The firm-level regressor ,4ë  also contains some measurement error, in principle; how-
ever, the vector /3 is estimated with such precision that we do not carry along its estimated
                                                                        ij
covariance matrix (including its estimated covariance with &, i, 4j, ,•, and j2) in these
calculations. Hence, we place        in the list of qj.
  "We adopt the model of Pagan (1984) and Murphy and Topel (1985); namely, that the
regression of interest relates a function of the individual-level data and several firm-level
parameters to the other measured firm-level outcomes. We account for the estiniation
error ([               -y Y2j ] — [ & ii7                72      explicitly, but we do
not add an additional measurement error. Thus, for example, we assert that the ontt-ome
Pj depends upon c and not upon aj + where j is an independent measurement error.




                                              18
 The variance of the regression error term for equation (31) consists of the
 component due to the estimation error in P1 plus the component due to


               Var[wj}[7r' PuJvar[}L{J+Var[ei]                                       (32)

 where the components of Var [jj are defined in the derivations above. We
 estimate equation (31) using generalized least squares based upon the error
 variance in equation (32).


 4 Estimation Results
 Table 2 shows the basic summary statistics, by sex, for the individual-level
 data. The usable sample consists of 3,434,530 observations on 711,518 men
 and 1,870,578 usable observations on 454,787 women. The basic individual-
 level variables consist of labor force experience, region of France, education
 level and seniority. Note that about 30% of the sample has no known educa-
 tional attainment. For 74% of the individuals, there are enough observations
 in the sample to permit estimation of a distinct firm-effect.'2 Recall from
 Table . that some 27% of our individuals appear in only one of the 10 data
years while 10.6% are present for all 10 years. More than 59% of the indi-
 viduals have only a single employer while 2, 3 and 4 employers account for
 21.8%, 10.7%, and 4.8% of the individuals, respectively.
     The results of our projection method for estimating the basic regression
parameters are shown in Table 3, separately for men and women. These
estimates are the results of applying the multiple step procedure presented
in section 3. The results shown in the columns "Projection Method," thus,
come from two separate regression models—the one shown in equation (2),
for the education coefficients, and the one shown in equation (9), for the
time-varying individual characteristics.13 For comparison purposes, Table 3
also shows the ordinary least squares results, the within estimates for fixed
  '2The individuals from firms with fewer than 10 observations in thesample were pooled
and a single firm-level regression was used to estimate their firm-effects.
  '3The remaining coefficients from equation (9) can be found in the Data Appendix. 'l'he
seniority coefficients shown for the projection method are the individual averages of
and 2j from Table 4.


                                          19
 person-effects and the within estimates for fixed firm-effects. Evidently, the
 projection method results are much closer to the within-person estimates
 than to those within firms whereas the least squares results are closer to the
 within-firm estimates.
    Table 4 contains descriptive statistics for the components of real com-
 pensation implied by the estimated parameters from equation (1) separately
 for each sex. For both males and females, the standard deviation of the
 individual-effect, and its components aand u, is much larger than that of
 the firm-effect, and its components , yj and )'2. As noted in Table 3, the
 complete parameterization in explains 80% of the variation in real salaries
for men and 75% for women; thus, the idiosyncratic component of variance
is still rather important.
    Table 5 shows the intercorrelations of the components of compensation.
All components of compensation except the residual account for 81% of the
variance of real total annual compensation costs (combined result for males
and females). Furthermore, the a component of the individual-effect (the
part not explained by education) is more important than the observable re-
gressors (xj3) in explaining compensation costs. The overall firm effect, ,
on the other hand, is only about one-quarter as important as the overall
person-effect. The individual-effect and the firm-effect are correlated 0.10
according to our results. The a and q components are correlated 0.08 ac-
cording to this method. Notice that although the firm-specific intercept, ',
and the a-component of the individual effect are positively correlated, the
firm-specific intercept is negatively correlated with the seniority slope (-0.56).
    One may get the impression from Table5 that the individual-effects and
firm-effects are not highly correlated. Table 6 shows that this is not com-
pletely correct. In this table we begin to address the problem of inter-
employer mobility in our sample. If the mobility in the economy is exogenous;
that is, if the probability of separation from one firm and accession into an-
other does not depend upon the individual's wage path, then the association
of the parameter ctj with the pay practices of firm j is correct. Otherwise, the
movers and stayers systematically sort according to their values of a, , and
e. In this second case, measured values of firm-effects are contaminated by
the average values of individual-effects of the movers relative to the stayers,
as can be seen in the two endogenous mobility models discussed above.
    For Table 6, the individuals were divided into three groups according to
their a's. High-a workers are much more likely to be observed in a single

                                      20
job (one employer) whereas low-cr workers are relatively more likely to have
 had three or more employers. High-cr workers also have more labor-force
experience. Although a and       are positively correlated, low- workers are
more likely to have had multiple employers. In particular the low-a low-gb low
experience workers are the most likely to have had multiple employers. Table
7 examines the mobility of high-cr versus low-cr workers explicitly. Persons
with low estimated individual-effects are much more likely to move between
low-ç5 jobs than are persons with high individual-effects (57% versus 40%).
Evidently the clean distinction between individual heterogeneity and firm
heterogeneity is called into question by this pattern. Do we estimate low cr's
because the individual has moved through a sequence of low-4' jobs or rather
because some employers are more likely to choose low-a workers, who are
more mobile for a variety of reasons? Our analysis does not provide a clear
answer to this question.
    Table 8 presents summary statistics for the sample of firms (weighted
to be representative of private industrial firms). Table 9 presents regression
models for the logarithm of real value added per employee, real sales per
employee (measures of productivity) and operating income as a proportion
of total assets (a measure of performance). Using the firm-level compensa-
tion policy measures generated by our projection method, we note that a
larger value of the predicted wage (xfl-component) is associated with higher
value-added and sales per worker and higher profitablity. A larger individual-
effect (a-component) is associated with a substantially larger value-added
per employee and sales per employee but not with higher profitability. The
part of the individual-effect related to education (wi-component) is associ-
ated with higher value-added per worker but is not significant in the other
two columns. Higher firm-specific wages (-component) are associated with
higher productivity (value-added per worker and sales per worker) and with
higher profitability. Neither seniority slope is associated with higher (or
lower) productivity or profitability.
    Table 10 presents the results for the relations among our compensation
measures and a variety of firm-level factor utilization rates. Larger values of
the x/3-component of compensation are associated with higher employment,
capital, capital-labor ratio, professional employment proportion and skilled
employment proportion. The cr-component of the individual-effect is posi-
tivelv associated with total employment, total real capital, the capital-labor
ratio and the proportion of engineers, technical workers and managers in the

                                     21
work force, and is negatively related to the shares of both skilled and uii-
skilled workers. Larger values of the average education effect are associated
with higher total employment, total real capital and professional propor-
tion but lower values of the skilled proportion. The firm-specific intercept
(ç-component of the firm effect) is strongly positively associated with total
employment, total real capital and capital intensity but is not associated with
any components of the skill structure of the work force. Employment propor-
tions are not related to this component of the firm effect in compensation. A
high firm-specific seniority slope is positively associated with capital intensity
and slightly associated with the proportion of professional employees.
    Table 11 presents a proportional hazards analysis of the relation between
the survival of firms and our estimated compensation components at the firm
level. Both components of the individual effect (a and the education part
uii) increase survivorship in a statistically significant manner. The effects
relatd to firm-specific compensation factors are large but very imprecise.
The effect associated with the x/3-component goes in the opposite direction.
    Finally, Table 12 uses industry-level averages of the individual and firm
specific components of compensation to explain the industry-effect found
in our raw individual data (regression adjusted for labor force experience,
region. year, education and sex) in the spirit of Dickens and Katz (1987)
and Krueger and Summers (1988). Since the right-hand side variables in
this regression fully account for the industry effects in a statistical sense
(R2 = 0.97), the interesting question is the relative importance of indi\'id-
ual heterogeneity (a-component of the person effect) and firm heterogeneity
(both and -y-components) as components of the industry effects. The third
through sixth columns of Table 12 present separate industry-level regressions
using first a alone (column 3 and 4) and then the three parts of the firm-
effect by themselves (columns 5 and 6). It is clear from the fact that a alone
explains 92% of the inter-industry wage variation, whereas the firm-specific
components explain only 25%, that individual effects, as measured statisti-
cally are more important than firm-components. One should recall, however,
that in our example theoretical models structural firm and individual het-
erogeneity can influence both of the statistical measures.




                                       22
5 Conclusions
In all likelihood, our analysis of the separate effects of individual arid firm
heterogeneity on wage rates and on firm compensation policies has raised
more new questions than it has resolved. We find that individual-effects
are a significant component of real total annual compensation variation.
Firm-effects, while also important, are not as important as individual-effects.
Firm-level heterogeneity and individual-level heterogeneity are not highly
correlated; however, mobility patterns suggest that the distinction between
an individual-effect and a firm-effect is not economically simple. Firms that
hire high-wage workers appear to be more productive per worker but not
more profitable. High-wage firms—those paying higher wages controlling for
the individual heterogeneity of the employees—are more productive per worker
and are more profitable. Both sources of wage rate heterogeneity—high-wage
workers and high-wage firms—are associated with more capital intensive firms.
We also estimated firm-level heterogeneity in the returns to seniority. This
component of wage variation is decidedly less important in our sample than
the tw pure heterogeneity components. We believe that our results provide
the statistical basis upon which to begin the process of testing the relevance of
agency, efficiency wage, search/matching, and endogeneous mobility models
as potential explanations for compensation outcome heterogeneity.




                                      23
                                                                                              Table I
                                                          Structure of the Individual Data by Ycara In Sample and Numberof Employers
                                                               (Number oflridisiduala, Most Common Configurationof Employers)
                                                                                     Ntimber of Employers
Ycars in                                                                                                                                                                        10     Total       Percent
                                                                   3             4              5            6              7               8                 9
Sample                 I             1*              2
                                                                                                                                                                                       318.627       27.3%
       1       318,627         247,532
                       I              I                                                                                                                                                              10.8%
                                                                                                                                                                                       126,365
       2        75,299          57,411        51,066
                     2               2             II
                                                                                                                                                                                        98.915         8.5%
         3      46,385          36,540         32,947        19,583

                       3              3            12           111
                                                                                                                                                                                        95,171         8.2%
         4       43.019          34,922        26,631        17,191         8,330
                      4               4             13          112          III!
                                                                                                                                                                                        95,124         8.2%
           5     41,130          34,5%         26,408        15,291         8,685          3,610
                           5          5             14          113          1112          11111
                                                                                                                                                                                         77,760        6.7%
           6                     25.388        20,953        13,734         7,592          4.073        1,653
                 29,755
                                                    15           114         1113          11112       11111
                      6               6
                                                                                                                         735                                                             62.671        5.4%
                                                              12,039         7.305         3,864         1,931
           7      19,413         16,709        17,384
                                                                              1114         11113       111112        1111111
                       7              7            16            115
                                                                                                                          917             327                                            72,069        6 2%
           8      23,484         20,378        20,421         13,185         7,673         4,001        2,061
                                                                              115          11114       111113        1111112        11111111
                       8                  8        4<            116
                                                                                                                          938             362               114                          97,137        8.3%
           9                     34,147         26,350        15.791         8,590          4,383        2,104
                  38,505
                                                                              1116         11115       111114        1111113        11111112        111111111
                       9              9             54           117
                                                                                                                                                            109                 34      122,466        10   5%
                                                                             8,369          3,839         1,837           739             314
         II)      56,881          51,425        32.616        17.728
                                                                                                       221113        1131112        11111113        111111112         1111111111
                      10'             10'            64           118         1117         11116
                                                                                                                                         1,003              223                  34    1,166,305      100 O0
                                               254.776       124,542        56.544         23,770        9,586          3,329
     Total      692,438          559,048
                                                                                                                         0.3%             0.1%             0.0%                0.0%       100.0%
                  59.4%            47.9%          21.8%         10.7%          4.8°'o        2.0%          0.8%
   Percent
Source: DAS individual data.
                                                                                                         with each of the individual'semployees, in oider(e.g. configuration
Notes: Eniplovment configurationsare descnbed in temis of the number of consecutiveyears spent
                                                                                           second                                                                          refers to
 124 means that the individual spent 1 year with his first employer, then 2 years with hit          employer. tnd finally 4 years with his third employer). Column Is
                                                   whose              lirrn had at ksst one oilier individual who had  changed   firms at least once in his career (required for
the ubsct ofindividuals with only one employer             esii""iing
 identification of both firm and individual effects).
 * This configuistion cnt-respondt to 10 yearsofdat with the first (and only) employer
                                               Table 2
         Descriptive Statistics for Basic Individual Level Variables by Sex for 1976 to 1987

                                                                Men                     Women
                                                           Mean       Std Dcv       Mean       Std Dev
Variable Definition
                                                          4,3442       0.5187      4.0984       0.4801
Log (Real Annual Compensation Cost, 1980 FF)
                                                         17.2531      11.8258     15.4301      12.0089
TotalLaborForceE.xperieflCe
                                                          4.3752       4.9 197     3.8230      4.9440
(Total Labor Force Experience)2/ 100
                                                         13.1530      19.4305     11.6079      19.6863
(Total Labor Force Experience)3/1000
                                                         43.3453      77.9542     39.0589      80.3251
(Total Labor Force Experience)4/10000
                                                          7.7067       7.5510      6.5437       6.5268
Seniority
Lives in lie-de-France (Paris Metropolitan Region)        0.2561                   0.2910
                                                          0.3064       0.2 190     0.2971       0.2 124
No Known Degree
                                                          0.1556       0. 1458     0.1893       0. 1739
Completed Elementary School
                                                          0.0565       0.0792      0.0869       0.1008
Completed Junior High School
                                                          0.0528       0.0804      0.0711       0.0881
Completed High School (Baccalauréat)
                                                          0.2652       0.1849      0.1926       0.1545
Basic Vocational-Technical Degree
                                                          0.070 1      0.0893      0.0532       0.0802
Advanced Vocational-Technical Degree
                                                           0.0469      0.0754      0.0838       0. 1247
Technical College or University Diploma
Graduate School Diploma                                    0.0465      0.0964      0.0259       0.055 1
Year of data                                              81.3106      3.7250     81.4730       3.7180
Number of Observations for the Firm in Sample           4402.3800 16164.6200 1605.3 100 7797.1300

Observations                                            3,434,530                1,870,578
Pecsons                                                   711,518                  454,787
Sufficient Data Available to Estimate Firm Effect          0.7425                  0.7448
Notes: For sources and methods see the Data Appendix.




                                                 25
                                                               Table 3
                                Estimates of the Effects of Labor Force Experience, Region and Year
                                       on the Log of Real Total Annual Compensation Costs
                                               Individual Data by Sex for 1976 to 1987
                                                                       Least Squares        Within   Peras                Within Firms
                                              Projection Method
                                           Parameter     Standard   Parameter   Standard  Parameter Standard           Parameter Standard
                                             Estimate      Error     Estimate     Error    Estimate   Error            Estimate    Error
Varialle
Men
                                               0.0729                 0.0522      (0.0003)     0.0675      (0.0004)       0.0434    (0.0003)
Total labor force experience                             (0.0004)
                                              -0.4509                 -0.2189     (0.0030)    -0.4435      (0.0029)      -0.1518    (0.0027)
                                                         (0.0027)
(LFexperiencesqUaredYl0O                                                                                                  0.0290
                                               0.1072    (0.0009)      0.0494     (0.0010)     0.1079      (0.0010)                 (0.0009)
(l,F experiencecubed)Il000                                                                    -0.0097                    -0.0025    (0.0001)
                                              -0.0095    (0.0001)     -0.0047     (0.0001)                 (0.0001)
(LF experiencequartic)/I0000                                                                   0.0049                     0.0094    (0.0001)
                                            -3.37e-05 (ISle-OS)        0.0143     (0.0001)                 (0.0001)
Seniority                                                                                                                -0.0030
                                            -5.36e-04 (2.92c-05)      -0.0048     (0.0002)    -0.0034      (0.0001)                 (0.0001)
Seniority spline at 10 years
                                               0.0800                  0.1400     (0.0005)      0.0820     (0.0011)        0.1116   (0.0007)
Lives in lIe-dc-France                                   (0.0010)
                                               0.0203                  0.0379     (0.0010)      0.0275     (0.0008)        0.0202   (0.0009)
Year 1977                                                (0.0007)
                                                0.0531   (0.0008)      0,0692  (0.0010)         0.0640     (0.0009)       0.0489    (0.0009)
Year 1978
                                                0.0782   (0.0009)      0.0895  (0.0010)         0.0922     (0.0010)       0.0629    (0.0009)
 Year 1979
                                                0.0914                 0.0957 (0.0010)          0.1076     (0.0011)       0.0678    (0.0009)
 Year 1980                                                (0.0010)
                                                0.1289 (0.0014)        0.1200 (0.0011)          0.1497     (0.0015)       0.0846    (0.0009)
 Year 1982
                                                0.1723                 0.1505 (0.0011)          0.1973     (0.0018)       0.1045    (0.0009)
 Year 1984                                                (0.0018)
                                                0.1966    (0.0020)     0,1727  (0.0011)         0.2235     (0.0020)       0.1182    (0.0009)
 Year 1985
                                                0.2304    (0.0021)     0.1906 (0.0011)           0.2592     (0.0022)      0.1349    (0.0009)
 Year 1986
                                                0.2517 (0.0023)        0.2020 (0.0011)           0.2825     (0.0024)      0.1433    (0.0009)
 Year 1987
                                                0.5778 (0.0036)        0.1138 (0.0020)                a                   0.0823     (0,0019)
 Elementary School Education
                                                 0.1494    (0.0058)    0,4515 (0.003!)                a                   0.3662     (0.0029)
 Junior High School Education
                                                 0.4249    (0.0063)     0.6665  (0.0033)              a                   0.5375     (0.0030)
 High School Graduate                                                                                                      0.2123
                                                -0.0704    (0.0028)     0.2454     (0.0016)           a                              (0.0015)
 Basic Vocational-Technical Grad.
                                                 0.6 136 (0.0051)       0.6325     (0.0027)           a                    0.5331    (0.0025)
 Advanced Vocational-Technical Grad.
                                                 0.1359    (0.0065)     0.6113     (0.0035)           a                    0.4716    (0.0031)
  Technical College or Undergrad. Degree
                                                                        1.4392     (0.0028)           a                    1.2604    (0.0025)
  GraduateSchool Degree                           1.6032   (0.0051)
                                                                        3.4244                         a                   0.0518    (0.0022)
                                                  3 6899   (0.0016)                (0.0014)
  Intercept                                                                                                                0,3420   h
                                                 0.2684                 04227                   0.2685
  Root mean square error
                                                                      1.434,506               2,722,9%                  5,234,086   b
  Error degrees of freedom                   2,585,147
                                                                         0.3358                  0.7875                    0.5715   h
  R-squared                                     07985
                                             3.434,50                 3,434.530               3,434,530                 5,305,108 b
  Sample 5i7e                                                                                                                           (cont,)
                                                           Table 3 (contlnucd)
                                  Estimates of the Effects of Labor Force Experience, Region and Year
                                          on thc Log of Real Total Annual Compensation Costs
                                                 Individual Data by Sex for 1976 to 1987
                                                                         Least Squares        WithinPersons        WithinFirms
                                                Projection Method
                                                           Standard   Parameter   Standard  Parameter Standard Parameter  Standard
                                              Parameter
                                                             Error     Estimate     Error    Estimate   Error   Estimate    Error
Variable                                       Estimate
Wonwn
                                                                           0.0299     (0.0004)      0.0268        (0.0006)    0.0210 (0.0004)
Total labor force expenence                       0.0334     (0.0005)
                                                                          -0.0938     (0.0038)     -0.1501        (0.0042)   -0.0230 (0.0035)
(LF experiencesquared)/100                       -0.1796     (0.0037)
                                                  0.0396                   0.0144     (0.0013)      0.0326        (0.0015)   -0.0072 (0.0012)
(LFexperiencccubedl000                                       (0.0013)
                                                 -0.0032                  -0.0010     (0.0001)     -0.0026        (0.0002)    0.0012 (0.0001)
(LFexperiencequartic)/10000                                  (0.0001)
                                                8.28e-04 (2.38e-0S)        0,0172     (0.0001)      0.0055        (0.0001)    0.0116 (0.0001)
Seniority
                                               -1.64e-03    (4.20c-05)    -0.0069     (0.0002)     -0.0074        (0.0002)   -0.0031 (0.0002)
Seniority spline at 10 years
                                                  0.0782     (0.0016)      0.1577     (0.0007)       0.0794       (0.0018)    0.1217 (0.0009)
Lives in lIe-dc-France
                                                  0.0218     (0.0010)      0.0588     (0.0014)       0.0304       (0.0011)    0372 (0.0012)
Year 1977
Year 1978                                         0.0638     (0.0011)      0.1135     (0.0014)      0.0766        (0.0012)    0.0832 (0.0012)
                                                  0.0938     (0.0012)      0.1447     (0.0014)      0.1098        (0.0014)    0.1083 (0.0012)
Year 1979
                                                  0.1093                    0.1548    (0.0015)      0.1276        (0.0016)    0.1192    (0.0012)
Year 1980                                                     (0.0014)
                                                  0.1529                    0.1872    (0.0015)      0.1751        (0.0021)    0.1454   (0.0013)
Year 1982                                                     (0.0018)
                                                  0.1962      (0.0022)      0.2349    (0.0015)      0.2227        (0.0025)    0.1769   (0.0013)
Year 1984
Year 1985                                          0.2135     (0.0024)      0.2510    (0.0015)      0.2408        (0.0028)     0.1830 (0.0013)

Year 1986                                          0.2427     (0.0027)      0.2676    (0.0015)      0.2706        (0.0030)     0.1991 (0.0013)
                                                   0.2609                   0.2731    (0.0015)       0.2894       (00033)      0.2038  (0.0013)
Year 1987                                                     (0.0029)
                                                   0.2782     (0.0045)      0.0046    (0.0025)             a                  -0.0145 (0.0023)
Elementary School Education
                                                   0.3480                   0.3472     (0.0032)            a                   0.2445   (0.0031)
Junior High School Education                                  (0.0065)
                                                   0.3348                   0.4813     (0.0040)               a                0.3307   (0.0037)
High School Graduate                                          (0.0078)
Basic Vocational-Technical Grad.                   0.1279     (0.0045)      0.2578     (0.0024)               a                0.1739 (0.0023)
                                                   0.4032     (0.0079)      0.4464     (0.0040)               a                0.3208 (0.0039)
Advanced Vocatjonal-Tech,njcal Grad.
                                                   0.6014     (0.0057)      0.6078     (0.0029)               a                 0.4817 (0.0027)
 TechnicalCollegeor Undergrad. Degree
                                                   1.2419                    0.9881    (0.0064)               a                 0.7933  (0.0059)
 Graduate School Degree                                       (0.0123)
                                                                             3.3364                           a               -0.0518   b
                                                   3.5422     (0.0023)                 (0.0019)
 Intercept
                                                   0.2855                    0.4215                    0.2833                  0.3420 b
 Root mean squared error
                                                                                                    1,415,775               5,234,086 b
 Error degrees of freedom                        1,340,697                1,870,554
                                                    0.7466                   0.2292                    0.7364                  0.5715 h
 R-squared                                                                                                                            b
                                                 1,870,578                1,870,578                 1,870,578               5,305,108
 Samplesize                                                                                               for                and is
                                                                              effect (see Data  Appendix      complete list)
 Notes: The projection method includes the variables for eliminatingthe firm
                                                                                          the result ofa multi-stepprocessdescribed
 estimated by least squares within person. Die estimates from the projection method are
 in the text (a)Not  separatelycalculated. (b) Pooled estimates of firm means, statisticsapply to pooled men-women equation
                                                Table 4
                Descriptive Statistics for Components of Log Real Total Compensation
                                         by Seifor 1976 to 1987

                                                                Men                     Women
Variable Definition                                        Mean       Std Dcv      Mean     Std Dcv
Log (Real annual compensation costs, 1980 FF)             4.3442      0.5 187     4.0984     0.4801
xt3 - Predicted value                                     0.4261      0.1383      0.3234     0.1120
0 - Total individual effect                               3.9160      0.4387      3.7776     0.3843
Sampling variance of 0                                    0.27 14     0.2758      0.3444     0.3299
c -Individual effect not related to education             0.0000      0.3947      0.0000     0.3639
Sampling variance of                                      0. 1357     0.1379      0.1722     0.1649
un -Individual effect related to education                3.9160      0.1915      3.7776     0.1238
Sainp1ingvarianceofu                                      0.1357      0.1379      0.1722     0.1649
  - Total firm effect                                     0.0028      0.0685     -0.0039     0.0566
Sampling variance of qi                                   0.0019      0.0075      0.0020     0.0075
 - Firm-specific intercept                                 0.0031     0.1044     -0.0072     0.0969
                                                           0.0137      1.8867     0.0065     0.1775
Samplingvarianceof
  -Firm-specific seniority slope                        -3.37e-05     0.0335    8.28e-04     0.032b
                                                           0.0009     0.0490      0.0009     0.0576
Sampling variance ofy1
fl-Firm-specific slope change at 10 years               -5.36e-04     0.0542    -1.64e-03    0.0574
Sampling variance ofy2                                     0.0131      1.5672     0.0122     1.3563
r-Residual                                                -0.0006     0.2328      0.0012     0.2417
Notes: For sources and methods scc the Data Appendix.




                                                    28
                                                                                     Table 5
                                                Summary Statistics for the Decomposition  of Variance Using the Projection Method
                                                                    for Individual Data, both Scies. 1976-1987

                                                                            Simple Correlations with
                                                                                   1          2        3          4                 6        7         8        9
No.      Variable Description                            Mean
                                                                                                                                          0,0276 0.4336
            - log (real total compensation)             4.2575     0.5189 1.0000 0.3271 0.8401 0.7331 0.4143 0.2131 0.1303 0.0053 -0.0293
                                                                                        1.0000    0.0710    -0.0267   0.2211 0.0325 0.0350 -0.0157 -0.0148            0.0077 -0.0048
7                                                       0,3899     0.1386     0.3271
         x11 -      predicted effect: experience,

         region, year
3        0' -individual effect                          3 .8672    0,4255     0.8401 0.0710 1.0000 0.9027 0.4303 0.0974 0.0802 -0.0201 -0.0171 0.0203 -0.0243
                                                                   0.3841     0,7331 -0.0267 0.9027 1.0000 0.0000 0.0853 0.0763 -0.0242
                                                                                                                                        -0.0186 0.0186 -0,0233
4                               of individual effect    0.0000
         a1 -component
                                                         3.8672    0.1831 04143         0.2211    0.4303 0.0000       1.0000    0.0473   0.0263 0.0041 -0.0006 0.0081 -0.0076
                - component       of individual
         effect
                                                         0.0004    0.0637     0.2131 0.0325 0.0974 0.0853 0.0473                1.0000 0.4428 0.2089 -0.0909 0.0717 -0.0001
6                        firm effect
         'VJ(i,t)
                                                                   0.1019     0.1303 00350        0.0802 0.0763 0.0263 0.4428            1.0000 -0.7844 -0.5625 0.2562 -0.0001
                     -                 of firm effect   -0.0005
         t'J(,()
                         component
                                                                                        -0,0157 -0.0201 -0.0242       0.0041 0.2089 -0.7844 1.0000 0.5507 -0.2298                0.0000
                                                         0.0009    0.0915     0.0053
         'Y1J(itJ(i,I):1
                                         - component
          2J(I)Tl(cJ(,,1)iH°)
                                                                                        4)0148    -0.0171   -0.0186   -0.0006   -4)0909 -0,5625 0.5507       1.0000 -0.2094 0.0000
                                                         0.0003    00332      -0.0293
 9                       - slope on seniority
         YJ(,,t)
                                                                                                                                  0717   0.2562 —0.2298 —0.2094        1.000))   00000
                  -                                      —0.00(9   O   0551 0 0276       0,0077   0 0201     0,0186 0.0081 0
    10    t2JOJ) slope on seniority splinc
          at 10 years
                                                                                                                                         —0,00(11   0.0000   0.0000    0,000()   I   J000
                —                                        00001      0.236))    0.4336   -0   0048 -0.0243 -0,0233 -0,0076 -0.0001
    II    t,,       residual
                                                           Tablc 6
                 l)escripic Statislica for Individual Level Variables by u.-Catcgory 4nd Number of Euipluci'
                                                      for 1976 to 1987
                                                         Low cx                Middle               High
Variable Defirutiort                                    Mean Std Dev           Mean Std Dcv        Mean Std Dc
1 Einpi'or
Log (Real Annual Cornpensauon Cost, 1980 FF)            3.859        0476      4.221     0.302     4.673    0438
Male                                                    0.640                  0.606              0.643
Total Labor Force Experience                           IS .496    11861       17.122    12.341    23.826    12.236
    - Preoicicd Value                                   0.385      0.142       0.378     0.137     0.372     0127
u -Individual Effect Rclated to Education               3.872      0.202       3.845     0.165     3.879    0.183
   - Total Firm Effect                                  0.000      0.073       0.009     0.066     0.008    0.058
  - Firm-specific Intercept                            -0.004      0.110       0.011     0.109     0.014    0 114
                                                        0.007      0.213      -0.000     0.159    MOOS      0 179
c - Rcsial
                                                     710,892                 773.743             919,119
Number of Obscrvauous
                                                     29,57 %                 32.19%              38.24 %
Percent olObservauons in i Catcgor


2 Enip'owrs
                                                        3 903        0.458     4.209     0.314     4.611     U-I3
Log Rcal Annual Conlpcns;oJwi Cost, 198() [-F)
                                                        0.657                  0.603               0.584
Male
                                                       12.678     10.242      14.244    11.034    19.694    11700
Total Labor Force Experience
                                                        0.392        0.143     0.386     0.139     0.389     0 125
x13 - Predicted Value
                                                        3.876        0.204     3.839     0.155     3.865     0.17$
u -individual Effect Related to Education
   - Total Firm Effect                                 -0,009        0.064    -0.001     0.056     0.002     0057
                                                       -0.014        0.092    -0.002     0.092     0.001     0.09u
p - Firni-specifie Intercept
                                                        O 005        0.298    -0.002     0.197    -0.007     0.222
c - Residual
                                                      460.275                494,574             458,772
Number of Observattoirs
                                                      32 56 %                34,99 %             32.45 %
Percent of Obscrvation.s in r Caiccor


3 or.tIore Einp/uter
                                                        3.949        0.467     4 235     0.364     4.644     0 478
Log (Real Annual Comp'..isrution Cost. 1980 FE)
                                                        0.759                  0.679               0.660
Male
                                                       11.48$        8.751    12.695     9.745    17.518    10.920
Total Labor Force Experience
                                                        0.4 14       0.149     0.405     0.147     0.413     0.132
x3 - Predicted Value
                                                        3.896        0.201     3.851     0.158     3.877     0.183
u -Individual Effect RelatcO to Enucatiout
                                                       -0.013        0.070    -0.005     0.063     0.001     0.068
w - TwI Firm Effect                                                                               -0.001     0,097
  - Finn-specific Intercept                            -0.017        0.091    -0.007     0.088
                                                        0.00 7       0.343     0.000     0.255    -0.007     0 27
  -   Residual

                                                      595,220                504,083             388,430
Number of Observations                                                                           26.11 O/
                                                      40.01 %                33.88%
Percent of Observations iou Caicgor




                                                           30
                                                             Table 7
                                Decomposition of Job Changes by a, Previous4) and New 4>
             a Category:                   Low
                                            a                                a                               a
                                                     Total      Low                  Total      Low 4)    High 4)    Total
            of New Employer:   Low 4>     High +                       4)   High
       4)

  4>   of Previous Employer:
                                                      74.3% 47.6%            19.5%     67.1%      39.5%      20.8%   60.3%
                Low4)            57.1%
                                            7.8%      25.7%     19.6%        13.3%     32.9%      20.3%      19.4%   39.8%
             High 4)             17.8%
                                           25.0% 100.0% 67.2%                32.8%     100.0%     59.8%      40.2%   100.0%
              Total              75.0%
I
                                                                              was -0.000497. There were 362,686
  Notes: Cutoff levels for a were -0.1394 and 0.1196. The cutoff level for 4>
                        a                                                               transitions of High a
  transitions of Low workers, 277,153 transitions of Middle a workers and 205,748
  workers.
                                          Table 8
                               Summary Statistics for Finns
                         Annual Averages over the Life of the Firm
______             (weighted by inverse sampling probability, 1978-1988)
Variable Definition                                                  Mean         Std Dcv
Average xf3 of employees at the firm                                0.3906         0.2420
Average a of employees at the firm                                 -0.0549         0.6446
Average ui of employees at the firm                                 3.8503         0.2836
                                                                   -0.0196         0.2707
4 - Firm-specific wage premium
11 - Firm-specific seniority slope                                  0.0027         0.0775
72 - Change in seniority slope at 10 years                        -0.0031          0.1728
Number of employees sampled at firm                               34.2950        610.4800
Employment at December 31st (thousands)                             0.1097         1.6789
Real total assets (millions FE 1980)                               59.4769     3,938.9800
Operating Income/Total Assets                                       0.1254         0.4544
Value-added/Total Assets                                            1.005 1         1.8889
Real total compensation (millions FF 1980)                         1.3260           2.3570
Real value added/Employee (thou. FE 1980)                        106.7672        936.5212
Real total assets/Employee (thou. FF 1980)                       363.0707     2 1,067.5500
(Engineers, Professionals and Managers)fEmployee                   0.2362           0.4072
Skilled workers/Employee                                           0.5414           0.5255
                                                                   1.7711           3.3558
Log(Real total assets)
                                                                   4.5215           1.1050
Log(Real value added/Employee)
                                                                   5.5673           2.0139
Log(Real sales/Employee)
Log(Total employment at December 31)                              -3.0262           2.1109
                                                                   4.7972          2.27 10
LogReal capitallEmployee)
Age of firm (N7,385)                                              19.5023         23.0331

 Number of firms                                                    14,717
Notes: For sources and definitions, see the Data Appendix.




                                                 32
                                                              Table 9
                                    Gcneralized Least Squares Estimates of the Relation Between
                                       Productivity, Profltability and Comnensation Policies
                              Dependent variable:    Log (VAddedlWorker)        Log(Sales/Employee)         Operating lnc./Capital
                                                                 Standard                     Standard                      Standard
                                                  Coefficient      Error       Coefficient     Error        Coefficient       Error
Indepenent Variable
                                                        0.6057      (0.0310)        0.4833      (0.0494)          0.0569      (0.0161)
Average predicted wage (x3)
                                                        0.2617      (0.0118)        0.1623       (0.0188)          0.0102     (0.0061)
Average individual effect (CL)                                                     -0.0674                       -0.0036      (0.0 143)
Average education effect (mi)                           0.0725      (0.0275)                     (0.0437)
                                                        0. 1240     (0.0343)        0.1128       (0.0546)          0.0415     (0.0179)
Firm-specific intercept (4))                                                                                       0.0571
                                                        0.1492      (0.1195)        0.2852       (0.1902)                     (0.0623)
Firm-specificseniorityslope(71)
                                                       -0.0485      (0.0428)       -0.1107       (0.0681)         -0.0264      (0.0223)
Change in slope (72)
                                                        0.68 15      (0.0247)       0.8989       (0.0394)         -0.1267      (0.0126)
(Engineers, Tech., Managers)fEmployee
                                                        0.2 167      (0.0 190)       0.4979      (0.0302)          0.0094      (0.0099)
 (Skilled Workers)fErnployee
                                                        0.1017       (0.0025)        0.2290       (0.0039)
Log(CapitallEmployee)
                                                         4.3985      (0.1126)        2.9784       (0.1791)         0.1664      (0.0586)
 Intercept
                                                                                                              effects. All sources are
 Note: Models were estimated using 14,717 firms with complete data. All regressions included 2-digit industry
 discussed in the Data Appendix.
                                                         Table 10
              Generalized Least Squares Estimates of the Rd ation Between Factors and Compensation Policies
                                                                        Dependent Variable
                                           Log(Empl-       Log(Real    Log(Capital         EPM         Skilled W Unskilled W
Independent Variable                           oyees)       Capital)   fEmployee)    IEmployee        fEmployee   /Emplovce

Average predicted effect (x13)                  0.2541        1.0205          0.7665         0.1142           0.0628     -0.1770
                                             (0.0724)         (0.1036)      (0.0638)       (0.0117)        (0.0150)    (0.0142)
                                                0.2764          0.7454        0.4690          0.123 1       -0.0316      -0.0914
Average cx in firm
                                             (0.0273)         (0.0391)      (0.0241)       (0.0043)        (0.0055)    (0.0052)
             in firm                            0.3478          0.4076        0.0598          0.3307         -0.0964     -0.2343
Average ui
                                             (0.0643)         (0.0921)      (0.0567)       (0.0101)        (0.0129)    (0.0122)
Firm-specific $                                 0.3748          0.7618        0.3869          0.0057         -0.0052     -0.0005
                                             (0.0802)         (0.1148)      (0.0707)        (0.0131)       (0.0167)    (0.0158)
Firm-specificy1                                -0.0262          0.5277        0.5539          0.0835         -0.0303     -0.0532
                                              (0.2798)        (0.4005)      (0.2467)        (0.0456)       (0.0582)     (0.0553)
                                                0.0011          0.0497         0.0486        -0.0314          0.0140      0.0174
Firm-specificy2
                                              (0.1002)         (0.1435)      (0.0884)       (0.0164)       (0.0209)     (0.0198)
(Engi.. Tech., Managers)fEmployec               -0.1181          2.0038        2.1219
                                               (0.0568)        (0.0812)      (0.0500)
(Skilled Workers)IEmplovee                      -0.2947          0.0707        0.3654
                                               (0.0445)        (0.0637)      (0.0392)
Intercept                                       -3.4129          3.0371        6.4499        -0.8485          0.8309     1.0176
                                               (0.2630)        (0.3765)      (0.2319)       (0.0423)        (0.0539)   (0.0512)
Notes: The models were estimated using the 14,717 firms with complete data. All equations include a set of two-
 industry effects. Sources and methods arc discussed in the Data Appendix. Standard errors in parentheses.
                                   Table 11
      Proportional Hazards Estimates of the Relation between Firm Survival
                           and Compensation Policies
                                             Parameter     Standard         Risk
                                               Estimate        Error       Ratio
Independent Variable
                                                    2.0751       (0.6241)        7.9650
Average predicted effect (xf3)
                                                   -0.5327       (0.2064)        0.587()
Average c in finn
                                                   -1.8615       (0.5398)        0.1551)
Averageu1infirm                                                                  0.5540
                                                   -0.5909       (0.5356)
Firm-specific                                                                    5.2050
                                                   1.6497        (2.4598)
Firm-specific y                                                                  1.4320
                                                   0.3592        (0.6677)
Firm-specific                                                                    1.5060
(Eng., Tech., Managcrs)/EmpIoyCC                   0.4096        (0.3699)
                                                   0.3372        (0.2926)        1.40 10
(Skilled Workers)fEmployee
Notes: Negative coefficients indicate a reduced probability of firm  death. This model
was estimated using the 7,382 firms with known birth dates. The niodel includes two-
digit industry effects.




                                          35
                                              Table 12
              Generalized Least Squares Estimates of the Relation betweenIndustry Wage
                 Effects and Industry Averages of Firm-specific CompensationPolicies
                                                   Standard             Standard                     Standard
Independent Variable                 Coefficient      Error Coefficient    Error Coefficient            Error
Industry average x13                     -0.5123    (0.0116)
Industryaveragea                          0.7505    (0.0025)      0.8324 (0.0017)
Industry average ui                      0.3947     (0.0096)
                                         0.3350     (0.0153)                              -0.6659     (0.0150)
Industry average 4)
Industry average y1                      0.8726     (0.1359)                            -18.2220      (0. 1256)
Industry averagey2                        1.8595    (0.1011)                              2.9917      (0.0979)
Intercept                                 1.7854    (0.0339)      3.1088    (0.0019)       3.0687     (0.0019)

R2                                        0.9664                   0.9213                 0.2486
Notes: The dependent variable is the 83 industry-effects estimated by least squares controlling for labor force
experience (through quartic), region, year, education (eight categories) and sex (fully interacted). The
independent variables are the industry averages for the indicated firm-specific compensation policy. The time
period is 1976-1987.
A Data Appendix
A.1 Description of the DAS
The Declarations Annuelies des Salaires are a large collection of matched
employer-employee information generated by INSEE (Institut National de
la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques). The data cover all individ-
uals employed in French enterprises who were born in October of even-
numbered years, with civil servants excluded.14 Our extract runs from 1976
through 1987, with 1981 and 1983 excluded because the underlying admin-
istrative data were not sampled in those years. The initial data set con-
tained 7,416,422 observations. Each observation corresponds to a unique
establishment-individual-Year combination. The observation includes an iden-
tifier that corresponds to the employee (called ID below), an identifier that
corresponds to the establishment (SIRET) and an identifier that corresponds
to the parent enterprise of the establishment (SIREN). We have information
on the number of days the individual worked in the establishment, as well
as the full-time/part-time status of the employee. This allows us to aggre-
gate all of the establishments in which an individual worked in a given year
and thus not treat changes of establishmemit within the same enterprise as
if they were changes of employer. Each observation also includes, in addi-
tion to the variables listed above, the sex, month, year and place of birth,
occupation, total net nominal earnings during the year and annualized gross
nominal earnings during the year for the individual, as well as the locatioii
and industry of the employing establishment.

A.2 Observation selection, variable creation and miss-
     ing data imputation
A.2.1 Aggregation of establishments
The creation of the analysis data set involved the selection of desired mdi-
viduals, the aggregation of establishment-level data to the enterprise level,
and tile construction of.the variables of interest from the variables already
  '4Mcron (1988) shows that individuals employed in the civil service move almost ex-
dusivelv to other positions within the civil servke Th,, the p'cc 1'in r,f cjvl rnt
should not affect our estimation of a worker's market wage equation.


                                        37
in the data set. We selected only full-time employees (sample reduced to
5,966,620 observations). We then created a single observation for each ID-
year-SIREN combination by aggregating within ID and year over SIRETs in
the same SIREN. For each ID-year-SIREN, we summed total net nominal
earnings and total days worked over all SIRETs. We used the occupation,
location and industry that corresponded to the establishrrient in which the
individual worked the largest number of days during the year. This reduced
the number of observations to 5,965,256. We then selected the enterprise
at which the individual had worked the largest number of days during that.
year (sample reduced to 5,497,287 observations). The aggregation of total
number of days worked across all establishments occasionally yielded obser-
vations for which the total number of days worked was greater than 360
(the maximum permitted). In these cases, we just truncated days worked at
360. We then calculated an annualized net nominal earnings for the ID-year
SIREN combination. We eliminated all years of data for individuals who
were younger than 15 years old or older than 65 years old at the date of their
first appearance in the data set (sample reduced to 5,325,413 observations).

A.2.2 Total compensation costs
The dependent variable in our wage rate analysis is the annualized real total
compensation cost of the employee (LFRAISRE). To convert the annual-
ized net nominal earnings to total compensation costs, we used the tax rules
and computer programs provided by the Division Revenus at INSEE (.J.L.
Lhéritier, private communication) to compute both the employee and em-
ployer share of all mandatory payroll taxes (cotisations et charges salariales
employé et employeur) Total annualized compensation cost is defined as the
sum of annualized net nominal earnings, employee payroll taxes and eiiiployer
payroll taxes. Nominal values were then deflated by a consumer price index
to get real annualized net earnings, and real annualized total compensation
cost. We eliminated 61 observations with zero values for annualized total
compensation cost (remaining sample 5,325,352).

A.2.3 Education and Total Labor Market Experience
Our initial DAS file did not contain education information. We i.ised sun-
pleineritary information available for 10% of the DAS, (EDP, Echiiihloim

                                     38
Démographique Permanent) to impute the level of education of all iiidivid-
uals in the DAS.15 The EDP includes information on the highest degree
obtained. There were 38 possible responses, including "no known degree."
These responses were grouped into 8 degree-level categories as shown iii ta-
ble 1. Using these eight categories and data available in the DAS, we ran
separate ordered logits for men and women to estimate coefficients used to
impute education for the individuals in the DAS who are not part of the
EDP. EDP sample statistics for the men are in table 2, and those for the
women are in table 3. The estimated logit equations are in table 4 for men
and table 5 for women.




 15Access to the EDP is particularly difficult to obtain due to privacy regulations.

                                          39
                      Table 1: Degree Categories
Category Degree                  U.S. Equivalent
1        Sans Aucun Diplôme      No Terminal Degree
2        CEP                     Elementary School
         DFEO
3        BE1C                    Junior high School
         BE
         BEPS
4        BAC (not F, G or H)     High School
         Brevet superieur
         CFES
5        CAP                     Vocational-Technical School (Basic)
         BEP
         E FAA
         BAA
         B PA
         FPA icr
6        HP                      Vocational-Technical School (Ad vanced)
         B EA
         BEC
         BE II
         BEI
         B ES
         BATA
         BACF
         BACG
         BAC H
         San té                  Technical College and
         BTS                     Undergraduate University
         DUT
         DEST
         DEUL
         DEUS
         DEUG
S        2ème cycle              Graduate School and Other
         3ème cycle              Post-Secondary Education
         Grande école
         CAPES
         CA P E'F

                                 40
Table 2: EDP Sample Statistics - Men (Std. Deviations in Parentheses)
      V.rtbIe                                                Derree_C.1e1-ory
                                                              3                     8        0          7        8
       Nieme             OverII          1        3
                           0.188                                                0.055    0.098      0063     0.186
   008, <     1924                  0.254     0.295      0.160
                                                                                        (0.297)   (0.243)   (0389)
                         (0391)    (0435)    (0.456)   (0.361)    (0.343)   (0.228)
                           0.056     0 062     0.085                0.049       0.034    0.048     0026      0.065
1925 —< 0013, <— 1929
                         (0.230)   (0.242)   (0.279)   (0.200)    (0.215)   (0.180)     (0.214)   (0 1iB    (u.247)
                           0,097    0 109      0.120                0 068     0.081       0 095    0 004     0 101
1930 —< 0013, <
              —   1334
                         (0,296)   (0.311)   (0.325)   (0.250)    (0 252)   (0.273)     (0.203)   (0.226)   (0.301)
                           0.061    0.056      0.070     0.048      0.048       0.063    0.079     0 047      0 078
     — 0013, <
1935 <       — 1.133
                                                                            (0.244)     (0.270)   (0212)    (0.268)
                         (0:240)   (0.229)   (0.255)   (0.214)    (0.215)
                           0.094    0.070     0.091      0.075                  0.117    0.133     0 118      0,149
1940 —< 0013,   <
                — 1044
                         (0 292)   (0.256)   (0.287)   (0.264)    (0.298)   (0.322)     (0.340)   (0 323)   (0 356)
1945 < 0013, < 1949        0.102     0.064    0.097      0.099                  0.130    0.152     0.175      0 164
                         (0.302)   (0.244)   (0.296)   (0.299)    (0.336)   (0.336)     (0.359)   (0380)    (0370)
                           0.159     0.095     0.132     0.166      0.245     0.224       0.217    0.288     0.201
1950 < 0013, < 1954
                         (0365)    (0.293)   (0.339)   (0.372)    (0.430)   (0.417)     (0.412)   (0.453)   (0 401)
                           0.101     0.072    0.060                 0.151     0.145       0.110    0.176     0.054
1955 < DOB,       1959
                                   (0.259)   (0.238)   (0.386)    (0.364)   (0.352)     (0.313)   (0.381)   (6 226)
                         (0.302)                                                                             0 003
                           0 141     0.218               0.160      0 069     0.151       0.068    0 052
1960 < 0013, < 1976
                         (0 348)   (0.413)   (0.218)   (0.367)    (0 253)   (0.358)     (0.251)   (0.224)   (0 056)
      ,n 1k dc Fronc       0.232     0.204    0.226      0.288                0.187       0.284    0309      0.457
                         (0.422)   (0 403)   (0.418)   (0.453)    (0.478)   (0.390)     (0.451)   (0.462)   (0 498)
                           0.263     0.357    0.282                 0.157     0.199       0.145     0.184    0.105
       C$P62
                         (0.440)   (0.479)   (0.450)   (0.391)    (0.364)   (0.399)     (0.352)   (0.387)   (0.307)
                           0.225    0.231      0.255                0.071     0.299       0.186    0.096     0.058
       CSP6I
                         (0.418)   (0.422)   (0.436)   (0.321)    (0.266)   (0.458)     (0.390)   (0.295)   (0 233)
       CSP.0               0.151    0 118     0.166                 0.219       0.108     0.203    0.235      0.203
                         (0.358)   (0322)    (0372)    (0.448)    (0448)    (0.310)     (0.402)   (0424)    (0.402)
                           0.112    0.061     0.110                 0.233       0.080     0.258     0.275    0.225
       CSP4O
                         (0.315)   (0 240)   (0.314)   (0.379)    (0 423)   (0.272)     (0.438)   (0.447)   (0.418)
       CSP3O               0,043     0 020    0025       0.053      0 147       0015      0.057     0.080     0.359
                         (0.203)   (0.142)   (0.157)   (0.224)    (0.354)   (0.121)     (0.232)   (0.271)   (0.480)
Nombr of 0brvooo          71229     26236     12825      3847       3036      16489 - -    3878                2531




                                                       .11
I'ablc 3: E1)i> Sample Statistics - Women (Std. Deviations in Parcntlieses)
      V.ri.ble                                             Degree_Csteyory
        Nnrr            Ovorsll          1         2         3         4         1         0         7
    0013 < 1324           0152       0.235     0.206     0.129     0.055     0.034     0042      0.055          0.056
                        (0.359)    (0.424)   (0 405)   (0.336)   (0.229)   (0.181)   (0.202)   (0.226)        (0.230)
 1025 < D073     1529     0.047      0.053     0.078     0 045     0.025     0.024     0.017     0022           0023
                        (0,212)    (0 224)   (0.268)   (0.206)   (0.156)   (0.153)   (0.130)   (0 146)        (0.148)
             — 1934
 1530 < DOES 0            0.084      0.096     0 118     0.070     0.043     0.051     0054      0.049          0.052
                        (0 278)    (0 294)   (0.322)   (0.255)   (0.203)   (0.239)   (0.226)   (0.216)        (0.222)
 1935 —< 0011 0—1933      0 054      0 056     0,069     0.047     0036      0.050     0045      0.038          0.047
                        (0 226)    (0.229)   (0 254)   (0.211)   (0.185)   (0.218)   (0.208)   (0.190)        (0212)
 1940 —0 20 (3 <—1944     0,083      0.070     0 113     0.086     0090      0 103     0.108     0.101          0.127
                        (0.290)    (0.255)   (0 317)   (0.281)   (0.287)   (0.304)   (0.311)   (0 301)        (0.334>
 945—0 DOI1 —0 949        0.114      0077      0 125     0 109     0,116     0,135     0.164     5) 156         0,209
                        (0.317)    (0.267)   (0 331)   (0.311)   (0.321)   (0.341)   (0.371)    3.3s3)        (5.107)
 1950 0 iiLb K— j934      0.186      0 112     0 180     0.167     0.285     0 247     0.252     0.298         0.354
                        (0.389)    (0 315)   (0.384)   (0.373)   (0.451)   (0.431)   (0.434)   (0 457)        (0.478)
 555 —< DOS 0—2339        0.120      0.078    0.067      0.178     0.217     0.166     0.169     0 223         0.125
                        (0325)     (0 267)   (0.251)   (0.353)   (0 412)   (0.373)   (0.375)   (0 416)        (0.331)
 1960<
     — LJr), 01976
             —            0.150      0.224     0.043     0.170    0133       0.180    0.117      0.059         0.008
                        (0.357)    (0 417)   (0 202)   (0.375)   (0.339)   (0.384)   (0.355)   (0.236)        (0066)
Work. rr hr Or Eronco     0.254      0.237     0.239     0.266     0333     0.221     0.316      0.283         0,466
                        (0.435)    (0425)    (0.426)   (0452)    (0471)    (0415)    (0.465)   (0451)         (0499)
       C51'62             0227       0343      0.296     0 108     0.079     0 125    0.073     0,011           0053
                        (0.4 19)   (0.475)   (0.456)   (0 310)   (0.270)   (0.331)   (0.255)   (0 240)        (0 224)
       COIl               0050       0.061     0.067     0027      0.023     0.044    0.027      0029          0.013

        2i              (0.218)
                          0 458
                        (0458)
                                   (0.239)
                                    7) 365
                                   (0.482)
                                             (0 249)
                                              0.427
                                             (0.495)
                                                       (0 163)
                                                        0 596
                                                       (0491)
                                                                 (0.150)
                                                                  0.570
                                                                 (0 495)
                                                                           (0.205)
                                                                            0 539
                                                                           (0498)
                                                                                     (0 161)
                                                                                      0 630
                                                                                     (0483)
                                                                                               (0 168)
                                                                                                 0,420
                                                                                               (0494>
                                                                                                              (0 120)
                                                                                                               0.511
                                                                                                              (0.500)
       (:014              0073       0.040    0.035     0030      0 165     0.045     0.097     0.330           0214
                        (0361)     (0 195)   (0 185)   (0 286)   (0371)    (0208)
                                                                             0005
                                                                                     (0296)    (0477)
                                                                                                 00)2
                                                                                                              00410)
       (:S)'o             0,013      0.008    0,005      0.016    0048                0.009                      150
                        (0 115)    (0090)    (0.068)   (0.125)   (0214)    (0.071)   (0093)     017b(         10357
NornL 1 'i1.,)nr         57677      19622     12718      4760      3112     10385      2633      3173     -     1021




                                                  42
         'I'ab!e 4: l)egree Category Model Coefficients-Men          _________
                            Variable                     Coefficient
5ree                         Intercept                                 6.254    0.122
                    1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                        -0.496   0.105
                    1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                        -0.493   0.090
                    1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                        -1.234   0.100
                    1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                        -2.031   0.085
                    1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                        -2.818   0.085
                    1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                        -3.388   0.086
                    1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                        -2.289   0.113
                    1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                         1.897   0.360
       Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)            -0.850   0.116
         Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i,t)             -0.904   0.132
       Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)           -2.758   0.111
        Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)            -4.028   0.117
                 Manager at Date tin Firm J(i,t)                       -5.892   0.124
                       Works in lie de France                          -0.627   0.048
                            Intercept                                   5.828   0.125
 2
                    1925 < Date of Birth <   1929                      -0.320   0.IUb
                    1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                        -0.518   0.091
                    1935< Date of Birth < 1939                         -1.117   0.102
                    1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                        -1.863   0.u7
                    1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                        -2.430   0.087
                    1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                        -3.248   0.089
                    1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                        -2.649   U.1 19
                    1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                         0.246   0.363
        U nskiiied Blue-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J (i, 1)         -1.311   0.119
         Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(z, 1)           -1.074   0.135
       Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(z, t)           -2.635   0.114
        Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)            -3.740   0.121
                 Manager at Date tin Firm J(i,t)                       -5.996   0.132
                       Works in lie de France                    _____ -0.629   0.050




                                      43
Degree                          Variable                            Coefficient     Std. Err.
  3                             Intercept                                 2.465         0.134
                      1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                        -0.333         0.131
                      1930 <Date of Birth < 1934                         -0.344         0.112
                      1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                        -0.667         0.12
                      1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                        -1.120         0.105
                      1945 <Date of Birth < 1949                         -1.307         0.102
                      1950 <Date of Birth < 1954                         -1.373         0.100
                      1955< Date of Birth < 1959                          0.074         0.123
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                         2.89 1        0.364
          Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date £ iii Firm J(i, £)        -9.681         0.126
           Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)            -0.557         0.14I
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)           -0.944         0.118
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i, 1)            -1.610         0,127
                    Manager at Date t in Firm J(i, t)                    -3.400         0.142

  .      —               Works in lie de France                          -0.410
                                                                          0.803
                                                                                        0.037
                                                                                        0.14
                                Intercept
                      1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                         0.005         0.13j
                      1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                        -0.109         0.117
                      1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                        -0.325         0.13u
                      1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                        -0.381         0.106
                      1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                        -0.379         0.194
                      1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                        -0.069         0.101
                      1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                         0.830         0.127
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                         2.855         0 369
          Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date £ in Firm J(i, t)         -0 193         0.134
           Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,i)            -0.294         0.15
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)         -0.217         0.125
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date £ in Firm J(i,t)           -0.377         0.132
                                                                         - I .311
                    Manager at Date £ in Firm J(i, t)
                         Works in lIe de France                                         °°
                                                                                        0. 130




                                       44
                               Variable                            Coefficient SW. Err.
Degree                                                                  3.985     0.125
  5                            Intercept
                      1925 . Date of Birth 1929                         0.392     0.113
                      1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                       0.734     0.096
                      1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                       0.446     0.105
                      1940 Date of Birth < 1944                         0.090     0.089
                      1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                      -0.336     0.089
                      1950 <Date of Birth     1954                      0.700     0.090
                      1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                       0.230     0.116
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                       3.319     0.362
          Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)       -1.306     0.116
           Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i t)           -0.340      0.131
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date i in Firm J(i, t)       -2.494      0.110
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date i in Firm J(i, t)        -3.011      0.117
                    Manager at Date i in Firm J(i, t)                  -5.195      0.131
                         Works in lIe de France                        -0.766      O

  6                            Intercept                                1.714      (1   1.
                      1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                       0.266      Ui
                      1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                       0.471      0111
                      1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                       0.318      11.1 10
                      1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                       0.000      0.102
                      1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                      -0.2 16     0.102
                      1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                       -0.363     0.103
                      1955 < 1)ate of Birth < 11959                      0.312     1) 1 30
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                        2.742
          Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)        -0.849     0.129
           Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, L)         -0.006     0.142
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date L in Firm J(z, t)        -1.100     0. 121
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm .J(i, )         -1.030     0. 12C
                                                                        -3.036     0.141
                    Manager at Date L in Firm J(i, t)
                         Works in lie de France                         -0.510     ouSt;




                                       45 -
begree                        Variable                           Coefficient Std. Err.
                                                      -—_____ __________-
                                Intercept                             -0.141     0.158
                      1925 < Date of Birth < 1920                      0 102     0179
                      1930 < Date of Birth < 1931                      0.407     1)115
                      1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                      0.349     0 154
                      1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                      0.5 19    0.120
                      1945 < Date of Birth < 1940                      0.653     0.123
                      1950< Date of Birth < 1951                       0.843     0.121
                      1)55 < Date of Birth < 1959                      1.704     0 145
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                      3.339     0 379
          UiikiIled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)       -0.155     0 130
           Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)        -0.055     0.157
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)      -0.137     0.129
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)        -0.100     0.134
                   Manager at Date in Firm J(z, 1)                  -1.648       0.148
                        Works in lIe de France                      -0 399       0.062




                                      46
       Table 5: Degree Category Model Coefficients-\Vornen
ree
 1
                         Variable
                           Intercept
                                                      Coefficient Std. Err.
                                                                7.296     0.205
                  1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                  -0.723     0.257
                  1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                  -0.999     0.199
                  1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                  -1.393     0.206
                  1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                  -2.328     0.169
                  1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                  -3.023     0.16 1
                  1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                  -3.791     0.156
                  1955 < Date of Birth 1959                    -3.082     0.172
                  1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                   1.070     0.382
      Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)     -0.205     0.195
       Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)    -0.634     0.295
      Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm Jii, t)   -2.250     0.144
       Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)     -3.853     0.161
                Manager at Date tin Firm i(i,t)                -5.449     0.191
      —               Works in lie de France
                            Intept
                                                               -0.925 -
                                                               7.148
                                                                    224
                                                                          0.069
                                                                          0.206
                                                                          0.257
                  1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                  -O
                  1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                  —0   (3    0.200
                  1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                  -1.073     0.207
                  1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                  -1.743     0.169
                  1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                  -2.429     0.161
                  1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                  -3.433     0.157
                  1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                  .3323      0.175
                  1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                  -0.673     0.381
      Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, 1)    -0.787     0.196
       Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)    -0.977     0.296
      Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i, t)    -2.466     0146
       Skilled White-Collar Worker at. Date tin Firm J(i, t)   -4.352     0.165
                Manager at Date t in Firm J(i, t)              -6.431     0,216
                     Works in lie de France                    -0.983     0.070




                                       47
Degree   —
                              Variable                           Coefficient Std. Err.
  3                           Intercept                               4.645      0.211
                     1925 ( Date of Birth < 1929                     -0.307      0.265
                     1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                     -0.742      0.207
                     1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                     -1.021      0.217
                     1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                     -1.550      0.177
                     1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                     -2.011      0.167
                     1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                     -2.537      0.162
                     1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                     -1.409      (3.176
                     1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                      1.506      0.385
        Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, 1)        -0.778      0.202
         Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i,t)           -0.840      0.308
       Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i,t)          -1.218      0.149
        Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(it)           -2.379      0.166
                  Manager at Date tin Firm J(i,t)                    -3.977      0.209
 _____                  Works in lie de France                       -0.738      0.074
 4                            Intercept                               2.263      0.223
                     1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                      0.023      0.285
                    1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                      -0.314      0.225
                    1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                      -0.383      0.233
                    1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                      -0.542      0.189
                    1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                      -0.894      0.180
                    1950 < Date of Birth < 1954.                     -0.694      0.172
                    1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                       0.075      0.187
                    1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                       2.448      0.390
        Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date L in Firm J(i, 1)       -0.248      0.210
         Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)        -0.167      0.320
       Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i,i)        -0.502      0.154
        Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)          -0.880      0.169
                  Manager at Date t in Firm J(i, t)                  -1.725      0.193
                        Works in lIe de France                       -0.462      0.076




                                      48
                               Variable                            Coefficient Std. Err.
Degree                                                                   4.555     0.211
  5                          Intercept
                     1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                         0.391     0.267
                     1930< Date of Birth < 1934                          0.441     0.208
                     1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                         0.371     0.214
                     1940< Date of Birth < 1944                         -0.057     0.177
                     1945< Date of Birth < 1949                         -0.529     0.168
                     1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                        -1.022     0.163
                     1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                        -0.342     0.178
                     1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                         2.753     0.385
         Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)          -0.898     0.196
          Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)          -0.645     0.297
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)          -1.593     0.144
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)          -3.272     0.162
                   Manager at Date tin Firm J(i,t)                      -5.147     0.218
                        Works in lie de France                          -0.967     0.070
                             Intercept                                   2.693     0.231
  6
                     1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                        -0.148     0.309
                     1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                         0.111     0.233
                     1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                         0.054     0.241
                     1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                        -0.210     0.199
                     1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                        -0.461     0.189
                      1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                       -0.927     0.184
                      1955 < Date of Birth < 1959                       -0.264      0.199
                      1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                        2.531      0.396
         Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i,L)            -IJ969      0.212
          Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date t in Firm J(i, t)          -0.675      0.320
         Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)          -1.008      0.153
          Skilled White-Collar Worker at. Date tin Firrti J(i,t)        -2.062      0.171
                   Manager at Date tin Firrii J(i,t)                    4.133       0.27k?
                         Works in 1k de France                          -0.541      0.07




                                          49
Dcgrct 1                        Variable                         Coeflicieiit Std. Evr.
                                Intercept                             2.278        0223
                       1925 < Date of Birth < 1929                   -0.137        0.289
                       1930 < Date of Birth < 1934                   -0.201        0.224
                       1935 < Date of Birth < 1939                   -0.361        0.233
                       1940 < Date of Birth < 1944                   -0.439        0.189
                       1945 < Date of Birth < 1949                   -0.552        0.178
                       1950 < Date of Birth < 1954                   -0.601        0.173
                       1955 <Date of Birth <1959                      0.153        0.187
                       1960 < Date of Birth < 1976                     1.638       Q.39F
           Unskilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i, t)     -0.511        0.213
            Skilled Blue-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,L)        0.064        0.315
           Unskilled White-Collar Worker at Date tin Firm J(i,t)     -0.749        0.155
            Skilled White-Collar Worker at Date in Firm J(i, t)      -0 047        U 166
                     Manager at Date tin Firm J(i, 1)                -2.052        0.201
                          Works in lie de France                      -0 738       0 077




                                       50
    With these estimated coefficients, we were able to calculate the probabil-
ity that a given individual would have a degree in a particular category. We
used the data corresponding to the earliest date that an individual appeared
in our sample to calculate these probabilities. The probability that a given
individual i has a degree in category n was calculated as follows. For au
ñ E {1,2,3,4,5,6,7}, let
                           PREr = exp      (x),
where X represents the vector of covariates for individual i and /EP corre-
sponds to the vector of coefficients for degrees of category ñ. Let

                             PRE =         PRE.

Now, if ii E {1,2,3,4,5,6,7},
                                             =       PRE
                   P (degree categoryg =         1   + PREI'
and if ;i = 8,

        P (degree category = 8) =   1 —     P (degree categoryg =

We used this degree category (actual, where possible, otherwise ilfl1)Uted) fur
all observations on the individual.
    To calculate school leaving age we used table 14 in CEREQ-DEP-IN SEE
(1990), which provides the average age of termination for each French diploma
separately for men and women in 1986. Using the probability of each de-
gree category and the average school-leaving age for degrees in that category
(the ages were fairly homogeneous within categories), we calculated ex1)ected
school-leaving age.

A.2.4 Job Seniority, and Total Labor Market Experience
Individuals fell into two categories with respect to the calculation of job
seniority (employer-specific experience): those for whom the first year of
observation was 1976 and those who first appeared after 1976. For those

                                      51
individuals whose first observation was in 1976, we estimated the expected
length of the in-progress employment spell by a regression analysis using a
supplementary survey, the 1978 Enquête sur la Structure des Salaires (ESS,
Salary Structure Survey). In this survey, respondent establishments provided
information on seniority (in 1978), occupation, date of birth, industry, and
work location for a scientific sample of their employees. Using the ESS in-
formation, we estimated separate regressions for men and women to predict
seniority in 1976. The coefficients from these regressions were used to calcu-
late expected job seniority in 1976 for DAS individuals whose first observa-
tion was in 1976. The dependent variable in the supplementary ESS regres-
sions was current seniority with the employer and the explanatory variables
were date of birth (DOB), occupation (CSP, 1-digit), region of employment
(metropolitan Paris), and industry (NAP 100, approximately 2-digit).16 Ta-
ble 6 provides sample statistics for the ESS data. Results of these regressions
  '6The excluded categories were: 1960<DOB1, CSPG2 (1 if i is an Unskilled Blue-Collar
Worker at Date t in firm J(i i)), and N89 (1 if firm J(i, t) is in industry 89, Financial
Organizations). The coefficients on the industry indicators are not shown below.




                                          52
Table 6: ESS Variables and Means (Std. Deviations in Parentheses)
  Variable                        Mean-Men Mean-Women
                                        10.244            7.910
  Seniori ty ,J(i ,t)
                                       (9.27 1)         (7.796)
  DOB        1924                        0.113            0.095
                                       (0.317)          (0.293)
  1925 DOB1 1929                         0.112            0.087
                                       (0.315)          (0.281)
  1930 DOB 1934                          0.124            0.097
                                       (0.330)          (0.296)
  1935 DOB1 < 1939                       0.115            0.088
                                       (0.3 19)         (0.283)
  1940 DOB 1944                          0.111             0.087
                                       (0.3 14)         (0.282)
  1945 < DOBI < 1949                     0.153             0.145
                                       (0.360)          (0.352)
  1950 < DOB, 1954                       0.154             0.188
                                       (0.36 1)         (0.391)
  1955 < DOB 1959                        0.094             0.174
                                       (0.292)          (0.379)
  Worked in lie de Francej,J(,)          0.191             0.233
                                       (0.393)          (0.423)
                                         0.106             0.026
  CSP3O,J(,)
                                       (0.308)          (0.161)
                                         0.175             0.072
  CSP40,c,J(,t)
                                       (0.380)          (0.258)
                                         0.180             0.492
  CSP5O,tJ(I,)
                                       (0.384)           (0.500)
  CSP6 1 ,t,J(it)                        0.283             0.064
                                       (0.450)           (0.245)
                                         0.256             0.346
  CSP62,J(,i)
                                       (0.437)           (0.476)




                                  53
are shown in equations 33 for men and 34 for women.

 seniority,,J(,) = 2.513
                 (0.081)
                 +14.151 [DOB      1924]          +12.820 [1925 DOB,          1929]
                 (0.067)                          (0.067)
                 +10.299 [1930 DOBI 1934] +7.445 [1935 < DOB1 < iy]
                 (0.066)                          (0.067)
                 +4.748 [1940 < DOB, < 1944]      +2.569 [1945 DOB, < 194}
                 (0.067)                          (0.065)
                 +0.612 [1950 DOB, 19541          —0.642 [1955 DOB, < 1959]
                 (0.065)                          (0.067)
                 +4.039 CSP30,J(1,)               +4.939 CSP40,l,J(1,)
                 (0.038)                          (0.031)
                 + 1.885 CSP5O,J(,)               +2.898 CSPG Ii,t,Jt,t)
                 (0.037)                          (0.027)
                 —0.958 lie de FranceI,J(,)
                 (0.026)
                                  IV = 547, 746
                                   R2 = 0.461
                                                                       (33)




                                    54
 seniorityl,tJ(1) = 2.114
                  (0.084)
                  +12.669 [DUB1 1924]               +11.014 [1925 DUB,              1929)
                  (0.074)                           (0.075)
                  +8.979 [1930 DOBI 1934] +7.278 [1935 DOB, 1939
                  (0.073)                           (0.074)
                  +5.989 [1940 DOB1 1944] +4.604 [1945 DOB, <                      1949]
                  (0.075)                           (0.070)
                  +2.822 [1950 DOB, 1954] +0.641 [1955 <            DUB1     < 1959]
                  (0.068)                           (0.068)
                  +5.116 CSP3OI,t,J(1,t)            +5.789 CSP4O,,,J(lt)
                  (0.082)                           (0.057)
                  + 1.442 CSP5O,t,J(I,t)            +2.429 CSP611t,J(1,t)
                  (0.037)                           (0.054)
                  —0.988 lIe de France,,J(l,1)
                  (0.03 1)

                                     N = 260,580
                                      R2 = 0.373
                                                                            (34)
where
                DOB, =       Date of Birth of Individual i
         CSP3Ol,,J(l,) =     1 if i is a Engineer, Professional or Manager
         CSP40,.t,J(I) =     1 if i is Technician or Technical White-Collar

          CSP5OI,,J(1,t) = 1 if i is any other White-Collar
          CSP611,,J(l,t) = 1 if i is a Skilled Blue-Collar
          CSP62l,J(l,t) = 1 if i is an Unskilled Blue-Collar
   lie de France,J(1,) = 1 if the establishment is in Ile-de-France.
                                                                           (35)
    We used these results to impute levels of job seniority in 1976 for the
left-censored DAS individuals first observed in 1976. If the individual was
left-ensored and the imputed job seniority was negative, we set job seniority
prior to 1976 to zero. If the individual was first observed after 1976, we as-
sumed that job seniority prior to the date of the first DAS observation for the
individual was zero. If the age at the date of ally observation (1976 or oth-
erwise) was less than the expected school-leaving age, both total labor force
experience and prior job seniority were set to zero. In all other c?tses (when




                                       55
the age was greater than the expected school-leaving age), we calculated to-
tal labor market experience and job seniority as follows. If the observation
was the earliest appearance of the individual in our data, we set job seniority
equal to job seniority up to the date of the first observation plus the number
of days worked for that enterprise in the year of the first observation, divided
by 360 and we set total labor market experience to the current age less the
school-leaving age. If the observation was not the first for the individual but
there was an observation in the previous year for the person17, we added
1 to total labor market experience. If the individual was employed for the
majority of the current year by the same enterprise that employed him or her
for the majority of the previous year, i.e. SIRENS = SIREN_1, we added
1 to the level of seniority at t — 1. if SIRENS SIREN_1, we set seniority
equal to the number of days worked divided by 360.
    If, on the other hand, there was no observation in the previous year, we
distinguished between t = 1982 or i = 1984 and other years. When t 1982 or
1984, total labor market experience was increased by 1 (reflecting experience
gained in the year of the observation). If the current SIREN and the most
recent previous SIREN were the same, we added the number of days worked
over 360 to the most previous level of seniority. This is similar to assuming
that the worker was temporarily laid off, but retained his or her seniority in
the firm when recalled. Otherwise, we set seniority to the number of days
worked over 360.
   In the case where t = 1982 or t =1984, if the preceding observation was 2
years earlier (i.e. the missing data only occurred over a period when no data
were available for any individual), we increased total labor market experience
by 2. If SIREN_2 = SIREN,seniority was increased by 2. If SIREN_2
SIRENS, seniority was increased by 0.5 plus the number of days worked over
36018.
   '7The structure of our database is such that this condition (observations for individual i
at both t and t — 1) could only fail to be satisfied under 3 conditions. The first is that the
individual was employed in the civil service in the intervening years. The second is that
the individual was unemployed for an entire calendar year. The third is that i =1982 or
t =1984, since we were not given access to the data for these years. We largely discount
the first possibility, since full-time civil servants rarely move out of the civil service one
they have entered (Meron (1988)). The other two possibilities are treated explicitly.
   '8We assumed that the probability the individual was reemployed in the missing year was
equal to the probability that the individual was rcemployed in the observation year. Thus
the expected increment to job seniority is the share of the year worked in the observation


                                            56
    If the preceding observation was more than 2 years earlier, we increased
total labor market experience by 1.519. If the current SIREN and the most
recent previous SIREN were the same, we added the number of days worked
over 360 plus 0.5 to the most previous level of seniority. This is similar
to assuming that the worker was recalled from temporary layoff with equal
probability in the observation year and in the missing year. If the two SIRENs
were different, we set seniority to 0.5 plus the number of days worked over
360.

A.2.5 Elimination of Outliers
After calculating all of the individual level variables, we eliminated obser-
vations for which the log of the real annualized total compensation cost
(LFRA1SRE) was more than five standard deviations away from its pre-
dicted value based on a linear regression model with dependent variable
LFRAISRE, shown in equation (36). This gives us the analysis sample
year plus ( 0) + ( . 1) = 0.5.
  '9We assumed that the probability the individual was reemployed in the missing year
was equal to the probability that the individuatwas reemployed in the observation year.
Thus the expected increment to total labor market experience is ( . 1) + ( .2) = 1.5




                                         57
of 5,305,108 observations.
  LFRAISRE = —3.250
                   (0.005)
                   +0.210 Males                   +0.123 lie de Francet
                   (0.000)                        (0.000)
                   +0.082 Yeart                   +0.056 Degree Category 2,
                   (0.000)                        (0.002)
                   +0.415 Degree Category 3 +0.627 Degree Category 4,
                   (0.002)                        (0.003)
                   +0.266 Degree Category 5 +0.642 Degree Category 6,
                   (0.001)                        (0.003)
                   +0.648 Degree Category 7 +1.421 Degree Category 8
                   (0.002)                        (0.003)
                   +0.055 Experienceit            —0.222 Experience
                   (0.000)                        (0.003)
                   +0.052 Experience              —0.005 Experience
                   (0.001)                        (0.000)

                                N = 5,325,352
                                  R2 = 0.437
                                   a = 0.477
                                                                             (36)

A.3 Supplementary information on projection method
     variables
The derivation of the individual and firm effects took place in three basic
steps: an estimation of the "first-step equation" derived as equation (9),
an extraction and decomposition of the individual effect (os) into observ-
able (u1i) and unobservable (ag) components, and a decomposition of the
correlated component        into the enterprise-specific constant effect (j),
the enterprise-specific coefficient on seniority (yij) and the cntcrprisc-specific
coefficient on the linear spline at seniority of 10 years (y23).




                                       58
A.3.1 The First-Step Regression
Equation (5) represents the projection of the firm-specific variables onto firm
and individual data. In order to estimate the first-step equation (9), we
require (in addition to the seniority variable derived in section A.2.4 above)
some firm specific variable (denoted fJ(,t)t in equation (5)) and a vector of
means of some individual specific variables (denoted in equation (5)). We
calculated firm employment directly from the firms represented in the DAS
data. The sampling scheme of the DAS ensures that we have a sample
of the private French working population. Since we have 10 years worth of
data on the French economy, we calculated fJ(1,g)as:

    fJ(i,t)   = (2.5 x Number of DAS Observations for Firm J(i, t)) — 8.3.
                                       1000

 Although this measure does not vary over time for a particular firm, it does
vary over time for an individual who changes employers, which is the essence
of our identification of firm effects relative to individual effects. The vector x
in equation (5) includes time-varying individual-specific variables. The vector
   in equation (5) contains the individual specific means of the two individual-
specific variables onto which the firm effect was projected: individual i's total
labor market experience and total labor market experience squared at date
t. These individual-specific means were used in the calculation of the matrix
z. Table 7 presents the variables appearing in the matrix Zt.
    The first step equation (9) requires that the variables all be restated in
terms of deviations from individual-specific means shown below for men with




                                       59
   Table 7: z Variables and Means (Std. Deviations iii Parentheses)
TVariable                                       Name            Mean
 Firm Employment*Mean Experience1                    ZX               15.710
                                                                   (746.422)
 Firm Employment*Mean Experience                     ZX28              4.032
                                                                   (222.783)
 Firm Employment *Mean Experience1 *Seniority        SX              726.375
                                                                   (8,747.38)
 Firm Employment * Mean Experience *Seniority        SX21            178.764
                                                                  (2,752.69)
 Firm Employment *Mean Experience1 *Seniority?       S2X1           7,766.07
                                                                (135,011.21)
 Firm Employment*Mean Experience*Seniorityt S2X21                   2,175.18
                                                                 (43,035.26)

more than one observation (37)
 LFRAISRE = 0.073 EXPER1 -0.451 EXPER +0.107 EXPER
                 (0.000)                (0.003)             (0.001)
                 -0.009 EXPER +0.080 ILEDF1                 +0.084 AN771
                 (0.000)                (0.00 1)            (0.001)
                 +0.169 AN781           +0.266 AN791        +0.394 AN80L
                 (0.001)                (0.001)             (0.00 1)
                 +0.615 AN821           +0.803 AN841        +0.860 AN851
                 (0.00 1)               (0.002)             (0.002)
                +0.880 AN861            +0.906 AN871        +5.237e-5 ZX
                (0.002)                 (0.002)             (2.96e-6)
                —1.477e-6 ZX21          —8.00 le-6 SX1      +1.977e-5 SX21
                (1.002e-5)              (2 .8e- 7)          (1 .OOe-6)
                +6.99e-7 S2X1           —1.883e-6 S2X21
                (2e-8)                  (6e-8)

                             N = 3,248,901
                                 R2 = 0.604
                                 a = 0.245
                                                                         (37)

                                   60
and for women with more than one observation (38).

  LFRAISRE        = 0.033 EXPER1—0.180 EXPER21                 +0.040 EXPER3
                  (0.000)       (0.004)                        (0.001)
                  -0.003 EXPER4 +0.078 ILEDF1                  +0.086 AN771
                  (0.000)       (0.002)                        (0.001)
                  +0.180 AN78              +0.281 AN79         +0.4 12 AA'80,
                  (0.00 1)                 (0.001)             (0.001)
                  +0.639 AN821             +0.827 AN84         +0.877 AN85L
                  (0.002)                  (0.002)             (0.002)
                  +0.893 AN861             +0.915 AN87         +5.573e-5 ZX
                  (0.003)                  (0.003)             (6.67e-6)
                  —1.29e-4 ZX2Lt           —1.198e-5 SX1       +2.847c-5 SX2
                  (2.263e-5)               (6. Oe- 7)          (1 .94e-6i
                  +6.46e-7 S2X,            —1.713e-6 S2X2
                  (6e-8)                   (1.9e-7)

                                  N = 1,739,996
                                    R2 = 0.564
                                        = 0.256
                                                                            (38)

A.3.2 Imputed firm effects
For individual in firms with insufficient data to calculate a firm effect (less
than 10 observations in the firm), we ran a single regression of equation (17),
pooling all of the data and assigning the estimated coefficients to all firms
in the group. This group included 1,353,794 observatons (26% of the total),
although it represented 86% of the firms. The results of the regression on
this g:oup are presented in equation (39).
            DLFRAJSRIL =       —0.028          +0.003 s   —0.005   s
                               (3.375e-4) (8.476e-5) (1.772e-4)
                                                                            (39)
                               N=   1,353,794
                                R2 = 0.0013




                                      61
A.4 Construction of the Firm-Level Data
A.4.1 Calculation of the Firm-Level Averages


,
We need to calculate os,, uT/ and their respective variances based on the
c1and u,i estimated according to the procedure laid out in section?? above.
    uir,i are simply the means of aand url, weighted by individual-years. In
other words,
                        >   [oT,j                      > [(u1rj) T1]
                 cx =               ,        UT/   =   $




where T1 represents the number of observation for individual i for which he
or she is employed in firm j. The variances of c, uii are calculated as

                 >2 [Var(o) T1}                               >2 [Var(u) T13]
     Var(a3) =    *
                              2
                                             Var (ujii)                 2

                      (T)                                         (T)
 since each cand Ujlj is a random variable with known variance. The variables
 c5.,, ii3 and Y2j already have unique values for a given SIREN (enterprise).
 Unfortunately, even having restricted estimation of firm-specific ,, 7i3 and
'12j to those SIRENs for which we had 10 or more observations, we still
ended up with some outliers. Thus, in cases where either —3              3 or
 —2             2 or —2     Yi. + 72j  2, we set , y', and 'Y2j equal to the
values estimated in the pooled regression. Weighting by individual-years,
this affected only 0.15 percent of the observations in our sample.

A.4.2 Firm-level Employment and Capital Stock
The variable EFFEC (effectif, in thousands of workers) measures the total
full-time employment in an enterprise as of December 31 (prior to 1984)
and the annual average full-time employment (1984 and later) as found in
the BIC. We then took its mean over all years that the firm appeared in
the sample to get MEFFEC, the mean number of employees. Total capital
in the enterprise is defined as the sum of Dettes (Debt) and Fonds propres
d'entreprise (Owners' Equity). Our capital measure is equal to Actif total
(Total assets) in French accounting systems. This information was taken

                                        62
directly from the BIC for every firm-year. We used a sector-by-sector, time
varying index of the cost of capital (KAPP, 1980=100), available from the
Banque de Donées Macroéconomiques (BDM). CAPITR is defined as total
capital divided by cost of capital (in millions of 1980 FF). MCAPITR is
the annual average of CAPITR over all available years for the firm. The
capital labor ratio is defined as CAPITR/EFFEC and its annual average is
MCAPITRF (thousands of 1980 FF)

A.4.3 Real Operating Income per Unit of Capital
We used the BIC to obtain the Excédent brut d'exploitation (Operating
Income), or EBE, for each firm in each year that it appeared in the firm
sample. The formula used to calculate the EBE is shown in equation 40.
   EBE =      ventes de marchandises (merchandise sold)
          —   achat de marchandises (merchandise purchased)
          —   variation de stock de marchandises
               (variation in merchandise inventory)
         + ventes de biens (goods sold)
         + ventes de services (services sold)
         + production stockée (inventoried production)
         + production immobilisée (unfinished production)
         —   achats de matièrespremières (primary materials purchased)
         — variation de stocks sur matières premieres

              (variation of primary materials inventories)
         — autres achats et charges externes

              (other purchases and outside charges)
         + subventions d'exploitation (incentives for production)
         —
              impôts, taxes et versements assimilés
               (value added tax and other accrued taxes on
               or credits for production)
         —    salaires et traitements (salaries and benefits)
         —
              charges sociales (payroll taxes)
                                                                        (40)
The EBE was deflated by the prix de valeur ajoutée (value added price index),
also found in the BDM, to yield EBER (thousands of 1980 FF). EBER was
divided by CAPITR (times 1,000) to yield EBERC, real operating income

                                      63
 per unit of capital (1980 FF). Lastly, we took the mean of EBERC over all
 of the firm-years to get MEBERC, mean real operating income per unit of
 capital (1980 FF).

 A.4.4 Real Value Added Inclusive of Labor Costs
To calculate the valeur ajoutée réelle brute au coit des facteurs-(real value
added inclusive of labor costs), VABCFR, we divided the frais de personnel
(employer's compensation cost) from the BIC (thousands of FF) by the indice
des prix a la consornmation (consumer price index) from the BDM to yield
the employer's real compensation cost (thousands of 1980 FF). The results
was added to EBER, as defined above in section A.4.3, to yield the VABCFR,
real value added inclusive of labor costs (thousands of 1980 FF). VABCFR
was divided by EFFEC to yield VABCFRF, real value added inclusive of
factor costs per worker (1980 FF). We took the mean of VABCFRF over all
of the years that the firm appeared in the sample to get MVABCFRF, mean
real value added inclusive of labor costs per worker (1980 FF).

A.4.5 Employment structure
The variable MING, proportion of engineers, technicians and managers in
the work force (EFFEC), was calculated from the ESE using the PCS occu-
pation classification (35) for individuals in categories 30 and 40. MOQA, the
proportion of skilled workers in the work force, was calculated from the ESE
using the PCS occupation classification (35) for individuals in categories 50
and 61. Both variables were expressed as a ratio to EFFEC and averaged
over all the available firm-years.


B Model Appendix
Tables B1 to B3 show the first- and second-period wage equations for each
of the representative individuals as a function of the statistical parameters of
equation (1) and the parameters specified in each of the theoretical models
in section 3.1.




                                      64
                                      Table Bi
                     Matching Model with Homogeneous Workers



Individual Wage Period 1                          Wage Period 2


1            Yii =11+ U1+ørn      W               Y12   =+( +m+             U1




2            Y21   =P+ a2+m W
3            J3j   :JL+ 3+5m +)rn=W
                                                  Y42     +a3+mW
5              =i+
             ysi       =w             — LL
                                        2         Y52   =+5+n+'Yn = W +11
             YI t+ 6+n +W+ H
                                                                                     !
6

7                  —12+ C7+n      W—    2         Y72    +a7+m=W                     I



8                                                 Ys2     +8+fl=W 4
                                                  Y92     +crg+cn=w- q-

Notes: Individual 1 enters type in firm in period 1; individual 2 entered type in
    firm in period 0 (before period 1); individual 3 entered type n firm in period
    0 (before period 1), had a negative matching outcome and left for a type in
    firm; individual 4 enters type rn firm in period 2; individual 5 enters type
    n firm in period 1, has a positive matching outcome; individual 6 entered
    type n firm in period 0 (before period 1), had a positive matching outcome
    and remained in type n firm for period 1; individual 7 enters type n firrn
    has a negative matching outcome and leaves for a type in firm in period 2;
    individuals 8 and 9 enter type n firm in period 2.




                                             65
                                      Table B2
                                Rent-Splitting Model


 Individual   \Vagc Period I                   Wage Period 2


 1            y=/z+c1+=x1 —smQ Y12/L+01+m+7, xj+s7Q
 2            Y21 = / + 2 + m =      — SmQ    Y22 = /1   + 2 + n = 12 — sQ
 3            Y3 = /L + 03 +   = 13 + s,Q     Y32 =    + 03 +    + = 13 —    Q
4             y4l=p+o4+=x4+sQ Y42=+U4+mX2+3nQ
Notes: The quasi-rent is —Q in type m firm in period 1 and Q in period 2. 'l'he
    quasi-rent is Q in type ri firm in period 1 and —Q in period 2. Individual 1
    works in type rn firm in both periods. Individual 2 works in type in firm in
    period 1 and in type n firm in period 2, Individual 3 works in type n firm in
    both periods. Individual 4 works in type 11 firm in period 1 and in type in
    firm in period 2.




                                       66
                                       Table B3
                       Incentive Model with Heterogeneous Workers




              Yii = + a1 + m = W               yi2=p+ai+m+ym W
                     = p + a2 + m =            Y22P+Q2+m+7m W
              Y31 = / + 3 + m = W              y32=p+a3+m+ym = W
                                                                 6r 2
              !/41 =/i+a4+c6n=y—6rq4           42/L+&4+n+7n =y+ --q+Orq4
                                                                  8r 2
              f5j                              ys2=LL+as+n+7n =y+7q5+ôrq5
                                                                             5r   2
              Y61 =+&6+n=y—Tq
              Y71                              y72=p+a7+n+y =y+q+rq7
              Ysi
                                                                  r2
                                               1/s2=+Q8++Yfl =y+ --q8
                                                                  )r
              1/91                             yg2=p+a9+n+7n =y+ 7q9              2




Notes: Individuals 1, 2, 3 belong to type in firm with qj, i = 1,2,3 hetweii (3 and
    1/3, individuals 4 to 9 belong to type n firm with q1, i = 4 to 9 above 1/3,
    Individuals 4, 5, 6, 7 pass the test, and receive the bonus; individuals S and
    9 fail.




                                          67
References
[1] Abowd, John M. (1990) "Does Performance-Based Managerial Compen-
   sation Affect Corporate Performance," Industrial and Labor Relations
    Review, 43:S52-S73, February.
[2] Abowd, John M and Francis Kramarz. (1993) "A Test of Negotiation and
    Incentive Compensation Models Using Longitudinal French Enterprise
    Data," In J.C. van Ours, G.A. Pfann, and G. Ridder, editors, Labour De-
    rnand and Equilibrium Wage Formation, (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
[3] Bulow, Jeremy and Lawrence Summers. (1976) "A Theory of Dual Labor
    Markets with Applications to Industrial Policy, Discrimination and Key-
    nesian Unemployment," Journal of Labor Economics, 4:376-414, July.
[4] Cahuc, Pierre and Brigitte Dormont. (1992) "Profit Sharing: Does It
    Increase Productivity and Employment? A Theoretical Model and Em-
    pirical Evidence on French Micro Data," Universite' de Paris I Working
    Paper, 92.45.
[5] Cain, Glenn. (1976) "The Challenge of Segmented Labor Market The-
    ories to Orthodox Theory," Journal of Economic Literature, 14:1215-
    1257, December.
[6] Chamberlain, Gary. (1984) "Panel Data," in Z. Griliches and M.D. Intril-
    ligator, eds., Handbook of Econometrics, (Amsterdam: North Holland).
[7] Dickens, William T. and Lawrence F. Katz. (1987) "Inter-Industry
    Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics," In Kevin Lang aiid
   Jonathan S. Leonard, eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor
   Markets, (Oxford: Basil Blackwell).
[8] Dickens, William T. and Kevin Lang. (1985) "A Test of Dual Labor
   Market Theory," American Economic Review, 75:792-805, September.
[9] Ehrenberg, Ronald 0. editor. (1990) Do Compensation Policies Matter?,
    (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press).




                                    68
[10] Ehrenberg, Ronald 0. and George T. Milkovich. (1987) "Compensation
     and Firm Performance," In Steven G. Allen et. a!., editor, Human Re-
     sources and the Performance of the Firm, pages 87-122, (Madison, WI:
     IRRA).
[11] Flinn, Christopher (1986) "Wages and Job Mobility of Young Workers,"
     Journal of Political Economy.
[12] Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz. (1991) "Layoffs and Lemons,"
    Journal of Labor Economics.
[13] Gibbons, Robert and Lawrence Katz. (1992) "Does Unmeasured Abil-
    ity Explain Inter-Industry Wage Differentials?" Review of Economic
     Studies, 59:515-535
[14] Gibbons, Robert and Kevin Murphy. (1990) "Relative Performance
    Evaluation for Chief Executive Officers," Industrial and Labor Relations
    Review, 43:30S-51S, February.
[15] Gibbons, Robert and K.J. Murphy (1992), "Optimal Incentive Contracts
     in the Presence of Career Concerns: Theory and Evidence," Journal of
     Political Economy 100:468-505.

[16] Groshen, Erica. (1991) "Sources of Intra-Industry Wage Dispersion,"
     Quarterly Journal of Economics
[17) Hart, Oliver and Bengt Holmstrôm. (1987) "A Theory of Contracts," In
     Truman F. Bewley, editor, Advances in Economic Theory, Fifth World
     Congress, pages 71-155, (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press).
[18] Heckman, James J. and G. Sedlacek (1985) " " Journal of Political
    Economy.
[19] Hutchens, Robert. (1987) "A Test of Lazear's Theory of Delayed Pay-
    ment Contracts," Journal of Labor Economics, 5:S153-S170, October.
[20] Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw (1993) " Do High Performance
    Work Systems Really Work?" Columbia University working paper.
[21] INSEE (1989) "Echantillon d'entreprises état d'avancement" (Paris: IN-
     SEE, République Francaise, No. 13/G231).

                                   69
[22] INSEE (1990a) "Echantillon d'entreprises fichier de référence de
     l'échantillon" (Paris: INSEE, République Francaise, No. 06/ G23 1).
[23] INSEE (1990b) "Echantillond'entreprises mise a disposition des données
     BIC" (Paris: INSEE, République Francaise, No. 10/G231).
[24] INSEE (1990c) "Echantillon d'entreprises mise disposition des données
     ESE" (Paris: INSEE, République Française, No. 64/G231).
[25] Jovanovic, Bojan. (1979) "Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,"
     Journal of Political Economy.
[26] Kahn, Lawrence and Peter Sherer (1990) "Contingent Pay and Manage-
     rial Performance," Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43: 52S-73S.

[27] Krainarz, Francis and Patrick Rey (1994) •'The Dynamics of Wages,"
    INSEE working paper.
[28] Krueger, Alan B. and Lawrence H. Summers. (1988) "Efficiency Wages
    and the Inter-Industry Wage Structure," Econometrica, 56:259-293,
    March.

[29] Lazear, Edward P. (1979) "Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?"
    Journal of Political Economy, 87:1261-1 2S4, December.
[30] Leonard, Jonathan S. (1990) "Executive Pay and Firm Performance,"
    Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 43:S13-S29, February.
[31] Meron, Monique (1988) "Les Migrations des salaries de I'Etat: plus loin
     de Paris, plus près du soleil," Economie et Statistique, 214, Octobre.
[32] Mundlak, Y. (1978) "On the Pooling of Time Series and Cross Section
     Data," Econometrica, 46.
[33] Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. Topel. (1985) "Least Squares with
    Estimated Regressors" Journal of Business and Economic Statistics.

[34] Nickel!, Stephen and Sushil Wadhwani. (1991) "Employment Determi-
     nation in British Industry: Investigations Using Micro-Data," Review of
     Economic Studies, 58:955-970, October.


                                    70
[35] Pagan, Adrian (1984) "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions
     with Generated Regressors," International Economic Review, 25:21-47,
     February.
[36] Rosen, Sherwin (1986) "The Theory of Equalizing Differences" in 0.
    Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics, (Ams-
    terdam: North Holland)
[37) Roy, A. D. (1951) "Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings,"
    Oxford Economics Papers, 3:135-146, June.
[38) Sappington, David. (1991) "Incentives in Principal-Agent Relation-
    ships," Journal of Economic Perspectives 5:45-66.
[39] Scheffé, H. (1959) The Analysis of Variance (New York: Wiley).
[40] Shapiro, Carl and Joseph E. Stiglitz. (1984) "Equilibrium Unemploy-
    ment as a Worker Discipline Device," American Economic Review,
    74:433-444, June.
[41] Thaler, Richard H. (1989) "Anomalies: Interindustry Wage Differen-
    tials," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 3:18 1-193, Spring.
[42] Topel, Robert and Michael Ward (1992) "Job Mobility and the Careers
     of Young Men," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.
[43] Willis, Robert (1986) "Wage Determinants: A Survey" in 0. Asherifelter
     and R. Layard, eds. Handbook of LaborEconomics, (Amsterdam: North
     Holland), pp. 525-602.




                                   71
</ref_section>
