NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES COMPETITION FROM HMOS
AFFECT FEE-FOR-SERVICE
PHYSICIANS?

Laurence C. Baker

Working Paper No. 4920

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994

This paper is based on the second chapter of my Ph.D dissertation. An earlier version

was

circulated under the title "Do HMOs affect
Fee-For-Service Physician Fees: Evidence based on
county-level estimates of HMO market share.t' I wish to thank Joel Cantor, Kenneth Corts, Alan
Krueger, and Uwe Reinhardt for helpful comments and discussions. I also thank Erika Miles tor
her assistance. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Health Care. Any
opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1994 by Laurence C. Baker. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be .quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4920
November 1994
DOES COMPETITION FROM HMOS
AFFECT FEE-FOR.SER VICE

PHYSICJ&J5?
ABSTRACT
This paper develops county-level estimates of HMO market share for all
United States and uses them to examine

for a normal office visit with

counties in the

the relationship between HMt) market share and the fee

an established patient charged by 2,845 fee-for-service (FFS)

physicians. Two-stage least squares estimates indicate that increases of 10

percentage points in
HMO market share are associated with decreases of approximately ii
percent in the normal
office visit fee. However, further
examination indicates that the incomes of the physicians in the

sample are not lower in areas with higher HMO market share. In
addition, the quantity of
services provided, measured by the number of hours worked and the

number of patients seen per

week, is not higher in these areas. While it is possible that physicians induce
the volume or mix of services

demand to change

provided to patients in ways that do not affect the number of hours

worked or patients seen, another hypothesis Consistent with these findings is

respond to competition from liMOs by

adopting multi-part pricing strategies in which the price

for an office visit is reduced but prices for other services are raised.

Laurence C. Baker
Health Research and Policy
HRP Redwood Building, Room 253
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER

that FFS physicians

1. Introduction
An important form of competition in health

care markets may take place between

Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and physicians who operate on

(FFS) basis. If HMOs compete with FFS

a fee-for-service

physicians for patients, or if HMOs are able to

provide medical care more cost-effectively, FFS

physicians in markets where HMOs have

significant market share may have to lower their fees or alter their practice styles

to compete.

A number of studies have examined the effects of

HMOs on expenditures in the FFS sector.

Some find that HMOs reduce FFS

expenditures for ambulatory and hospital care

expenditures, while others suggest that HMOs have not reduced, and may actually have
increased, costs.2 However, since all of these

studies examine expenditures, which reflect

both price and quantity, they are unable to separately determine the

quantity. There have been no studies looking
physician fees or the quantity or services

responses of price and

directly at the relationship between HMOs and

provided. A clear understanding of health care

markets requires that these potentially separate responses to HMO competition be examined.
This paper examines the effects of HMO market share on the fees charged by FFS

physicians

and on the quantity of services they provide.

To do this, a good measure of HMO
the prevalence of HMOs and interest

activity is needed. However, despite increases in

in their ability to provide cost effective medical care,

estimates of HMO enrollment and market

share have not been available for areas smaller than

See e.g. Baker (1994), Robinson (1991),
Noether (1988), survey by Frank and Welch (1985), and
Goldberg and Greenberg (1979).
2See e.g. Hill and Wolfe (1993),
McL.aughlin (1988a and l988b), Feldman et al. (1986), Luft CE al.
(1986), and Newhouse (1985).

states and selected Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs). The next section of this paper
(section 2) describes the development of new county-level estunates of HMO enrollment and

marker share. These estimates were constructed using published data that indicates, for the
year 1990, the total enrollment for each HMO in the United States as well as the counties in its

service area. The enrollees of each HMO were distributed to counties in the HMO's service
area based on the county populations and distance from the HMO headquarters. Thenew
estimates compare favorably to reliable estimates available for a limited number of MSAs.

Section 3 begins the examination of the effect of HMO market shareon FFS physician
prices by discussing the theoretical relationship between HMOs and FFS physician fees in the

context of a simple linear spatial location model. In this model, as in standard competitive and
monopolisticany competitive models, the entry of HMOs into a market will cause FFS

physicians to lower their prices. Thus, testing the relationship between HMOs and fees will
provide information about the extent of competition in health care markets.

Section 4 presents the empirical work. The new estimates of HMO market share are
used along with data on the fee for a normal office visit with an established patient from a

1991 survey of young physicians. Several results are of interest. First, the initial examination
of the relationship between HMO market share and fees reveals an positive correlation--high
HMO market shares are associated with expensive office visits. This is probably the result of
HMOs choosing to locate in areas where physicians use high fees. To account for this

possibility and for omitted variables that may cause market share to be endogenous, two-stage

least squares (2SLS) was applied. Firm size and type (white collar vs. blue collar) serve as
instruments for market share. The 2SLS results are in line with the predictions of the theory,
2

showing that increases in HMO market share are associated with significant decreases in
physician fees.

Among the independent variables included in the fee regressions are the number of
generalist and specialist physicians per capita. These variables were used since earlier
literature (e.g. Cromwell and Mitchell, 1986) indicated that increases in the number of

physicians per capita are associated with increases in fees. However, the results presented
here suggest that the number of physicians per capita does not have a significant effect on fees.

After examining fees I turn to incomes and the quantity of services provided. Here,
2SLS estimates reveal no relationship between HMO market share and physician incomes, the

number of patients seen per week, the number of hours worked per year, and the number of
surgical procedures performed. The fact that incomes did not change while fees fell would at
first suggest that physicians induced demand to make up for the reduction in fees. However,
the lack of a response in the other quantity variables suggests that this did not happen to a
significant degree. An alternate interpretation is that physicians adjusted different fees in

different ways, perhaps engaging in some sort of multi-part pricing scheme. For example,
they may have lowered the office visit fee but raised fees other services in response to
competition.

3

2. County Level Estimates of LIMO Enrollment and Market Share
To enable the subsequent empirical analysis, county-level3 estimates of HMO market

share had to be developed. Conceptually, this took place in three steps. First, the total
enrollment of each 1-IMO in the country and its service area, specified by county, were

obtained. Second, the enrollment of each HMO was distributed among the counties in its

service area. Finally, the total number of enrollees in each county was computed by summing
county enrollments over all of the HMOs serving the county. Using the total number of HMO
enrollees in each county, HMO market share was computed simply as the ratio of enrollees to
total population.

2.1. Enrollment and Service Area Data
The primary source of information on HMO enrollments and service areas is the
National Directory of HMOs, published annually by the Group Health Association of America

(GHAA). Each year the GHAA conducts a mail survey, with telephone follow up, of all
known HMOs in the country and, among other things, asks their total enrollment and their

service area. The results of the survey are published in the National Directory of HMOs
(Hereinafter the Directory). To construct estimates of 1990 county market share, I used the

3Counties were selected as the unit of analysis since they represent areas small enough to capture
market dynamics while retaining data availability. Counties are defined here using the Area Resource File
(ARF) definitions. Although these are largely consistent with the standard FIPS definitions, they differ in
a couple of ways. See ARF user documentation for details (Office of Health Professions Analysis and
Research, 1993).

4

1991 Directory, which lists enrollment and service area for each of the 567 HMOs in the

mainland U.S., Alaska, and Hawaii as of December 31, 1990.
In the Directory, enrollment is defined as all individuals who have been enrolled in

the

HMO as subscribers or as eligible dependents of subscribers and for whom the HMO has
accepted the responsibility for the provision of basic health services. HMOs were asked to
include enrollment by individuals and through

employer groups, Medicare, Medicaid, and the

Federal Employees Health Benefits Program. Any enrollment in Preferred Provider

Organizations is excluded (GHAA, 1991). All but one of the HMOs in the directory indicated
their enrollment. In the one missing case, data from the 1992 Directory was used. In all,
there were about 36.4 million HMO enrollees in 1990.
For each HMO, the Directo,y also lists a service area. Most HMOs (459 of 567)
indicated the counties that they served.5 However, the remaining 108 HMOs (19 percent),

representing 20 percent of nationwide HMO enrollment, did not provide a clear definition of

their market area in terms of counties. For these HMOs, the market area was determined by
one of three methods. First, some ambiguous service area definitions did provide sufficient
information to construct the service area in terms of counties. For example, an HMO that

indicated serving 'ten counties in metro Chicago" would have been assigned the ten counties
that make up the Chicago Consolidated MSA (CMSA).

4The directory covers 569 HMOs, which includes 2 HMOs in Guam.
51n one case, 3 liMOs operating in separate states but from the same headquarters indicated separate
enrollment figures for each HMO but only one comprehensive market area. In this case, the market area
list was separated and the operations in each state were treated independently.
S

However, most of the ambiguous area definitions required further follow-up. In these

cases, the next method used was consultation of the 1992 or 1993 Directories. Over time, the
service area definitions included have become more precise. Many HMOs for whom the
service area definition was ambiguous in 1991 provided specific county information tbr the

more recent years. Where available, this information was used, with preference given to the
1992 rather than the 1993 Directory.

Since service areas change over time, use of the more recent information could distort

the market areas. However, this is unlikely to cause significant bias in the estimates since, in
most cases, there is considerable agreement between the definitions provided for different

years. For example, in the 1991 directory, some HMOs indicated serving an area consisting
of some number of counties in a state (e.g. '11 counties in southeastern Indiana. ) In
subsequent directories, most of these HMOs indicated their service area in a list of counties of

approximately the right length.6 Other HMOs indicated only city names in the 1991 directory,
but provided a list of counties encompassing the same cities in a later directory.7

After applying the first two methods, all but five of the 108 original ambiguous cases

had been resolved. The remaining five HMOs were telephoned and a list of counties obtained.

6There was, of course, some variation. For example, an HMO that indicated serving "54 counties" in
1991 listed only 48 counties in subsequent directories. An HMO that indicated "31 counties" in 1991
listed 33 later. Since it is unclear whether the earlier or later definition is more accurate, the precise
definitions available in the later directories were used.
71n the few cases where there was clear disagreement between the areas indicated in the 1991 National
Directory and the county list provided in later directories, the county list was altered to conform to the
1991 information.

6

2.2. Distributing enrollment over service areas
The next step was to allocate each county in the service area of an HMO a portion of
the I-IMO enrollment that, in the case of the basic estimates, varies with the population of the

county and, in the case of later estimates, incorporates the distance

of the county from the

HMO headquarters.

2.2.1. MethsjA
Estimates that depend only on county population (method A) were Constructed first.

For each HMO, method A gives to each county in the service area a number of enrollees
proportional to that county's share of the total population in the service area. Specifically,
consider HMO i, which has E1 enrollees and serves N1 counties. For each countyj in the

service area, method A assigns enrollment,

a11

a, according to

= (1'E Pk)EI

where P is the population in countyj. Once the enrollment of each HMO has been distributed
among the counties in its service area, the total enrollment for

each county, A, is computed as

4, E a.1 .
Using the set of county enrollment estimates,

(2)

A, market share estimates S are computed by

taring the proportion of the population enrolled in HMOs:

S = A,/P.

The set of enrollment

and market share estimates based on method A will be referred to as Series A.

7

2.2.2. Methods B and C
While series A is probably a good first estimate of market share, it may be possible to
improve the estimates by incorporating more information. One useful addition may be

distance from HMO headquarters. If HMO enrollment is concentrated near the headquarters
or if HMOs are likely to locate their headquarters in areas where their enrollment is
concentrated, allocating more enrollment to counties closer to the headquarters will yield a
better estimate.

Methods B and C use this strategy, apportioning enrollment using weights that are the
product of a distance component and the county share of the service area population.

Specifically the weight for countyj in the service area of HMO i, w, is defined by:

w1

=

Pt),

where d is the distance component of the weight.
The distance components vary with distance from the HMO headquarters. They are

obtained from a function that declines linearly from 1 to 0.5 as distance from headquarters
increases from 0 up to a set limit, 1, and then becomes flat at 0.5 for all distances higher than

1. Thus, d, is computed as:
d,, =max((21—ô)/21,Q.5)

(4)

8

where 8 is the distance from the centroid of county j to the centroid of the county

containing

the headquarters of HMO i, calculated using the distance formu1a. Use of this function is

admittedly ad hoc. It was chosen after experimenting with several

different specificatjo

including non-linear functions and cut-off levels other than 0.5, and observing that use of other
plausible functional forms made little difference in the outcomes.
Methods B and C both use distance

limit 1. The limit for method B is

components based on equation (4), but differ in the

approximately 100 miles9--that is, method B distance

components decrease from 1 to 0.5 as distance goes from 0 to 100 miles from the headquarters

and are 0.5 for all counties more than 100 miles from

the headquarters. The limit for method

C is about 50 miles. Thus, method C concentrates enrollment near the HMO headquarters to
greater degree than method B.
After scaling the weights so that they sum to one for each HMO, enrollment estimates

for each county in the service area of each HMO, b1 and c,,,, were

computed by multiplying

the appropriate weight by the total enrollment in the HMO, E1. County level enrollment

estimates, B and C, as well as market share estimates S' and S, are computed as described

Latitude and longitude population centroids for each county in the U.S. was obtained from the 1990
county-level summary files.

census

9For convenience, distances are discussed in miles. The calculations, however, are done in degrees of
latitude and longitude. For conversion, it is useful to assume that 1 degree is approximately equal to 50
mile, although conversion cannot be done exactly since longitude measurements are complicated by the
curvature of the earth. The further north a measurement is made, the fewer miles are associated with a
degree of longitude. The distortion introduced between the southern and northern U.S. is not large
enough to introduce significant bias into the estimates. Alaska is not a problem since it is treated as a
single unit and since there were no HMOs there in 1990.

9

a

above for method A. The set of enrollment and market share estimates obtained from methods

B and C will be referred to as series B and series C.
Series B market share estimates are presented graphically in Figure 1. As expected,
areas with the strongest concentrations of HMOs include: San Francisco, California; Portland,
Oregon; Denver and Colorado Springs, Colorado; Minneapolis-St. Paul, Minnesota;

Milwaukee, Wisconsin; and Rochester, New York. Other areas where HMOs have large
market shares include: Los Angeles, California; Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona; Albuquerque,

New Mexico; and Boston, Massachusetts. There are large areas in the midwest and south that
had very little HMO activity.

Series B and C are highly similar to series A, although there is some evidence that the
later methods consolidated enrollees into metropolitan areas in which many HMOs are

headquartered. Table 1 presents the correlations between the series A, B, and C estimates of
enrollment (top panel) and market share (bottom panel). The series exhibit a high degree of
internal consistency. For the enrollment estimates, in every case the correlation coefficients

are above 0.99. For market shares, the results of the different methods are also highly
correlated, with coefficients of about 0.98 and higher.

2.3. Validity of the new estimates
Since the county service areas on which the series are based are quite accurate, it is

likely that the series themselvesare also quite accurate. Indeed, the nationwide pattern seen
in Figure 1 is consistent with the expected patterns of HMO activity. However, it is also

likely that some errors are present in the estimates. In particular, it is possible that too many
I0

enrollees were allocated to counties adjacent to

metropolitan areas. Since many HMOs tend to

serve metropolitan populations, counties which are partly metropolitan may be included in the

service area of an HMO but may not, in actuality, be fully served. Since the apportjomnent
algorithms use the entire population of the

county when distributing enrollees, such counties

may receive excess enrollees. For example, in Colorado, Teller and Crowley counties have
the highest estimated HMO market shares in the state. These counties are adjacent to, but not

included in, the Colorado Springs and Pueblo MSAs.
Since there have been no previous studies of county-level patterns in HMO enrollment,
it is difficult to find existing data with which to validate the new measures. One exercise is

possible at the MSA level. The GHAA has constructed estimates of enrollment and market
share at the MSA level for the 27 largest MSAs in 1989 and the 54 largest MSAs in 1991 (see
Palsbo, 1990; and Bergsten and Palsbo, 1993, respectively). Since my estimates are for 1990,
it may be helpful to compare the two sets of GHAA estimates to MSA estimates constructed

by aggregating my data.'°
Results of this exercise are presented in Table 2. The top panel shows mean

enrollments and market shares. The two columns present means for the 27 MSAs and 54
MSAs for which the GHAA produced 1989 and 1991
estimates, respectively. My enrollment

estimates are higher than the 1989 GHAA enrollment estimates and lower than the 1991

°Using my data, I constructed enrollments and market shares for MSAs that matched those used by
the GHAA as closely as possible. However, MSAs in New England are not always defined by counties.
To construct estimates for these MSAs, I attempted to group counties to match the exact definitions.
However, the geographic areas covered by the standard New England MSAS and my New England MSAs
are not exactly the same. All estimates presented were reestimated without the New England MSAs and
no significant differences were found.
11

enrollment estimates, which is to be expected since HMO enrollment was growing over this

time period. For 1991 the difference in mean market share is consistent with the difference in
mean enrollments. Curiously, in the 1989 samples the mean market shares obtained from my
data are lower than the mean GHAA market share. This may be due to differences in the
population estimates used. The population estimates used in my calculations are from the 1990
Census, while the GHAA used 1989 population estimates based on projections from the 1980
Census and Current Population Surveys.

The bottom panel of Table 2 shows the correlation between the GHAA estimates for
1989 (column 1) and 1991 (column 2) and the series A, B, and C enrollment and market share
estimates. The enrollment estimates are very highly correlated--the correlation coefficients are

above 0.99 in every case. The market share estimates are also highly correlated, with
coefficients of about 0.97 for the 1989 sample and 0.94 for the 1991 sample."

3. Theory of HMOs and FFS physician fees
Before proceeding to an empirical examination of HMO market share and physician
fees, this section considers theoretical frameworks within which physician prices may be

examined. The question under consideration is the effect that the entry of HMOs into a

marke, or their expansion within a market where they already exist, will haveon the fees
charged by FFS physicians.

"In addition, I computed correlation coefficients weighting by the total population of the MSA. In all
cases, these coefficients were higher than those reported in Table 2. The correlation for the enrollment
estimates based on series B was 0.995 for the 1989 sample and 0.997 for the 1991 sample. For market
share estimates based on series B, the coefficients were 0.978 for 1989 and 0.967 for 1991.
12

The entry or expansion of HMOs in a market may be modelled in two ways. First,
HMOs may be treated as new entrants into a market, bringing new physicians and resources

into a market. Alternatively, they may be viewed as reorganizing existing physicians and
resources already in place within the market. The implications of HMO entry under the
former view can be addressed in the context of existing theories of physicianpricing, which

often examine the effect of the physician entry on prices. However, since the latter view may
be more plausible for many health care markets, and since the existing models ofphysician
pricing do not readily allow for heterogeneous consumers or products, I will also model
physician prices using a spatial location model. Variation in the cost functions of providers
will be incorporated into this model.

The traditional models of physician pricing have, for the most part, been developed in
the context of the debate over supply-induced demand and are based on standard market

frameworks.'2 Perhaps the simplest case is that of a competitive market in which expansions
in the supply of health care, perhaps occasioned by the entrance of an HMO from outside the

market, will prompt prices to fall as the supply curve shifts out. However, if physicians have
at least some market power, monopolistic competition may be a preferable framework.'3 In
this case, the market demand is divided among the physicians in the market, but each

2See, for example, Phelps (1992), chapter 7, or Feldstein (1988), chapter 9, for a more complete
discussion.
'3The markets in which physicians operate may be viewed as falling on a continuum running between
competitive and monopolistic. Thus, the two models presented here may be viewed as opposite extremes.
One way to implement such a continuum is by incorporating patient search. If there is no patient search
then the model is monopolistic or monopolistically competitive. As more patients search, the model
approaches the competitive outcome. See, for example, Pauly and Satterthwaite (1981) or Schwartz and
Wilde (1982).
13

physician still faces a downward sloping demand curve. If there are excess profits being

earned in the market, then profitable entry by new providers is possible. The entrance of a
new provider will reduce the demand available to each provider, shifting their demand curves
in and causing prices to fall.

The implications of these models are less clear if physicians can induce demand for
their services.

If they are able, they may do so in response to changes in supply and demand

conditions. This may upset the conclusions derived under the assumption that there is no
demand inducement. For example, under the target income hypothesis'5 a supply increase that
leaves physicians below their target level will be met with an induced outward shift in the

demand curve. This will, at least, result in a smaller reduction in prices than would have
occurred without demand inducement and, depending on how much demand physicians can

and wish to induce, could shift the demand curve far enough to causeprices to rise. '
Although the models discussed above are useful for describing the effects of additional

physicians, they do not incorporate aspects of the marketplace that are important when

working with HMOs. Three things are particularly noteworthy. First, the standard models
often assume that both the consumers and the product are homogeneous.'1 However, it is
'4Whether physicians are able and willing to induce demand for their services is thesubject of
considerable debate. See, for example, Reijthardt (1985) or Feldman and Sloan (1988) for discussions of
this issue. Cromwell and Mitchell (1986) and McCarthy (1985) are examples ofopposmg empirical
evidence.

'The target income hypothesis posits that physiciansattempt to meet a target income. If their income
falls below the target level, they will undertake action, possibly including demand inducement, to bring
their income backup to the target. It was originally posited in Evans (1974); See Feldstein (1988) pages
189-192 for a nice review.
'6For further discussion of the ambiguity surrounding price results whensupply induced demand is
possible, see Feldman and Sloan (1988).

14

likely that HMOs and FFS physicians produce health care in somewhat different ways and that
consumers vary in (heir preferences for medical care--some consumers may be more favorably

disposed toward receiving care in a FFS setting than others. Second, the standard models

assume that all providers face the same cost of providing health care services. However, if
HMOs can provide health care services more cost-effectively than FFS physicians, as is often

suggested, this assumption will not hold. Third, the standard models assume that entry takes

place in the form of providers new to the market. However, much of the recent growth in
HMOs has come from the formation of networks by providers already established within their

markets. In other markets, existing HMOs are working to expand their operations by
recruiting local physicians to join them or by purchasing their practices.

Use of a simple linear spatial location model of the type originally introduced by

Hotelling (1929) is one way to incorporate these aspects of the market. This model assumes
that the consumers of health care in a market are uniformly distributed on the unit interval.
The interval represents a continuum of styles of health care provision and the location of
consunlers on the interval reflects the degree to which they prefer FFS care, which will be

a,sumed to be at 0, or HMO care, assumed to be at l.' FFS providers and HMOs produce a

'In some cases, models have been extended to allow for variation in quality among providers. See.
for example. Feldman and Sloan (1988).
'8See TiroIc (1988), chapters 2 and 7. for a discussion of this model.

The assumption tha FFS and UMO styles of care lie at the extremes of the interval simplifies the
model. It is possible to derive many of the results shown here under the more general assumption that
FFS and HMO care lie at arbitrary points within the interval.
15

single good, 'health care," but differ in the way in which they produce it. FFS physicians and
HMOs have constant marginal cost: c1 and

Ch,

respectively.

The consumers have unit demands for health care--they either consume 0 or I unit.
They face costs of consumption that increase linearly with the distance from the type of health

care consumed; that is, a person lying at pointx, x€[O,1], would face costs tr if FFS care is
consumed and r(1-x) if HMO care is consumed, where (>0.20 Consumers have reservation

price r, which is assumed to be sufficiently high that the entire market is covered.
I examine this model in two stages. I begin with a market in which only FFS care is
available and consider the effects of making HMO care available, holding the marginal cost of

providing FFS care and HMO care equal. Next, I consider variation in marginal costs.
Assume a single profit-maximizing FFS provider located at 0 on the continuum. This
provider will face a demand curve that depends on the FFS price, P1. Specifically, all

consumers on the interval [0,], will demand health care from the provider, where
(5)

i=(r—P1)It.
The profit-maximizing price will be:

P1(112)(c+r)

(6)

where c is the marginal cost for the FFS provider, which is assumed for now to be equal to the

marginal cost for the HMO.

°ln the standard version of this model, these costs are the transportation costs incurred by the consumers
in travel to and from the point of purchase.
16

Now, if an 1-IMO enters the market, and locates at the other end of the continuum, it

will compete for consumers with the FFS provider. Since both providers have the same
marginal cost, it is easily shown (see Tirole, 1990, page 280) that the Nash equilibrium price

charged by each will be equal and will be
given by:
(7)

where

h denotes the price charged by the HMOs and the stars distinguish the prices charged

when both providers operate from the price charged when only FFS physicians operate.
Comparing equations (6) and (7) shows that the FFS price falls after HMO entry (P < Pf) if c

+ 2r < r. This is equivalent to the condition that the entire market is covered by the FFS
producer operating alone. That is, if HMOs and FFS providers compete for patients in the
market, the entry of HMOs will force FFS providers to lower their price.
To extend this model, I now allow different marginal costs to face HMOs and FFS
providers. It can then be shown (see Appendix A) that the FFS and HMO prices, Pf and Ph,
aie given by:

Pf=t+(213)Cf+(113)Ch

(8)

and

(9)

17

Equations (8) and (9) yield two important results. First, reductions in the cost of providing
HMO care will reduce the FFS price. As the HMO cost falls, it becomes profitable for the
HMO to attract additional consumers away from the FFS provider, which increases the level

of competition. The second implication of equations (8) and (9) is that, if the HMO's
marginal cost is less than the FFS providers, the HMO price will be lower than the FFS price.
This is observed, to at least some extent, in the actual market.
Taken as a whole, this model shows that entry by an HMO into a FFS dominated
market and a reduction in the cost of providing HMO care will result in a reduction in the FFS

price. In addition, the second stage considered alone has a useful interpretation. Consider a
model in which the definition of the continuum is broadened so that it represents, for example,
the progression from high-technology, non-primary-care intensive medicine to more

conservative, preventive-care-oriented medicine. Suppose that half of the producers in this
market operate at one end and half at the other end. In this context, the model suggests that if
the providers at one end band together to form an HMO, and in doing so are able to reduce
their marginal cost, they will force the physicians at the other end to reduce their prices. In
this way, the result that the FFS price falls when HMOs are created does not depend on the
assumption that new HMOs enter from outside the market.

So far, this model has only dealt with the implications of HMO entry or formation.
However, it may also be possible to expand this model to include the effects of the expansion

of existing HMOs through non-price competition. One way in which this could be viewed is
as a shift in the distribution of consumers on the continuum. If HMOs are able to make

18

consumers more favorably disposed toward the type of care they offer, they will force further
price reductions by the FFS providers who will have to compete ever harder for patients.
The result that FFS prices will fall in response to the formation of HMOs becomes

more complicated if FFS providers are able to induce demand. However, under some
circumstances this result will continue to hold. In particular, as long as consumers are able to
observe FFS and HMO prices and face relatively low costs of switching providers (so that
neither provider has strong market power over their consumers) providers will only be able to

raise prices at the expense of lost demand. Although they may be able to prescribe excess
services or otherwise induce demand, price changes will be difficult. However, if providers
do have market power over their consumers, then price increases may again become possible.
This model is meant to be instructive rather than comprehensive and there are some

components of the health care system that are missing and should be noted. First, the
implications of health insurance are not considered. Not only may traditional indemnity
insurance distort the incentives facing patients, but the fact that HMOs offer a form of
insurance which is often more generous than traditional policies but imposes additional

constraints may also complicate analysis. Second, this model assumes that all patients have

t1 ability to choose between a FFS provider and an HMO. However, for employees this
choice is likely to be constrained by the health insurance options offered by their employers.
Thus, the incentives of employers as well as the premiums charged for insurance may be

important. Finally, this model assumes that providers produce only a single good. However,
taken as a whole, physicians provide thousands of goods and each may be independently

priced. It is quite possible that some fees would respond differently to competition than
19

others. For example, if some fees are focal for consumers when selecting a provider,
physicians may reduce these fees but raise others in response to competition.

4. An Empirical Examination of HMOs and Physician Fees

4.1. 1a1a
To empirically examine the relationship between HMOs and FFS physician prices, I
combined the county level estimates of HMO market share described in section 2 with data on
the fees and other characteristics of young physicians obtained from the 1991 Survey of Young
Physicians. This survey was designed to represent all allopathic physicians (and osteopathic
physicians completing allopathic residencies) who were under age 45 and had between 2 and
10 years of practice experience in 1991 ;21 it contains data for 6,053 physicians and had a

response rate of 70 percent. Since the survey was based on a complex sampling design,
weights are used to adjust for the sampling strategies used and correct estimates to reflect the
AMA Physician Masterfile distribution of young physicians by sex, age, country of medical
education (U.S. or other), and AMA membership.22

Additional characteristics of the county in which each physician reported having his or

her main practice23 was obtained from two other sources and added to the file. Data on the

See Cantor et a!., 1993 for further information on this survey.
2A11 results presented were also estimated without the weights. In no case did this qua!itatively
change any of the findings.

Physician could list multiple practices on the survey. The analysis presented here focuses on the
practice designated by the physician as the main practice. In this sample, 419 (14.7 percent) of the
physicians reported having more than one practice.
20

number of physicians and hospital beds, county economic conditions, and demographic

characteristics were obtained from the 1993 Area Resource File, which compiles data from a
variety of sources including the American Medical Association, the American Hospital

Association, and the Bureau of the Census. The mean number of employees per firm was
obtained from the 1990 County Business Patterns file.

To identify a base sample of FFS physicians for analysis, I initially selected the 3,928

physicians who answered 'yes" when asked "In [your main] practice do you provide at least
some medical care for which patients pay on a fee-for-service basis" and who indicated

elsewhere that they were not employed by an HMO in their main practice. Physicians
practicing FFS medicine who also have contracts with Independent Practice Association (IPA)

type HMOs were included in the sample.
From this group, radiologists, anesthesiologists, and pathologists were excluded since

physicians in these specialties were not asked to report their fees on the survey. Psychiatrists
were also excluded, as were physicians for whom fees or other necessary information was

unavailable. This left a sample of 2,845 physicians (47 percent of the original 6,053) for
analysis. Physicians in the sample represent all 50 states and Washington DC, and 821
counties.

4.2. Results
Characteristics of the sample are described in Table 3. The top portion of the table
shows mean fees and hourly incomes. The survey asked physicians "In [your maini practice,
what is your current usual fee for an office visit with an established patient including an
21

examination and/or treatment for the same or new illness?" This is a standard question,
identical to the question asked yearly by the AMA on the annual Socioeconomic Monitoring

System surveys, which most physicians should understand and be able to answer. In my
sample, the mean fee was $46.25. It is important to note that this fee pertains to only one of

the many services that physicians provide. As discussed below, fees for different procedures
may vary in different ways. Unfortunately, data that would allow me to examine this issue
directly are not available.
Contrary to expectation, an initial examination suggests that physician fees are

positively correlated with market share. The mean fee for physicians in counties without
HMOs is $35.34, while the mean fee for physicians in counties in which HMO market share is

25 percent or more was $53.09. A simple regression of the log of physician fees on HMO
market share and a constant confirms this finding. The estimated equation is:

logf= 3.563 + 0.097 S
(0.015)

R2=0.05 (10)

(0.008)

where logf denotes the natural logarithm of physician fees24 and S denotes HMO market share

(divided by 10). Standard errors of the coefficients are in parenthesis.
The bivariate analysis presented above suffers from at least two important difficulties.

First, there are many omitted variables that may be correlated with both physician fees and

HMO market share. For example, urban areas are more likely to have HMOs and may also
have higher costs of living, which may prompt higher fees. A number of other factors

24The logarithm of fees is used based on visual inspection and Box-Cox analysis. See the discussion of
equation (12).

22

including the preferences of physicians, patients, and insurers as well as the health status of
the population could also play a role.

A second difficulty is the fact that HMO market share and fees are likely to be
simultaneously determined. Forward-looking HMOs may consider current and expected future

expenditures when deciding whether to enter or expand operations in a market. HMOs that
can provide highly cost-effective care will achieve better outcomes in markets where FFS

physician services are overpriced and may thus be more likely to enter or expand in these

markets. Alternatively, demand for HMOs by purchasers of health coverage may be higher in
areas with high expenditures since use of HMOs may be viewed as an effective cost

containment measure. These hypotheses are supported by studies which report that managed
care market share is positively related to overall health care costs and utilization.25

To incorporate additional independent variables into the analysis and attempt account

for these difficulties, I adopt a two-stage least squares (2SLS) approach in which equations of
the following form are estimated:

(11)

logJ = P0 +

Here,

+

(12)

e, .

subscript i denotes physician i. HMO market share in 1990 is denoted by S. Series B

estimates of market share are used because of their marginally better performance in

See e.g. Welch (1984), Morrisey and Ashby (1982), Goldberg and Greenberg (1981), McNeil and
Schienker (1975).
23

validation. Results obtained using series A and C are almost identical to those reported. The
natural logarithm of 1991 physician fees is denoted by logf. A logarithmic specification for
fees is used since both visual inspection and Box-Cox analysis indicated that it was superior to

a linear specification.ib X denotes a vector of additional covariates. In some specifications,X

includes a set of 50 state dummies. N denotes the excluded instruments. e and are assumed
to be well-behaved error terms.

A number of independent variables are used (see Table 3). In addition to HMO market
share, several variables controlling for the characteristics of each physician and the area in
which he or she practices are included. Included physician characteristics include specialty,

practice setting, sex, board certification, location of medical school (U.S. or foreign), and age.
A dummy variable indicating whether a physician has a contract with an IPA is also included.
This variable is intended to capture the effects of the IPA on the remainder of the physicians

practice.27 Finally, the number of patients seen per hour is also included as a measure of
quality and patient satisfaction. Since, as discussed below, patients per hour may be related to
HMO market share, models were reestimated without this variable and the results did not
differ significantly from those reported.

The Box-Cox transform of y, (yA - 1)I A, indicates a log specification as A goes to 0 and a linear
specification as A goes to I. Maximum likelihood estimates of x are 0.151 without state dummies included
and 0.152 with them.
27This effect could go either way. On the one hand, FFS physicians with IPA contracts might carry
over pricing practices from the IPA portion of their practice to the FFS portion to facilitate uniform office
practices. On the other hand, if the IPA can obtain price concessions from physicians, they may price
discriminate against their FFS patients to make up the lost revenue.
24

Economic, demographic, and health system variables describe the area in which each

physician practices. A dummy indicating whether the county is in an MSA is also used.
Included economic characteristics are the unemployment rate and per capita income.
Demographic characteristics include two variables indicating the percent of the population that

has completed high school and college, and three variables indicating the percent of the
population that is female, non-white, and over age 65. Hospital capacity is included in the
equations using the number of hospital beds per 1000 population.
Since other physicians are likely to provide an important source of competition, I

include the number of generalists and specialists per 1000 popu1ation. Since generalist
physicians may be substitutes for other generalist physicians while specialists may be

complements, and vice versa, the number of generalists and specialists per 1000 population is
interacted with dummy variables indicating whether the physician is a generalist or a
specialist.

In equation (11), the average number of employees per firm and the percent of the

work force that is white collar are the excluded instruments for HMO market share, S. These
are appropriate instruments if they are correlated with S and uncorrelated with e. Since I
expect that larger firms and white collar finns are more likely to offer their employees a
variety of health insurance options, which may include HMOs, areas with more of these types
of firms will provide a better environment for HMOs.

2Generalists physicians are those in general/family practice, general internal medicine, and pediatrics.
All other physicians are considered specialists.
25

Results from estimation of the first stage (equation 11) are presented in Table 4. The
regression presented in the first colunm does not include the state dummies; the regression

presented in the second column does. In both cases, the excluded instruments (employees per
firm and percent of workers white collar) have the expected sign and are highly statistically

significant. Following the suggestion of Bound, Jaeger, and Baker (1993), I performed an F
test for the hypothesis that the coefficients on the instruments are jointly 0. The hypothesis
was rejected in both specifications (F[2,2808] =123.02 in column 1 and F[2,2758] =78.94 in
column 2).

Results from estimation of the second stage are presented in Table 5•29 Columns 1 and

2 contain OLS and 2SLS results from a specification that omits the state dummy variables,

respectively. In the OLS model, the coefficient on HMO market share is positive, although
not significantly different from zero. This represents a significant decline from the bivariate
results reported earlier in equation (10). Closer examination of the independent variables
indicates that those responsible for the majority of the decline are the health system variables
(generalists and specialists per capita, hospital beds per capita), economic characteristics

(unemployment rate and per capita income) and the MSA dummy. Use of only these
independent variables reduces the coefficient on market share from 0.097 to 0.031.

In the 2SLS results (column 2), the coefficient on market share is -0.108 and
significant (t=3,471). This suggests that the bias induced by the simultaneous determination

290LS standard errors are presented. However, to account for possible heteroskedasticity, I computed
both White (1980) standard errors and a set of standard errors based on a generalization of White's
method that allowed for intercorrelation between physicians in the same state. In neither case did this
cause a qualitative change in the results.

26

of HMO market share and FFS physician fees causes OLS results to understate the fee-

reducing effect of HMOs. This result indicates that increases of 10 percentage points in HMO
market share are associated with decreases of 10.8 percent in FFS physician fees.
The coefficients measuring the effect of the number of physicians are not significantly

different from zero. Although some studies (e.g. Cromwell and Mitchell, 1986) have found
that fees increase with the number of physicians, and the OLS results indicate that fees are
positively associated with the number of specialists per capita, the 2SLS results provide no

evidence of a relationship between the number of physicians and fees. This result, which is
consistent with the results of other studies that use physician level data (e.g. Rossiter and
Wilensky, 1983), may indicate that physicians are not able to raise their fees in response to the

entry of other physicians. Although it does not deal with the ability of physicians to induce
their patients to use more services, this finding contradicts a portion of the supply-induced
demand hypothesis.

The use of both the mean number of employees per firm and the percent of workers
who are white collar as instruments for market share provides an overidentifying restriction
that can be tested. The test used here examines the hypothesis that both instruments used
independently would produce the same estimate of the effect of managed care and is
constructed by multiplying the sample size by the R2 from a regression of the 2SLS errors on

the exogenous variables and excluded instruments (see Newey, 1985). The x2[l] test statistics

27

are presented at the bottom of Table 5. The overidentifying restrictions are not rejected at the
0.01 level.30

The difference between the OLS and 2SLS results suggests that endogeneity bias is

present in the OLS estimates. More formally, a Hausman (1978) test, formulated by
estimating equation (7) with both the predicted values of market share from the first stage and
the actual values, rejects the hypothesis that the difference in market share is uncorrelated with

the error term (t=4.204).
It is not clear that state dummies should be included in the equations. For example, if
HMO market shares are high in all of the counties of a state, the dummy for that state will
absorb any effect of HMO market share on fees. However, since there is also the possibility
that the specifications presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 5 omit important effects that
might be picked up by state dummies, they are included in the specifications presented in

columns 3 and 4. Column 3 presents OLS results and column 4 presents 2SLS results. With
the additional variables, the OLS estimate falls slightly and remains insignificant. The 2SLS

estimate falls somewhat ( =-0.077), but the standard error almost doubles and the t-statistic
falls to 1.361.
Because HMOs employ mostly generalist physicians and tend to provide a large amount

of primary care, they may affect the fees of generalists and specialists differently. Changes in
both demand for health care and supply of physician services may play a role. On the demand

30Analysis using the instruments separately indicates the average number of employees per firm does
most of the work. The estimate of the effect of HMO market share obtained using just this instrument is
similar to that reported while the estimate obtained using only the percent of workers who are white collar
is much smaller and statistically insignificant.
28

side, if HMOs attract those patients who are most interested in obtaining regular primary

care,3' generalist physicians who would have provided this care may feel pressure. Specialists,
on the other hand, might not be pressured since HMOs are not as likely to attract patients

seeking specialty care. The supply relationship may work in the opposite direction. Since
HMOs tend to hire more generalists than specialists, and often hire them out of the FFS
sector, markets with many HMOs may have fewer FFS generalists practicing in them than

specialists. This may allow FFS generalists to charge higher fees.
To examine this question more closely, I estimated equations (11) and (12) using 2SLS
separately for generalists and specialists.32 The coefficients obtained for HMO market share

and the number of generalists and specialists per capita are presented in Table 6. Coefficients
obtained on other variables were similar to those reported in Table 5. The first column
excludes the state dummies and the second column includes them. For both generalists and
specialists, the effect of HMO market share is negative and significant when the state dummies

are excluded (13=-O.108, t=2.775 for generalists, 13=-O.083 t=l.779 for specialists). As in
Table 5, however, once the state dummies are added the coefficient is no longer statistically

significant. In addition, as in Table 5, the coefficients for the number of generalists and
specialists per capita provide no evidence that fees are related to the number of physicians in
the market.

31There is evidence that HMOs attract a patient mix that is healthy relative to the overall population.
See e.g. Luft and Miller (1988) or Wilensky and Rossiter (1986).
32As before, generalist physicians are those in general/family practice, general internal medicine, and
pediatrics. All others are specialists.

29

One interpretation of the fact that the coefficient on market share in the equation for
generalists is somewhat larger than the coefficient in the equation for specialists is that the
effects of HMOs on demand are felt more by generalists than specialists, and that the influence
of demand factors over physician prices is stronger than the effects of HMOs on the relative

supply of generalist and specialist physicians. However, the fact the difference between the
coefficients is not large33 suggests that interpretations should be made with caution.

4.3. Physician Incomes
Although one might expect that physician incomes should fall if the fee for a standard
office visit falls, this need not happen if physicians are able to do one or more of the following

things. First, physicians may be able to respond to a reduction in the fee for a standard office
visit by increasing the quantity of services provided. This is the standard contention of the
supply-induced demand hypothesis. A related possibility is that physicians can alter their case-

mix, perhaps through demand inducement, toward services with larger markups. Finally, it
may be possible to raise the fees for other services enough to compensate for the reduction in
the office visit fee.

To examine these questions empirically, I estimated models identical to those used
above (equations 11 and 12) using the log of physicians hourly incomes as the dependent

variable.M Hourly income estimates were derived from data on yearly income, weeks of

33The difference is statistically significant. An F test for the equality of the two coefficients rejects the
hypothesis (F[ 1.2788] =7.609).
34Models using weekly and yearly income yielded highly similar results.

30

work, and number of hours worked per week for each physician. On the survey, most
physicians reported their 1990 yearly income after expenses but before taxes.35 To compute

hourly income, yearly income was divided by the product of the number of weeks worked in

1990 and the number of hours worked per week. The number of weeks worked during 1990

was reported by each physician. The number of hours worked per week is proxied by the
number of hours worked in the last complete week of practice prior to the survey. In my
sample, mean hourly earnings are $54.35.
Selected coefficients from 2SLS estimation of the models are presented in Table 7. As

above, the model presented in the first column excludes the state dummies and the model in

the second column includes them. In neither case is the coefficient on HMO market share
significantly different from zero--changes in HMO market share are not associated with
changes in physician incomes.

4.4 Quantity of Services Provided
Perhaps physicians are working more in response to the reduction in fees. To see
whether this is the case, I looked at the number of patients each physician reported seeing in
the most recent full week of practice and the number of hours worked in the previous year.

Regression results are presented in Table 8. There is no evidence that physicians increase the

number of patients they see in response to competition from HMOs (columns 1 and 2). If
35Specifically, the survey asked for 'all income from fees, salaries, retainers, bonuses, and other forms
of compensation' after expenses but before taxes. Contributions to pension, profit-sharing, or other
deferred compensation plans are excluded. For 99 of the physicians yearly income had to be imputed
from two other questions, one asking what each physician thought an appropriate income for someone like
himself or herself might be and a second asking the relationship between the actual and appropriate figure.
31

anything, the estimates indicate that they see fewer patients. Results from regressions where
annuai hours worked is the dependent variable (columns 3 and 4) also failed to show a
significant relationship, although the estimated coefficients were positive. The final two

columns of Table 8 examine the number of patients seen per hour. A log specification is used
since the distribution of the number of patients per hour is highly skewed. The estimated
coefficients are negative but not significantly different from zero.

As an additional test, I examined the number of surgeries that general and family

practitioners, general internists, surgeons, obstetricians, and gynecologists, performed or
assisted with in the previous week of practice.36 The results are presented in Table 9.
Although the coefficients on HMO market share are positive, they are insignificant and
provide little evidence of a quantity response.

Taken together, these estimates provide no evidence that physicians take on more

patients, work more hours or see more patients per hour in response to competition from
HMOs. The findings for the number of surgeries performed provides limited evidence that
they do not perform extra services. A common response of health economists to the
phenomena of falling fees and stable incomes would have been to suggest inducement of

demand by physicians. However, these findings imply that the maintenance of physician
incomes in the face of a decline in the basic office visit fee has not occurred because
physicians have suggested extra office visits to patients or performed extra procedures for

them in the office (to the extent that this would have increased their hours of work). It is

Only physicians in these specialties were asked to report the number of surgeries on the survey.
32

possible that physicians have altered the service mix they provide to patients toward services

with higher mark-ups. However, the extent to which this is possible without changing hours
worked is probably limited.
Another explanation is that physicians are able to adjust prices for different services in

different ways--engaging in two-part (or multi-part) pricing. For example, they may raise the
margin on X-rays while lowering office visit fees. This may be an effective response to
competition if those selecting physicians are able to look at fees for only a few of the many
services that physicians provide. Alternatively, physicians may adjust fees to target patients

for whom they are competing with HMOs. If these patients are more interested in office visits
than other services then this strategy may be optimal. Since some literature has shown that
HMOs attract relatively healthy patients, an optimal response to competition may be to reduce
the prices for services of interest to these patients--office visits, common procedures, and
preventive care--while raising the prices of interest to other patients who, because they are not
tempted to join HMOs, have less elastic demand.37

4.5 Physician Density and Ouantity of Services

Tables 7, 8, and 9 also present coefficients for the number of physicians per capita.
Overall, they do not indicate that the number of physicians per capita affects physician

incomes or the quantity of services provided. This contrasts with earlier supply-induced

37See Hoerger (1989) for an example of a model of two-part pricing examining the prices for new and
established patient office visits.
33

demand literature that suggests that physicians would increase quantity in response to an
increase in the number of physicians in their market.

5. Conclusion
Examination of the relationship between HMO market share and physician incomes

shows that increases in market share are associated with decreases in fees. Although simple
OLS estimates of the effect of HMO market share were positive--increases in market share are
associated with increases in fees--2SLS estimates indicate that increases in HMO market share

o1 ten percentage points are associated with decreases of 10.8 percent in FFS physician fees.
The explanation for the disparity between the OLS and 2SLS results may be the presence of

simultaneity bias. If HMOs are more likely to locate in areas where fees are higher, then the
positive association observed in the OLS regressions may be the result of this bias.
However, examination of the relationship between HMO market share and physician

incomes did not reveal a significant association. Furthermore, the number of patients seen, the
number of hours worked, and the number of surgeries performed were not significantly related

to HMO market share. There are at least two explanations for the ability of physicians to
maintain their incomes while at least one fee is falling. First, they may be adjusting different

fees in different ways. If the fee for an office visit falls, but fees for other services can be
increased to make up for the change, incomes may not fall. Second, physicians may be able to
alter the mix of services provided to patients toward services with higher margins and, thus

maintain incomes. The fact that data necessary for a direct exploration of these hypotheses are
unavailable provides a useful direction for future efforts.
34

Overall, while the findings from the fee analysis suggest that competition from HMOs

is able to affect the fee for at least one service, the rest of the findings suggest that physicians

retain a non-negligible amount of market power. Further evidence of this comes from the
failure to find a significant relationship between physician density and fees, incomes, or

quantity of services provided. If there were a significant degree of competition in health care
markets, one would expect variation in the number of competitors to prompt changes in at
least some of these variables.

35

References

Baker, Laurence C., "Can Managed Care Control Health Care Costs: Evidence From
The Medicare Experience," mimeo, Princeton University, February 1994.

Bergsten, Christopher D., and Susan E. Palsbo, "HMO Market Penetration in the 54 Largest
Metropolitan Statistical Areas, 1991," The Group Health Association of America,
Washington DC, Research April 1993.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina Baker, "The Cure Can be Worse Than the
Disease: a Cautionary Tale Regarding Instrumental Variables," NBER Technical Paper
No. 137, June 1993.
Office of Health Professions Analysis and Research, "User Documentation for the Area
Resource File," Office of Health Professions Analysis and Research, Bureau of Health
Professions, Health Resources and Services Administration, Dept. of HHS, September
1993.

Cantor, Joel C., Laurence C. Baker, and Robert G. Hughes, "Preparedness for Practice:
Young Physicians' Views of their Professional Education," Journal of the American
Medical Association 270:9 (September 1, 1993) 1035-1040.
Cromwell, Jerry, and Janet B. Mitchell, "Physician-Induced Demand For Surgery," The
Journal of Health Economics 5 (1986) 293-3 13.
Evans, Robert A., '•Supplier Induced Demand: Some Empirical Evidence and ImpI ications,"in
The Economics of Health and Medical Care, Mark Perlman, ed., (London, McMillan,
1974).

Feldman, Roger, and Frank Sloan, "Competition Among Physicians, Revisited," Journal of
Health Politics. Policy, and Law 13:2 (Summer, 1988) 239-261.
Feldman, Roger, Bryan Dowd, Don McCann, and Allan Johnson, "The Competitive Impact of
Health Maintenance Organizations on Hospital Finances: an Exploratory Study,"
Journal of Health Politics. Policy, and Law 10:4 (Winter 1986) 675-698.

Feldstein, Paul J., Health Care Economics (Albany, NY: Delmar Inc., 1988).
Frank, Richard G., and W. Pete Welch, "The Competitive Effects of HMOs: a Review of the
Evidence," Inquiry 22 (Summer, 1985) 148-161.

36

Goldberg, Lawrence G., and Warren Greenberg, "The Competitive Response of Blue Cross
and Blue Shield to the Growth of Health Maintenance Organizations in Northern
California and Hawaii," Medical Care 17:10 (October, 1979) 1019-1028.
Goldberg, Lawrence G., and Warren Greenberg, "The Determinants of HMO Enrollment and
Growth," Health Services Research 16 (1981) 421-438.
Group Health Association of America, National Directory of HMOs 1991, 1992, 1993
Washington DC: The Group Health Association of America, 1991, 1992, 1993.

Hausman, Jerry A., 'Specification Tests in Econometrics," Econometrica 46:6 (November,
1978) 1251-1271.
Hill, Steven, and Barbara Wolfe, "Testing the HMO Competitive Strategy: an Analysis of its
Success and Failure in Wisconsin," mimeograph, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
1993.

Hoerger, Thomas J., "Two-part pricing and the markups charged by primary care physicians
for new and established patient visits," The Journal of Health Economics 8 (1989) 399417.
Hotelling, Harold, 'Stability in Competition," Economic Journal 39 (1929) 41-57.

Luft, Harold S., and Robert H. Miller, "Patient selection in a competitive health care system,'
Health Affairs 7:3 (Summer 1988) 97-111.
McCarthy, Thomas R., "The Competitive Nature of the Primary-Care Physician Services
Market," The Journal of Health Economics 4(1985)93-117.
McLaughlin, Catherine G., "The Effect of HMOs on Overall Hospital Expenses: Is Anything
Left After Correcting For Simultaneity and Selectivity?" Health Services Research 23:3
(August, 1988a) 421-441.
McLaughlin, Catherine G., "Market responses to HMOs: Price Competition or Rivalry?"
Inquiry 25 (Summer, 1988b) 207-218.
McNeil, Richard, and Robert E. Schlenker, "HMOs, Competition, and Government," Milbank
Memorial Fund Quarterly 53:2 (Spring 1975) 195-224.
Morrisey, Michael A., and Cynthia S. Ashby, "An Empirical Analysis of HMO Market
Share," Inquiry 19:2 (Summer 1982) 136-149.
Newey, Whitney, "Generalized Method of Moments Specification Testing," Journal of
Econometrics 29 (1985) 229-256.
37

Newhouse, Joseph P., William B. Schwartz, Albert P. Williams, and Christina Witsberger,
"Are Fee-For-Service Costs Increasing Faster Than HMO Costs?" Medical Care 23:8
(August, 1985) 960-966.
Noether, Monica, "Competition Among Hospitals," Journal of Health Economics 7 (1988)
259-284.

Paisbo, Susan E., "HMO Market Penetration in the 30 Largest Metropolitan Statistical Areas,
1989," The Group Health Association of America, Washington DC, Research Brief
Number 13, December 1990.

Pauly, Mark V., and Mark A. Satterthwaite, "The Pricing of Primary Care Physicians'
Services: A Test of the Role of Consumer Information," Bell Journal of Economics
12:2 (1981) 488-506.
Phelps, Charles E., Health Economics (New York, NY: Harper Collins, 1992).
Reinhardt, Uwe E., "The Theory of Physician-Induced Demand: Reflections After a Decade,"
Journal of Health Economics 4 (1985) 187-193.
Robinson, James C., "HMO Market Penetration and Hospital Cost Inflation in California,"
Journal of the American Medical Association 266:19 (November 20, 1991) 2719-2723.
Ross iter, Louis F., and Gail R. Wilensky, "A reexamination of the use of physician services:
the role of physician-induced demand," Inquiry 20:2 (1983) 162-72.

Schwartz, A., and L.L. Wilde, 'Imperfect Information, Monopolistic Competition, and Public
Policy," American Economic Review 72:2 (May, 1982) 18-23.
Sloan, Frank and Roger Feldman, "Competition Among Physicians," in Competition in the
Health Care Sector: Past. Present. and Future ed. Warren Greenberg (Germantown,
MD: Aspen Systems, 1978).

Tirole, Jean, The Theory of Industrial Organization (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1990).

Welch, W. Pete, "HMO enrollment: a study of market forces and regulations," Journal of
Health Politics. Policy, and Law 8:4 (1984) 743-58.
White, H., "A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct Test
for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica 50 (1982) 483-499.

Wilensky, Gail R. and Louis F. Rossiter, "Patient self-selection in HMOs," Health Affairs 5:1
(Spring 1986) 66-80.
38

39

Appendix A: Derivation of Equations (8) and (9)
This derivation follows that shown in Tirole 1990, page 279-280, and differs in the use
of linear transportation costs and the assumption of separate marginal cost functions.

The unit interval, with FFS and HMO providers at opposite ends, will be split between
FFS providers and HMOs at point x, given by the solution to:

P1+txP,+t(l —x)

(Al)

Thus demand curves as a function of the two prices are given by

Df=(Ph—Pf+t)I2t

(A2)

D=(Pf—Ph+t)I2t.

(A3)

and

Each maximizes profits, given by:
ll1(P1—c1)D1

(A4)

and
(AS)

The two first order conditions imply that:

P,.=(1/2)(P+t+c1)

and

(A6)

P=(lI2)(Pf+t+ch).

(A7)

These may be solved jointly to yield the Nash equilibrium prices:

pf=t+(213)cf+(lI3)c
ph=t÷(213)ch

÷(1/3)c1.

(A8)

Table 1: Correlation Matrices for Apportionment Methods

Series C

Series A

Series B

gnrollment
Series A

1.000

0.994

0.992

Series B

0.994

1.000

0.999

Series C

0.992

0.999

1.000

Market Share
Series A

1.000

0.989

0.977

Series B

0.989

1.000

0.994

Series C

0.977

0.994

1.000

N3080 counties

Table 2: Comparison of MSA Level Estimates Based on the New Series to the

GHAAs MSA Estimates

I. Meana
MSA Sample Year
1989

1991

906.728

618,253

Series A

927,688

542,984

Series B

943,725

553,545

Series C

949,285

557,245

GH.AA Estimates

21.1

21.8

Series A

20.1

18.4

Series B

20.5

18.9

Series C

20.7

19.1

Enrollment
GHAA Estimates

Market Share

II. Corre1ation
GHAA MSA Estimates From
1989

1991

Enrollment
Series A

0.994

0.996

Series B

0.994

0.996

Series C

0.994

0.996

Market Share
Series A

0.967

0.936

Series B

0.972

0.937

Series C

0.973

0.934

Note: The GHAA 1989 sample contains enrollment and market share estimates for
27 MSAS; the 1991 sample contains estimates for 54 MSAS.

Table 3: Sample Characteristics

Variable

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Deendent VariabLe
Fee
Log(Fee)

46.25
3.712

30.33
0.490

Independent Variables
HMO Market Share (Series B)

15.382

11.681

SDecialtv
General/Family practice
General Internal Medicine
Spec. Internal Medicine
General surgery
Specialized Surgery
pediatrics
Obstetrics/Gynecology
Emergency Medicine
Other Specialty

0.213
0.230
0.058
0.059
0.140
0.105
0.087
0.036
0.072

0.410
0.421
0.234
0.236
0.347
0.306
0.282
0.185
0.258

Setting
Self Employed Solo
Self Employed Non Solo
Employee of Phys. or Group
Employee of Hospital/Clinic
Academia
Government
Other

0.291
0.359
0.141
0.104
0.079
0.012
0.015

0.454
0.480
0.348
0.305
0.270
0.109
0.120

0.777
0.828
0.138
0.723
36.937
1372.554
2.150

0.417
0.377
0.345
0.448
2.873
212.698
1.588

0.842
0.879
1.887
5.615
54.247
22.443
6.519
19.809
51.415
20.434
12.512

0.364
0.536
1.567
3.477
6.341
8.034
2.082
4.989
1.226
15.447
3.488

15.849
59.877

3.716
8.670

Male
Board Certified
International Medical Grad.
Has Managed Care Contract
Age
Age2

Patients per Hour
Area Characteristics

MSA
Generalists per 1000 Pop.
Specialists per 1000 Pop.
Hospital Beds per 1000 Pop.
% Population High School Grad.
% Population College Grad.
Unemployment Rate
Per Capita Income /lOOa
% Population Female
% Population Non-White
% Population over 65
In e t rument s

Employees per Firm
% Workers White-Collar

Note: Results are weighted using sampling weights. N=2,845.

Table 4: First Stage Regression Results
dependent variable: HilO market share (S)

Variable
Employees per Firm

% Workers White-Collar

Generalists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Specialty
General Internal Medicine

Spec. Internal Medicine

General Surgery

Specialized Surgery

Pediatrics

Obstetrics/Gynecology

(1)

0.096

0.055

(0.006)

(0.005)

0.024

0.025

(0. 006)

(0.004)

1.295

0.497

(0.157)

(0.110)

-0.406

-0.328

(0. 054)

(0.037)

1.872

0.903

(0. 183)

(0.129)

-0.608

-0.447

(0.066)

(0.046)

-0.062

Other Specialty

0.050

(0.054)

(0. 036)

-0.049

-0.014

(0.107)

(0.071)

-0.144
(0.106)

-0.124
(0.071)

-0.183

-0.126

(0.092)

(0.061)

0.042

0.060

(0.066)

(0.044)

-0.159

-0.058
(0.066)

(0.100)

Emergency Medicine

(2)

-0.043

0.026

(0.121)

(0.081)

-0.088

-0.116

(0.104)

(0.069)

continued

Table 4, continued

Variable

Setting
Self Employed Non Solo

Employee of Phys. or Group

Employee of Hospital/Clinic

Academia

Government

OtheL

Male

Board

Certified

International Medical Grad.

(1)

0. 083

0.045

(0.043)

(0.029)

0.028

0.036

(0.056)

(0.038)

-0.009

-0.005

(0. 065)

(0.044)

0.099

0.154

(0.071)

(0.048)

0.263

0.162

(0. 158)

(0.105)

0.079

0.010

(0.143)

(0.095)

-0. 104

-0.051

(0. 042)

(0.028)

-0.077

-0.048

(0. 046)

(0.031)

-0.035
(0. 052)

Has Managed Care Contract

Age

Age2

Patients per Hour

MSA

Hospital Beds per 1000
Population

(2)

0.069
(0.035)

0.435

0.156

(0.041)

(0.028)

0.139

0.048

(0.120)

(0.079)

-0.002

-0.001

(0.002)

(0.001)

0.009

0.012

(0.011)

(0. 007)

0.415

0.225

(0.068)

(0.047)

-0.071

-0.021

(0. 007)

(0.005)

% Population High School
Graduate /10

0.217

-0.214

(0.048)

(0.039)

% Population College
Graduate /10

0.143

-0.233

(0.071)

continued

(0.055)

Table 4, continued

Variable

Unemployment Rate

Per Capita Income /1000

% Population Female /10

% Population Non-White /10

1 Population Over 65 /10

Intercept

N

50 State Dummies

F test for excluded
instruments [DF]

(1)

(2)

0.073

-0.083

(0.011)

(0.010)

0.027

0.037

(0.006)

(0.005)

-2.485
(0.200)

0.367
(0.170)

0.126
(0.016)

(0.014)

0.110

0.445

-0.235

(0.071)

(0.057)

4.672

-1.867

(2.447)

(1.706)

2845
0.44

2845
0.76

No
123.02
(2,2808]

Yes
78.94
(2,2758]

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Results are weighted using sampling
weights.

aThe F statistic tests the hypothesis that the coefficients on employees per
firm and percent workers white collar are jointly zero.

Table 5: OLS and 2SLS Regression Results for Fees
dependent variable: log(fee)

OL.S

(1)

Variable

HMO Market Share /10

Generalists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists
Generalists

per 1000 Pop.

(2)

Spec. Internal Medicine

Specialized Surgery

(4)

0.005

-0.077

(0.009)

(0.013)

(0.057)

-0.041

-0.011

(0.077)

(0.080)

-0.058

0.089

(0.074)

(0.085)

0.079

0.041

0.071

0.050

(0.025)

(0.028)

(0.026)

(0.030)

-0.043

0.059

0.193
(0.108)

-0.010
(0.036)

-0.050
(0.092)

0.019
(0.103)

0.060

0.027

(0.032)

(0.040)

0.116

0.119

0.113

0.121

(0.025)

(0.026)

(0.025)

(0.026)

0.229

0.228
(0.052)

0.244
(0.050)

0.245
(0.050)

(0.050)
General Surgery

2SLS

(0.031)

Specialty

Internal Medicine

(3)

-0.108

(0.031)

General

OLS

0.013

(0.087)

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

2SLS

0.086

0.072

0.100

0.091

(0.050)

(0.052)

(0.050)

(0.050)

0.248

0.231

0.254

0.246

(0.043)

(0.045)

(0.043)

(0.044)

0.095

0.105

0.091

0.098

(0.031)

(0.032)

(0.031)

(0.032)

Obstetrics/Gynecology

0.429
(0.047)

0.414
(0.049)

0.434
(0.047)

0.432
(0.047)

Emergency Medicine

0.384
(0.057)

0.380
(0.059)

0.393
(0.057)

(0.057)

0.386
(0.049)

0.382
(0.050)

0.391
(0.048)

0.384
(0.049)

Pediatrics

Other Specialty
.

0.391

Table 5, continued

OLS

Variable

(1)

2SLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

Se tt irig

Self Employed Non Solo

Employee of Phys. or Group

Employee of Hospital/Clinic

Academia

Government

Other

Male

0.011

0.023

0.017

0.022

(0.020)

(0.021)

(0.020)

(0.021)

0.041

0.049

0.047

0.051

(0.027)

(0.028)

(0.027)

(0.027)

0.075

0.091

0.090

0.094

(0.030)

(0.032)

(0.031)

(0.031)

0.081

0.100

0.089

0.103

(0.034)

(0.035)

(0.034)

(0.035)

—0.344

-0.304

-0.350

-0.335

(0.074)

(0.078)

(0.074)

(0.075)

-0.269

-0.268

-0.254

-0.258

(0.067)

(0.069)

(0.067)

(0.067)

0.008
(0.020)

Board Certified

International Medical Grad.

Has Managed Care Contract

Age

Age2

Patients per Hour

-0.004
(0.021)

0.009

0.005

(0.020)

(0.020)

0.034

0.024

0.032

0.028

(0.022)

(0.023)

(0.022)

(0.022)

-0.015

-0.013

-0.038

(0.025)

(0.025)

(0.025)

-0.033
(0.025)

0.015

0.080

0.025

0.041

(0.020)

(0.026)

(0.020)

(0.023)

0.064

0.084

0.067

0.070

(0.056)

(0.058)

(0.056)

(0.056)

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

-0.001

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

(0.001)

-0.020

-0.018

-0.018

-0.017

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.005)

0.084

0.170

0.049

0.085

(0.028)

(0.036)

(0.030)

(0.039)

Hospital Beds per 1000
Population

-0.008

-0.016

-0.007

-0.009

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.003)

(0.004)

% Population High School
Graduate /10

-0.0002
(0.0216)

0.029

-0.008

-0.023

(0.023)

(0.026)

(0.028)

% Population College
Grauiate /10

-0.005

0.016

-0.030

-0.040

(0.027)

(0.028)

MSA

(0.024)

(0.025)

Table 5, continued

OLS

Variable

Unemploieflt Rate

Per Capita Income /1000

% Population Female /10

(1)

% Population Over 65 /10

Intercept

N

(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

0.031

0.037

0.016

0.007

(0.005)

(0.005)

(0.007)

(0.009)

0.021

0.026

0.015

0.019

(0.003)

(0.003)

(0.004)

(0.004)

-0.383

-0.563

-0.110

-0.040

(0.101)

(0.115)

(0.125)

(0.088)

% Population Non-White /10

2SLS

0.036

0.055

0.030

0.043

(0.007)

(0.009)

(0.010)

(0.013)

0.043

0.057

-0.059

-0.093

(0.032)

(0.033)

(0.040)

(0.046)

3.454

3.622

2.484

2.276

(1.146)

(1.187)

(1.201)

(1.218)

2845
0.29

2845
0.24

2845
0.32

2845
0.31

50 Stat' Dummies

0.854

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Results are weighted using sampling
weights. 2SLS results use the number of employees per firm and the proportion
of the workers who arewhite collar as excluded instruments for HMO market
share.

£rhe x2 statistic is for a test of the overidentifying restriction.

Table 6: 2SLS Results From Fee Regressions for Generalists and Specialists
dependent variable: log(fee)

(1)

(2)

General ists

HMO Market Share /10

Generalists per 1000 Pop.

-0.108

-0.033

(0.039)

(0.063)

0.096

-0.0004

(0.081)

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

0.037
(0.026)

N

Specialists

HMO Market Share /10

Generalists per 1000 Pop.

N

50 State Dummies

0.056
(0.028)

0.25
1577

0.36
1577

-0.083

-0.036

(0.047)

(0.111)

0.126
(0.138)

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

(0.0732)

-0.071
(0.150)

0.011

0.057

(0.045)

(0.061)

0.18
1268

0.25
1268

No

Yes

Note: Standard errors in parentheses. Results are weighted using sampling
weights. The number of employees per firm and the proportion of the workers
w are white collar are excluded instruments for HMO market share.
Regressions also included the other covariates shown in Table 5.

Table 7: 2SLS Estimates from Hourly Income Equations
dependent variable: log(hourly income)

(1)

}1O Market Share /10

Generalists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

0.008

0.041

(0.039)

(0.073)

0.0003

0.028

(0.1057)

(0.104)

0.009

0.008

(0.034)

(0.039)

0.001
(0.134)

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

(2)

-0.007
(0.134)

0.004

0.013

(0.046)

(0.051)

N

0.28
2845

0.30
2845

50 State Dummies

No

Yes

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis. Results are weighted using sampling
weights. The 2SLS estimates use the number of employees per firm and the
proportion of the workers who are white collar as excluded instruments for liMO
market share. Regressions also included other covariates described shown in
Table 5.

Market Share
/10

Yea

No

Yes

No

0.21
2816

Yes

0.22
2816

0.014
(0. 051)

0.014

(0.132)

-0.106

(0.045)

(0.131)

-0.038
(0.038)

(0.102)

0.049

(0.074)

-0.111

(6)

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis. Results are weighted using sampling weights. The 2SL.S estimates use
the number of employees per firm and the proportion of the workers who are white collar as excluded
instruments for liMO market share. Regressions also included other covariatea described shown in Table 5.

No

50 State Dummies

0.18

2841

0.16
2841
0.28
2826

0.26

2826

N

(76.348)

-39.874
(67.709)

0.386
(4.524)

(199.324)

-0.066

(0.034)

134.144

-0.024
(57.220)

(0.103)

0.060

(0.038)

-0.026

(5)

Log(Patients
Seen Per Hour)

-47.217

1.590

-12.945

80.536
(154.709)

(3. 983)

-29.909
(199.660)

-3.368
(11.769)

(51.226)

-32.639

-5.069

(3.382)

(3.017)

(11.754)

-6.014

-4.420

-51.082
(157.109)

1.361

42.937
(109.436)

20.098

(4)

(57.629)

(3)

Hours Worked
Per Year

(9.100)

(6.559)

-0.553
(9.250)

-12.572

(3.397)

(2)

-3.982

(1:

R2

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

Specialists per 1000 Pop.

Generalists
Generalists per 1000 Pop.

HMO

Dependent Variable

Per Week

Patient.: Seen

Table 8: 2SLS Estimates from Quantity Equations

Table 9: 2SLS Estimates for Number of Surgeries Performed
dependent variable: number of surgeries performed

(1)

HMO Market Share /10

Generalists
Generalists Per 1000 Pop.

0.444

1.174

(0.545)

(1.170)

-1.714

-1.018
(1.399)

(1.443)

Specialists Per 1000 Pop.

Specialists
Generalists Per 1000 Pop.

Specialists Per 1000 Pop.

(2)

0.578

0.647

(0.457)

(0.487)

-0.895

0.367

(1.427)

(1.487)

0.073

-0.089

(0.488)

(0.612)

N

0.43
1362

0.44
1362

50 State Dummies

No

Yes

Note: Standard errors in parenthesis. Results are weighted using sampling
weights. The 2SLS estimates use the number of employees per firm and the
proportion of the workers who are white collar as excluded instruments for liMO
market share. Regressions also included other covariates described shown in
Table 5.

crj

0)
.—
0)

Cl)

I

C
.,I

C)

C/D

0
C)
C)

I

'C

LI
C)

