NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TESTS OF ThREE PARITY
coNDrnONS: DISTINGUISHING
RISK PREMIA AND SYSTEMATIC
FORECAST ERRORS

Richard C. Marston

Working Paper No. 4923

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994

The author appreciates the comments of seminar participants at the Bank of Norway,

Kid

Institute, and New York University. He is grateful to Sanwa Bank and the Wharton School's
Weiss Center for International Fmancial Research for financial support- This paper is part of

NEER's research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1994 by Richani C. Marston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs. may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit. including
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4921
November 1994
TESTS OF THREE PARiTY

coNDmoNS: DISTINGUISHING
RISK PREMIA AND SYSTEMATIC
FORECAST ERRORS

ABSTRACF
Two explanations are given for why nominal or real returns differ across currencies:
foreign exchange risk preniia and systematic (rational) forecast errors. This study reexamines
three parity conditions in international finance, uncovered interest, parity, purchasing power parity,

and real interest parity, to determine the relative importance of these two factors. The study

develops joint tests of the three parity conditions by relating nominal and real interest
differentials and inflation differentials to the same set of variables currently known to investors.
The study tests parameter restrictions based on knowing that risk premiums only affect nominal
and real interest differentials, but not inflation differentials, while systematic errors in forecasting

exchange rates only affect nominal interest differentials and inflation differentials, but not real
interest differentials.

Richard C. Marston
Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NEER

Three parity conditions have preoccupied empirical
researchers in international finance searching for the links between
markets in different currencies: uncovered interest parity, purchasing

power parity, and real interest parity. These parity conditions have
been tested using a variety of methods. Uncovered interest parity
has been rejected in most cases, but the two other parity conditions

have fared much better.' 'TWo competing explanations have been
offered to justify departures from uncovered interest parity: foreign
exchange risk premia and systematic forecast errors, but it is difficult

to distinguish empirically between these two explanations. By
examining the three parity conditions together, howevei, it should be

possible to determine the relative importance of these two
explanations since risk premia and forecast errors have different
impacts on the other two parity conditions.
rrhe study develops joint tests of the three parity conditions

by relating nominal and real interest differentials and inflation
differentials to the same set of variables currently known to investors.
The tests consist of parameter restrictions based on knowing that risk

premia only affect nominal and real interest differentials, but not
inflation differentials, while systematic errors in forecasting exchange

rates only affect nominal interest differentials and inflation
differentials, but not real interest differentials.
As explained below, conventional PPP has been rejected in most
studies, but an expectational form of PPP has been more robust.

The study examines interest differentials using two quite
different sets of returns. Most studies of interest differentials have
been confined to short term Eurocurrency markets or short term
national money market instruments such as interbank rates. This
study will examine one month Eurocurrency interest rates, but it will
also examine bond yields using a new holding period series, developed

by Morgan Guaranty Trust. Although the MGT series begins only
in 1985, it has been extended back through the entire floating rate
period beginning in 1973 using a methodology developed by Shiller
(1979) for U.S. yields.

The study begins by discussing the link between real interest

parity and the other two parity conditions. Then joint tests of the
three parity conditions are described in detail. The last two sections

of the paper apply these tests to one-month Eurocurrency rates and
holding period yields on medium-term government bqnds.

A. Real interest Parity Defined
Real interest parity holds if the real interest rates faced by

two different sets of investors or borrowers are equal. Many
observers believe that real interest parity should hold as long as there

are no barriers to trade in assets. Yet there is no set of agents
willing and able to take advantage of deviations from real interest

parity. To show that this is the case, I first define several real
interest rates faced by firms in the American and foreign markets.
Consider an American firm that can borrow either in its own

market or in country k's market. If the U.S. interest rate is given by
'At and

the expected inflation rate by
-2-

EAt,

then the real interest rate

faced by the American firm borrowing in its own market is given by:2

E r1 = 'At -

(1)

This real interest rate is defined as the expected or ex ante cost of
financing where the expectation is based on information available at

time t. The American firm faces a different real interest rate if it
borrows in the foreign market. If kt is the interest rate in country k
and Axkt is the expected rate of depreciation of country k's currency,3

then the real interest rate faced by the American firm in that market
is:

E rtA = (kt - Axkt)

(2)

-

At•

Both real interest rates are deflated by the same expected inflation

rate used to deflate any financing by this firm. If the firm were a
multinational with major sales abroad, it might make sense to deflate
by a weighted average of foreign and American inflation rates, but

the same deflator should be used for both American and foreign
financing.

All interest rates and other variables are expressed in
continuously compounded form. Thus L is the continuously
2

compounded American interest rate which is related to the simple
American interest rate, 'At' by the expression: Af = In [1 +
Similarly, At is the expected American inflation rate given by E
[ln(PA+ 1/At)J

If 5kt is the currency k price of the dollar, then the expected
/ Skj.
rate of depreciation of currency k is given by Axk = E
-3-

The two real interest rates faced by the American firm
collapse to one if expected nominal returns are equal across
currencies:
(3)

kt =

1AL +

This is the familar uncovered interest parity (UIP) condition which

says that the interest rate in country k is equal to the expected
nominal return (interest rate plus currency gain) from investing in
the United States.

A firm from country k faces a separate set of real interest
rates. The real interest costs faced by such a firm in its own market
and in the American market are given by:
(4a)

E rkl =

(4b)

Er=

- kt'
(iAt

+ AxkL) -

hid.

Both real interest costs are expressed in currency k before being
deflated by the expected inflation rate in currency k. As in the
American case, these costs are distinct unless UIP holds.

Using the real interest rates defined above, real interest
parity (RIP) can be written as:
(5)

E rA = E rkL.

That is, the real cost of financing for the American firm borrowing
in its own market is equal to the real cost of financing for country k's

-4-

firm borrowing in k's market. In a frequently-cited study, Adler and

Lehmann (1983) argue that real interest parity is ensured by
"financial arbitrage" in bonds. However, there is no single borrower

(or investor) who compares these two real interest rates, so there is
no direct arbitrage which ensures that (5) holds. An American firm,

for example, may compare E r, with E rL, but will not compare
either real interest rate with E r11.4

Real interest parity ill hold under two conditions which are
made apparent by decomposing the differential between the real
interest rates as follows:5
(6)

E rk — E r,

=

[ikt - (iAE + Ax11)] —

- (EAt + Axkt)].

The first term in parentheses is the uncovered (nominal) interest
differential, while the second term is the expected deviation from
purchasing power parity (PPP). This second expression says that

expected rates of inflation are equal across currencies when
expressed in a single currency or, alternatively, that expected rates of
depreciation of currency k are equal to the expected inflation

differential between the United States and country k. So real

' Real interest parity might be brought about indirectly by trade
flows under the same conditions that equalize other factor prices, but
it is doubtful that the researchers who have tested real interest parity
had such an indirect mechanism in mind.

Several studies emphasize the link between the two underlying
parity conditions and real interest parity including Mishkin (1984),
Cumby and Obstfeld (1984), and Frankel (1986).
-5-

interest parity must hold if (1) UIP holds and (2) the expectational

form of PPP or "ex ante PPP" holds. Real interest parity does
involve "financial arbitrage," but of nominal, not real, returns. The

second condition involving ex ante PPP, however, is a condition
involving goods markets, not financial markets.6

B. Interpretation of Departures from the Three Parity Conditions
Real interest parity is an ex ante concept involving expected

rather than actual inflation.

Since expected inflation rates are

unobservable, so also are expected (or cx ante) real interest rates.
What we can observe are ex post real interest rates defined by using
actual inflation rates. Ex post real interest rates differ from expected
real rates by forecast errors in predicting inflation rates, lkt = (Apkt SPAt) - (xkt - At)•7

It is useful to think of ex post real interest

differentials as being attributable either to cx post differentials in
nominal interest returns or PPP differentials or some combination of
the two.

Consider first ex post deviations from uncovered interest

6 The sharp distinction between real interest rates facing
domestic and foreign firms becomes blurred if both sets of firms are
multinationals with worldwide sales (and even worldwide production).
With increasingly integrated financial markets, it is the prices faced
by firms which distinguish theft real costs of financing from those of
other firms. Most firms in the G-5 countries, however, sell more to
their own markets than do foreign firms, so domestic prices matter
more to the domestic firm than to foreign firms.

/"kt

actual inflation rate is denoted apkl and defined as ln[Pk÷l
-6-

parity.8 Differentials between nominal interest returns may arise
either because of risk premia (pa) or exchange rate forecast errors
(cu):
(7)

kt

tAt k1 =

Pu

Risk premia arise if investors require an expected excess return on
one currency or the other to compensate for the risk of holding that

currency. Unlike equity risk premia, there is no presumption that
the risk premia should be positive or negative, and indeed exchange
risk premia might vary in sign over time.9 Forecast errors in the
exchange market, defined as c = As - Ax, should be random if the
market is efficient. But there are several reasons why these errors

might be systematic over time.

First, investors may anticipate

changes in the underlying process generating returns which have yet
to occur in the sample period; the classic example of this phenomena
is the anticipated devaluation of the Mexican peso in the mid-1970s

(hence the term "peso phenomena" by which such phenomena are
known).'° Second, after there has been a change in regime, investors
may learn only gradually the true process governing returns. During

Hodrick (1987) surveys the empirical evidence on uncovered
interest parity.
For models of international asset pricing and foreign exchange
risk, see Adler and Dumas (1983), Dumas (1994), and Lewis (1994).
10 For a concise discussion of the peso phenomena, see Froot

and
Thaler (1990). Rogoff (1979) was among the first to discuss this
phenomena.
-7-

the learning process, forecast errors will not be random.11

In a similar way, deviations from PPP can be attributed to
expected deviations from PPP, 8kt' or to forecast errors in predicting

either inflation differentials or exchange rate changes:
-

(8)

A5kt

=

8k1

+ I1kt -

Roll (1978) argues that commodity Speculators will keep expected

deviations from PPP O equal to zero.'2 This exoectations theory
of PPP implies that actual deviations from PPP as in (8) are random

as long as the errors in forecasting inflation, p, and exchange rates,

are themselves random. Although there is overwhelming
evidence against conventional forms of PPP in which no deviations

from PPP are supposed to occur, many studies such as Roll (1978)

and Adler and Lehman (1983) are unable to reject the hypothesis

that deviations from PPP are random. More recent studies by
Abuaf and Jorion (1990), Glen (1992), and Lothian and Taylor
(1992) are able to find evidence of mean-reversion in deviations from

PPP, but only by using much longer spans of price data. The same

problems of interpretation confront tests of PPP as tests of UIP. If
there are systematic deviations from PPP, they could be caused

j Lewis (1989) develops a model in which market participants
update their expectations using Bayesian methods.
'2

Speculation in commodities like copper and wheat is easier to
imagine than in many of the goods and services that comprise the

consumer price index, but Roll intends his theory to apply to all

prices m an economy.

-8-

either by cx ante departures from PPP or systematic forecast errors.
Given equations (7) and (8), real interest differentials can be
decomposed as follows:

(9
¼1

rU - rAt

=

kt - 0Id

-

rkr

According to this expression, real interest differentials arise because

of risk premia in the foreign exchange market, expected deviations

from PPP, or forecast errors in predicting inflation. The first two

factors are associated with ex ante deviations from real interest
parity, while inflation forecast errors lead to ex post deviations,
whether systematic or not.

Equation (9) shows that exchange rate forecast errors have

no effect on the real interest differential. As Mishkin (1984) and
others have emphasized, this explains why real interest differentials

are so much less volatile than nominal interest differentials or
deviations from PPP. Figure 1 illustrates this point by comparing
uncovered (nominal) interest differentials with real interest
differentials for the mark relative to the dollar. The nominal interest

rate series is several times more volatile than the real interest rate
series.

The series illustrated represent ex post rather than cx ante
deviations from the parity conditions. These ex post deviations could

be due solely to random forecast errors. To determine whether

there are systematic deviations from real interest parity or the
underlying parity conditions, it is necessary to examine conditional

estimates of the three parity conditions. As Mishkin (1984) and
-9-

other studies have done, I present conditional tests of the real
interest parity conditions obtained by regressing real interest
differentials on variables in the current information set, Z.13 I
combine tests of real interest parity with simultaneous tests of the
two underlying parity conditions using the same set of information
variables.

Consider the three equation system relating each

differential to the same set of information variables, Zkt.
-

(ba)

=

'At - Askt

YkO + Yk Zk(

4-

(lOb)

Apkt - SPAt - A5kt = A + Ak Zkt + u

(lOc)

rk

-

rAE

=

dkO

÷ cDk ZkL +

Ukt.

If these parity conditions hold, the coefficients of the current
information variables should be insignificantly different from zero.
lithe respective coefficients of the information variables (7k,

Ak,

and

dk) are significantly different from zero, the fitted values from these

regressions represent the systematic component of any departures
from the three parity conditions.

Because deviations from these three parity conditions are
driven by common factors such as risk premia and forecast errors as

in equations (7)-(9), these equations should be estimated jointly.

The three equations are linked by an identity, so only two of the

13 Other tests of real interest parity of a similar form include
Mark (1985), Kester and Luehrman (1989), and Dutton (1993).
-10-

three equations can be estimated jointly at any time. If estimated
jointly, it is possible to test cross equation restrictions and interpret

them in terms of these common factors. Consider two alternative
cases:

Case 1:

Yk

/ 0,

4k

0, but Ak = 0. That is, there are systematic

departures from uncovered interest parity and real interest

parity, but not from purchasing power parity. In this case,
the evidence of systematic departures from UIP and RIP is
consistent with there being a foreign exchange risk premium,

Pkt' causing departures from both parity conditions. It is
possible to test for a common factor affecting equations (lOa)

and (bc) by testing the cross equation restriction, Yk = 4¼.
Since the dependent variable in (lOb) is linearly related to

those, in (ba) and (bOc), however, this restriction is
equivalent to the test of Ak = 0 in equation (lob).
Case 2. Yk 0, Ak 0, hut 4¼ = 0. In this case, the evidence of

systematic departures from UIP and PPP is consistent with

an exchange market forecast error, ç, causing (systematic)
departures from both parity conditions. The common factor

in equations (lOa) and (lOb) can be tested by the cross
equation restrictions, Yk = Ak. But this restriction is
equivalent to the test of 4k = 0 in equation (bc).
Thus jointly testing the three parity conditions offers the possibility
of distinguishing between the two alternative reasons for deviations

&om uncovered interest parity, risk premia and foreign systematic
exchange forecast errors. To test these restrictions, I use a Wald test

-11-

with the test statistic distributed as x2(N), where N is the number of
information variables in an equation (excluding the constant).

If instead of these cases, there is evidence of systematic
departures from all three parity conditions, then this is consistent
with the coexistence of both foreign exchange risk premia
systematic forecast errors in the foreign exchange market.'4 In that

case, deviations between any two of the parity conditions may move

independently of one another as inspection of equations (7)-(9)
makes clear.'5
There is an interesting alternative hypothesis that can be
tested -- that these deviations are perfectly correlated with one

another (even if they are not equal in size). This perfect correlation

occurs if a common nominal disturbance affects both inflation
forecast errors (Pu) and foreign exchange forecast errors (Cu) so that
MU = h,

6kt' where h, is a constant.'6 One example of such a
common disturbance is a shift in the monetary regime such as

14 It should be noted, however, that the same pattern is also

consistent with there being no systematic forecast errors, since ex
ante deviations from PPP (0kt) together with risk premia (Pkt) are
sufficient to account for deviations from all three parity conditions.

' The three equations are still tied together, so only two can be
independent.
16 Perfect correlation could also occur if risk premia
were

perfectly correlated with forecast errors or cx ante PPP deviations,
but such correlation is more difficult to justilS'.
-12-

occurred in the United States in 1979.' If agents are not fully
informed about such a shift, they will make forecast errors in
predicting both inflation and foreign exchange rates. Because the
two forecast errors appear in all three parity conditions, the perfect

correlation between these errors will lead to linear relationships
among all three parity conditions:
Case 3. $k = h1 Yk' and Ak = (1

h, is the same
proportionality factor tying the forecast errors together.'8
For the deviations from all three parity conditions to be
-

h1) Yk where

positively correlated, the proportionality factor, h,, must be
between zero and one.'9
To test this hypothesis of proportionality between the coefficients, I

can use a J-statistic developed by Hansen (1982) to test
This statistic is asymptotically
proportionality restrictions.20
distributed as x2 with degrees of freedom equal to N-i where N is
the number of information variables in the equation.

Another example would be a shift in exchange rate regime
between fixed and flexible rates or between different sets of exchange

rate targets.
Because of the cross equation restrictions, Ak = (Y1

-

4¼).

If h1 = 1, for example, then the nominal disturbance has no
effect on the PPP deviation (i.e., Ak = 0).
20

Cumby and Huizinga (1992) recently used this statistic to test

for proportionality between exchange rate changes and inflation
differentials as well as between other variables.
-13-

C. Joint Tests of the Parity Conditions for Eurocurrency Rates
To test the parity conditions, I will first examine one month

Eurocurrency interest rates. Eurocurrency interest rates are used in
preference to national money market rates for two reasons.2' First,
during much of the period of study, the British, French, and Japanese
governments maintained controls inhibiting capital flows between the

national market and markets abroad.

Second,.the national money

markets, particularly in Japan and France, were restricted by national

regulations and conventions; prior to 1979, for example, no CD
market existed in Japan, while French CD rates were subject to
ceilings for several years during the 1980s.

To form real interest rates as well as the PPP deviations, two

price series are used: the consumer price index (CPI) and the
producer price index in manufacturing (PPIM). The CPI contains a
broad set of traded and non-traded goods and services, while the
PPIM is confined to manufactured products which are largely traded.

So the real interest rate defined in terms of the PPIM is more
representative of real financing costs faced by internationallyoriented firms. The real interest rate defined in terms of the CPI,
in contrast, is more representative of real returns faced by investors

as well as the real financing costs faced by domestically-oriented

21

The Eurocurrency interest rates are end-of-month rates from

Data Resources Inc. They begin in June 1973, a few months after
the major currencies began generalized floating.
Germany and the United States removed most of their controls
in 1973.
-14-

firms.

Estimates of real interest differentials as well as PPP

differentials are reported for both sets of price indexes. The French
government stopped publishing producer price indexes in 1985, so the

French equations reported are for the consumer price index alone.
Table I reports conditional tests of all three parity conditions.
Equations are estimated for the four dollar exchange rates of the G-5
countries using a heteroskedasticity-.consistent estimator." The

choice of information variables to include in Zkt

is inevitably

somewhat arbitrary; any variable in the current information set is a

potential candidate. The variables chosen include two sets of
financial variables: the simple interest differentials (ikE - iAt) between

the Eurocurrency markets for currency k and the dollar and the
share yield in the two countries, the latter being a variable often used

in studies of risk premia in equity markets.24 The variables also
include an inflation variable, the inflation differential between the

two countries over the past twelve months, because the same
information variables wifi be used in the PPP equation as in the
nominal and real interest parity equations. Thus there a,e four
information variables in all: the interest differential, share yields in

the two countries, and the inflation differential between these two

" Since Eurocurrency interest rates are of one month maturity,
there are no overlapping observations which would lead to serially
correlated disturbances.
24 Risk premia in equity and foreign exchange markets should be

driven by common factors, a point emphasized by Bekaert and
Hodrick (1992) who show that share yields have explanatory power
in both sets of markets.
-15-

countries.

The Wald tests reported in Table I are to determine if the
coefficients of the information variables (all except the constant) in

an equation are equal to zero. As explained above, each test is
equivalent to a test for the equality of the coefficients in the other
two equations because the three dependent variables are linearly
related. Thus, for example, the test of whether the coefficients in the

PPP equation are equal to zero, Ak = 0, is equivalent to the test of

whether the coefficients in the UIP equation are equal to the
coefficients in the RIP equation, Y = 4¼. The test statistic is
distributed as x2 with four degrees of freedom. The J-statistic tests

whether the fitted values of the UIP and PPP equations are
proportional to each other even if they are not equal. As explained
above, this test is the same as testing proportionality between fitted

values of the UIP and RIP equations, since the three equations are
linearly related. The figure in square brackets below each f-statistic
is the p-value for the null hypothesis.

Consider first the equations estimated with consumer price
indexes. The results of the estimation for the $/ and DM/$ rates

are quite definitive. All three parity conditions are rejected at one

percent levels of significance. And the hypothesis of perfect
correlation between the UIP and PPP deviations is also rejected at

about the one percent level. So there is evidence that deviations
from all three parity conditions are systematically related to variables

currently known to market participants. Yet these deviations are nQi
perfectly

correlated, so there is no reason to believe that one
-16-

common disturbance is causing these deviations. This evidence is
consistent with the coexistence of both risk premia

forecast errors.

systematic

Estimates based on producer prices in

manufacturing are consistent with the same interpretation.

The results for the FF/$ rate are more complicated. There

is strong evidence that deviations from UIP and RIP are
systematically related to current variables. But the p-value for Ak =
0

is 0.130, so deviations from PPP are .çfl statistically different from

zero at the ten percent level. The same statistic also applies to the
equality of coefficients in the equations for UIP and RIP deviations
(Yk = •L); it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that these

coefficients are identical.

Evidence from the three Wald tests is

thus consistent with there being a risk premium driving deviations

from UIP and RIP but no systematic forecast error. The risk
premium causes deviations from UIP and RIP, but not PPP.
This interpretation of the Wald tests for France, however, is

not consistent with the J-statistic for the hypothesis of perfect
correlation. With a p-value of 0.427 for this statistic, it is not
possible to reject the hypothesis that deviations from IMP and PPP

for France are perfectly correlated. As explained above, perfect
correlation can occur when there is a common factor driving
exchange market and inflation forecast errors in all three equations.
So perhaps deviations from PPP are systematically related to current

variables after all -- driven by the same forecast errors which cause

deviations from UIP and RIP.

The t/$ equations yield results which are quite different

-17.

from those of the other equations. In the equations based on

consumer prices, neither UIP nor PPP can be rejected at
conventional levels of significance, although RIP can be rejected. In

the equations based on producer prices in manufacturing in the
bottom half of Table 1, even real interest parity cannot be rejected.

If all three parity conditions hold, this is consistent with forecast

errors being random (i.e., non-systematic) jjjj risk premia being
unimportant?5 The J-statistic cannot reject p.oportionality between

coefficients, hut this test is more difficult to interpret when the
underlying parity conditions cannot be rejected.26 So the Japanese
evidence stands apart from the other 0-5 evidence, although this may
simply be due to greater noise in the Japanese series making it more

difficult to reject the parity conditions. Unlike in Japan, in all of the
other countries there is ample evidence of departures from the three
parity conditions.

D. Joint Tests of the Parity Conditions for Bonds

If average real interest differentials are generally small
between short term instruments then it is natural to ask if the same
is true of real interest differentials between bonds. To measure real

In traditional tests of UIP of the form As,, =
+ vt,

a + b

(i - i)

the hypothesis that a=O and b= I cannot be rejected at

conventional levels of significance -- a result also consistent with
there being random forecast errors and no foreign exchange risk
premium.
26

In the extreme case when Ak
= Yk = 0, then proportionality
between these coefficients is of no interest at all.
-18-

bond returns for investors, it is preferable to use the returns on

government rather than corporate bonds because in most countries
the government bond market is much larger and more liquid than the

corporate market. For that reason, internationally diversified
portfolios are said to hold much larger proportions of government
bonds than corporate bonds. To measure the real cost of financing
for firms, however, it would be preferable to use corporate bond
yields. But government bond data are more readily available and
are of higher quality than corporate bond data.27

The real interest rate for a medium or long term bond is
more difficult to define than for a short term instrument. If the
bond has a maturity of n periods, one definition of the real interest
rate would be the expected real return over n periods. The nominal

return can be measured by the yield to maturity of the n period
bond, i? So the real return can be obtained by deflating by some
measure of expected inflation, t1:
(11)

E1 (rD =

,i1

—

flirt.

This is the definition of the real interest rate found in the literature

27 Returns on Eurobonds would be interesting to compare, but
there are no consistently defined yield series extending back into the
1970s.

28 To simplify the notation, the subscript k for country k is

omitted from the expressions in this section.

comparing the cost of capital internationally.29 Since what is being

measured is the cost of financing or the return to investing over n
periods, the expected inflation rate should match the horizon of J.
That is, it1 should be interpreted as the inflation rate expected over

the life of the bond. Unless the bond is a pure discount bond,
moreover, the inflation rate has to be defined so as to match the
intermediate as well as terminal cash flows on the bond. As a result,

this version of the real interest rate is difficult to implement
empirically?0

An investor evaluating this bond would normally prefer to
examine returns over a shorter horizon than the maturity of the

bond. In fact, the investor may be interested in returns over a
holding period corresponding to the maturity of short term assets
like Eurocurrencies. The nominal return over such a period isgiven

defined as the capital gain plus
by the holding period yield,
coupon payment received on the bond between t and t + 1:
=

(12)

29

(B1+1/B - 1)

+C/B

Most of these studies calculate a weighted average of the real

rate on bank loans and the real rate on bonds where the latter is
defined as in (11). McCauley and Zimmer (1989) survey this
literature.

3° An alternative interpretation of (ii) is that r' is being
measured over a shorter interval than the maturity of the bond, but

then some strong assumptions have to be made about the
relationship between the yield to maturity of the bond and expected
yields over shorter intervals.
-20-

where B is the price of the bond and C is the coupon. Thus an
alternative expression for the real interest rate is formed by deflating

the holding period yield (in logs) by the same one-period expected
inflation rate used to deflate Eurocurrency deposits:3'
(13)

E (r) =

E (h)

-

(1 + Hj. This second measure of the real interest
rate is linked to the first measure, since the price paid for the bond
where

= In

(and hence the yield to maturity) is related to expected holding
period returns. But this second measure is more precisely defined
and therefore easier to measure in practice. The one drawback of
this measure is that it is more appropriate for an investor than for
a borrower, since the latter is more likely to be interested in real
financing costs over the life of the bond.

Morgan Guaranty Trust recently developed a series for
holding period yields on government bonds based directly on bond

market prices. This series, which is based on prices for a broad

range of intermediate-term government bonds accessible to
international investors, extends back to December 1985.32 For the
period prior to 1985, I have constructed a holding period series from

' This is the measure used by Huizinga and Mishkin (1984) who
examine real returns on a variety of longer term U.S. bonds.
32 The bonds are described in Morgan Guaranty Trást (1989).

They are generally shorter in maturity than the earlier yield to
maturity series published by Morgan with the biggest differences
occurring in the case of U.S. and British bonds.
-21-

yield to maturity data using a linear approximation due to Shiller
(1979). The yield to maturity data, from Morgan's World Financial
Markets, extend back to the early 1970s, but I begin the sample in
June 1973, the same month as the Eurocurrency data. The linear

approximation is for an n-period bond with yield to maturity (in
levels) of RI" and duration 0D.33 The duration of a bond is a
coupon-adjusted time to maturity (to reflect the fact that coupons

shorten the effective maturity of the bond). If c is the coupon rate
(expressed as a fraction of the principal), then the duration of this
bond is given by:

=

(14)

[gc+2g2c+...+nc+ ng"J
[gc+ g2c+...+ghlc+ g"]

where g =

1

/ [I + l*]. For a bond selling at par, the coupon

rate is equal to ,1P. In that case, the duration is given by D =
gfl)

(1

-

/ (1 - g). The holding period yield from t to t÷1, 0H1, can then

be expressed as a function of current yields to maturity, j, by
linearizing (12) around j to obtain:
(15)

(ED) j - (D -

1)

1+i

So the holding period yield in period t is related to the yield to
maturity of an n period bond at time t relative to the yield to

maturity of an n-I period bond at t+ 1. Figure 2 compares the
This particular formulation using durations is from Shiller,
Campbell, and Schoenholtz (1983).
-22-

derived series for U.S. bonds with the corresponding Morgan series
based directly on bond price data. Over the period when both series

are available, December 1985 to February 1992, the correlation
coefficient between the derived and Morgan series is 0•96•M The
combined holding period series extends from June 1973 to December
1992.

The holding period yields will be used to conduct tests of the

same form as the Eurocurrency tests. Thus the tests will examine
whether nominal and real differentials are systematically related to
variables in the current information set. In these tests actual holding
period yields will differ from expected holding period yields because

of forecast errors. So the nominal and real yield differentials
between currency k and the dollar will be subject to an additional
factor not found in the Eurocurrency differentials. Equations (7) and

(9) now become

(7')

flhkt -

(9')

flrkl - flrA

RhAt

-

=

= Pu
Pk,

-

+

-

+ VkI -

v=

(0h - flhAt) - (E flhkL - E RhAt) is the forecast error
in predicting nominal holding period yields. (The inflation

where

differential or deviation from PPP given by (8) is unaffected). This

additional forecast error complicates the interpretation of the three

3' The correlation between the corresponding series for Britain
is 0.92, for France 0.89, for Germany 0.93, and for Japan 0.88.
-23-

differentials. If there ate nominal and real yield differentials but no
PPP differentials, these could be due to forecast errors in predicting

holding period yields instead of or in addition to foreign exchange
risk premia.

Table 2 reports the results of estimating equations relating

nominal yield differentials, PPP deviations, and real yield
differentials to variables in the current information set. This
information set includes the four variables used in the Eurocurrency
equations. In addition to the one-month Eurocurrency differential,
however, I also include the differential between the yields to maturity
of the bonds, zjkt - n'At• So there are five variables in the information

set in each equation. As in the case of Table 1, this table reports the
Wald tests to determine if the nominal and real yield differentials

and the PPP differentials are systematically related to the
information variables and J-statistics to test for proportionality
between the coefficients in the equations for the nominal yield
differentials and PPP deviations.

The results of the estimation for the FF/$ and DM/$ rates
are sufficiently similar so that they can be considered together. In
both cases, all three differentials are significantly different from zero
at the five percent level. That is, the nominal yield differential, the

PPP differential, and the real yield differential are all systematically
related to currently known variables. This pattern is consistent with

the coexistence of both risk premia and systematic forecast errors.
The one difference between the two exchange rates lies in the J-test.
In the case of the FF/$ rate, it is not possible to reject the

-24-

hypothesis that the yield differentials and PPP differentials are
perfectly correlated. The J-statistic testing that hypothesis has a p.

value of 0.586. So as in the case of the French franc/dollar
Eurocurrency differential, it is not possible to rule out the possibility

that the differentials in all three equations are driven by a common
nominal disturbance.

In the case of the $/

rate, both nominal yield differentials

and PPP differentials are systematically related to currently known

variables. But this is not true of real yield differentials. It is not
possible to reject the hypothesis that real yields on sterling and dollar

bonds are the same (k = 0) or, equivalently, that nominal yields
move together with PPP deviations (Yk = Ak). So systematic foreign

exchange forecast errors rather than risk premia appear important

in this case. In the case of the Y/$ rate, the opposite is true. There

is evidence that both nominal and real interest differentials are
systematically related to current variables, but not PPP differentials.

So this evidence suggests that risk premia (or forecast errors in
predicting holding period yields) are important rather than foreign
exchange forecast errors.
In the case of both exchange rates, however, the J-statistics
have high p-values, so it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that
(the systematic components of) nominal yield differentials and PPP

differentials are perfectly correlated. Since correlation between any
two differentials implies correlation with the third differential, there

may be a common factor driving differentials in all three equations.

Under this interpretation, nominal disturbances may be causing

-25-

simultaneous forecast errors in predicting foreign exchange rates and

inflation rates (and perhaps holding period yields as well). These
errors must be systematic, .however, since it is the fitted values (or
systematic components) of these forecast errors which are correlated.

It should be pointed out that the results for bond yields are
quite similar to those for Eurocurrency differentials. In both Tables
I and 2, most of the Wald tests result in rejections of the coefficient

restrictions. Thus there is evidence that most nominal differentials

between Eurocurrency rates and between bond yields are
systematically related to currently known variables. And the same
can be said for real differentials and PPP deviations.
E. Concluding Remarks

This study has provided ample evidence that interest
differentials between countries cannot be attributed to either risk

premia or systematic forecast errors alone. Evidence from both
Eurocurrency markets and bond markets suggest strongly that in
most cases both factors are at work in separating markets.
The study has shown that if risk premia alone are important,

then there are cross equation restrictions between nominal and real
interest differentials, or, equivalently, systematic deviations from UIP

and RIP but not PPP. If systematic forecast errors are important

instead, there are cross equation restrictions between nominal
interest differentials and PPP deviations. If both factors are
important, however, then these cross equation restrictions will be
rejected. The evidence suggests that most of these cross equations
restrictions can be rejected. Or, equivalently stated, the deviations
-26-

from each of these three parity equations are, in most cases,
systematically related to variables in the current information set.

Perhaps the most intriguing evidence is that for some currencies,
these three sets of deviations are perfectly correlated, suggesting that

a common factor may be driving all three deviations.

The challenge facing researchers is to formulate empirically

testable asset pricing models to explain risk premia or models of
peso phenomena or learning behavior to explain systematic forecast
errors. Such efforts would provide more direct evidence that one or

more factors are important in explaining deviations from the three

parity conditions. Such efforts to date have met with only limited
success.

-27-

REFERENCES
Abuaf, Niso, and Philippe Jorion, 1990. "Purchasing Power Parity
in the Long Run," Journal of Finance, March, 157-174.

Adler, Michael, and Bernard Dumas, 1983. "International Portfolio
Choice and Corporation Finance: A Synthesis." Journal of
Finance, June, 925-984.
Adler, Michael; and Bruce Lehmann, 1983. "Deviations from
Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run," Journal of Finance,
December, pp. 1471-87.

Bekaert, Geert, and Robert J. Hodrick, 1992. "Characterizing
Predictable Components in Excess Returns on Equity and Foreign
Exchange Markets," Journal of Finance, June, 467-509.
Cumby, Robert E., and John Huizinga, 1992. "Investigating the
Correlation of Unobserved Expectations: Expected Returns in
Equity and Foreign Exchange Markets and Other Examples,"
Journal of Monetary Economics, November, 217-253.

Cumby, Robert E., and Maurice Obstfeld, 1984. "International
Interest Rate and Price Level Linkages under Flexible Exchange
Rates: A Review of Recent Evidence," Exchange Rate Theory and
Practice, John Bilson and Richard Marston, editors, pp. 121-51.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dumas, Bernard, 1994. "Partial-Equilibrium vs. GeneralEquilibrium Models of International Capital Market Equilibrium,"
Handbook of international Macroeconomics, Frederick van der
Ploeg, editor. Oxford: Blackwell.

Dutton, Marilyn Miller, 1993. "Real Interest Parity: New
Measures and Tests," Journal of International Money and Finance,
February, 62-77.
Frankel, Jeffrey A., 1986. "International Capital Mobility and
Crowding-Out in the U.S. Economy: Imperfect Integration of
Financial Markets or of Goods Markets?" How Open is the U.S.

Economy?, R.W. Hafer, editor. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington
Books.

Froot, Kenneth A., and Richard H. Thaler, 1990. "Anomalies:
Foreign Exchange," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer,
179- 192.

Glen, Jack D., 1992. "Real Exchange Rates in the Short, Medium,
and Long Run," Journal of International Economics, August, 147166.

Hansen, Lars P., 1982. "The Large Sample Properties of
Generalized Method of Moments Estimators," Econometrica,
1029- 1054.

Hodrick, Robert, 1987. The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency
of Forward and Futures Foreign Exchange Markets. Chur:
Harwood Academic Publishers.

Huizinga, John, and Frederic S. Mishkin, 1984. "Inflation and
Real Interest Rates on Assets with Different Risk Characteristics,"
Journal of Finance, July, 699-712.

Kester and Luehrmann, 1989. "Real Interest Rates and the Cost
of Capital: A Comparison of the United States and Japan," Japan
and the World Economy, July, 279-301.
Lewis, Karen K., 1989. "Changing Beliefs and Systematic Rational
Forecast Errors with Evidence from Foreign Exchange," American
Economic Review, September, 621-36.

Lewis, Karen K., 1994. "Puzzles in International Financial
Markets," Handbook of International Economics, G. Grossman
and K. Rogoff, editors, Amersterdam: North-Holland.

Lothian, James R., and Mark P. Taylor, 1992. "Real Exchange
Rate Behavior: The Recent Float from the Perspective of the Past
Two Centuries," November, processed.

Mark, Nelson C., 1985. "Some Evidence on the international
Equality of Real Interest Rates," Journal of International Money
and Finance, June, 189-208.
McCauley, Robert N., and Steven A. Ziinmer, 1989. "Explaining
International Differences in the Cost of Capital," Quarterly
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Summer, 7-28.

Mishkin, Frederic S., 1984. "Are Real Interest Rates Equal Across
Countries? An Emirical Investigation of International Parity
Conditions," Journal of Finance, December, 1345-1357.

Morgan Guaranty Trust, 1989. "The J.P. Morgan Government
Bond Index," World Financial Markets, November 22, 5-13.
Rogoff, Kenneth (1979). "Essays on Expectations and Exchange
Rate Volatility." Ph.D. Dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Roll, Richard, 1979. "Violations of Purchasing Power Parity and
Their Implications for Efficient International Commodity
Markets," International Finance and Trade, Marshall Sarnat and
G.P. Szego, editors, pp. 133-76 Cambridge, Mass.: Ballinger
Publishing Co.
Shiller, Robert J., 1979. "The Volatility of Long-Term Interest

Rates and Expectations Models of the Term Structure," Journal of
Political Economy, December, 1190-1219.
Shiller, Robert J., John Y. Campbell, and Kermit L. Schoenholtz,
1983. "Forward Rates and Future Policy: Interpreting the Term
Structure of Interest Rates," Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity, No.1, 173-217.

TABLE 1

TESTS FOR PREDICTABLE COMPONENTS IN TAP, PPP, AND RIP DEVIATIONS
FOR ONE MONTH EUROCURRENCY RATES, 1973(6)-1992(12)
=0
(4¼ = 7k)

('k = Is)

28.56

22.91

28.41

12.23

(.000]

10001

(.000]

[.007)

FF/$

12.19
[.016]

7.12
[.130]

131.03
[.000]

2.78
(.427]

DM/$

21.02
[.000]

17.18
[.002]

76.34

10.93

[.0001

(.0121

4.51
[.341]

2.98

15.01

[.562]

[.005]

1,90
(.594]

21.41
[.000)

28.48
[.000)

14.52

75.19
[.000]

[.014]

6.11
[.191]

[.696]

=

4¼ = 0

i-statistic

(A =

h1

It)

CPI Estimates

$/i

/$
PPIM Estimates

$/

28.05
[.000]

DM/S

k/$

19.16
[.000]

[.006)

3.99
[.407)

[.781]

1.75

9.99
[.0 19]

10.65

1.44

Note: the first three columns report x2(4) tests of the coefficient restrictions with the p-value
in square brackets. The last column reports the J-Statistic testing the proportionality of
coefficients in the equations for the UIP and PPP deviations; it is distributed as x2(3).

TABLE 2
TESTS FOR PREDICTABLE COMPONENTS IN UIP, PPP, AND RIP DEVIATIONS

FOR HOLDING PERIOD YIELDS ON GOVERNMENT BONDS, 1973(6)-1992(12)
=0

Ak

0

=0

i-statistic

(4 = )

(A = 1k)

26.33
(.000]

7.68
[.174]

0.99
(.912)

12.66

15.58
[.008]

2.83
[.586]

[.054]

(AL

= h1 1k)

CPI Estimates
28.70
[.000]

FE/S

DM/S

'/

$

23.44
[.000]

[.027]

18.36
[.002]

[.004]

18.37
(.003]

4.47

13.91

[.483]

1.0 161

[.374]

26.54
[.000)

22.73
[.000]

8.77
[.119)

[.780]

16.01

15.41
[.009]

[.000]

2.78

16.97

[.733]

[.005]

9.55
[.089]

17.51

9.30

4

PP!M Estimates

DM/S

(.007)

Y/ $

10.69
[.058]

24.11

1.76

11.20
[.024]

2.14
(.710)

Note: the first three columns report xk5) tests of the coefficient restrictions with the p-value
in square brackets. The last column reports the J-Statistic testing the proportionality ot
coefficients in the equations for the UIP and PPP deviations; it is distributed as x2(4).

FIGURE 1
NOMINAL AND REAL INTEREST DIFFERENTIALS
ONE MONTH EURODOLLAR AND EUROMARK RATES AND CPIs
15%

I

F-

z

0

10%

5%

a:

w

0

___ ____

0%

z
F—

-5%-0
a:
LU
0 -10%
LU

-15%

$øI

—
I

1976

1980

1984

—NOMINAL REAL

1988

1992

FIGURE 2
COMPARISON BETWEEN DERiVED AND MORGAN HOLDING
PERIOD YIELDS FOR U.S. BONDS, 1985(12)-i 992(2)
00/
o io

Iz

Cal
o io

H

0

4%

cc

w

0

2%

0
Ix
w
0

1% 01

H
zw

L /0

-4%

DERIVED MORGAN•

