                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INTEREST ALLOCATION
                           RULES, FINANCING PATI'ERNS,
                             AND THE OPERATIONS OF
                               U.S. MULTINATIONALS




                                      Kenneth A. Froot
                                     James R. Hines, Jr.




                                  Working Paper No. 4924



                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 MassachusettS Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 1994


                                                   research assistance, and to Julie Collins for
We arc grateful to Paul O'Connell for outstanding                                by the NBER,
helpful comments on an earlier draft. Generous research support was provided
the Division of Research at Harvard Business School, and the National ScienceInternational
                                                                                    Foundation
(Grant No. SES-9209373). This paper     is part of NBER's   research  programs  in
                                                 Macroeconomics, and Public Economics. My
Trade and Investment, International Finance and
opinions expressed are those of the authors and  not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

   1994 by Kenneth A. Froot and James R. Hines, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
                                                                                            full
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                     NBER Working Paper #4924
                                                                              November 1994


                                 INTEREST ALLOCATION
                              RULES, FINANCING PATFERNS,
                                AND THE OPERATIONS OF
                                  U.S. MULTINATIONALS


                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper examines the impact of the 1986 change in U.S. interest allocation rules on

the investment and financing decisions of American multinationals. The 1986 change reduced

the tax deductibility of the interest expenses of firms with excess foreign tax credits. The

resulting increase in the cost of debt gives finns incentives to substitute away from using debt

finance. Furthermore, to the extent that perfect financing substitutes are not available, the overall

cost of capital rises as well. The empirical tests indicate that the loss of tax deductibility of

parent-company interest expenses appears to reduce significantly borrowing and investing by

firms with excess foreign tax credits. The same firms tend to undertake new lease commitments,

which may reflect the use of leases as alternatives to capital ownership. In addition, firms

affected by the tax change tend to scale back the scope of their foreign and total operations.

These results are consistent with the hypothesis that firms substitute away from debt when debt

becomes more expensive, and also with the hypothesis that the loss of interest tax shields

increases a firm's cost of capital.


Kenneth A. Froot                                      James R. Hines, Jr.
Morgan 391                                            John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard Business School                               Harvard University
Harvard University                                    79 John F. Kennedy Street
Boston, MA 02163                                      Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                              and NBER
1. liuroduction
                International business operations pose speciai tax problems for multinational firms as

well as the governments that tax them. Multinational firms often centralize certain activities that

generate returns in more than one country. For example, firms may borrow money in one country in

order to deploy the funds elsewhere. Firms are entitled to claim tax deductions for interest costs, but

countries in which they borrow may not permit all of the associated interest expenses to be deducted

against local income for tax purposes. The method used to calculate allowable interest tax deductions

can, in turn, affect tinar.cing choices and operating decisions.

                  American tax law permits only incomplete deductibility of the interest expenses of

multinational firms. U.S. law specifies rules that detennine the extent to which interest costs incured

by multinational firms in the United States can be deducted for tax purposes against U.S. income.

These rules are often changed, the last major change occuring in 1986.

                  This paper examines the impact on firm behavior of the change in the U.S. interest

allocation rules introduced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The 1986 Act significantly reduced the

tax deductibility of the U.S. interest expenses of certain American multinational corporations.

Congress changed the law in 1986 because it was concerned that some U.S.-based firms received tax

deductions for interest expenses in the United States that enhanced their profits overseas. The 1986

 Act introduced a new formula for multinational firms to use in calculating the fraction of their interest

 expenses that can be deducted against taxable income in the United States.

                  This tax change increased the tax liabilities of certain American multinationals, and

 made additional borrowing more expensive for these firms. One of the concerns raised during the

 deliberations over the 1986 Act was that this additional cost of borrowing might discourage some

 firms from investing in new plant and equipment, since a sizable fraction of new investment is

 financed by borrowing. The object of this paper is to examine the impact of the tax change on the

 operations of those multinational firms that were affected by the change in interest allocation rules.
To do so, it is necessary to compare the behavior of the affected firms to the behavior of those firms

that were unaffected by the interest allocation provisions of the 1986 Act.

                The results indicate that the change in interest allocation rules significantly influenced

the operations of American multinational firms. Firms that were unable to deduct all oftheir interest

expenses against their U.S. tax liabilities issued 4.2 percent less debt between 1986-1991 (measured

as a fraction of total firm assets), and invested 3.5 percent less in property, plant, and equipment,

than did other firms. In addition, the affected firms showed a greaterproclivity to lease rather than

own capital assets, and to reduce the scope of their foreign operations. MI of these behavioral

responses are consistent with the incentives created by the interest allocation provisions of the Tax

Reform Act of 1986.

                Section II describes the U.S. tax treatment of the interest expenses of multinational

corporations, and analyzes the incentives created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986. Section III

describes the data used to analyze the impact of the 1986 tax change. Section IV presents the results

ol' regressions that estimate the impact of the 1986 tax change on various aspects   of the operations of
American multinational firms. Section V is the conclusion.



II. The Tax Treatment of Interest Expense
                This section describes the tax treatment of interest expenses of U.S. corporations,

paying special attention to the treatment of multinational corporations. The object of this section is to

identify the incentives created by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, as a prelude to analyzing the impact

of the Act on the behavior of U.S. firms.

                Interest expenses are generally deductible against the taxable income of U.S.

corporations. There are, however, two important circumstances in which the deductibility of interest

is of limited value to an interest-paying corporation. The first arises when a corporation has negative


                                                                                                             2
protits before interest deductions. Since a firm with losses pays no taxes, interest deductions do not

reduce its tax liability. Corporations are, however, permitted to carry net operating losses backward

up to three years or forward up to fifteen years.1 The second circumstance is one in which a firm is

subject to the corporate Alternative Minimum Tax (AMD; firms paying the AMT lace idiosyncratic

tax incentives.3




                   A. Foreign and Domestic Allocation of Interest Deductions

                   Special problems arise in allocating the interest deductions of multinational firms.

The idea that underlies U.S. law is that, when a. multinational firm incurs interest expense in the

United States, a certain fraction of the expense should be allocated as a deduction against taxable

domestic income, and the remainder allocated against the firm's foreign income. The respective

fractions are determined on the basis of the income-generating capacity created by the loans on which

interest is paid. The extreme difticuliy that this concept encounters is that it is not always clear to

what extent a particular loan generates domestic-source and foreign-source income.

                   In order to understand the significance of the sourcing of interest deductions, it is

necessary to review the treatment of foreign-source income. Due to some peculiaritiesof the changes

in U.S. tax law after 1986, certain firms found that the cost of debt changed significantly between

 1986 and 1987. The goal of the empirical work described in section 3 is to follow and compare the

behavior of those firms facing higher costs of debt to those firms facing unchanged cost of debt.




    'Tax loss carryforwards do not accrue interest, a feature that limits their value even to firms that
expect to have taxable profits in the ftiture. Scholes and Wolfson (1992) analyze the value of tax loss
carryforwards in uncertain environments.

       2For the remainder of the paper, we analyze taxpaying firms that are not subject to the AMT.
 Lyon and Silverstein (1993) report that 30.7% of firms with assets over $500million paid the AMT in
 1990.

                                                                                                           3
                 B. US Taxation of Foreign Income'

                 The United States taxes income on a "residence" basis, meaning that American

 corporations and individuals owe taxes to the U.S. government on all of their worldwide income,

 whether earned in the United States or not. The top U.S. corporate tax rate is now 35 percent. Since

 foreign profits are usually taxed in host countries, U.S. law provides a foreign tax credit for income

taxes (and related taxes) paid to foreign governments in order not to subject American multinationals

to double taxation. With the foreign tax credit, a U.S. corporation that earns $100 in a foreign

country with a 12 percent tax rate (and a foreign tax obligation of $12) pays only $23 to the U.S.

government, since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35 percent of $100) is reduced to $23 by the

foreign tax credit of $12. The foreign tax credit is, however, limited to U.S. tax liability on foreign

income; if, in the example, the foreign tax rate were 50 percent, then the firm pays $50 to the foreign

government but its U.S. foreign tax credit is limited to $35. Hence, a U.S. firm receives full tax

credits for its foreign taxes paid only when it is in a "deficit credit" position, i.e., when its average

foreign tax rate is lower than its tax rate on domestic operations. A firm has "excess credits" if its

available foreign tax credits exceed U.S. tax liability on its foreign income.4 Firms average together

their taxable incomes and taxes paid in all of their foreign operations in calculating foreign tax credits

and the foreign tax credit limit.

                Deferral of U.S. taxation of certain foreign earnings is another important feature of

the U.S. international tax system. A U.S. parent firm is taxed on its subsidiaries' foreign income

only when returned ("repatriated") to the parent corporation. This type of deferral is available only

to foreign operations that are separately incorporated in foreign countries ("subsidiaries" of the


       'Parts of this brief description of the tax system are excerpted from Hines (1991).

         'Furthermore, income is broken into different functional "baskets" in the calculation of applicable
credits and limits. In order to qualify for the foreign tax credit, firms must own at least 10% of a foreign
affiliate, and only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are creditable.

                                                                                                            4
parent) and not to consolidated ('brancW) operations. The U.S. government taxes branch profits as

they are earned, just as it does profits earned within the United States.

                The deferral of U.S. taxation may create incentives for firms with lightly-taxed

foreign earnings to delay repatriating dividends from their foreign subsidiaries.5 This incentive arises

in those cases in which firms expect never to repatriate their foreign earnings, or if they anticipate

that future years will be more attractive for repatriation (either because domestic tax rates will be

lower, or because future sources of foreign income will generate excess foreign tax credits that can be

used to offset U.S. tax liability on the dividends).' It appears that, in practice, U.S. multinationals

choose their dividend repatriations selectively, generally paying dividends first out of more heavily

taxed foreign earnings.' Consequently, the average tax rate that firms face on foreign income need

not exactly equal the average foreign tax rate faced by their branches and subsidiaries abroad.

                Branch earnings and dividends from subsidiaries represent only two forms of foreign

income for U.S. income tax purposes. Interest received from foreign sources also represents foreign

income, though foreign interest receipts from high-tax countries are assigned their own "basket" and

therefore are not averaged with other income in calculating the foreign tax credit. Royalty income

received from foreigners, including foreign affiliates of U.S. firms, is also foreign source income.




       'The incentive to defer repatriation of lightly taxed subsidiary earnings is attenuated by the Subpart
F provisions, introduced in U.S. law in 1962, that treat a subsidiary's passive income, and income
invested in U.S. property, as if it were distributed to its American owners, thereby subjecting it to
immediate U.S. taxation. The Subpart F rules apply to controlled foreign corporations, which are foreign
corporations owned at least 50% by U.S. persons holding stakes of at least tO% each. Controlled foreign
corporations that reinvest their foreign earnings in active businesses can continue to defer any U.S. tax
liability on those earnings. See Hines and Rice (1994) and Scholes and Wolfson (1992) for the behavioral
implications of these rules.

       9t is interesting to note that the size of the tax obligation triggered by repatriation does not itself
create an incentive to delay paying dividends from foreign subsidiaries, since the U.S. tax must be paid
eventually. See Hartman (1985).

       'See the evidence presented in Hines and Hubbard (1990).

                                                                                                           5
Foreign governments often impose moderate taxes on dividend, interest, and royalty payments from

foreign aftiJiates to their American parent companies; these withholding taxes are filly creditable

against an American taxpayer's U.S. tax liability on foreign income.



                  C. interaction of interest Expense and Foreign income Rules

                  American firms with foreign income are generally not permitted to deduct all of their

interest costs in the United States against their domestic taxable incomes. Instead, the law provides

for various methods of allocating interest expenses between domestic and foreign income. The

intention of the law is to retain the full deductibility of interest expense against taxable U.S. income,

but only for that part of interest expense generating income that is subject to U.S. taxation.

                  From the standpoint of taxpaying firms, the U.S. tax law's distinction between

domestic and foreign interest deductions is potentially quite important. If interest expense is deemed

to be domestic, then it is deductible against the taxpayer's U.S. taxable income. Alternatively, if it is

deemed to be foreign, then the interest expense reduces foreign taxable incomefor the purposes of

(1.3. income taxation only. Foreign governments do not use U.S. methods of calculating interest

deductions, and generally do not permit U.S. finns to reduce their taxable incomes in foreign

countries on the basis of interest expenses incurred in the United States. Consequently, interest

expenses allocated against foreign income are valuable to a U.S. firm only if it has deficit foreign tax

credits.   If it does have deficit credits, then some of the firm's foreign income is subject to U.S. tax,
and any additional dollar of interest expense allocated against foreign income reduces the firm's U.S.

taxableincome by a dollar.' With deficit foreign tax credits, firms are indifferentbetween allocating




      'Curiously, the law is written so that the additional dollar of interest expense reduces taxable
Income without reducing the foreign tax credits available for foreign income taxes paid.

                                                                                                             6
interest expenses against foreign income and allocating them against domestic income.9 If, on the

other hand, firms have excess foreign tax credits, then any interest expenses allocated against foreign

income are useless from the standpoint of reducing tax liabilities, since foreign income generates no

U.S. tax liability anyway.

                The Tax Reform Act of 1986 significantly changed U.S. tax law governing the

allocation of interest expenses. Prior to 1986, the interest expenses of U.S. taxpayers were

determined separately for each company within a controlled group.'° In principle, each company

was required to allocate interest deductions between domestic and foreign source in proportion to

domestic and foreign assets." In practice, however, this rule permitted taxpayers to structure their

linances in order to obtain a full tax deduction in the United States for interest expenses associated

with borrowing done in the United States.

                Consider, for example, the situation of an American corporation that borrows $100 in



        9Tbis statement, along with much of the analysis described in the paper, abstracts from the ability
of firms to carry excess foreign tax credits backward two years and forward five years. Firms that carry
excess credits forward or back may (depending on specific circumstances) face incentives that are
intermediate between those of deficit credit and excess credit firms.

       '°Separate allocation of interest deductions for each company within a controlled group was firmly
established by Treasury Regulation §1.861-8, issued in 1977. Prior to 1977, US law was somewhat
vague about whether all of the companies within a controlled group should be consolidated for purposes
of interest allocation, though in an important case based on pre-1977 US law, (177' v. Unjied Stases) the
courts held that interest should be allocated on a consolidated basis.

     "Taxpayers were given the alternative of allocating interest deductions on the basis of gross
domestic income and gross foreign income, though it is hard to understand why a tax-minimizing
corporation would do so, since tax-planning opportunities are so attractive using the asset method on a
single-company basis. The regulation provides that, if the income method is chosen, interest deductions
allocated against foreign-source income cannot be less than 50% of the amount that would have been
allocated against foreign-source income by the asset method. Taxpayers allocating their interest
deductions on the basis of domestic and foreign assets were required to do so based on the hook values
of those assets, unless the taxpayer elected to allocate on the basis of ftir market values, and could
demonstrate fair market values to the satisfaction of the IRS. Once chosen, taxpayers were required to
continue to use the fair market value method until granted permission by the IRS to discontinue its use.
Book values of stock (such as a parent corporation's stock in its foreign subsidiaries) were not adjusted
to include undistrihuted earnings and profits reinvested by the subsidiary corporations.
                                                                                                            7
the United States, paying interest of $10 annually. The corporation has $150 of U.S. assets and $50

of foreign assets, and earns profits of $15, gross of interest costs, in the United States, and profits of

$5 abroad. The corporation does no foreign borrowing. Under pre-1986 law, this corporation would

be entitled to deduct only $7.50 (75% of $10) of its interest charges against U.S. income, since only

75% of its assets produce U.S.-source income; the remaining $2.50 of interest deductions would be

allocated against foreign-source income. The same firm, with the same real business activities, could,

however, reorganize its affairs in a manner that would permit all of the $10 interest cost to be

deductible against U.S. income. To do so, the parent Lu-in need only borrow the $100 in the U.S.

market and then contribute the money as paid-in capital to a wholly-owned domestic subsidiary that

owns the firm's domestic and foreign operations. The domestic subsidiary pays all of its profits to its

parent as dividends. The parent firm and the domestic subsidiary file a consolidated tax return and

annual report. The domestic subsidiary has $15 of tJ.S.-source income and $5 of foreign-source

income; it has no interest expenses. The parent firm has $20 of income on the basis of dividends

received from its subsidiary, and $10 of interest deductions. The parent firm is entitled to deduct all

of its interest expense against U.S. income, since the firm's assets (its wholly-owned subsidiary) are

all in the United States.12

                The Tax Reform Act of 1986 significantly changed the method by which interest

deductions are allocated, specifically by introducing a "one-taxpayer rule" in which the attributes of

all members of a controlled group - whether owned directly by a parent firm or owned by the parent

through one or more subsidiaries - determine the allocation of interest deductions between domestic




        Prior to 1986, U.S. law did not use sophisticated look-through" rules to determine the extent
to which a U.S. corporation represents a U.S. asset. Instead, a U.S.-located subsidiary was considered
to be a U.S. asset as long as 20% or more of its gross income ftw the prior three years had U.S. source.
In the example, 75% of the domestic subsidiary's gross income has U.S. source.

                                                                                                         8
and foreign income.'3 The motivation for the tax change was the insight that financial fungibility

implies that borrowing by one part of a controlled group directly or indirectly influences the economic

activities of all of the group. The 1986 Act provides that the interest expenses of a U.S. taxpayer

should be allocated between domestic-source and foreign-source income based on the relative assets of

the domestic and foreign operations of the controlled group. Of course, several complications attend

the implementation of such a rule.

                Controlled groups represent chains of 80% or greater ownership. Consequently, an

American parent corporation that owns 75% of the voting stock of a domestic subsidiary, the other

25% of which is owned by unrelated parties, separately allocates the interest deductions of the parent

corporation and the domestic subsidiary. The 80% rule corresponds to the requirements for filing

consolidated tax returns and annual reports. The interest expenses of foreign corporations are never

included within the controlled group for purposes of interest expense allocationY

                 Taxpayers are required to allocate interest deductions between domestic and foreign

source on the basis of the book values of assets held domestically and abroad.'3 In the cases of

subsidiaries that are 10% or more owned by members of the affiliated group, the book values of stock

held in the subsidiaries are adjusted to reflect accumulated earnings and profits of the subsidiaries.




        "The changes in the interest allocation rules introduced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 were
phased in over three years. Various phase-in rules apply to the interest on debt issued between 1983 and
1985.

        "There is an exception for financial institutions whose business is primarily with unrelated parties
and that are required by law to be operated separately from nonfinancial institutions. Such financial
institutions are not included with the rest of an affiliated group for purposes of interest allocation; instead,
the financial institutions are treated as a separate entity for purposes of interest allocation. Special rules
also apply to corporations claiming the U.S. possessions tax credit (available under §936): these
corporations are incLuded in the consolidated group for purposes of interest expense allocation if they
otherwise meet all of the requirements for inclusion.

       "Taxpayers have the alternative of using the fair market values of assets held domesticallyand
abroad, but if taxpayers do so, they are not again able to use book values without permission of the IRS.

                                                                                                               9
Hence, in the case of an American firm that initially finances its wholly-owned French subsidiary

with $100 of equity, and in which the subsidiary subsequently earns and reinvests an additional $400,

the parent's book value of the subsidiary is adjusted to $500 for purposes of interest expense

allocation.

                The 1986 Act provides for a curious treatment of foreign assets and foreign interest

deductions by members of a controlled group. For this purpose, the gross value of U.S. assets and

the net value of foreign assets are used. This leads to something of an asymmetric treatment of

foreign and domestic borrowing for purposes of interest expense allocation. Consider, for example,

the case of a U.S. firm that has $200 of U.S. assets, of which $150 is equity and $50 is debt

borrowed from an unrelated party; the firm also has $200 of foreign assets, of which $150 is parent

equity and $50 is debt borrowed by the subsidiary from an unrelated foreign party. The firm has

U.S-source gross income of $40, U.S. interest cost of $5. foreign-source gross income of $40, and

foreign-source interest expense of $5. This firm is required to allocate almost half of its $5 domestic

interest deduction against foreign-source income,'6 and the firm is not permitted to allocate any of its

foreign interest expense against domestic-source income, even though the leverage situation of the

foreign subsidiary is the same as the leverage situation of its American parent.

                One of the consequences of the asymmetric treatment of U.S. parent firms and their

foreign subsidiaries is that the tax law can encourage firms to finance their subsidiaries with debt

from the American parent instead of parent equity or unrelated-party debt. Parent equity in foreign

subsidiaries reduces the amount of domestic interest payments allocated against U.S.-source income.

It, in the previous example, the subsidiary borrowed $50 from its parent company instead of from an

unrelated party, and the parent financed the loan to its subsidiary by borrowing an additional $50


       ISThe firm has domestic assets of $200 and foreign book assets of $150. so it allocates four-
sevenths ($2004350) of its domestic interest expense against domestic-source income, and the remaining
three-sevenths against foreign-source income.

                                                                                                       10
from unrelated U.S. parties, then the subsidiary's tax position would not change (it still gets a $5

deduction against taxable income in the foreign country for interest paid to its U.S. parent)," but the

parent firm receives a larger interest deduction against U.S.-source income.

                The U.S. Treasury issued regulations designed to prevent U.S. firms from reacting to

the passage of the 1986 Act by financing their foreign subsidiaries with loans from U.S. parents

financed by U.S. borrowing. The first set of regulations was proposed in 1987 but never took

effect." A second set of regulations was proposed in 1988, and was temporarily in effect from that

time until 1991. Under the 1988 regulations, related-party debt influences interest allocation only if

the U.S. parent company's ratio of third-party borrowing to total assets differs significantly from its

foreign subsidiaries' (aggregate) ratio of third-party borrowing to total assets. The idea is to flag

situations in which foreign subsidiaries route their third-party borrowing through their American

parent companies. The 1988 regulation requires domestic interest expense to be allocated to foreign

source if foreign subsidiaries' aggregate ratio of third-party indebtedness to total assets is less than

80% of the third-party indebtedness of the U.S. parent company.'9 If such cases, domestic interest



        "Subject to two qualifications. Certain countries (including the United States) impose thin-
capitalization" laws that limit the amount of related-party interest foreign finns can deduct from local
taxable income. In addition, countries often impose withholding taxes on cross-border interest payments;
U.S. firms with deficit foreign tax credits receive foreign tax credits for paying these taxes. Withholding
taxes on interest are usually reduced, often to zero, by bilateral tax treaties.

        "The 1987 proposal was ultimately dropped due to its draconian impact on certain taxpayers with
extensive foreign operations. The 1987 proposal would have first allocated domestic interest expense
against foreign income to the extent of any related-party interest receipts from controlled foreign
corporations of the American parent company. Remaining domestic interest expense would then be
allocated between U.S. and foreign source on the basis of assets. Hence, a firm with $100 of interest
expense from borrowing by the U.S. parent in the United States, and $20 of interest receipts from its
foreign subsidiary, would first allocate $20 of its U.S. interest expense against foreign income, and
allocate the remaining $80 of interest expense between foreign and domestic sources based on relative
assets.

       "The temporary regulation phased in the 80% requirement: the criterion was 50% for 1988, 65%
for 1989. and 80% for 1990 and subsequent years.
                                                                                                           11
expenses are allocated against foreign-source income until the third-party indebtednessof foreign

subsidiaries plus domestic interest expenses, allocated in this way, equal remaining domestic-source

third-party interest expenses. Remaining domestic interest expenses are then allocated between U.S.

and foreign source according to the §861-8 statute.

                The interest allocation rule just described is likely to have some curious effects on the

actions of those farms that are bound by the 80% requirement. The 1988 regulations were, however,

supplanted by new regulations in 1991, and taxpayers have the option of recalculating their prior tax

liabilities using the new regulations in place of the 1988 regulations for every year that the 1988

regulations apply. At the time that the 1987 and 1988 regulations were proposed, many observers

anticipated that they would be replaced by somewhat more flexible rules that would be made

retroactively applicable. Consequently, it is unlikely that the 1988 regulations had an important effect

on arm behavior.

                The 1991 regulations compare current-year behavior of U.S. parent companies to their

behavior over 5-year 'base periods." Specifically, the regulations provide that domestic interest

expense deductions are allocated against foreign source income if both (i) third-party indebtedness of

the U.S. parent and (ii) lending by the U.S. parent to its foreign subsidiaries exceed base levels

(adjusted tbr acquisitions, dispositions, and changes in amounts of assets). Various exceptions apply

to firms for whom the adjustment would be a small matter, and firms that experience large year-to-

year changes in their borrowing behavior. Once this intrafirm interest expense allocation is complete.

remaining domestic interest expenses are allocated to foreign source based on the §861-8 statute.

Given the complexity of the 1991 regulation, and the important role it gives to a 6rm's pat behavior,

it appears that the incentives it creates can be very firm-specific. In what follows, firms are assumed

not to be bound by the base-period ratio tests.

                There are exceptions to the allocation rules introduced in the 1986 Act. One


                                                                                                        12
exception concerns interest on certain non-recourse debt. Taxpayers are permitted to allocate all of

their interest expenses against income derived from property acquired using non-recourse debt,

subject to various restrictions. Consequently, an American multinational that finances a $100

domestic invesunent with $60 of equity and $40 of non-recourse debt is entitled to deduct the interest

expenses   generated by the $40 debt from the income flow of the $100 investment in calculating its

taxable income. There is a second exception in which nonfinancial firms are permitted to deduct

interest expenses on debt used to purchase interest-bearing securities against the interest income from

those securities, again subject to certain restrictions.



                 D. Incentives Creased By The Tax Rules

                 The upshot of the rules just described is that firms with excess foreign tax credits and

substantial foreign assets (as a fraction of total assets) could no longer enjoy the benefits of full

deductibility of interest expenses incurred in the United States after 1986. Firms with deficit foreign

tax credits, or those with no foreign assets, retain full benefits of interest expense deductibility. As a

consequence, firms in the first category can be expected to reduce their borrowing relative to firms in

the second, and can also be expected to reduce the volume of their debt-financed investment

activity.2'


        The use of non-recourse debt in a situation like this one offers a tax advantage, but is costly in
that lenders typically.require higher interest rates to compensate for the additional risks they bear due to
the non-recourse nature of the debt.

    21Three other studies examine the impact of interest allocation rules on the behavior of impacted
firms. Collins and Shackelford (1992) find that firms with large ratios of foreign to domestic assets are
more likely than other firms to issue preferred stock (as a substitute for debt) in the period after 1986.
Collins and Shackelford do not, however, distinguish excess foreign tax credit firms from deficit foreign
tax credit finns. Altshuler and Mintz (1994) analyze the borrowing patterns of a sample of eight
multinational firms, finding that firms that are unable to claim full tax deductions for interest payments
in the United States are more likely to borrow abroad than to borrow in the United States. Froot and
Hines (1994) examine the effect of interest allocation rules on the financing patterns of firms as they
grow, finding that the tax change discouraged some firms from adding new assets to their balancesheets.
                                                                                                          13
                in order to analyze more carefully the incentives created by changes in the U.S. tax

treatment of interest deductions, it is helpful to examine firm behavior within a very stylized model.

We assume that an American firm's domestic profits after depreciation and other expenses (but before

interest charges) is Q(A), in which A represents domestic assets. Foreignprofits after depreciation

and other expenses including interest charges on foreign borrowing is Q'(A5), in which A represents

foreign assets net of foreign borrowing. Domestic assets have two components: equity (E) anddebt

(D), so A = E+D. The interest rate on domestic borrowing is r, the domestic corporate tax rate is

r, and the foreign tax rate is r. Firms are assumed to repatriate their foreign after-tax profits as

earned, and the foreign withholding tax rate on dividend repatriations is assumed to be zero.

                We use a as an indicator variable that takes the value I if the firm has excess foreign

tax credits (in this model, a = I if rt > r), and 0 if the firm has deficit foreign tax credits. A firm

is required to allocate domestic interest deductions of rD[A1(A+A')) against foreign-source income.

Firms with deficit foreign tax credits are unaffected by this requirement, while the after-tax profits of

firms with excess foreign tax credits are reduced by the product of this amount and the statutory U.S.

tax rate. The foreign operations of firms with deficit foreign tax credits are effectively taxed at the

U.S. tax rate, while the foreign operations of firms with excess foreign tax credits are effectively

taxed at foreign tax rates.

                Firms are assumed to maximize total after-tax profits, which equal:



Profits = [Q(E+D) - rD](1-r) - anD[A*I(E+D+M)] + Q'(A)tl - at' - (I-a)r] - XA                          (I)


in which X is the shadow cost of resources devoted to foreign operations. Consider first the behavior

of firms with excess foreign tax credits. Setting a = 1, and solving for an interior maximum of (I)

over the choice of D, yields:


                                                                                                          14
                  Q'(A) = r + rrA(E+At)/I(l-r)(E+D+A5)2]                                                   (2)



Solving for an interior maximum of (1) over the choice of As yields:



                  Q'(A = X +           rrD(E+D)f[(lr)(E+D+A*)1                                             (3)



By contrast, the first-order conditions that characterize the behavior of firms with deficit foreign tax

credits   (a = 0) are:


                  Q'(A) = r                                                                                (4)



                  Q*r(A*) = A                                                                              (5)



                  Examination of equations (2) - (5) indicates that the interest allocation rules raise the

required marginal product of debt-financed domestic and foreign capital for firms with excess foreign

tax credits. The degree to which required marginal products are raised depends, in part, on terms

that include ratios of domestic indebtedness and domestic assets to the square of total assets. The

squared terms appear due to the conflicting effects of interest allocation on the demand for domestic

and foreign assets. Interest allocation raises the after-tax cost of marginal debt used to finance the

domestic operations of tirms with excess foreign tax credits. At the same time, interest allocation

encourages firms with excess foreign tax credits to expand their domestic operations in order to

allocate as much as possible of their inframarginal domestic interest expense against U.S.-source

income. The combination of these two effects attenuates, but does not eliminate, the direct effect of

interest allocation on the demand for domestic assets. Interest allocation raises the required marginal


                                                                                                              15
product of foreign capital through its effect on the allocation of inframarginal interest expenses for

firms with excess foreign tax credits.

                One complication that arises in using (2)-(5) to estimate the effect of interest allocation

rules on firm behavior after 1986 is that foreign and domestic asset levels are themselves endogenous

to the tax changes under consideration. We treat this problem by using 1986 levels of (At/(A+At)I

in the regressions as proxies for contemporaneous foreign asset fractions. Since foreign asset

fractions did not influence the allocation of interest deductions iii 1986, the 1986 level of this variable

is arguably exogenous to the change in behavior induced by. the tax change. Of course, more

sophisticated treatments are possible, such as instrumenting for contemporaneous foreign asset

fractions with the 1986 fraction, or parameterizing the model to include endogenously the tax-induced

changes in the fraction of foreign and domestic assets. One of the difficulties that such investigations

encounter is that available data are sketchy, and in particular, that asset and foreign tax credit

information does not correspond exactly to definitions that apply for tax purposes. In addition, richer

models that incorporate possible substitutability or complementarity of domestic and foreign assets are

likely to suggest subtle variants of the procedure described above. Given the limitations inherent in

using publicly-available data, we proceed to analyze simple specifications of the relationships implied

by (2)-(5).



Ill.   Data and Preliminary Results

                We use information reported by Compustat on the balance-sheet items of large

publicly-traded corporations. Compustat currently provides information on somewhat more than

7,500 companies. We select only multinational firms incorporated in the United States: firms are

included if their reported foreign assets equal I % or more of reported total assets for each year 1986-

1990. 422 firms satisfy this criterion.


                                                                                                          16
                Foreign tax rate information is central to our analysis, since the hypothesis that firms

maximize after-tn profits implies that deficit foreign tax credit firms will react quite differently to the

Tax Reform Act of 1986 than will excess foreign tax credit firms. We construct foreign tax rates as

the ratio of foreign income taxes paid to foreign pre-tax income as reported by Compustat. This

variable is somewhat noisy, but is likely to capture the major differences between the foreign tax rates

facing different firms. In order to attenuate some of the difficulties that accompany annual

measurements of the foreign tax rate variable, firms were classified into excess foreign tax credit

status based on five years of data, 1986-1990. Firms for which the average foreign tax rate over that

period exceeds the contemporaneous average U.S. statutory corporate tax rate are classified as excess

foreign tax credit firms; all other finns are classified as deficit foreign tax credit firms? From our

initial sample of 422 firms, six additional firms were excluded, five due to insufficient tax rate

infonnation, and one to major ownership changes over the 1986-1991 time period?' Thus the total

sample is 416 firms Hand checking of the Compustat data led to the correction of two errors?

                 Mergers and other dramatic business events can complicate the interpretation of


        rThe introduction of the new interest allocation rules in 1986, along with other tax changes, gave
some firms incentives to adjust the location and tax-avoiding behavior of their foreign affiliates. In the
analysis that follows we take foreign tax rates to be exogenous to US tax changes. Endogenizing foreign
tax rates could change the interpretation of the magnitude of the estimated coefficients.

       This classification of the foreign tax credit status of the firms in the sample is necessarily
somewhat imprecise. The same firm may have excess foreign tax credits in one year and deficit foreign
tax credits in another; furthermore, excess foreign tax credits may be carried forward five years or back
two years. A firm's foreign tax credit status can be endogenous to discretionary decisions such as
dividend repatriation choices. The regressions reported in the tables were all re-run replacing the zero-
one foreign tax credit status with a continuous tax rate variable constructed as the average difference
between foreign and U.S. tax rates. The results are similar to those reported in the tables.

       'Coltec Industries was taken private in 1988, and completed an IPO in early 1992.

       Compustat reports that Alpnet's foreign asset to total asset ratio was 1.25 in 1988, while the
tirm's annual report implies that the ratio is 0.789; we use the latter figure. Compustat reports a jump
in IBM's foreign asset to total asset ratio from 0.48 in 1990 to 0.98 in 1991. IBM's annual report
indicates that the 1991 ratio was 0.469, which is the figure we use.
                                                                                                         17
changes in the behavior of firms over the sample period. In the process of merging, finns can exhibit

large changes in amounts of debt outstanding, ownership of property, plant, and equipment, and other

variables that serve as indicators of reactions to changes in the interest allocation rules. One

consequence is that an analyst might attribute some of these operational changes      to tax incentives

introduced by the 1986 Act, when, in reality, the changes are the results of merger decisions that

were uninfluenced by the 1986 Act. Alternatively, the 1986 Act might be responsible for important

changes   in capital structure or business operations, but these changes could be swamped by the effects

of mergers.
                 These difficulties notwithstanding, it is important to bear in mind that merging firms

face the same tax incentives as do firms that do not merge. One interpretation of the potential

problem introduced by mergers is that firm-specific attributes captured by the constant term used in

panel estimation may not remain constant for firms that merge. At the same time, merging firms may

provide the clearest indication of the behavioral responses to the tax change, since firms undergoing

mergers often simultaneously reexamine their capital structures, their needs for domestic and foreign

assets, and other considerations that nonmerging firms may address only sporadically.

                 We address the problem of mergers by repeating our estimation on three data sets.

The first is the universe of 416 firms described above. A second data set of 388 firms excludes any

firms that record a 100% or greater change in assets in one year. The idea is that firms with greater

than 100% changes in assets very likely experience substantial mergers that change the character of

their business decisions. The third data set, consisting of 331 firms, uses a more restrictive threshold

of 50% changes of assets. Due to space limitations, wedo not report below all of the results using

the three data sets; instead,   we report results for the largest available data set, while noting any

important differences in the results that appear using the more restricted samples.

                 We use firm-level information available through Compustat to calculate changes over



                                                                                                          18
the 19841991 time period in: debt, capital in place, foreign assets, costs of goods sold, foreign sales

net of intrafirm exports, taxes paid, and pretax income. Changes in debt are measured as the

difference between the book values of total debt (long-term and current) in 1991 and total debt in

1986. Changes in capital are measured as the difference between net property, plant and equipment

in 1991 and net property, plant, and equipment in 1986. Foreign assets are measured as total foreign

assetsin 1986, wdtheratioofthisvlewtotalassl98óisusednoconiytocontrolfortlsm
characteristics (degree of multinationality) but as a component of the cost of debt finance after 1986.

In some of the regressions, we use tax loss carry forwards (TLCF). Tax loss carryforwards are

measured (for those firms reporting it) using 1986 data only?' We use 1986 levels of TLCF due to

the potential endogeneity of TLCF over the 1986-91 period (since tax losses can be generated by

rapid debt accumulation). Table I presents means and standard deviations of variables used in the

regressions.

                The empirical strategy is to use the identifying assumption that foreign tax credit

status influences operational changes between 1986-1991 only through its effect, via interest allocation

rules, on the cost of borrowing. Of course, differences in foreign tax credit status could reflect firm

heterogeneity that is (for some reason) related in a nontax manner to operational changes over 1986-

1991. We attempt to control for firm heterogeneity in two ways. First, we use ratios of foreign

assets to total assets, TLCFs, and industry dummies to allow for industry- and firm-specific effects

that may be correlated with foreign tax credit status. Second, we use firm behavior over the 1984-86

period as a control for behavior from 1986.1991. If the results are driven by the 1986 tax change,

foreign tax credit status should have no ability to explain changes in debt, assets, foreign operations,

and other variables over the 198446 period. Alternatively, if the results are driven by omitted firm-



    1nformation on tax loss carryforwards in 1986 is missing for 29 of the firms in the sample of 416;
these firms were dropped from the sample in specifications using TLCF as an explanatory variable.

                                                                                                       19
specific factors that are constant over 1984-1991 and correlated with the 1986 tax variables, then

results for the pre-reform (1984-86) and post-reform (1986-91) periods should look similar.



IV. Regression results
                This section describes the results of regressions that estimate the effects of the changes

in interest allocation rules on firm financing and operational patterns. The null hypothesis is that the

changes in interest allocation rules had no impact on firm behavior; this hypothesis implies that firms

simply bear the tax cost of the 1986 Act. We contrast this null hypothesis with two alternative

hypotheses: (1) that firms respond to the tax changes by using non-debt financing, and (11) that firms

respond to the tax changes by reducing their foreign operations?

                We examine these alternatives by constructing independent variables that distinguish

firms by their exposures to the tax change as of 1986. Firms with excess Ibreign tax credits and high

ratios of foreign to domestic assets are the ones that are least able to take deductions against their

U.S. tax liabilities for domestic interest payments. The foreign tax credit status dummy variable

(described above) is a simple measure of firm exposure to the change in the interest allocation rules.

It is possible to obtain more precision by measuring interaction effects. For example, we use the

squared ratio of foreign assets to total assets, interacted with the foreign tax credit dummy variable, to


    21The null and alternative hypotheses correspond to different theoretical specifications of the ease with
which firms can adjust their financial and operating patterns. Stiglitz (1973) argues that the tax advantage
to debt makes borrowing a firm's preferred method of financing marginal investments. If this argument
is correct, and firms continue to prefer debt to other financing methods even after some of its tax
advantages are lost due to the interest allocation rules, then firms will not react to the tax changes by
substituting other financing methods for debt, but will react by reducing the size of foreign and total
operations. Alternatively, the Miller (1977) model of financial equilibrium implies that firms impacted
by the interest allocation rules will change their capital structure to pure equity finance. As long as the
capitalization of the affected firms does not exceed the initial amount of equity on the market, this type
of financial arbitrage implies that the interest allocation rules will not affect the capital costs, or real
operations, of any firms. Gordon and Malkiel (1981) examine a model in which debt is tax-preferred
but its use raises the probability that a firm will incur costs associated with bankruptcy; this model carries
implications between those of the Stiglitz and Miller models.

                                                                                                           20
detect differences in firm behavior based on foreign tax credit status, given the ratio of assets abroad.

According to the model, excess foreign tax credit finns ought to show greater behavioral responses

the higher are their ratios of foreign to total assets. We also control for other firm characteristics

that might be correlated with firm responses, such as growth over the sample period, industry, and

presence and amount of tax loss carryforwards.

                We choose dependent variables to identify changes in: (i) firm capital structure; (ii)

investment spending; (iii) lease commitments; and (iv) foreign operating levels. These variables are

chosen because of their relationships with the alternative hypotheses. For example, alternative

hypothesis (I) implies that firms can costlessly substitute away from higher-priced debt toward other

financial vehicles; this behavioral response should appear as a change in capital structure. In

addition, investment spending would tend to fall and leasing to increase in excess foreign tax credit

firms, as they take assets off their balance sheets through leasing. Finally, hypothesis (I) implies

that foreign operating levels should not change in response to the 1986 Act, since managers finance

costlessly around the tax change.

                If alternative hypothesis (H) is correct, substitute financial vehicles are not perfect,
and consequently, the tax change raises the cost   of capital in certain businesses. This increase in

costs may encourage firms to cut back on their operations. We also might expect some effect on

financing methods, as firms substitute away from debt and toward leasing. However, we would also

expect a decline in investment and foreign operations, measured by foreign-produced foreign sales, or

even by firm-wide costs of goods sold.



     "Operating leases (to which we refer) are not included on the balance sheet, and the associated lease
payments are fully deductible against U.S. taxable income.        Capital leases on the other hand, are
included on the balance sheet, and their associated lease payments are (as is true of debt) alloced for tax
purposes between domestic and foreign sources by §861-8. We use measures of investment that include
changes in capital leases but not in operating leases, and it is operating leases that are preferred by firms
unable to take full advantage of lease tax deductions. See, for example, Smith and Wakeman (1984) and
Edwards and Mayer (1991).

                                                                                                           21
                  If the null hypothesis is correct, then firms do little to change their financing or

 operating patterns; instead, they simply bear the additional burden created by the tax change. If this

 is the case, then changes in capital structure, leasing, investment, foreign operations, and firm-wide

 operations need bear no relation to firms' exposures to the interest allocation provisions of the 1986

 Act. However, one would expect to observe an increase in totalcosts (and a decline in after-tax

 profits) that reflects the additional tax burden.



                 A. A Nonparwnetric Look at the Sample

                 Table 2 describes some aspects of the behavior of the sample of firms after l986.

Firms are classified into two groups on the basis of fraction of foreign assets (above median and

below median); within group, they are further classified by excess foreign tax credit and deficit

foreign tax credit status. Roughly half of the firms in the sample (51.4%) are classified as having

excess foreign tax credits.

                 Firms that differ in the fraction of their assets held abroad may differ in other

important observable and unobservable ways. The model presented in section 2 implies that the 1986

Act raised the cost of debt-financed investments for firms with excess foreign tax credits and

significant foreign assets. The behavior described in Table 2 is consistent with the predictions of the

alternative hypotheses. Firms with excess foreign tax credits exhibit slower mean growth (from 1986-

1991) of outstanding debt relative to 1986 assets, and slower mean growth ofproperty, plant, and

equipment, than do deficit credit firms. This pattern appears for multinational firms with small

fractions of foreign assets (except for a negligible difference in debt changes for excess and deficit

foreign tax credit firms with small amounts of foreign assets), but is considerably more dramatic for


    2'Fables 2-3 describe the behavior of the sample of 388 firms that did not exhibit 100% or greater
change in assets in a year. The larger sample of 416 firms has moments that are very similar to those
reported in Tables 2-3.

                                                                                                         22
firms with high fractions of foreign assets.

                Figure 1 illustrates the mean growth of debt relative to 1986 asset levels for firms in

each cell reported in Table 2. The figure suggests that excess foreign tax credits affect only those

firms with significant foreign assets, which is consistent with the theory sketched in section 2.

Furthermore, there is a marked difference between the cumulative growth of debt in excess foreign

tax credit firms and that in deficit foreign tax credit firms. A similar pattern appears in finns'

accumulation of property, plant and equipment, as illustrated by Figure 2. This figure indicates that

the impact of excess foreign tax credits on the accumulation of property, plant, and equipment is most

dramatic for firms with significant foreign assets as a fraction of total assets.

                Alternative hypothesis (I) indicates that firms react to higher after-tax costs of debt by

replacing debt with alternative financing devices.
                                                Earlier work by Collins and Shackelford (1992)

calls attention to the impact of changes in interest allocation rules on firms' proclivities to issue

preferred stock. Only   a   small fraction of firms are financed with preferred stock, but they argue that

the use of preferred stock expanded after 1986 due, in part, to the rising after-tax cost of debt.

                Table 3 describes the responses of firms in our sample to the changing incentives to

issue preferred stock after 1986. The mean behavior of finns as reported in the table is not consistent

with the hypothesis that tax considerations were responsible for a significant shift of financing away

from debt and into preferred stock. The absence of an important effect in the means may reflect the

omission of important variables that explain preferred stock issuances, or may simply reflect the

smallness of the fraction of the sample that ever issues preferred stock. One tidbit of evidence

presented in Table 3 is consistent with the theory of tax-motivated preferred stock issuances: excess




        3°Collins and Shackelford (1992) include a number of additional explanatory variables in their
regressions. Many of these additional variables, such as net operating loss status, are likely to influence
preferred stock issuances, but most financial and operating variables are themselves endogenous to
financing choices and may respond to unobservables that also influence financing decisions.

                                                                                                         23
                                                                                                   that
foreign tax credit status is positively correlated with the fraction of high-foreign-asset firms
                                                                      correlated with the fraction of
increase their outstanding preferred stock after 1986, and negatively
                                                                                        The reverse
high-foreign-asset firms that decrease their outstanding preferred stock after 1986.
                                                                  size of the sample of firms
pattern appears for tow-foreign-asset finns. Given the very small
                                                                                       than suggestive.
changing their preferred stock amounts, however, these correlations are no more



                  B. CapioJ Structure and Changes in Borrowing Patterns

                  Tables 4a-b report regressions of changes in capital structure, measured as the change

in debt divided by beginning-of-period assets. The sample period
                                                                 used in the regressions reported in

Table 4a is the 1986-1991 period, whereas the sample period used in the regressions reported in

Table 4b is 1984-1986. All regressions are OLS.

                  The first specification in Table 4a regresses the change in debt from 1986 to 1991

 (scaled   by assets in 1986) on a constant and the foreign tax credit status dummy. The coefficient on

 the dummy term is negative as expected; however, it is not statistically significant. A more precise

 specification is that excess foreign tax credit firms should exhibit greater aversion to using debt the

 higher are their ratios of foreign to total assets. The second regression in Table 4a tests this

 specification, by including both the (squared) ratio of foreign to total assets and an interaction term

 between this ratio and the foreign tax credit status dummy. Here, the coefficient of .0.64 on the

 interaction term indicates that a firm with excess foreign tax credits and half of its assets abroad

 reduces its debt accumulation by 16% [-0.64(1/2)1 of assets over 5 years, or about 3% per year.

                   This coefficient on the interaction term becomes larger and more significant when (as

 in the regressions reported in column 3) tax loss carry forwards (TLCF) are included as an

 explanatory variable. The introduction of industry dummy variables, intended to capture differential

 pressure on debt accumulation across industries, also raises the magnitude of the estimated coefficient


                                                                                                           24
that reflects the impact of interest allocation rules. In the specification reported in column 5, one that
                                                                      the interaction term is -0.96.
includes both TLCF and industry dummies, the estimated coefficient on

This implies that the interest allocation rules encourage a firm with excess foreign tax credits and half

of its assets abroad to reduce debt accumulation at an annual rate of 4.8 (-0.96(1/2)/51 percent of

initial assets.

                  Table 4b reports estimated coefficients from regressions that repeat the same 5

                                                                        variable is now the change in
specifications as those reported in Table 4a, except that the dependent
                                                                            driven by unobserved,
debt prior to the tax-law change (1984-1986). lithe results in Table 4a are
                                                              with included tax variables, we would
time-invariant, and tirm-specific factors that are correlated

 expect to find the results reported in Table 4b to resemble those in Table 4a. Note, however, that

 this is not the case: the estimated coefficients on all of the explanatory variables (except TLCF)

                                                Table 4b offers little support for the hypothesis that
 change sign and become insignificant. Thus,

 firm-specific unobservables are responsible for the results reported in Table 4a.'1 A better

                                                4b is that excess foreign tax credit firms tend to
 interpretation of the results of Tables 4a and
                                                                                             firms with
 substitute away from debt finance. As expected, this appears to be particularly true for

 larger ratios of foreign-to-total assets.
                  Table 5a presents estimated coefficients from regressions that examine changes in

                                                                                                     side
 property, plant, and equipment (PPE) from 1986 to 1991, scaled by 1986 assets. Right-hand
 specifications are similar to those used in Table 4a. The first specification reported in Table Sa shows

  that investment rates differ by foreign tax credit status. While the coefficient on the foreign tax

  credit dummy variable is statistically negative, it is relatively small: excess foreigntax credit firms

  invest at rates that are about 1.5% [-0.074/51 lower per year. Note that, as before, the effect


      31We ran the specifications presented in Tables 4a-4b for two smaller data samples that filter out those
  firms with year-on-year changes in assets of 100 and 50 precent, finding results that are similar to those
  above. However, in some cases the statistical significance of the parameter estimates was reduced.
                                                                                                             25
becomes larger when interacted with the ratio of foreign-to-total assets. For example, the second

specification reports an interaction coefficient of -0.56, implying that an excess foreign
                                                                                           tax credit firm

                                            rate of 2.8% ((O.56*(l/2)2)/5] lower than a
with half its assets abroad invests at an annual

comparable deficit foreign tax credit firm.'3 When industry dummies and tax loss carryforwards are

added to the specification, the coefficient increases in magnitude, reaching -0.69 in the specification

reported in column 5. The same regressions, when run using data on PPE accumulation over the

1984-1986 time period, produce estimated interaction coefficients that are positive rather than

negative (though not significantly different from zero). Table 55 presents estimated coefficients from

these regressions.

                There are two possible interpretations of the tendency for firms with excess foreign

tax credits and high ratios   of tbreign to total assets to accumulate PPE more slowly than do other
firms. The first is that the loss of debt tax shields experienced by these firms results in a higher

overall cost of capital, and, consequently, a lower level of investment. Of course, to the extent that

firms substitute away from debt finance toward cheaper after-tax financing sources, these substitutions

can mitigate the increased cost of capital.   The second interpretation is that firms do not face any

increase in the cost of employing capital, but that they reduce PPE expenditures by leasing rather than

owning capita]. Leases allow the leasor to use the debt tax shield from debt financing of PPE, since

the capital cost component of lease prices is not allocated between foreign and domestic source.

Thus, leases may represent low-cost devices to preserve the tax shield for given amount of PPE. This

suggests that excess threign tax credit firms — particularly those with higher foreign asset ratios — had

incentives to expand more rapidly the use of leases than did deficit foreign tax credit firms.

                Table 6a reports our attempts to test this latter interpretation. We regress a measure

of unexpected increases in lease committments over the 1986-91 period on the same explanatory



    "As above, percentage figures are expressed relative to beginning-of-period assets.

                                                                                                          26
variables used in earlier regressions. The dependent variable is unexpected increases in leases

because that variable measures the differential effect of the 1986 tax act. It is unlikely that the

interest allocation rules enacted at the end of 1986 were understood in detail in prior to that year. In

any case, to the extent that such changes were anticiaptaed, the power of our tests is reduced. In

order to measure unexpected increases in lease committments, the numerator of the dependent

variable equals the difference between actual lease payments in each year from 1986 to 1990 and the

five year lease committments as of December 1985. This difference is scaled by 1986 assets. Table

6a reports the results from regressing this measure on right-hand side variables similar to those in

previous tables.

                   The first specification uses only the foreign tax credit dummy variable, finding there

to be a small difference between excess foreign tax credit and deficit foreign tax credit firms.

Similarly, both the foreign asset ratio and interaction term are statistically insignificant when added to

the regression (as reported in column 2). One possibility is that the colinearity between these two

terms, particularly the collinearity introduced by errors in measurement of the ratio of foreign assets

to total assets, is responsible for the insignificance of individual coefficients. Column 3 reports

estimated coefficients from specifications that omit the foreign-to-total-assets ratio term. Omitting this

ratio imposes the restriction that there is no relationship between foreign assets and leases among

deficit foreign tax credit firms. This restriction cannot be rejected by the data, since the estimated

coefficient on the ratio of foreign assets in the specification reported in column 2 is statistically

indistinguishable from zero.

                   The estimates presented in column 3 indicate that the interaction-term coefficient

increases in magnitude and becomes statistically significant once the asset ratio restriction is imposed.

The interaction coefficient reported in column 3 implies that, among excess foreign tax credit firms, a

50 percent difference in the fraction of total assets that are foreign-held is associated with an average



                                                                                                            27
difference in unexpected leases over five years of 25% [1.00(112)9 of assets, or about 5% per year.

                The estimated coefficient on the interaction term is also large and marginally

significant when the simple foreign tax credit status dummy variable is added (as in the specification

reported in column 4). These results therefore suggest that deficit foreign tax credit firms on average

do more leasing than excess foreign tax credit firms (the reverse of what one might expect); however,

excess foreign tax credit firms with larger ratios of assets held abroad show a stronger tendency to

lease. Overall, Table 6a provides some evidence that excess foreign tax credit firms with high ratios

of assets abroad tend to engage in additional, unexpected leasing subsequent to 1986. Table ôb

reports estimated coefficients from identical regressions that include industry dummy variables; the

results are similar, though of lower statistical significance.

                To the extent that firms increase their leasing to avoid higher debt costs for on-

balance-sheet assets, they are able to mitigate tax-induced changes in financing costs. The results

reported in Table 6a therefore provide some support for alternative hypothesis (1), although they by

no means rule out hypothesis (II). Indeed, the evidence presented in Tables 4a-6b suggests that

financing responses did occur, but not that operating responses did not occur. Thus, there appears to

be evidence against the null hypothesis, and some evidence in favor of hypothesis (I), but one cannot

rule out hypthesis (II).



                 C. Changes in Operating Patterns

                 One way to obtain additional evidence on hypotheses (1) and (11) is to investigate the

level of firms' foreign operations. For example, by examining changes in foreign sales, and foreign

 costs of production (with and without financing costs), one might gain a better sense for whether

 excess foreign tax credit firms changed their operations as a result of higher capital costs.

 Unfortunately, relatively little data on firms' foreign operations is available. In this section we use


                                                                                                           28
different measures of operations, although in some cases we are forced to employ data that combine

foreign and domestic operating information.

                The first variable that measures changes foreign operations is foreign-produced

foreign sales. This variable is the difference between sales by foreign affiliates and intrafirm exports

from the United States. This variable identifies firms that avoid higher capital costs by substituting

away from foreign assets toward domestic assets, as reflected by a proclivity to service foreign

markets by exporting rather than using local production.

                Tables 7a and 7b report estimated coefficients from regressions that use foreign-

produced foreign sales as the dependent variable. In the regressions reported in Table 7a, the

independent variables are similar to those presented in Tables 4a-6b, with the difference that

debt/assets is used as a regressor in Table 7a place of foreign assets/total assets. The reason for this

substitution is that the margin of substitution tested in these regressions is one in which greater

indebtedness raises the cost of each dollar of foreign assets, and not one in which the foreign asset

ratio is appropriately held constant. If the tax change induces operating effects, the reason must be

that firms find it costly to substitute away from debt financing. Thus, excess foreign tax credit firms

with high levels of debt in 1986 will not, in these instances, be able inexpensively to reconsitute their

capital strucutures, and thus are more likely to reduce their foreign-produced foreign sales.

                The first specification reported in Table 7a indicates that excess foreign tax credit

firms on average reduce foreign-produced foreign sales by about 5.7 percent ova five years relative

to deficit firms; this effect is not, however, statistically different from zero. Column 2 reports

estimated coefficients from a more precise specification in which the foreign tax credit dununy

variable is interacted with the ratio of debt to total assets. The estimated coefficient on this

interaction term is significant, and indicates that firms with excess foreign tax credits and 25% debt-

to-asset ratios reduced their foreign sales by 2% a year (relative to assets) after 1986. Columns 3-S


                                                                                                          29
of Table 7a report the results of alternative specifications in which the estimated interaction effect

remains negative while exhibiting reduced statistical significance.

                Table 7b presents similar regressions that include an addition variable conditioning on

the amount of debt in the capital structure as of 1986. The results are similar to those presented in

Table 7a. Together, the results reported in Tables 7a and 7b provide mild support for hypothesis II

above, i.e., that firms responded to the tax change by cutting back on their foreign operations instead

ol filly absorbing the increase in capital costs.

                One logical implication of the preceding analysis is that the interest allocation rules,

by raising the cost of domestic operations and raising the cost of foreign operations, depress the level

of total business operations by impacted firms. Since the magnitude of total business operations is

influenced by runny important nontax factors, and, as a practical matter, can be measured in more

than one way, this is a challenging hypothesis to test.

                Table Sa presents estimated coefficients from regressions in which the dependent

variables are changes in costs of goods sold between 1986 and 1991 (scaled by assets in 1986). The

cost of goods sold variable includes foreign and domestic costs. In order to simplify matters, the

independent variables are the same as those used in the regressions reported in Table 4a. Table 8a

indicates that the tax effects take the expected negative sign - firms affected by the interest allocation

rules reduced the scales of their operations - but the estimated coefficients are insignificant in every

case. The statistical insiginificance of the coefficients no doubt reflects, at least in part, the

impossibility of controlling for many important factors that influence changes in costs of goods sold

over this period. The evidence is certainly consistent with a sizable impact of interest allocation rules

on scales of operation (the point estimate in the regression reported in column 3 of Table 8a implies

that costs of goods sold were reduced by 2%Iyear, relative to assets, for affected firms with 25%

 foreign assets), but it is not possible to reject the hypothesis that there was no impact on operations.


                                                                                                            30
                Table Sb presents the results of specifications that repeat this estimation, taking as the

dependent variable changes in costs of goods sold over 1984-1986. Again, the tax terms are

insignificant, though they are of opposite sign to those reported in Table Ba. Takentogether, the

regressions reported in Tables 8a and Sb provide suggestive but inconclusive (from a statistical

standpoint) evidence that interest allocation rules may influence the overall magnitude of firm

operations.




V. Condusion

                This paper examines the impact of interest allocation rules introduced by the Tax

Reform Act of 1986. The incomplete tax deductibility of parent-company interest expenses appears to

reduce significantly borrowing and investing by excess foreign tax credit firms. In addition, excess

foreign tax credit firms affected by the interest allocation rules are the most likely to undertake new

operating leases, presumably in lieu of acquiring new capital. These results are consistent with the

hypothesis that firms substitute away from debt when it becomes more expensive, as well as the

hypothesis that loss of interest tax deductibility can increase a firm's cost of capital.

                 Note, however, that the size and significance of the effects on borrowing, investment

spending and leasing do not imply that interest allocation rules necessarily impose large costs on

excess foreign tax credit firms. All of the results just mentioned might appear even though non-debt

financing substitutes are available at essentially the same cost as debt finance. If, for example,

leasing can be done at the same after-tax cost as buying, then the tax law change may just encourage

low-cost substitution.

                 Of' course, many of the results are also consistent with the proposition that excess

fo reign tax credit firms face relatively greater costs of capital. Finns may choose to fund property.

plant, and equipment off the balance sheet as a way of capturing pan of the otherwise-lost tax shields.


                                                                                                          31
The portion that cannot be captured is a real cost. This may lead excess foreign tax credit firms to

underinvest, to grow more slowly, and to restrict the scope of foreign operations; this behavior, in

turn, reduces their needs for debt financing. Some of the results reported in the paper suggest that

firms affected by the change in interest allocation rules reduced their foreign and total operations in

response. The tax law change may also skew investments by affected finns away from businesses in

which the tax deductions are crucial to be competitive. In this way, the loss of U.S. multinational tax

shields could represent substantial firm-specific costs.




                                                                                                          32
VI. References

Alishuler, Rosanne, and Jack Mintz (1994), "U.S. Interest Allocation Rules: Effects and Policy,"
NBER Working Paper No. 4712, April.

Collins, Julie H., and Douglas A. Shackelford (1992), "Foreign Tax Credit Limitations and Preferred
Stock Issuances,' Journal of Accounting Research, 30, 103-123.

Edwards, J.S.S. and C.P. Mayer (1991), 'Leasing, Taxes, and the Cost of Capital," Journalof
Public Economics, 44, 173-197.

Froot, Kenneth A. and James R. Hines Jr. (1994), "Losing Interest: Interest Allocation Rules and the
Cost of Debt Finance,' mimeograph, Harvard University.

Gordon, Roger H. and Burton G. Malkiel (1981). 'Corporation Finance," in Henry J. Aaron and
Joseph A. Pechman, c*Js. How Taxes Affect Economic Behavior (Washington, D.C.: Brookings).

Hariman, David G. (1985), "Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," Journal of Public
Economics, 26, 107-121.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1991), "The Flight Paths of Migratory Corporations," Journal of Accounting,
Auditing, and Finance, 6, 447479.

Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1990), 'Coming Home to America: Dividend
Repatriations by U.S. Multinationals," in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod eds. Taxation in the Global
Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice (1994), 'Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
Business,' Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, 149-182.

Lyon, Andrew B. and Gerald Silverstein (1993), "The Alternative Minimum Tax and the Behavior of
Multinational Corporations,' mimeograph, University of Maryland.

Miller, Merton H. (1977), "Debt and Taxes," Journal ofFinance, 32, 261-275.

Scholes, Myron S. and Mark A. Wolfson (1992). Taxes and Business Strategy: A Planning Approach
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall).

Smith, Clifford W., Jr., and L. MacDonald Wakeman (1985), "Determinants of Corporate Leasing
Policy', Journal of Finance, 40, 895-908.

Stiglitz, Joseph E., (1973), 'Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of Capital,' Journal
of Public Economics, 2, 1-34.




                                                                                                     33
                                                     flgurel
             Debt AccumulatIon 1986-1991 (as a Fraction of 1986 Assets), by Tax Status

aDebt/1986 Assets


    0.2
                    Foreign Assets/Total Assets                        Foreign Assetsflotal Assets
                           below Median                                     above Median




   F_II1_____            Excess
                          FTCs
                                      Deficit
                                      FTCs
                                                                             Excess
                                                                              FrCs
                                                                                         Deficit
                                                                                         PTCs




      Note: Bars measure the ratios of 5-year changes (1986-1991) in book values of debt to 1986 book
      assets. Entries dq,ict the mean ratio for firms In each cell. 193 firms had below-median ratios of
      foreign assets to total assets In 1986, of which 91 were classified as having excess foreign tax credits
      and 96 were classified as having deficit foreign tax credits. 193 firms had above-median ratios of
      foreign assets to total assets, of which 92 were classified as having excess foreign tax credits, and 101
      as having deficit foreign tax credits.
                                                     Figure 2

              WE Accumutatlon 1986-1991 (as a Fraction of 1986 Assets), by Tax Status

APPEII9B6 Assets


    0.2




   0.15




    0.1




   0.05




     0
                         Excess      Deficit                                Excess      Deficit
                         Fits        FTCs                                    FTCs       FTCs

                   Foreign Assets/Total Assets                        Foreign Assets/Total Assets
                        below Median                                       above Median



     Note: Bars measure the ratios of 5-year changes (1986-1991) in book values of property, plant, and
     equipment to 1986 book assets. Entries depict the mean ratio for firms in each ccli. 193 farms had
     below-median ratios of foreign assets to total assets in 1986, of which 91 were classified as having
     excess foreign tax credits and 96 were classified as having deficit foreign tax credits. 193 firms had
     above-median ratios of foreign assets to total assets, of which 92 were classified as having excess
     foreign tax credits, and lOt as having deficit foreign tax credits.
                                                 Table I

                              Variable Means and Standard Deviations


Variable                                Mean                Standard Deviation



  Debt 1986-1991/Assets 1986           0.2089                   0.4566                    416

  Debt 1984-1986/Assets 1986           0.1341                   0.5254                    386

X PPE 1986-1991/Assets 1986            0.2003                   0.3903                    414

  PPE 1984-1986/Assets 1986            0.0874                   0.2024                    385

New Leases, 1986-1991/Assets 1986      0.43 15                  0.8298                    286

. Foreign Sales/Assets 1986            0.3114                   0.7089                    409

  Cost 1986-1991/Assets 1986           0.5051                   0.9709                    416

  Cost 1984-1986/Assets 1986           0. 1750                  0.8093                    385

FTC dummy                              0.4808                   0.5002                    416

IA*/(A+A*)12                            0.0836                   0.1104                   416

FTC dummy [At/(A+A*)Jz                 0.0400                   0.0930                    416

Tax Loss Carry/Assets                   0S487                    0.2432                    387


Debt/Assets, 1986                       0.2373                   0.1887                   416

FTC dummy (Debt/Assets]                 0.1132                   0.1705                   416



Note: Debt represents the book value of total (domestic plus foreign) debt. Assets 1986 represents
the book value of total assets at yearend 1986. PPE is the book value of property, plant and
equipment. New Leases represents the difference between actual lease expenditures and long-term
commitments at the start of the period.     Foreign Sales represents foreign-produced foreign sales
over the 1986-1991 period: the difference between total foreign sales and exports from the United
States.    Cost is the change in total (domestic plus foreign) cost of goods sold. The FTC dummy
variable takes the value one if a firm has excess foreign tax credits, and zero otherwise. The term
[A/(A+A)] is the ratio of a firm's foreign assets to its total assets in 1986. The variable Tax Loss
Carry/Assets is the ratio of tax loss carryforwards to total assets at yearend 1986. Debt/Assets is the
ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of total assets at yearend 1986.
                                               Table 2

   Debt and PPE Accumulation, 1986-1991, by Foreign Asset Concentration and ETC Status


                      Foreign Assets/Total Assets                      Foreign Assets/Total Assets
                            below Median                                      above Median


                  Excess FTC             Deficit FTC               Excess FTC              Deficit FTC




#oitirms                  97                      96                      92                     10!




(Change in Debt)/Assets:

Mean                  0.13678                 0.13426                  0.10556                 0.15447
Median                0.11705                 0.05519                  0.06016                 0.14446
Std. Dcv.             0.28151                 0.22383                  0.12348                 0.24886



(Change in PPE)/Assets:

Mean                  0.13847                 0.15538                  0,13395                 0.18940
Median                0.11121                 0.07145                  0.13104                 0,14902
SW. Dcv.              0.24350                 0.29645                  0.22000                 0.29366




Note: Firms are classified into cells based on foreign asset/total asset ratios in 1986, and by foreign
tax credit (FTC) status as calculated over the 1986-1991 time period. (Change in Debt)/Assets
represents the difference between total debt in 1991 and total debt in 1986, divided by total assets in
 1986. (Change in PPE)/Assets represents the difference between net property, plant, and equipment
in 1991 and net property, plant, and equipment in 1986, divided by total assets in 1986.
                                              Table 3
                                                                             FTC Status
   Changes in Preferred Stock, 1986-1991, by Foreign Asset Concentration and

                      Foreign AssetslTotal Assets
                            below Median                                      above Median



                  Excess FTC             Deficit FTC              Excess FTC             Deficit FTC



                                              96                      92                     101
#offirrns            97



(Change in Preierred Stock)/Assets:

Mean                  0.00221                 0.00584                 0.00080                 0.00275
                      0                       0                       0                       0
Median
SW. Dcv.              0.01839                 0.06027                 0.03005                 0.04661



                                             10                      17                      10
I Increases           9


                                             14                      12                      17
I Decreases          [Ci




Note: Firms are classified into cells based on foreign assetitocal asset ratios in 1986, and by foreign
tax credit (FTC) status as calculated over the 1986-1991 time period. (Change in Preferred
Stock)/Assets represents the difference between preferred stock outstanding in 1991 and preferred
stock outstanding in 1986. divided by total assets in 1986. I Increases indicates the number of firms
in each cell for whom the difference between preferred stock outstanding in 1991 and preferred stock
outstanding in 1986 is positive; I Decreases indicates the number of firms for wflich thedifference is
negative.
                                                    Table 4a

                                         Debt Accumulation, 1986-1991


                         Dependent Variable: Change in Debt, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant                  0.2256          0.1907        0.1893
                         (0.0311)        (0.0281)      (0.0293)
FTC dummy                -0.0348
                         (0.0448)

[At/(A+A)J2                               0.5243        0.8858      0.5469            0.9237
                                         (0.2737)      (0.3309)    (0.2765)          (0.3354)

FTC dummy-                               -0.6410       -0.9253     -0.6724           -0.9698
IAf(A+AW                                 (0.3247)      (0.3628)    (0.3288)          (0.3669)

Tax Loss Carry!                                        -0.2588                       -0.2791
Assets                                                 (0.1005)                      (0.1012)


Industry                     No              No           No             Yes           Yes
dummies



adj. R                   -0,001          0.006          0.021       0.010            0.027

No. Ohs.                   416             416          387             416           376




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in the book value of a firm's debt between
1986-1991 to its total assets in 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if a firm's average
foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-1991 period; the
dummy is zero otherwise. The term (A/(A+A)] is the ratio of a firm's foreign assets to its total
assets in 1986. The term [Tax Loss Carry/Assetsj is the ratio of tax loss carryforward at yearend
1986 to firm assets at   yearend 1986.
                                              Table 4b

                                  Debt Accumulation, 1984-1986


                   Dependent Variable: Change in Debt, 1984-1986/Assets 1986




Constant             0.1285         0.1819         0.1900
                    (0.0371)       (0.0340)       (0.0362)

FTC dummy            0.0115
                    (0.0536)

(A*/(A+A*)12                       -0.7118        -0.6585        -0.7250         -0.6844
                                   (0.3228)       (0.4048)       (0.3297)        (0.4150)

FTC dummy-                          0.2911         0.2636         0.2793          0.2627
(A/(A ÷ At)]2                      (0.3997)       (0.4540)       (0.4059)        (0.4609)

Tax Loss Carryl                                   -0.1215                        -0.1178
Assets                                            (0.1192)                       (0.1215)



Industry                 No            No            No              Yes            Yes
dummies


adj. K2              -0.002         0.009          0.008          -0.004         -0.006

No.Obs.                386           386            362            386             362




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in the book value of a firm's debt between
1984-1986w its total assets in 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if a firm's average
foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-1991 period; the
dummy is zero otherwise. The term (A/(A+At)] is the ratio of a firm's Ibreign assets to its total
assets in 1986. The term [Tax Loss CarryfAssetsi is the ratio of tax loss carryforward at yearend
1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                               Table Sa

                                    PPE Accumulation, 1986-1991


          Dependent Variable: Change in Property, Plant, and Equipment, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant                0.2358       0.1844          0.1848
                       (0.0266)     (0.0241)        (0.0251)

FTC dummy              -0.0739
                       (0.03 83)

                                     0.4592          0.6469         0.4032         0.5888
                                    (0.2344)        (0.2837)       (0.2366)       (0.2869)

FTC dummy-                          -0.5613        -0.6892          O.5545         O.6855
                                    (0.2781)       (0.3112)        (0.2814)       (0.3138)

Tax Loss Carry/                                    -0.2057                        -412181
Assets                                             (0.0861)                       (0.0824)


Industry                   No           No            No              Yes            Yes
dummies


adj. R2                0.007         0.007          0.016           0.013          0.027

No. Obs.                 414          414            386            414             386




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in the book value of a firm's property, plant,
and equipment between 1986-1991 to its total assets in 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if
a firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-
1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term [A*/(A+A*)] is the ratio of a firm's foreign
assets to its total assets in 1986. The term [Tax Loss Carry/Assets) is the ratio of tax loss
carryforward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                 Table Sb

                                     PPE Accumulation, 1984-1986


                                                                                              1986
            Dependent Variable: Change in Property, Plant, and Equipment, 19841986/Assets




Constant                  0.0825       0.0928         0.0967
                         (0.0143)     (0.0132)       (0.0138)

FTC dummy                 0.0104
                         (0.0207)

                                      -0.1512        -0.0765        -0.1418        -0.0765
                                      (0.1250)       (0.1536)       (0.1236)       (0.1524)

FTC dummy'                             0.1888         0.1568         0.1183         0.0973
                                      (0.1547)       (0.1721)       (0.1520)       (0.169!)

Tax Loss Carry!                                      -0.128!                       -0.1343
Assets                                               (0.0452)                      (0.0446)


Industry                                  NC)           No             Yes            Yes
duies

adj.   R2                -0.002        0.000          0.021          0.051          0.070

No. Ohs.                    385          385          361            385             361




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in the book value of a firm's property, plant
and equipment between 1984-1986 to its total assets in 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if
a firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-
1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term 1A/(A+A)I is the ratio of a firm's foreign
assets to its total assets in 1986. The term ITax Loss Carry/Assetsi is the ratio of tax loss
carrytbrward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                Table 6a
                                        New Leas, 1986-1991


                       Dependent Variable: New Leases, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant               0.4694         0.3871         0.3608          0.4710            0.3842
                      (0.0690)       (0.0530)       (0.0611)        (0.0891)          (0.0561)

FTC dummy             -0.0768                                       -0.2071
                      (0.0982)                                      (0.1221)

                                                     0.5597         -0.0205
                                                    (0.6473)        (0.7303)

FTC dummy•                           0.9994          0.5309          1.4469          1.0152
                                    (0.4681)        (0.7162)        (0.8952)        (0.4793)

Tax Loss Carry/                                                                     0.1789
Assets                                                                              (0.1946)


Industry                  No             No            No              No             No
dummies



adj. R?               -0.001         0.012           0.011          0.018           0.013

No. Ohs.                286            286           286             286             268




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is a ratio. The numerator of the ratio is the difference between a firm's
leases of property, plant and equipment over 1986-1991 and its preexisting lease coinmittments at
yearend 1986. The denominator of the ratio is the firm's total assets at yearend 1986. The FTC
dummy takes the value one if a firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory
corporate tax rate over the 1987-1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term (At/(A+At)1
is the ratio of a firm's foreign assets to its total assets in 1986. The term [Tax Loss Carry/Assetsj is
the ratio of tax loss carryfbrward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                Table 6b

                                        New Leases, 1986-1991


                       Dependent Variable: New Leases, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant


FTC dummy             -0.0910                                       -0.2048
                      (0.0845)                                      (0.1049)

                                                      0.0972        -0.4883
                                                     (0.5589)       (0.6318)

FT dummy-                             0.5654         0.4845          1.3867          0.6105
[A /(A + As))                        (0.4157)        (0.6247)       (0.7744)         (0.4306)

Tax Loss Carryl                                                                       0.1114
Assets                                                                               (0.1683)


Industry                  Yes            Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes
dummies



adj. R                0.28!          0.283           0.281           0.288           0.268

No. Ohs.                286            286            286             286             268



Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is a ratio. The numerator of the ratio is the difference between a firm's
leases of property, plant and equipment over 1986-1991 and its preexisting lease committments at
yearend 1986. The denominator of the ratio is the firm's total assets at yearend 1986. The FTC
dummy takes the value one if a firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory
corporate tax rate over the 1987-1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term [A5/(A+A)]
is the ratio of a firm's foreign assets to its total assets in 1986. The term [Tax Loss Carry/Assets) is
the ratio of tax loss carryforward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                Table 7*

                               Foreign-Produced Foreign Sal, 1986-1991


              Dependent Variable: Foreign-Produced Foreign Sales, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant               0.3389         0.3579        0.4169
                      (0.0486)       (0.0419)      (0.0562)

FTC dummy             -0.0572
                      (0.0702)

Debt/Assets                                        -0.3319                       -0.2864
                                                   (0.2110)                      (0.2095)

FTC dummy'                           -0.4151       -0.2442        -0.3043        -0.1583
[Debt/Assets]                        (0.2069)      (0.2334)       (0.1927)       (0,2201)
Tax Loss Carry/                                                   -0.0979        -0.0766
Assets                                                            (0.1340)       (0.1347)


Industry                 No              No           No            Yes            Yes
dummies


adj. R2               -0.001         0.007          0.011          0.003          0.013

No. Ok.                 409            409           409           381             381




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from 01_S regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change, from 1986-1991, in a firm's foreign-produced
foreign sales [the difference between total foreign sales and exports from the United States] to total
assets at yearend 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if a firm's average foreign tax rate
exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-1991 period; the dummy is zero
otherwise. Debt/Assets is the ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of total assets at
yearend 1986. The term (Tax Loss Carry/Assets is the ratio of tax loss carryforward at earend
 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                Table 7b

                               Foreign-Produced Foreign Sales, 1986-1991


              Dependent Variable: Foreign-Produced Foreign Sales, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant               0.2033         0.2623
                      (0.0697)       (0.0789)

DebtiAssets                          -0.3302                                     -0.2321
                                     (0.2093)                                    (0.2085)

FTC dummy-            -0.4045        -0.2344        -0.3747       -0.2936        -0.1760
[DebtlAssetsl         (0.2053)       (0.2315)       (0.2076)      (0.1908)       (0.2182)

Tax Loss Carry!                                                   -0.1890        -0.1685
Assets                                                            (0.1362)       (0.1374)

Foreign Assets!        0.623 I        0.6220        0.5911         0.6502         0.6273
Total Assets          (0.2254)       (0.2249)       (0.2272)      (0.2215)       (0.2224)


Industry                  No              No          Yes            Yes           Yes
dummies



adj. R                 0.023          0.027          0.033         0.023          0.0 13

No. Obs.                 409           409           409            381            381




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change, from 1986-1991, in a firm's foreign-produced
foreign sales [the difference between total foreign sales and exports from the United Statesj to total
assets at yearend 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if a firm's average foreign tax rate
exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-199 I period; the dummy is zero
otherwise. DebtlAssets is the ratio of the book value of debt to the book value of total assets at
yearend 1986. The term ITax Loss CarrylAssetsj is the ratio of tax loss carryfbrward at yearend
1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986. Foreign Assets/Total Assets is the ratio of book values of
foreign assets and total assets in 1986.
                                                Table 8a

                               Change in Scale ot Operations, 1986-1991


             Dependent Variable: Change in Cost of Goods Sold, 1986-1991/Assets 1986




Constant               0.5660         0.4561         0.4485
                      (0.0660)       (0.0599)       (0.0632)

FTC dummy             -0.1267
                      (0.0952)

[A/(A+A*)J2                           1.0492         1.7204          0.9010          1.5615
                                     (0.5829)       (0.7 145)       (0.5840)        (0.7186)

FTC dummy-                           -0.9659        -1.4156         -0.9265         -I .3650
[A/(A+A)]2                           (0.6914)       (0.7835)        (0.6945)        (0.7861)

Tax Loss Carry/                                     -0.4890                         -0.4981
Assets                                              (0.2170)                        (0.2167)


Industry                  No             No            No               Yes           Yes
dummies


adj. R                 0.002          0.003          0.014           0.024           0.035

No. Obs.                416            416            387             416            387




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in a firm's total (domestic plus foreign) cost of
goods sold between 1986-1991 to its total assets in 1986. The FFC dummy takes the value one if a
firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-
1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term [A*/(A+A*)] is the ratio of a firm's foreign
assets to its total assets in 1986. The term fl'ax Loss Carry/Assets] is the ratio of tax loss
carryforward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
                                                Table 8b

                               Change   in Scale or Operations, 1984-1986


             Dependent Variable: Change in Cost of Goods Sold, 1984-1986/Assets 1986




Constant              0.2058         0.4561          0.4485
                     (0.057 1)      (0.0599)        (0.0632)

FTC dummy            -0.0645
                     (0.0826)

[A/(A+A)i                           -0.5799         -0.3883         -0.6469         -0.4708
                                    (0.5001)        (0.6263)        (0.5059)        (0.6348)

FTC dummy-                           0.2256          0.1216          0.2388          0.1419
(A*/(A+A*))l                        (0.6189)        (0.7020)        (0.6224)        (0.7044)

Tax Loss Carry/                                     -0.3072                         -0.3199
Assets                                              (0.1844)                        (0.1856)


                          No              No           No              Yes             Yes
Industry
dummies



a*Jj. R2              0.002         -0.001           0.004           0.005           0.013

No. Obs.                385             385           361             385             361




Note: Standard errors are in parentheses. The columns report coefficients from OLS regressions in
which the dependent variable is the ratio of the change in a firm's total (domestic plus foreign) cost of
goods sold between 1984-1986 to its total assets in 1986. The FTC dummy takes the value one if a
firm's average foreign tax rate exceeds the average US statutory corporate tax rate over the 1987-
1991 period; the dummy is zero otherwise. The term 1A/(A + A)1 is the ratio of a firm's foreign
assets to its total assets in 1986. The term ITax Loss Carry/Assets] is the ratio of tax loss
carryforward at yearend 1986 to firm assets at yearend 1986.
