                           NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              TECHNOLOGY AND TRADE




                                    Gene M. Grossman
                                    Elhanan Helprnan




                                  Working Paper No. 4926




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      November 1994


A version of this paper will appear as a chapter in The Handbook of International Economics,
vol. 3. edited by C. Grossman and K. Rogoff. We thank Jim Anderson, Pranab Bardhan, Jon
Eaton, and Jim Markusen for their comments and suggestions, and the National Science
Foundation and the U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation for financial support. Grossman
also thanks the John S. Guggenheim Memorial Foundation, the Sumitomo Bank Fund, the Daiwa
Bank Fund, and the Center of International Studies at Princeton University. This paper is part
of NBER's research program in International Trade and Investment Any opinions expressedare
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Gene M. Grossman and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragSphs, may be quoted without explicit permissionprovided that full
credit, including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                NBER Working Paper #4926
                                                                          November 1994


                              TECHNOLOGY AND TRADE


                                        ABSTRACT


       We survey research on the relationship between technology and trade. We begin with the

old literature, which treated the state of technology as exogenous and asked how changes in

technology affect the trade pattern and welfare. Recent research has attempted to endogenize

technological progress which results either from learning-by-doing or from investments in

research and development. This allows one to examine not only how technology affects wade.

but also how wade affects the evolution of technology. We emphasize the parallelsbetween the

models with learning-by-doing and those with explicit R&D and highlight the role that the

geographic extent of knowledge spillovers plays in mediating the relationship between trade and

technological progress.




Gene M. Grossman                                          Elhanan Helpman
Woodrow Wilson School                                     Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Princeton University                                      Tel Aviv University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                       Tel Aviv, ISRAEL 69978
and NBER                                                  and NBER
                                                                           cross-
   Ever since David Ricardo published his Principals of Political Economy,
country differences in technology have featured prominently in economists' expla-
nations of the international pattern of specialization and trade.1 Yet, until quite
recently, the formal trade-theoryliterature has focused almost exclusively on the ef-
                                   without delving much into their causes.
fects of technological disparities
    This focus—which undoubtedly has produced many useful insights—is nonethe-
                                      informal commentators see the integration of the
less somewhat surprising. After all,
world economy as having an important influence on the pace and direction of tech-
                                                                             discussions
 nological change. Indeed, allusions to "globalization" pervade popular
                                         where trade is seen variously as a "highway
 of recent technological developments,
 of learning" and a "handmaiden of growth". Global integration presumably affects
 both the private incentives for and the social benefits from investments in technology.
                                            the size of the market and so the potential
 On the positive side, integration expands
                                                                                     or
 profit opportunities available to a firm that succeeds in inventing a new product
                                                                 good, a country that
 process. Also, because knowledge is the quintessential public
                                                                            that takes
 integrates itself into the world economy often can benefit from learning
 place outside its borders. On   the negative side, firms sometimes cite international
                                                                           technology
 competition as one of the major risks associated with investments in high
                                                      involvement in the development
 and as an ekment in the case for greater government
 of new technologies.
                                                                                             national
     The prolonged absence of a formal literature on the determinants of
 productivity levels and on the relationship between trade and technological progress
                                                              no explicit reasons for the difference in
      'in his famous wine-and-cloth example, Ricardo gave
                                                                                              exclusively
  comparative costs between Portugal and England. Many believe that Ricardo thought
                                           and national character, rather than in terms of cross-countrY
  in terms of differences in soil1 climate
                                                                                             capabilities
  differences in knowledge. But Ricardo clearly was aware that differences in production
                                                He even discussed a case where the discovery of a new
  could account for comparative advantage.
                                                                                        of specialization
  production process for wine making in England might flip the international pattern
                                                   Other classical writers, including John Stuart Mill,
   and trade (Ricardo, (1951-55, pp.137-138]).                                      in addition to other
   Torrens, MaIthus, and Cairns, regularly pointed to technological disparity
                                                            BloomiIeld (1978) examines the views of the
   factors as a potential source of comparative advantage.
   nineteenth-century British authors on the role of technology in trade.

                                                     I
 cannot be ascribed to lack of interest. Rather, trade theorists lacked the tools needed
 to deal with these issues. Since most of the costs of developing a new technology
 occur before production begins and do not vary with the intended scale of output,
 innovation normally gives rise to dynamic scale economies. And since firms typically
 cover the costs of their up-front investments by exploiting market power generated
 by their inventions, innovation gives rise to imperfect competition. Not until scale
 economies and imperfect competition had been incorporated into static trade theory
 (a development that is reviewed in Chapter 1 of this volume) could dynamic theories
 of the relationship between trade and technology evolve.
    The modelling efforts that we survey in this chapter have been motivated by a
 number of important concerns. Some of these concerns remain the same as in earlier
 work on trade and growth [which was reviewed by Ronald Findlay (1984) in the first
 volume of the Handbook of International Economicsj. For example, many authors
continue to be interested in the link between the nature of differences in countries'
technological capabilities and the pattern of world trade. Recent research has asked,
How will an across-the-board technological gap between rich and poor countries be
reflected in global trade structure?. And how will the invention of new goods in the
industrialized "North" affect the number and type of goods that are produced by the
less developed "South." Also, attention still focuses on the age-old question of how
technological developments in one country or region affect living standards abroad.
Should a country be happy to see technologicalprogress in its trade partners, or should
it disparage the consequent "loss of competitiveness"? Is trade typically beneficial to
all parties in a world of unequal (and changing) technological capabilities or might
some be losers in the long run?
   However, many of the questions posed in the recent literature—while long of inter-
est to trade economists and often made the subject of their informal writings—could
not be addressed in a formal and rigorous way using the static models of old. At the
most general level, there is the question: How does trade affect a country's (and the
world's) growth rate? Will every country grow faster if it chooses to be open to inter-
national trade? Or does the answer depend on the nature of its natural endowments,


                                          2
 its initial conditions, or something else? One wonders also whether, over time, trade
 will tend to shrink the enormous disparities that exist between countries' produc-
 tivity and income levels, or whether the differences should be expected to persist or
 even grow. In other words, are there mechanisms unleashed by international
                                                                              intgra-
 tion that serve to close the technological gaps between nations? Or are technological
 processes better seen as cumulative, so that trade might reinforce the initial gaps?
    These positive questions suggest some normative ones, which have also been ad-
 dressed in the research we describe. What is the relationship between the national
 growth rate and welfare in an open economy? What policies are likely to promote pro-
 ductivity growth and national welfare? Should a country's trade stance depend on its
 stage of technological development, with lagging countries perhaps needing some form
 of protection until the technological gap between themselves and their trade partners
 has been narrowed or closed? Can temporary policies have long-lasting, beneficial
effects? And how do the trade and technology policies in one country impact upon
its trade partners?
    As always, the answers to such questions depend upon the particular assump-
tions that are made about the economic environment. The literature has explored
a wide variety of assumptions, in models that are not always readily comparable.
One clear distinction concerns the driving force behind technological progress. Many
recent (and older) writings investigate technical gains that stem from learning-by-
doing; that is, the mere repetition of certain productive activities, which may allow
firms and industries to find new and better ways of doing things. Another body of
research focuses more on research and development; that is, on investments in activ-
ities undertaken with the primary or sole objective of discovering new technologies.
Besides this fundamental distinction there are other, more subtle ones. Technological
improvements may be targeted at intermediate goods or at final goods. Newly dis-
covered products may be better than older varieties or merely different from them.
Investments in knowledge may generate widespread benefits or benefits that are fully
appropriable by the investor. If spillovers do occur, they may take place across firms
in an industry, across industries in a country, or across nationalborders. And so on.

                                          3
One of our goals in this chapter is tk provide a unified and synthetic treatment of the
various models, so that their common elements can be appreciated and their essential
distinguishing features understood. In this way, the different answers they give to
the above-mentioned questions can be linked to differences in primitive assumptions.
Hopefully, this will pave the way for empirical work aimed at identifying the more
realistic of the alternative assumptions.
   We have divided the chapter into four sections. The first one reviews the literature
that takes technology as exogenous and examines the implications of productivity dii
ferences for trade patterns and the effects of technical change on outputs and welfare.
This sets the stage for Sections 2 and 3, both of which treat dynamic models in
which the evolution of technology is endogenous. In Section 2, technological progress
is viewed as an accidental by-product of production activities, while in Section 3 it
results from deliberate investment. The various sub-sections explore the implications
of alternative assumptions about the form of industrial innovation and the nature
of technological spillovers. The last section contains a melange of topics not covered
elsewhere, including a discussion of the effects of trade and industrial policies, of trade
based on imitation in a setting of imperfectly-protected intellectual property rights,
and of direct foreign investment and international licensing as vehicles for technology
transfer.



1 Exogenous Technology
In what follows we will largely be concerned with how the international trading en-
vironment affects the pace and direction of technological change. In our view, the
trade pattern should properly be regarded as a dynamic phenomenon, responding
continuously to the ebbs and flows of accumulating knowledge. Moreover, foreign
market opportunities and international competition have an important influence on
the course of technologkal progress. Yet even if one adopts this perspective on world
trade, it is necessary to understand fully how technology differences shape the pat-
tern of global specialization before proceeding to the full dynamic process. This is


                                             4
because, in the short run, history dictates a relatively fixed distribution of knowledge,
and the resource allocations effected by this momentary distribution weigh heavily in
the determination of subsequent technological developments.
    We begin this section with a review of the familiar Ricardian model, including
extensions that allow for a continuum of goods. We then show how, by adding
structure to the model, it can shed light on some commonly observed trade dynamics.
After a brief mention of several elaborations that allow for more than one factor of
production, we conclude the section with a discussion of the effects of exogenous
technological progress on national welfare levels.


1.1     The Ricardian Model
The Ricardian model provides the simplest framework in which one can examine how
national differences in technological capabilities give rise to specialization and trade.
We review this venerable model in order to introduce notation and to recall some
results for later use.
   In the simplest Ricardian setting, there are two countries, two goods, and a single
factor of production. With only one productive factor, the composition of countries'
endowments are bound to be identical. This leaves tastes and technology as the
only dimensions along which countries may differ. (We ignore government policies
and institutional disparities for the time being.) Technologies are characterized by
constant returns to scale, and so can be fully described by a single number. In the
home country, a units of labor are needed to produce one unit of good i, i = x,y.
Unit labor coefficients for the foreign country are similar, but are distinguished by
an asterisk. Then the model predicts—as is very well known—that comparative
advantage alone determines the pattern of trade. That is, in a competitive equilibrium
with freely transportable goods but immobile labor, the home country exports good
x if and only if ar/ay   <i4/a;.   This can be seen in Figure 1, which also shows the
different types of equilibria that are possible.
   Assume for concreteness that as/a,, <a/a;. Then both countries will specialize in
the production of good y (and therefore world output of good z is nil) if p/p C ag/av,

                                            5
 where p. denotes the price of good i. This is because the cost of producing good
 i at home is wa1, where w is the home wage rate, and production of                       a good is
 profitable if and only if its unit cost does not exceed the price. Thus, if p1/p3, C
 production of good x is not profitable at home and, a fortiori, not profitable abroad.
 By similar reasoning both countries will specialize in the production of good x if
Pr/Pt, > a/ç, in which case the world supply of this goods equals L/a, + L/a;,
where L and L are the home and foreign labor supplies, respectively. If a/a >
Pr/Pt, > a5/a,, the home country produces only good x (with output equal to L/a5)
and the foreign country produces none of it. Finally, if the relative price happens
to equal the relative input requirements in one of the countries, then production of
both goods will be (marginally) pofitable in that country, and the supply of good
z there will be infinitely price elastic within the range of outputs that can feasibly
be produced. Taking all of this into account, the figure shows SS, the world supply
curve for good x.
   World demand for good r can take any of the three positions labelled D1 D1,
       or D3D3. In the first and last of these, the share of world income spent on one
or the other of the two goods is relatively high. Then one of the countries remains
incompletely specialized in the free-trade equilibrium, while the other is active only in
the sector in which it is relatively more productive. The free-trade relative price equals
the relative input requirement of the country that remains incompletely specialized.
Clearly, this country exports the good in which it enjoys a comparative advantage,
because that good is consumed by its trade partner but not produced there.
   The other type of equilibrium arises when a moderate share of world income is
spent on both goods, so that world demand is as depicted by D2D2. Then both
countries specialize in their production. The pattern of trade is immediate in this
case.
    The model can readily be extended to include more goods.2 It is simplest, in fact,
   2lt is also straightforward to expand the number of countries. With only two goods, all of the
countries with the greatest comparative technological advantage in sector z (i.e., those with the
smallest values of a,/a) produce and export this good, wbile the remaining countries produce and
export goody (see Becker [1952]). If all countries have different relative input requirements, then at


                                                  6
to allow for a continuum of goods, as in Dornbusch, Fischer, and Samuelson (1977).
Let the goods be indexed by z E [0, 1] and let a(z) and a(z) be the unit labor
requirements for producing good z in the home and foreign countries, respectively.
Order the goods so that M(z) a(z)/a(z) is increasing in z, as shown in Figure
2, This means that for any two goods z' and 9, if z' c 9 the home country has
the greater relative technological advantage in producing z'. Then, for any pair of
wage rates in the two countries, the unit cost of producing good z at home is less
than the cost of producing that same good abroad if and only if wa(z) c wa(z), or
M(z) c w/w. Once we have determined the equilibrium relative wage, we will also
know which goods are produced by each country; the home country produces all and
only those goods for which A'I(z)       w/w.
    To determine the relative wage we must specify the demand conditions. The
simplest case is one in which all consumers have identical Cobb-Douglas preferences,
spending the constant share b(z) of their income on good z? If the home country
produces all of the goods with an index less than z, the share of world income devoted
to its (aggregate) output is 8(z)        i
                                      b(s)ds. This must match the value of its output,
which, in a competitive equilibrium, equals its total wage bill. Thus B(z)(wL +
wL) = wL, or
                                       'if     L1—B(z)                                           I
                                        wL 8(z)
We plot the right-hand side of (1) in Figure 2, and and the equilibrium wage at the
intersection with the M(z) curve. The equilibrium features a "chain" of comparative
advantage, with the home country producing all of those goods for which its relative
technological advantage is the greatest.
   This simple continuum model gives sharp predictions about the static pattern of
trade. It has been used extensively to study a number of important issues, including
                                                                                     identity of the
 most one of them can be incompletely specialized in the free-trade equilibrium. The
 marginal country producing each good is determined by demand conditions. The model with more
 than two countries and goods is somewhit more complicated; see Jones (1961).
    3Wilson (1980) treats the case with non-homothetic and non-identical demands.



                                                 7
 the gains from trade, the effects of technological progress, the interaction between
 monetary disturbances and international specialization, and the effects of environ-
 mental regulations on trade. We will illustrate some of these applications in sections
 1.2 and 1.5.


 1.2     Technology Gaps
 In the general Ricardian model, the pattern of relative technological capabilities is
entirely arbitrary. As a consequence, the model has nothing to say about the type of
goods in which a country with certain characteristics might be expected to export.
To fully address this issue, it is necessary to endogenize the accumulation of technical
know how, as we intend to do in the sections that follow. But even within the
present paradigm it is possible to put more structure on the nature of technological
differences across countries, in order to make the model consistent with observed
patterns of trade.
   For example, it is commonly noted that the more advanced countries typically
produce and export the more technologically sophisticated goods. Krugman (1986)
describes a model of "technology gaps" that has this feature. Suppose there is a
"best-practice" labor requirement for producing good z, a(z), that evolves according
to a(z) = e_9(t)t. Goods are ordered so that g(z) is an increasing function of z. Then
we can interpret z as a measure of the technological intensity of a good, because goods
with higher indexes experience more rapid technological progress. Now suppose that
both home and foreign producers lag behind the technological frontier, but by differing
amounts. Let y and y• be the respective technological lags. This means, for example,
that a home firm can produce a unit of good z at time t with a(z) = e_9(t_1) units
of labor. According to this formulation, the foreign country, which we take to be more
"advanced" (i.e., 'y c7), has an absolute advantage in producing all goods. But its
comparative advantage lies in the more sophisticated goods, because the technological
gap matters relatively least for the goods that experience the slowest technological
progress. So the more technologically advanced country indeed produces and exports
the more knowledge-intensive goods.

                                          8
 1.3 Product Cycles
 It has also been observed by Vernon (1966) and others that the North produces and
 exports the majority of newly invented goods. The South, meanwhile, specializes in
 goods that have been around for longer. This trade pattern emerges in Krugma&s
 (1979) model of the "product life cycle", which emphasizes the slow diffusion of
 technologies from North to South.
     Let consumers have the utility function is = [f000c(z)adzJva, 0< a c 1, that is
defined over all existing and potential goods. Here c(z) is consumption of good z. At
time t there are n1 goods available and every pair of these has a constant
                                                                           elasticity of
substitution a 11(1 — a). Now suppose that all innovation takes place in the North.
At every moment Northern producers somehow acquire the additional knowledge
needed to produce a certain number of new goods. Firms in the South, meanwhile,
learn the methods of producing these goods only after a (random) adoption lag. This
sequence of innovation in the North and diffusion to the South gives rise to a particular
pattern of trade when the South has a cost advantage due to lower wages: the North
enjoys comparative advantage in relatively new goods (those technologies that the
South has not yet learned to produce), while the South has comparative advantage
in older products whose technologies it has already mastered.
    The static equilibrium can be described as follows. Let nq denote the number
of goods that can only be produced in the North (at a moment in time) and let rig
denote the number of goods that can be produced in both the North and the South.

With perfect competition, the price of a good produced in country j is aw,,j = 5, N,
where w, is the country's wage rate. Using the assumed CES utility function, we can
derive the relative demands for typical goods produced in the North and the South,
eN/cs = (wN/ws). Then, if the North manufactures all of the goods and only those
goods that solely its producers know how to produce, labor-market clearing in each
country entails njc =   L,j = S,N.    We can solve for the equilibrium relative wage
that is implied by this hypothesis, namely wpj/wg = (nN/ns)'/'(LN/Ls)"°. For a
range of values of flN/ns and LN/LS, the implied relative wage exceeds one, which
is all that we need to support the pattern of specialization that we have assumed.

                                           9
Krugman (1979) notes that the long-run relative wage of the North varies positively
with its rate of new product development, but negatively with the rate of technological
diffusion to the South. Yet, as Helpman (1993) points out, the North must benefit in
welfare terms from an increase in the rate of technology transfer, at least if the initial
diffusion rate is small.


1.4 Many Factors of Production
When there is more than a single factor of production and countries differ in their
relative factor endowments, general propositions about the relationship between tech-
nology and the pattern of trade are harder to come by. As Jones (1965, 1970) has
shown, technological differences must be gauged not only in terms of the sectorial ad-
vantages of one country vis-a-vis its trade partners, but also in terms of the factor bias
of the technological superiority. For example, a country that has a capital-saving tech-
nological superiority in the labor-intensive production sector may find itself importing
the labor-intensive good, even if it is relatively well endowed with labor compared to
its trade partner.
   Markusen and Svensson (1985)have examined the implications of (small) Hicks-
neutral technological differences between two countries that have similar factor en-
dowments and tastes. Let the technology for producing good z at home be F1(V,),
where V1 is the vector of inputs used in producing good z and F1(-) is homogeneous of
degree one. Suppose that the foreign technology differs slightly (i.e., by an arbitrary
vector of infinitesimal deviations), and is given by A1F1(V). Thea it can be shown
that 2 Ap1m, > 0, where Pa is the price of good z and m is the home country's
imports of this good. In other words, each country exports on average the goods in
which it enjoys the relatively largest productivity advantages.
  Small, Hicks-neutral technological differences also feature prominently in a recent
paper by Davis (1994). Suppose there are two factors of production and two industries
with differing factor intensities. The first industry produces a single good while the
second produces a pair of goods that are imperfect substitutes. Then if the home
country holds a small technological advantage in producing one of the two outputs

                                           10
of the second industry, it must produce all of the world's output of this good in any
trade equilibrium with factor price equalization. It is likely that the other country
will produce much or all of the other product of the second industry, especially if
the two goods enter demand relatively symmetrically and the countries are of nearly
equal size. In this case, small technological differences give rise to intra-industry trade
in a world of perfect competition and constant returns to scale.


1.5 Technical Progress and National Welfare
Models of trade with exogenous technological differences can be used to study the
effects of technical progress in one country on national welfare there and abroad.
This line of inquiry dates back at least to Hicks (1953), who introduced the useful
distinction between "export-biased" and "import-biased" technological change.
    The basic ideas can be illustrated most readily in the simplest Ricardian model
with two goods. Suppose first that the home country is incompletely specialized, while
the foreign country specializes in producing good x. Import-biased technicalprogress
reduces the labor requirement in the home country's import-competing sector. Take
the foreign wage rate as numeraire (i.e., w = 1). Then the price of good x must
remain fixed at Pr = a;. Since Pr = was, the home wage rate rises in proportion
to the fall in the input requirement; i.e., tb = —ax, where a circumflex indicates a
proportional change. So the price of good y, which equals its unit cost of production
war, rises in response to the import-biased technological progress. In short, the home
country's terms of trade improve. It follows that the home country must benefit from
this form of technological progress, while its trade partner must be harmed by the
change.
   Now consider export-biased technical progress. For this purpose, it is best to
focus on an initial equilibrium with specialization in both countries. It is neces-
sary to take a particular form for consumer utility in order to evaluate the welfare
changes. We assume for this purpose that U = (c + c)h/0 ; i.e., consumers perceive
a constant elasticity of substitution u 11(1 — a) between the two goods. With
these preferences, the share of individual (and world) income devoted to good z is

                                           11
  = pe/(pc +p). For concreteness, suppose that the foreign country produces
good x, and again take its wage as numeraire. Then p = a; is unaffected by the
productivity gain in the home country. Since the share b of world spending goes to
good x, equilibrium requires (wL + L)b = pL/a. We can use these equations to
calculate the equilibrium change in the home country's wage rate and, from that, the
change in p,.'
   Stability of world markets requires the price of good y to fall in response to an
exogenous increase in its supply. Thus, the home country suffers a deterioration of
its terms of trade in response to its export-biased technological progress. This move-
ment in the terms of trade offsets the direct gain from the productivity increase. The
question that arises is: Can a country that sees its production methods improve ac-
tually be harmed by the technological advancement? In our example the change in
real income is given by U = th —    — bJ,. It is straightforward to show that "im-
miserizing growth" can indeed occur in a stable equilibrium, and does so if and only
if a C b. Intuitively, the home country's terms of trade deteriorate most when the
two goods are poor substitutes, while the home residents benefit least as consumers
from the fall in the relative price of good y when good x comprises the bulk of their
consumption basket.5
   The effects of technological divergence and convergence across countries can be
captured in Krugman's (1986) model of technology gaps. Suppose that the adoption
lag shrinks in the country that already has the shorter lag, thereby widening this
country's technological lead. Such technical change is export biased, because the
fall in production costs is proportionally greatest in the most knowledge-intensive
   4From the equilibrium requirement we calculate b,+ (1—          = 0, where we have used the fact
that the share of spending devoted to good yequals the share of the home country in world income
in view of the complete specialization byboth countries. Also, from the definition of b, and the fact
that py = wa,, we find that & = (1—         — 1)(ti + âp). These two equations enable us to sove for
the proportional rate of change of the wage rate and the price of good y in response to an exogenous
change in a.
                                                                                            arise in
   5Bhagwati (1958a,b) coined the term irnmiserizing growth and explained how it could
the face of adverse movements in the terms of trade. The equations derived in the previous footnote
can   be used to derive the condition for immiserizing growth given in the text.

                                                  12
sectors, where the country already holds its comparative advantage. Using a diagram
like Figure 2, we can see that the relative wage of the advanced country must rise
while the range of goods that it produces expands. But then the relative wage increase
must be proportionally smaller than the productivity gain in the original marginal
sector, and a fortiori in the other sectors with even greater knowledge intensities.
As a result, the lagging country sees its terms of trade improve (the prices of all
goods originally produced by the leading country fall relative to the prices of all
goods originally produced by the lagging country) and its welfare rise. The advanced
country also must gain in this case, because its real wage rises in terms of the products
it originally produced (since productivity has improved), in terms of the products that
it ultimately imports (since the relative wage gap widens), and in terms of the goods
that it   begins to produce (since these goods would have become cheaper in terms of
the advanced country's labor had the other country continued to produce them, and
the shift in production to the new low-cost location reduces their price even more).
   Now consider technological "catch-up" by the less advanced country. Such learning
is import biased; i.e., it reduces costs the most for the goods that the lagging country
initially imports, including those that are at the margin of competitiveness between
the two countries. The range of goods produced in the lagging country expands while
its relative wage rises. The lagging country's welfare must improve, because its real
wage rises in terms of all goods. But the advanced country. may suffer from the
narrowing of its technological lead. The goods that it formerly produced but now
imports are cheaper relative to its own wage rate (or else the location of production
would not have changed), but the goods that it imports before and after the gap
closes are more expensive due to the adverse movement in its terms of trade.
   Finally, Findlay and Grubert (1959) have studied the terms-of-trade effects of
technological progress in a world of two goods and two factors of production. Hicks-
neutral technological progress in a country's import-competing sector must improve
its terms of trade, while the same form of technological progress in the export sector
has just the opposite effect. This is because, at constant prices, Hicks-neutral advance-
ment always expands relative output in the sector that experiences the productivity


                                           13
gain, and so the price of this good must fall to restore a stable, global equilibrium.
In contrast, capital-using technological progress in a capital-intensive export indus-
try may improve the terms of trade, while labor-using progress in a labor-intensive
import-competing industry may cause the terms of trade to deteriorate. In these two
cases, the factor bias in the technological change works against the direct effect of the
productivity gain by making relatively more scarce the factor used intensively in the
advancing sector's production. If the induced change in relative factor prices is large
enough, the relative output of the advancing sector may fall at constant prices even
though its technology has improved. Then the relative price will move in favor of the
advancing sector.


   It is apparent from our review that models with exogenous differences in tech-
nological capabilities have much to offer trade theory. These models provide clear
insights into important policy issues at relatively low cost in terms of technical com-
plexity. Still, they are rather limited in what they can teach us, because they fail
to identify the primitive sources of national competitiveness. We turn now to the
recent developments in the theory that allow us to address issues having to do with
the endogenous creation of comparative advantage


2 Learning by Doing
While technological progress sometimes happens serendipitously, more often it is a
consequence of economic activity. Two modes of learning seem most prevalent in
commercial enterprises. Some learning occurs as a by-product of activities undertaken
for other purposes. In particular, firms often discover better ways of doing things in
the course of producing output or installing capital. .Other learning is the result of
more deliberate efforts to create knowledge. This section focuses on the relationship
between international trade and incidental learning, while the next treats purposive
investments in the acquisition of knowledge.
   Where a leaning curve applies to a single plant or firm, the distinction between


                                           14
learning-by-doing and more formal R&D activities may not be so important. In both
cases the firm recognizes a cost of creating knowledge, which it weighs against the
potential benefits of a new or improved technique or product. But where the benefits
that derive from experience spill across firms—as when knowledgeable workers move
between rival producers or when the expertise accumulated by a company can be
gleaned by inspecting its products—the evolution of technology may reflect decisions
taken with quite different objectives in mind. In this section we focus on learning
that occurs not only "by doing", but also "by accident".
    Once we recognize that firms may gain knowledge from the experience of others, a
question that arises is: What is the set of others from which a given firm learns? There
are at least two dimensions to this question. First, does a firm in a given industry
acquire technical information from the activities of local firms in other industries?
Second, does it gain such information from the activities of firms in its own industry
operating in other countries? These are empirical matters that obviously may vary
with the particular context one has in mind.6
    It is useful to begin with a unified perspective from which the various special
cases can be analyzed and compared. To this end, suppose again that all outputs are
produced by labor alone and that production everywhere exhibits constant returns
to scale. But now suppose that the labor necessary to produce a unit of good i in
some country depends not only on the intrinsic productivity of the country's labor
in producing that good, but also on the accumu/ated knowledge available there for
manufacturing the product. In particular, let the production function take the form

                                         Z=                                                   (2)

where L denotes the labor used in producing good i, 1/a1 measures intrinsic produc-
tivity, and A1(-) is the relevant index of technical know how. In the models that we
   6As an example, Irwin and Klenow (1993) have investigated the existence and geographic scope
of knowledge spillovers from learning by doing in the semi-conductor industry. They find that firms
indeed learn from the experience of others, and that Learning spills over as much across borders as
it does between firms located in the same country.



                                                15
will consider in this section, knowledge accumulates in the course of manufacturing
output. The most general specification would make A a function of the experience
in each country at producing every one of the different goods. Rather than treat this
general case, we will highlight various special cases in which spUlovers are limited in
some way, for example to firms operating in a given industry or cluster of industries,
or to firms operating in a given country. This will allow us to isolate the specific
implications of each new assumption.


2.1      Complete International Spillovers
To begin with, suppose that technical information flows readily across international
borders. In the most extreme case, the experience of home producers contributes as
much to the knowledge base abroad as it does to that at home. We take learning
to be external to any individual firm but specific to its industry and proportional to
cumulative industry output. Then, with two countries, A = A? = £1(Q + Qfl, where
Q1(t)     f Z1(s)ds is cumulative output of good i at home and Q?() f. Z(s)ds
is cumulative output of the good abroad.
    In this case, the relative labor requirement for producing a unit of good i at home
versus abroad equals al/az at every moment in time. Evidently, learning neither
strengthens nor weakens the forces of intrinsic comparative advantage. Intuitively,
when producers in both countries share access to the same body of technical informa-
tion, the accumulation of knowledge does not affect their relative abilities to produce
any good. The trade pattern must be determined by other considerations.
   This conclusion applies to a broader set of circumstances. For example, if coun-
tries have similar intrinsic abilities but different endowments of several factors of pro-
duction, then Heckscher-Ohlin-like considerations dictate the pattern of trade. Our
dynamic result mirrors Ethier's (l982a) finding that trade patterns are determined by
traditional, comparative cost considerations when there are static increasing returns
to scale emanating from international external economies.
    Although technological progress has no bearing on comparative advantage when
spillovers are global in their scope, trade may affect national rates of productivity and

                                            16
output growth in the short and long run. To illustrate this, we develop an example
where, for certain parameter values and initial conditions, trade causes growth to
slow in one or both trading economies. To this end, consider once again a world
economy with two goods, r and y, in which consumers have the CES preferences
u = (c + c ) I/a   Recall that   a=   1/(1 — a) is the elasticity of substitution and suppose
that a > 1. In autarky, each country eventually specializes in producing one good
or the other (at least, asymptotically), where the sector of eventual concentration
depends on intrinsic abilities and initial conditions. Take, for instance, the home
country. Its relative autarky outputs, x/y, must satisfy relative demands, (p/pj°1
at the prevailing relative prices, pjp,, = Sa/a. Here S AJAX denotes the ratio of
the stocks of knowledge capital in the two industries. Using the production functions
for x and y analogous to (2), we can solve for the momentary employment level in
each industry. Then we can calculate output levels in each sector and so the additions
to experience and to the stocks of knowledge. We find that

                                         L
                                                                                         (3)
                                      1+S1—e a, a
The dynamics represented by equation (3) are globally unstable when a > I. So
S tends to infinity or zero as the initial ratio of knowledge stocks exceeds or falls
short of [(ö/a1)/(S/a)]"(". If S approaches zero, the fraction of the labor force
employed in sector y does likewise, while if S approaches infinity, the fraction of the
labor force employed in sector y approaches one. The long-run autarky growth rate
of output is LcIx/ar in the former case and LE/a in the latter.
   Now suppose that the two countries trade. For concreteness, assume that the home
country has comparative advantage in producing good z. This means, as we have seen,
that its relative intrinsic productivity in this sector exceeds that in the foreign country.
Also, let the initial equilibrium ijivolve complete specialization in both countries.
Then as long as both countries remain completely specialized, A = 6L/a1 and
   = 6L/a;. So . = 6L/a — 5L/a, which may be positive or negative. If it is
positive, then eventually the home country will find it profitable to begin producing
good y, whereupon relative productivity in that sector will accelerate further.. On

                                               17
  the other hand, if S is negative, then eventually the foreign country will find it
  profitable to produce good z, and the relative productivity of sector y will decline
  more rapidly. In the long run, both countries specialize in producing whichever good
  initially experiences the more rapid productivity growth.
      Notice that trade may lead one or both countries to specialize in a good different
 from the one in which it specialized in autarky. Suppose this is true of the home coun-
 try, which specialized, say, in producing good x in autarky but ultimately switches
 to producing good y after the opening of trade. Then, if 61L/a > £(L/a +
 trade effects an eventual slowing of this country's growth rate.1 If the foreign court-
 try also happens to specialize in producing good x in autarky and if c5L/a; >
 5(L/a + £/a;), then this country too will experience a slowdown in growth as a
 result of trade. Here, comparative advantage determines the initial pattern of spe-
 cialization when trade begins, but then ab3olute productivity and the size of each
 country determine how rapidly experience accumulates in each sector. If the coun-
 try that has comparative advantage in the sector with the lesser long-run growth
 prospects happens to be larger or more intrinsically productive, trade can tilt the
equilibrium growth path in the "wrong" direction [see Yanagawa (1993)J.
   On the other hand, if the coujitries ultimately specialize in producing the same
good with trade as they did in autarky, or if the two sectors do not differ greatly
in their growth potential (e.g., if 61[L/a + L/a;] = 6[L/a., + L/a;]), then trade
must boost the long-run growth rate in each country. This is because the long-
run trade equilibrium has both countries concentrating their production in the same
industry, and knowledge accumulates more rapidly when theexperiences of two sets of
producers contribute to learning instead of just one. Even so, one of the countries may
suffer a deceleration of its growth in the short or medium run. Suppose, for example,
that both countries produce good z in autarky and that both also will produce this
good (which, say, has greater growth potential) in the long-run trade equilibrium.
The foreign country may nonetheless experience a period where it specializes in the
   7ff both countries specialize in producing good i, world output or this good amounts to A(L/a
                                                                                                   +
L/a). Then 61(L/a1 + V/a;) gives the proportional rate o(productivity and output growth.


                                               18
 production of good y, as a result of its comparative advantage in producing that good.
In the event, the opening of trade may have an adverse impact on its growth rate
during the initial phase of the trading era.


2.2      National Spillovers
Most of the literature, beginning with Bardhan (1970), assumes that companies learn
more from the experiences of other domestic producers than they do from firms lo-
cated abroad. To understand the implications of having learning spillovers that are
limited in their geographic reach, we consider the extreme case of national learning;
that is, we posit industry-specific knowledge stocks that accumulate in proportion
to local industry activity alone. With the same notation as before, A, = 6Q and
   = 8iQz.
    Krugman (1987) studies a world economy with two countri and a continuum of
industries. He takes preferences to be Cobb-Douglas, so that the initial equilibrium
is determined as in Figure 2. Then, if industries are arranged in order of decreasing
relative productivity advantage for the home country at time 0, the home country
initially produces all goods with indexes below some critical number. Over time,
learning by doing makes the home producers even more productive in each of the
goods initially manufactured at home, while foreign producers gain no experience in
these sectors. Therefore, the relative productivity advantage of the home country in
each of these industries grows over time. Similarly, foreign firms gain experience and
knowledge in producing the range of goods initially manufactured abroad, while home
firms learn nothing in these industries. This widens the foreign relative productivity
advantage of its export sectors. In short, the analog to the M(z) schedule in Figure
2 becomes steeper over time, and the initial pattern of trade gets "locked in." Since
the initial pattern of specialization depends not only on intrinsic ability but also
on the initial stocks of industry knowledge in each country, history matters for the
determination of the long-run trade pattern.
    Lucas (1988) treats a similar model, but with two goods, CES preferences, and
a continuum of small countries. Suppose all countries have the same labor force L

                                          19
   and the same intrinsic abilities 1/ar and 1/au, but they differ in
                                                                                 their initial stocks
   of knowledge capital. Then those with the  highest ratios Ar/A, at time 0 initially
   produce good x and the remaining countries
                                                  initially produce good y. Will any
   country have an incentive to switch as time passes? To answer this question, we
   note that productivity grows at the rate &L/a in each country that produces
                                                                                good
   x. World output of this good expands at this same rate, assuming that no country
   changes its sector of specialization. Similarly,
                                                 productivity grows at the rate 8L/a,
  in the typical country producing good y, and aggregate output of this good
                                                                                grows
  at the same rate under our working hypothesis. Let's assume for concreteness that
  61/as > 59/a,, so that the relative output of good x is increasing over time and its
  relative price is falling. Then, if any country will switch its industry of specialization,
  it must be the marginal country that produces good r. But competitive producers
  will switch from producing good
                                         r to producing good y in this country only if the
  rate of price decline exceeds the rate at which productivity expands in sector x (since
 productivity in sector y is stagnant so long as none of this good is being produced).
 The relative price of good z falls at the rate L(6/a —
                                                          51,/a,)/c.8 With a > 1, this
 never exceeds the rate of productivity
                                        growth. So, again, the initial pattern of trade
 gets locked into place.
     ft can readily be shown that the countries that specialize in producing
                                                                             good x in
 the trade equilibrium experience faster real income growth than those that
                                                                                         specialize
 in producing good y.9 This raises the possibility that some countries might wish to
 use trade or industrial policies to alter their patterns of specialization. Indeed a small
country that specializes in the slower-growing sector in the absence of any policy
intervention but that is close to the margin of competitiveness in the faster-growing
sector would gain from any policy that induced its producers to switch over to the
other good. The short-run income loss for such a country would be small, while the
   5The CES preferences give rise to a constant elasticity of demand, so relative
                                                                                  price movements
are related to relative quantity changes according to 2, —     =     —
                                                           2, e(fl, a,). The expression in the
text follows from the fact that
                                aggregate output of good j grows at rate 2, = L61 /a,, for j = r, y.
   9Matsuyama (1992) makes a similar point in a model with specific (actors in each
                                                                                      sector, where
countries remain incompletely specialized.


                                                20
 policy would generate a permanent boost to its productivity growth. Moreover, the
 government intervention would only be needed for a short time, until the country had
 collected enough experience in its new area of specialization to overcome its initial
 comparative disadvantage in this sector. Policy here can correct the inefficiency that
 results from producers' failure to account for the externalities associated with their
 production decisions.'°
     Krugman (1987) makes a slightly different point about policy in his analysis of
 two large countries trading a continuum of goods. Each country then has an incentive
 to subsidize production of a few goods near the margin of competitiveness, so that it
can gain experience and take over production of these goods. By doing so, it expands
the range of products it manufactures, increases demand for its labor, and betters its
terms of trade. Again, the requisite subsidy need be in place for only a short time,
as producers soon will accumulate the knowledge to make up for any deficiency in
intrinsic ability or initial experience. The incentive to slice off new sectors a few at
a time continues for a while (Krugman refers to this as the "narrow moving band"),
but eventually the wage differential between the countries becomes sufficiently large
that the social cost of capturing the next industry exceeds the benefit.


2.3 Inter-industry Spillovers
Firms sometimes enjoy learning spillovers from the experiences àf other firms produc-
ing entirely different goods. Moreover, the activities undertaken in certain industries
may be especially conducive to generating ideas with widespread potential for improv-
ing productivity, while those performed in others may be more mundane and thus
contribute little to the accumulation of knowledge. Boldrin and Sheinkman (1988)
and Grossman and Helpman (1990b) have examined the implications of intersectoral
learning-by-doing, where various industries do not contribute equally to the creation
of knowledge.
  '°Bazdhan (1970) studied the time pattern of the optimal subsidy to production in a small country
that benefits from learning by doing in only one sector and that initially produces both goods,
because it has two inputs and the sectors have different factor intensities.



                                                21
      Let us again examine an extreme case, this time assuming that learning takes
 place only in the course of producing good x. Let the knowledge so generated bolster
 productivity equally in each of two sectors. In particular, take A1 =            for i =
 ,r, y. Suppose, moreover, that each industry uses a non-accumulable specific input,
 in addition to labor, so that there are strictly decreasing returns to labor in any one
 activity at every moment in time. This will allow a long-run equilibrium with active
 production in both sectors. We denote the production functions for goods r and y
 by ArFr(Lr) and AF(L), respectively. The functions F(•) and F() may differ
 across countries, if the countries happen to have different stocks of the sector-specific
 factors.
      Consider again a world economy with a continuum of small countries. At every
 moment in time, competition drives each country to produce where the ratio of the
 marginal products of labor in the two industries, F/F, equals the world relative
 price of good x. Then knowledge accumulates at the rate FZ(L4, and output and
 productivity grow in each sector at this rate. Since only experience in sector x gen-
erates technological progress, growth proceeds faster the greater are the resources
devoted to this activity in the trade equilibrium. Evidently, countries with a natural
comparative advantage in producing good x will grow faster than those with endow-
merits suitable for producing good y. Moreover, if a country happens to accumulate
more of the factor specific to industry y or if it somehow experiences an exogenous
productivity improvement in this sector, its growth will slow and its aggregate wel-
fare may fall [see Grossman and Helpman (1990b) and Matsuyama (1992) for further
discussion].


2.4      Industry Clusters
Posner (1961) was the first to note that "clusters" of industries might migrate together
to particular nations. This dynamic process would occur, he argued, if learning-by-
doing generated knowledge spillovers within but not between the clusters and if these
spillovers were limited in their geographic reach. We will illustrate here how clustering
might happen, without providing a general analysis.

                                           22
     Suppose that there are two distinct industry clusters, each comprising two goods.
 Let consumers worldwide devote constant and equal shares of their spending to each
 of the total of four goods. In the home country, one unit of labor can produce A11 units
 of good i in cluster j at a given moment in time. The corresponding (time-varying)
 productivity parameters for the foreign country are denoted by A. We assume that
 the home country initially has an absolute advantage in producing the first good in
 each cluster (A,, > A;1 for j = 1,2) and that the foreign country has an absolute
 advantage in producing the second good in each cluster (A;, > A2 for j = 1,2).
 But we also suppose that A,, > A, and A2 > A13; i.e., the home country's initial
 productivity advantage in the first good of cluster 1 exceeds the foreign country's
 productivity advantage in the second good of that same cluster, whereas the opposite
 is true for cluster 2. Finally, we assume that productivity improves with national
experience in producing any good in a cluster; i.e., dA12/dt = 1 and dA,;/dt = Xt,
where X, = E1X11 and      = >L X, are aggregate home output and aggregate foreign
output in cluster j, respectively.
   Let the two countries have the same labor force L. Then the initial equilibrium
has the home country producing the first good in each cluster and the foreign country
producing the second good in each cluster, in accordance with the dictates of (initial)
comparative advantage. In this equilibrium, the wage rates in the two countries
are equal." Home output in cluster 1 amounts to X, = X,, = A,,L/2, which
exceeds foreign output in that cluster, Xf = X, = A,L/2. So home productivity
in manufacturing the two goods of cluster 1 initially grows faster than does foreign
productivity. Similarly, foreign productivity grows faster in cluster 2, as the foreign
country produces a greater quantity of output there. It is this differential in national
productivity growth rates that gives rise to the possibility of industry clustering.
   In our example, eventually either A2, catches up with A1, or else A;2 catches up
with A12. That is, either the rapid home productivity growth in cluster 1 eliminates
  "when the home country produces all of world output of exactly two goods, the share of world
spending devoted to its product is one half. World spending on home goods thus amounts to
(wL+ wV)/2, where wand w are the home and foreign wage rates, respectively. This must equal
the value of home output, wL, which imlies w = w in view of the fact that L = L.


                                             23
 the foreign country's initial productivity advantage in producing the second good
 in this cluster, or else the rapid foreign productivity growth in cluster 2 eliminates
 its initial disadvantage in producing the first good of that cluster. Suppose, for
 concreteness, that the former event happens first. Then, at the moment that the two
productivity parameters become equalized (A21 = A;1), the home country commences
production of the second good in cluster 1 and the home wage begins to rise above
the foreign wage.'2 There ensues a period during which W/W = A21/A;1 and both
countries produce the second good of cluster 1. During this period, the home country's
market share iii this good increases over time. During this period, also, the foreign
country sees a (continued) narrowing of its relative cost disadvantage in producing the
first good of cluster 2. This narrowing occurs now for two reasons. First, the foreign
country continues to produce more output in cluster 2, so its productivity grows faster
than that in the home country. Second, the rising relative wage of the home country
enhances foreign relative competitiveness in all industries, given the productivity
levels. Eventually, there comes a time when w/w = A12/A3, whereupon firms in
the foreign country find it profitable to begin production of the first good of cluster 2.'
Thereafter, the wage gap between the countries narrows while the foreign country's
share of world production of good X12 grows, until in the long run the wage rates are
again equalized and each country specializes in producing both of the goods in one
of the two industry clusters.
    The explanation for the clustering of goods here is apparent. If a country initially
produces a large quantity of any one good in a cluster, then the learning spillovers
from this activity will tend to confer a dynamic comparative advantage in other
industries in the same cluster, even if productivity in those other industries initially
  1211 the   home wage did not rise above the foreign wage, the home country would immediately
have a cost advantage in producing three of the goods. But with three quarters of world spending
devoted to its goods and the
                           value of spending on home goods equal to the value of output, we could
not have w = w.              -


  '3Before   this happens, there may or may not occur a period during which the home country
produces all of world output of the second good in cluster 1 and the relative wage between countries
remains constant for a time.



                                                24
is low. In our example, the large initial outputs resulted from an assumed pattern of
absolute productivity differentials. But a similar dynamic would arise if, for example,
demands for the various goods were asymmetric. Then, a country that has an initial
comparative advantage in producing the most popular good or goods in a cluster
would tend1 over time, to gain competitive advantage in producing the remaining1
less-popular goods.


2.5         Bounded Learning
In all of the settings we have examined thus far, indefinite productivity growth has
been possible due to unbounded opportunities for learning by doing. Yet, as Young
(1991) points out, the empirical evidence points to strongly diminishing returns to this
type of learning1 at least where any particular manufacturing process is concerned.
Diminishing returns set in, presumably, because fresh insights are more difficult to
come by once a given activity has been repeated a large number of times.'4 But Young
(1991) and Stokey (1991) have shown that productivity growth may be sustained in
the long run, despite the boundedness of opportunities for learning in every sector,
provided that there are sufficient spillovers of knowledge from each activity to some
others with more long-run potential for contributing to well-being.
   In order to illustrate their point, we introduce two new forms for consumers'
 preferences. These are


                                                      X>1, t>l/2,                              (4)

 and

                                                               A>l,                             (5)
                             uc.o[xtIog(1+ci)jt
 where oj is consumption of a numeraire good           0 and cj is consumption of good i. If
                                                                                               doing
  '4Bardhan (1970, p.112-3) also recognized the posaibility that opportunities for learning by
 might be bounded. He examined the implications of this for the time path of the optimal production
 subsidy.


                                                 25
  consumers have the first of these two utility functions, they view all
                                                                     products except
  the numeraire good as perfect substitutes, but see products with higher indexes as
  contributing greater utility per unit of consumption. If they have the second set
  of preferences, they again see products with higher indexes as more desirable, but
  view the non-numeraire goods asimperfect substitutes while showing a taste for
  diversity in consumption. In either case, technological progress may take the form of
  improvements in the techniques for producing a given set of goods or the replacement
  of some goods by others of higher "quality".
      We now suppose that the opportunities for learning by doing are bounded for any
 product but that spillovers take place from one industry to another. In particular,
 the act of producing any "generation" of product contributes information that helps
 firms to better produce that generation and the next. More formally, we assume that
 one unit of labor can produce one unit of the numeraire good and A4 units of good 1,
 where Q_t = 0 implies A = 0 and Q.1 > 0
                                               implies
              A4 =
 This means that goods must be introduced in order;
                                                    i.e., the production of good
 I remains infeasible until some positive amount of good I — 1
                                                               has been produced.
 Once the production of a good becomes possible, labor productivity starts at A0
 and improves with experience in producing either the good before it on the quality
 ladder or the good itself When the productivity level reaches A, the opportunities
for learning about the good are exhausted.
    Consider first a closed economy in which households have the preferences given
by (4). We will show that, with certain parameter restrictions, there exists a steady.
state equilibrium in which utility grows indefinitely and new goods replace older ones
at regular intervals. We do this by construction. Suppose that, at some
                                                                           moment, the
economy produces the numeraire good and good i, and that experience in producing
good I — I had accumulated to Q, before
                                          production of that good had ceased. As-
suming that there exists a periodic steady state, good i should also be replaced by
good I + 1 when cumulative experience in the former reaches Q. Consumers begin
to buy good I + 1 at the moment when its price falls to a level only A times as great

                                         26
as that ol good i. This requires, in a competitive market, that the productivity of
labor in producing good i be only A times as great as that in producing good i + 1, In
other words, we need A0 + Q, = A(A0 + /3Q,), for good i + 1 to become competitive
at precisely the right moment. The solution to this equation gives a positive value
for Q4 = (A — l)A0/(1 — A,3), provided that /3 c 1/A. We also require that good i + 2
not be competitive at the moment after good i + 1 is introduced. Consumers will not
purchase good i + 2 at this moment if its price exceeds A times the price of good i + 1;
i.e., if A0 + /3Q5 > A14. Given the value of Q, that we have already determined, this
inequality is satisfied for /3 >   11(1   + A). Finally, the steady state we have described
can obtain only if learning in good i + 1 has been introduced before learning in good
i has been exhausted; that is, if Q, c A — A0.
    Under the parameter restrictions just described, a periodic steady state exists. In
the steady state, the wage rate remains fixed at one. Households spend a fraction
1 — z of their income of £ on purchases of the numeraire good and the fraction

I — p of the labor force is employed producing this good to meet their demands. The
remaining fraction /2 of the labor force produces a "current generation" of knowledge-
intensive products. Each generation is replaced by the next as soon as experience
in the current product provides enough technical information to make its successor
economically viable. As in Young (1991) and Stokey (1991), knowledge spillovers
from one industry to the next sustain productivity growth in the long run.
   Now let us reintroduce trade between two countries that are in every way identical
except that the home country initially is less advanced in its production of the non-
numeraire good. We assume that the foreign country has accumulated experience in
producing good i, while the home country has only produced goods up to i, i < i.
We wiU establish that, in the steady state of the trade equilibrium, the (lagging) home
country specializes in producing the numeraire good while the (advanced) foreign
country produces a succession of knowledge-intensive products introduced at regular
intervals. Thus trade retards growth in the country that begins behind.
   Again we proceed by construction. If the home country produces the numeraire
good, then its wage rate must equal one. Moreover, if this country specializes in


                                                27
producing the numeraire and the foreign country produces none of it, then total
output of this good and the total wage bill amount to L. Since a fraction 1 — p
of world spending is devoted to the numeraire good, the matching of revenues and
costs implies L = (1 — p)(L + wL), or w = p/(I — p) whenever L = V. Note
that this gives w > I when p > 1/2 ; i.e., when there is sufficient demand for
the non-numeraire good. In the event that w -> 1, the foreign country indeed is
uncompetitive in producing the numeraire good.
   We know also that the knowledge available for producing good i at home is at
most .4 + Q,, while that available for producing good i abroad is at least A0+ J3Q,.
Recognizing that the wage rate in the foreign country is higher than that at home,
consumers will nonetheless prefer the foreign good of generation i to the home good
of generation i if A"(A0 + JJQ,)/uf > A(Ao + Q3) , or

                                           A0+Q.        ji                                  (6
                                          A0 + $Q, I    —
                                                             p
If inequality (6) is not satisfied at time 0, then the home country produces some
knowledge-intensive goods at first. But since it also produces all of the world's output
of the numeraire good, it must devote less labor to the sector with learning than
its trade partner and so its experience accumulates less rapidly. Over time, the
technological gap between the two countries widens and eventually it becomes so
wide that an inequality like (6) is satisfied. Then the home country terminates its
production in the knowledge-intensive sector forever. The conclusion is much the
same as in Young (1991): trade causes the more advanced country to specialize in
producing the goods that generate the most learning and accelerates productivity
growth in that country. Meanwhile, the lagging country finds itself specializing in
goods where learning opportunities are fewer (or, as here, absent), and so its growth
slows.'5 The more advanced country must gain from trade, but the less advanced
country may gain or lose.
  '5flere, as in Young (1991), an initially lagging country that is larger than its trade partner
can sometimes overcome its technological disadvantage and eventually capture the technologically
progressive   industry.


                                              28
   The equilibria described so far have the unrealistic feature that the switch from
one generation of good to the next occurs quite abruptly. The alternative preferences
given by (5) generate a more gradual transition. For certain parameter values there
exists a steady state in which the economy passes through a succession of phases
in which: (i) only generation i of the knowledge-intensive good is produced; (ii)
generations i and i + I are produced; (iii) learning by doing becomes exhausted in
the production of good i; and (iv) production of good i ends and only good i + 1 is
produced.
   We construct such an equilibrium for a closed economy. The country devotes L/2
units of labor to producing the numeraire good and the remaining L/2 units to the
set of sectors where learning is possible. The prices of the knowledge-intensive goods
of generations i and i + 1 are A1 and A1÷1, respectively. Altogether, half of aggregate
income of L is spent on one or both of these goods. If consumption of both of these
goods occurs at some moment in time, then maximization of (5) implies that the
quantities purchased of each one must satisfy

                              C1        1   /   1         A   L\
                              A7     1+AecA2)                                               (7)

and

                            c+1_ I                    1
                                                                                            (8)
                            AH.I1+AkAI               A4÷1     2

When the expression in (7) or (8) gives a negative value for consumption of one good
or the other, then in fact none of that good is consumed and spending of L/2 falls
entirely on the other product.
    We can define Qe as the level of cumulative experience in producing good i at the
moment when good i + 1 is first introduced, and Q,, as the cumulative experience
in producing good i + I when production of good i ceases.16 It is easy to show
  t6The first of these is found by substituting for A1 in terms of Q, using Q11 = A — A0 and
      = A0, and solving (8) for the value of Q1 that makes C1.1 = 0. The second is found by
substituting for A1 and A1+t in terms of      using A1 = A, and solving (7) for the value of Q+t
that makes C1 =   0.



                                                29
that parameter values exist for which Qh c      Q&   (so that the replacement of each
generation by the next takes place smoothly ) and also Q& c A — Ao (so that each
product exhausts its learning potential before it exits the market).
   What are the effects of trade when consumers have the alternative preferences?
They are the same as before. A country that begins with a technological lead will
widen its lead over time, and eventually (if not immediately) take over the world's
production in the sector with learning. The other country will find that trade slows
its productivity growth, perhaps only moderately at first, but to zero in the long run.
The initially lagging country might gain from trade, because it can import the leading
country's advanced goods, but gains from trade are in no way ensured.


2.6     Technological Leapfrogging
Up to this point we have dealt with situations in which national learning by doing
means that an initial technological lead is self-reinforcing (see, however, the last
footnote). Brezis et al. (1993) identify circumstances under which leapfrogging may
occur; that is, a country that begins technologically behind may eventually surpass its
trade partner, only to be overtaken again in a subsequent phase of the periodic steady
state. This happens because new and superior technologies, which arrive exogenously
in their model, may be adopted by the lagging country even though they are not
profitable in the leading country.
   To see how this works, let preferences be given by (4) and consider a closed
economy. At first, only goods with indexes up to and including j can be produced,
with one unit of labor yielding one unit of the numeraire or A- units of good i, where
A1 = A0 + min(Q1, A — A0) for i j. Here, all spillovers are confined to the industry
in which they are generated and the opportunities for learning by doing are bounded
for every product. We assume that the knowledge stock for good j (and perhaps for
aU goods before it) has already reached its maximum of A at time 0.
    Now let the technology for good j+l suddenly become available, although of course
no producer has had any experience in using it. The technologies for producing goods
j +2, j +3, and so on, will arrive subsequently, at regular (but perhaps long) intervals

                                           30
of time. At the moment when it first becomes feasible to produce good .j + 1, the
price of this good is 1/A0, while that of good j is i/A. Consumers buy the new good
only if A > A/A0. Otherwise, the new and superior product never is introduced into
the market, and productivity growth does not pick up until some even more desirable
product arrives on the scene.
    But now let there be two countries and trade. At the outset, the home country
produces good j with labor productivity i/A, while the foreign country has no expe-
rience in this industry. Then, if the countries are not too different in size, the foreign
country initially specializes in producing the numeraire good while the home country
produces only good j. With this pattern of specialization, the foreign wage equals
one and equality of foreign labor income and spending on the numeraire good implies
that iv = iL/(i — M)L. The hypothesized pattern of specialization is realized for
A/A0> pL/(1 — j.i)L> I.
   What happens when the technology for producing good j + 1 comes along? If the
new generation of good is sufficiently better than the current generation (A > A/A0),
then producing with the new technology would be profitable in either country. The
model does not tell us which country would adopt it first, but as soon as one gains
a small edge in experience the pattern of trade gets locked in. A more interesting
equilibrium can arise if the superiority of the new generation is not so large (A c
A/A0). Then producers in the home country, who must pay w to their labor no
matter which technology they use, will be unable to produce good j + 1 at a profit
in competition with good j. On the other hand, production with the new technology
may be profitable in the foreign country. There, the wage rate initially equals one,
so the new good can be offered at a competitive price of 1/ito. Consumers will have
positive demand for the good at this price provided that A/A0 c wA =     ApL/(i —4L.
In the event, the new technology will be adopted by the foreign (lagging) country.
As soon as this happens, the wage rate in the home country falls, so that the quality
adjusted price of its knowledge-intensive good of generation j, wA/A, matches that
of the foreign country's good of generation j + 1. With iv = A/AA0 > 1, the home
country still specializes in the production of good z while the foreign country produces


                                           31
  the numeraire good and good j +         111
      Over time, the foreign country gains experience at producing good + 1. As it
  does so, its productivity rises and the price of its product falls. Demand for
                                                                                 good j
  produced by the home country declines. The home wage must fall, so that consumers
  are still willing to buy this good. Eventually, the home wage falls to w = 1. In the
  next instant, the home country takes over production of the numeraire good, and

 the foreign county specializes in the production of good j + 1. From then on, w
 rises, until learning by doing in the j + 1" ends when A,1 = A. Finally the world
 economy enters a stationary period which persists until the technology for good j + 2
 arrives, whereupon it is adopted in the home country. The countries alternate the
 lead position in the knowledge-intensive sector indefinitely.
     Essentially the same pattern emerges if preferences are given by (5), except that
 the location of production of the numeraire good switcheionly gradually, rather than
 abruptly, from country to country. (We leave this case as an exercise for the interested
 reader.) Indeed, leapfrogging can arise anytime learning by doing is bounded for
 a given product and specific to the product and country. Then, if the eventual
 superiority of a new technology is not enormous, existing producers will pass over
 that technology in favor of the one in which they are already experienced. No single
firm in the experienced country will find it profitable to change, in view of its inability
to internalize the externalities from learning. But firms in the lagging country may
be able to adopt the new technology, even though they lack experience in using it,
because they initially face a lower wage. When they do so, their productivity improves
over time and eventually the superiority of the new technology spells the demise of the
old. In short, the lagging country, by dint of its lack of experience with the existing
technology, always enjoys a comparative advantage in any new one that may happen
along.


  '7The foreign country's output of good j + 1 at the moment of its introduction to the market is
the solution to the equation p(L + wL) = AL/U + Z,÷1/A0. The left-hand side of this equation is
totat spending on non-numeraire goods, while the right-hand side gives the value of output of goods
j and j + I at the market-clearing prices.

                                                32
   This concludes our discussion of learning that occurs as an accidental by-product
of manufacturing activities. We have seen that the traditional forces of comparative
advantage dominate long-run outcomes whenever knowledge spillovers are global in
scope. In contrast, when knowledge spillovers are confined to a single country or
region, the vagaries of history can influence the trade patterns even in the long run.
National spillovers introduce a positive feedback that tends to reinforce any existing
pattern of specialization and trade.


3 Innovation
Accidental discoveries undoubtedly play an important role in the advance of tech-
nology. But firms also invest vast resources in order to generate productivity im-
provements; in the advanced industrial economies, private spending on research and
development typically exceeds two percent of industrial value added, and this number
has been growing steadily in recent years. In this section we discuss the relationship
between trade and technological progress when new technologies are the result of
intentional investments.
    Deliberate investments in knowledge require an environment where intellectual
property rights are protected. Without such protection, investors cannot appropri-
ate the fruits of their labor. In some cases, the legal system provides the needed
protection, as when governments grant patents for original ideas. In other cases the
protection comes more or less automatically, because imitation is costly and trade
secrets can be preserved. A patent or trade secret typically gives an innovator the
ability to exercise monopoly power in the product market. That is, a firm with pro-
prietary access to an innovative technology usually can price above marginal cost
 without losing all of its sales. And the more unique and superior the innovator's
 technology, the greater will be the monopoly power and the larger the reward (see
 Arrow (1962)]. This explains why imperfect competition features prominently in the
 various models we shall discuss below.




                                          33
 3.1 Economies due to Increasing Specialization
 It is useful to begin our discussion of endogenous innovation with a model that has
 many parallels with our treatment of learning by doing. The model is one where
 productivity gains stem from increasing specialization of the production process. The
 particular formalization is due to Ethier (1982a).
     Consider an industry in which output is manufactured from an assortment of
 intermediate inputs, with a greater number of inputs associated with more special.
 ization and refinement of each stage of production. In this setting, it is reasonable to
 suppose that total factor productivity will vary with the degree of specialization. A
 CES production function can be used to capture this idea. We suppose

                            x= [f0" i)°djj'         ,   Oca< 1,                            (9)

where X denotes final industry output, z(j) represents the input of intermediate good
j, and it is the number of intermediates employed. We treat it as a continuous variable
for convenience.
    Given the number of intermediates in use, the technology represented by (9) ex-
hibits constant returns to scale. We assume that each producer takes the set of
available intermediates as given. Since each has an incentive to use some of every
available input (that is, to specialize the production process as finely as possible),
the number of intermediates in use is effectively beyond its control. Thus each pro-
ducer of final goods perceives constant returns in production. The producers behave
competitively, pricing their output equal to perceived marginal cost.
    Now suppose that every intermediate input is used in equal quantity z, as will
be the case when the intermediates carry the same price. Then X = A(-)Z. where
Z=    viz is the aggregate quantity of intermediates and A =           n'° is an index
of the state of technology.'8 This reduced-form production function has the same
form as (2), which we used to study learning by doing. The difference, however, is
  '8Whenever all intermediates are produced with the same constant returns to scale production
function, it is meaningful to define an aggregate measure 2', where Z too can be produced with
constant returns to scale.


                                             34
that whereas the index of the state of technology in (2) measured the accumulated
experience in manufacturing the final good, here it depends upon the number of
avaIlable intermediate inputs. This number will reflect cumulative investment in
R&D, if intermediates must be invented before they can be produced.
  We proceed to determine the flow of profits that accrue to a new invention. In-
ventors are granted indefinite patents and produce their differentiated input with one
unit of labor per unit of output. With the number of intermediate inputs given at a
moment in time, each patent holder faces a demand with an elasticity approximately
equal to 11(1 — ).19 The firm equates marginal cost with marginal revenue, which
calls for a mark-up pricing rule,


                                                                                              (10)

This yields an equilibrium profit flow of

                                                                                              (II)
Here, profits per variety are inversely proportional to the number of competitors and
directly proportional to aggregate spending on intermediates. Aggregate spending
matches the value of final output, because producers of final goods earn zero profits.2°
    The incentive to innovate is given by the present value of the profit stream. If
Z is constant, it grows at a constant rate g, and the prices df intermediates grow
at a common, constant rate, then the present value of profits from any time t on-
ward equals ir(t)/(r + g), where r is the real interest rate in terms of intermediates.
It follows that the incentive to innovate varies directly with the extent of product
differentiation (as reflected in the parameter I/a) and inversely with the number of
available intermediates, the rate of introduction of new intermediates, and the real
rate of interest.
   '9The approximation neglects terms of order 1/n; it becomes precise as the number of competing
 differentiated products grows large. For further details, see Eelpman and Krugxnan (1985 p.118-119)
 or Dixit and Stiglitz (1993).
   20Equations (10) and (11) apply at each moment in time. We omit the time variables in order to
 simplify the notation.

                                                 35
   Having derived a measure of the incentive to innovate, we need to introduce a
cost of innovation and examine how private benefits and costs interact to determine
the evolution of industry output. The simplest way to treat the innovation cost is
to assume that there exists a deterministic production function relating R&D inputs.
which we take to include labor and a stock of knowledge capital, to research output,
which includes a flow of blueprints and perhaps additions to the knowledge stock. We
assume that there are constant returns to labor in research, so that ñ =
where ñ is the flow of newly invented products, L, is the labor.employed in R&D, and
      measures the productivity of labor in the research lab. Research productivity
varies with the stock of knowledge capital K,,, which represents the accumulated
scientific and engineering wisdom in society. We treat general knowledge as a free
public good. Then the cost of inventing a new product is w/Aj(K).
    With free entry into R&D and an active research sector, the value of a blueprint
matches the cost of inventing a new product. Using the present discounted value of
profits for the value of a blueprint, we have (after rearranging terms)

                               (1
                                    _0O)ZAI(Kn)=r+g.                               (12)
The left-hand side of (12) gives the profit rate for a firm producing a differentiated
product (i.e., the ratio of profits to the value of the blueprint) while the right-hand
side gives the real effective cost of capital. The latter includes not only the interest
cost, but also the rate at which the blueprint value depreciates in view of the ongoing
entry of new competitors.
   Equation (12) has important implications for the long-run dynamics of an economy
with costly innovation and free entry into R&D. Suppose that the stock of knowledge
ceases to grow, or that its contribution to research productivity peters out. Then,
if n grows continually, the profit rate on the left-hand side of (12) must eventually
fall below the effective cost of capital. At this point, there is insufficient incentive
for conducting research [see Judd (1985)]. Evidently, ongoing innovation requires
sustained increases in research productivity. The analogy with our earlier discussion
of bounded learning by doing is clear: If opportunities for learning are bounded or

                                          36
 the learning process runs into diminishing returns, then the engine of technological
 progress must eventually grind to a halt.
    Although the formal structure of our model is similar to that for learning by doing,
 the underlying economics may be different. Whereas bounded learning by doing in
 manufacturing seems a plausible and even compelling assumption, it iseasy to imagine
 that knowledge useful for conducting research might continue to accumulate forever.
 In industrial research, almost every new invention builds on some that came before it
and many industrial research projects generate knowledge beyond what was intended
for the specific application. If creative ideas are in limitless supply,so too may be the
opportunities to improve upon research productivity.
    Let us suppose, then, that an unbounded potential exists for learning about how
better to invent new products. We assume that each research project generates some
additional knowledge that is potentially useful to subsequent inventors and that this
knowledge enters rapidly into the public domain. In particular, we take K to be
proportional to the number of research projects previously undertaken (so there are
no diminishing returns to learning) and A1 to be proportional to K,,; then we can
write A,(K) = n/at. In the event, the profit rate does not decline with an increase
in the number of available products, because as the expansion of variety reduces
the profitability of a new product, the expansion of knowledge reduces the cost of
inventing it as well.
    It is possible now to have ongoing innovation in the steady state. The long-run
rate of innovation satisfies

                                  (1—a)Z
                                               =r+g.                               (13)
To close the model, we must specify how the equilibrium output of intermediate goods
and the real rate of interest are determined. Take for the moment the case where the
industry under examination comprises the entirety of the domestic economy. Then all
labor must be employed either in manufacturing intermediate goods or in conducting
industrial research. (Recall that final goods are produced from intermediates alone.)
Total employment in manufacturing matches the aggregate output of intermediates,

                                          37
      while employment in R&D is at/n times the number of new products
                                                                                             invented per
      unit of time. Thus, equilibrium in the labor market requires


                                                                                                        (14)
      were L once again represents the
                                      aggregate labor force. Finally, suppose that house-
   holds maximize the discounted value
                                           of the log of consumption and that they can
   borrow and lend on a frictionless credit
                                            market. Then the real interest rate in terms
   of intermediates will be constant and
                                          equal to the subjective discount rate p.21
       It is now straightforward to solve for
                                              the long-run rate of innovation in a closed
   economy of the type just described. Combining (13) and (14), we have g = —
                                                                                      (I
  cx)L/at — ap. The innovation rate is larger the
                                                    less substitutable are the specialized
  inputs, the greater is the stock of resources suitable for conducting R&D, the
                                                                                     more
  productive are these resources in the research lab, and the lower is the
                                                                               subjective
  discount rate. Moreover, the "long run" is achieved immediately, with
                                                                              a constant
  rate of innovation g at every moment in time [see Grossman and Helpman
                                                                                                  (199 Ia,
  ch.3)].
       We now have the building blocks needed
                                                         to examine how trade evolves in a world
 economy with endogenous technologjc1
                                                    progress. The answer, it turns out, depends
 upon the nature of the stock of general
                                                   knowledge capital. We will distinguish two
 case, one where knowledge spillovers
                                                are local in scope, so that only national R&D
 contributes knowledge that is useful in subsequent research, and another
                                                                             where the
Spillovers are global in scope, so that knowledge generated in
                                                               any country augments
research productivity worldwide.22 This distinction is reminiscent of the
                                                                          one we made
in our earlier discussion of
                             learning by doing, and many of the implications of it will

the
   2tWhen householth maximize JT°°     r"    log[c(s)Jcjs subject to an intertemporal budget constraint,
    first-order condition implies è/c + pt/p, = r + j,/p, —
                                                                 p, where p, is the price of final output.
In every momentary equilibrium we must have c = X
                                                           and p,,X = p. Z. Then, since Z is constant in
the steady state, the real interest rate in terms of intermediates, r,
                                                                         is equal to p.
  22Grossmajj and }Ielpman
                               (1990a) describe an intermediate case where knowledge capital disemi-
nates globally, but international
                                  transnthsjon involves longer lags than transmission within a country.
Some such intermediate case is
                                 probably closest to the truth, inasmuch as Coe and Helpman (1994),
Eaton and Kortum (1994), and Bernstein and
                                                     Mohnen (1994) present evidence of the existenc&

                                                  38
be the same. There are two new points to emphasize, however. First, whereas trade
had no direct effect on productivity in the model of learning by doing, here access
to foreign-made intermediate goods raises productivity in manufacturing even in the
absence of international knowledge spillovers. Productivity in manufacturing depends
on the range of intermediates used in production, irrespective of the sources of those
various inputs. Second, it may well be that foreign trade itself influences the degree to
which knowledge spills across international borders. Knowledge may be transmitted,
for example, when exporters describe the best uses of their products or when importers
report the needs of their customers. The role of trade as a conduit for knowledge has
been explored in Grossman and Helpman (199lc).


3.2 International Knowledge Stocks
We begin with the case where knowledge spillovers are global in scope. For simplicity
we assume that dissemination is immediate, so that researchers worldwide draw on
a common stock of general knowledge. Denoting this public input again by K,,,
we suppose that K,, is proportional to the cumulative number of research projects
previously undertaken in all countries combined. We also assume that countries
have the same production technologies, with one unit of labor required per unit of
intermediate and at/K,, units of labor required for each invention.
    Now consider a world economy that produces only the single final good, X. in the
steady state, each country produces and exports a constant fraction of the total num-
ber of input varieties. This fraction matches the country's share in the world supply of
labor. All countries import the differentiated varieties iuvented and produced abroad
and all experience the same rate of productivity growth in their final-goods sectors.
Productivity growth in final manufacturing is proportional to the rate of expansion
of international spillovers from R&D activity, while .Iaffe et a!. (1993) provide evidence that the
extent of knowledge spillovers from R&D falls (at least for some time) with geographic distance
from the source. Lichtenberg (1992) explicitly rejects the hypothesis of complete and instantaneous
international R&D spillovers,while Eaton and Kortun (1994) find that technology diffusion is con-
siderably more rapid within than between countries. Still, the extreme cases that we consider are
pedagogically useful for bringing out the forces at work.


                                                 39
in the total number of input varieties, with a factor of proportionality of (1 — a)/cr.
In each country, and in the world as a whole, the number of produced inputs ex-
pands in the long run at the rate g = (1 — a) E5 V/aj — ap, which is larger than
the rate of innovation experienced by any country in autarky. So integration boosts
not only manufacturing productivity at a moment in time (by expanding the range
of intermediate inputs available to a producer of final goods) but also the long-run
rate of productivity growth (by providing access to the general knowledge generated
abroad). There are both (welfare) gains from trade and a positive effect of trade on
the rate of technological progress in every country.
    While the above model highlights the importance of trade in differentiated in-
puts, it allows limited scope for interindustry trade. Besides trading intermediates, a
country may import some final goods. But inasmuch as the assembly of final goods
requires no primary resources here, such trade has no meaningful effects. To consider
the determinants of the pattern of trade, we must further elaborate the general equi-
librium structure of our model. To this end, suppose that two primary factors—say,
unskilled labor and human capital—are used in manufacturing the various inputs into
the production of final good X. Suppose also that there is a second final good Y that
is produced directly with these same primary inputs, also with constant returns to
scale but with no prospect for technological progress. Finally, suppose that human
capital and unskilled labor are also used in R&D and that the three activities em-
ploying the primary resources vary in their factor-intensity requirements. How will
the pattern of trade evolve over time?
   In the short run (i.e., shortly after trade begins), history may afford some partic-
ular country an initial advantage in producing intermediates. That is, a country may
have invented a disproportionate number of intermediates before trade commenced,
in which case it would become an immediate net exporter of these goods. But any
competitive advantages due to prior experience are bound to be short lived; initial
conditions play no role in determining the ultimate pattern of trade when general
knowledge is a global public good [see Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.7)].
   Suppose there are two countries, A and B. Figure 3 portrays the long-run equilib-


                                          40
  rium when intermediate goods must be produced where, they are invented and when
 consumers allocate a constant fraction of their spending to the technology-intensive
 good X. The dimensions of the box represent the world endowment of the two factors
 of production. The origin for country A is at the lower left corner, and the vector
 04E represents its factor endowment. That of country B is represented by E08,
 which culminates in its origin at the upper right corner. The figure depicts the case
 where country A has the relatively larger endowment of human capital compared to
 its endowment of unskilled labor.
     We use the familiar procedure of constructing a long-run trade equilibrium by
 showing that it is possible to allocate resources in each country so as to mimic the
 steady-state outputs of a hypothetical integrated equilibrium with no international
 borders. Assume that, in the integrated equilibrium, the vector O'R of resources
 would be used in inventing new intermediate inputs, the vector RX would be used
 in manufacturing the existing assortment of these goods, and the vector X08 would
 be used in producing the traditional good Y. Clearly, the figure depicts the case
 where R&D is the most human-capital-intensive activity and the production of the
final good V is the least so. In the long-run equilibrium with trade, country A can
employ the vector OARA in its R&D labs, the vector R4X4 in
                                                                  manufacturing the
varieties of intermediates that it has previously developed, and the vector XAE in the
traditional manufacturing sector. Country B can employ the resources ER8 in R&D,
R8X8 in producing intermediates, and XiO in producing good V. The important
thing to notice is that the ratio of OARA to RAXA is the same as the ratio of ERB
to R8X8, which is the same as the ratio of O4R to fix; in other words, the ratio
in country A of the size of its research sector to the size of its sector manufacturing
intermediates is the same as for country B, which in turn is the same as for the
world as a whole. This means that, when equal quantities of each intermediate are
produced, the number of different intermediates produced in each country is in exact
proportion to the number of intermediates being invented there per unit time. The
latter condition is a requirement of a steady-state equilibrium in which intermediates
must be produced where they are invented and the allocation of resources among


                                         41
    sectors in each country is constant over time.3
       In the long-run equilibrium depicted by the figure,
                                                              aggregate outputs of interme-
    diate goods are constant in each country, as
                                                  are outputs of the traditional good Y. So
    too are the fractions of the total number of intermediate goods
                                                                       emanating from each
   country, which implies that the rate of innovation g is eventually the
                                                                               same in both
   places. Now suppose for concreteness that assembly of
                                                               good X from intermediates
   takes place where the good is consumed, as it would for
                                                               example if X were nontrad-
   able (or if the intermediates were in fact final goods and X
                                                                 were only a fictitious good
   representing a subutility index). Then intraindustry trade in intermediates would
                                                                                          co-
  exist with a predictable long-run pattern of interindustry
                                                                  trade. In particular, the
  country with an abundance of the factor used
                                                    intensively in the high-technology sec-
  tor (that is, in research and production of intermediates
                                                                  together) becomes a net
  exporter of intermediate goods. The other
                                                country balances its long-run deficit in the
  high-technology sector by exporting the unskilledlaborintensive traditional
                                                                                     good.24
      We find that factor abundance
                                        alone determines the steady-state pattern of in-
  tersectora! trade. This is like the result for static trade models with
                                                                                     monopolistic
  competition, except that here it applies only as a long-run proposition.
                                                                            A human-
 capital rich country may begin as a net importer of intermediates, if
 has not been very active in inventing new products. But                historically it
                                                           once it becomes integrated
 into the world
                economy, its natural comparative advantage will eventually take hold.
 The country will specialj
                              disproportionateiy in the R&D activity, and over time
 will develop the capacity to
                               produce a disproportionate share of the differentiated
   23Figure 3 is constructed under the
                                        assumption that the relative factor endowments in the two
countries do not differ too greatly (i.e., point E lies
                                                        inside the parallelogram O'4X08x'), which
enables a long-run equlibrium with factor price equalization. For endowments
                                                                                 outside the paral-
lelogram, long-run (actor prices must differ and at least one of the countries
production.                                                                      must specialize in
   240ur discussion presum that no country imports in both sectors (on
                                                                          net) in the steady state.
It is in (act possible in our model
                                    that a country 'night run a long-run trade surplus in order to
service debt acquired along the equilibrium path. If the overall deficit
                                                                        were large enough, and its
factor composition not too different from that abroad, the
                                                           country could even have a net surplus in
both sectors.


                                               42
 products.
   What is the effect of trade on a country's technological progress in this setting?
 Consider first the case where factor compositions are everywhere the same (i.e., the
 point E in Figure 3 lies on the diagonal of the box). In this case, trade accelerates
every country's long-run rate of innovation, just as it does when there is only one
final good and one primary factor. When relative factor endowments are the same, so
too are long-run factor rewards and the long-run division of resources among sectors.
Then countries do not engage in interindustry trade in the long run, although they
do trade their unique varieties of the intermediate goods. With knowledge spillovers
that are global in reach, the knowledge stock grows faster in a larger world economy
than any single, smaller economy with similarly allocated resources. It follows that
the pace of innovation must increase as a result of the scale economies associated with
producing knowledge [see Rivera-Batiz and Romer (1991)1.
    Now consider a world where countries differ in their factor composition. Continuity
implies that innovation must accelerate if the differences in factor abundance are
small. But what if these differences are larger, though still not so large as to eliminate
the possibility of a long-run equilibrium with factor price equali2ation? With factor
price equalization, trade is like an enlargement of the economy. The human-capital-
poor country finds itself a part of a larger world economy that is relatively better
endowed with human capital. Since an increase in the endowment of human capital
causes an expansion of the relative size of the world research sector, this country
experiences an increased rate of innovation in its high-technology sector.25
    The conclusion differs for the human-capital-rich country. On the one hand, this
country too enjoys the benefits of-a larger world economy. On the other hand, its
relative endowment of human capital in autarky exceeds the human-capital-to-labor
ratio for the integrated world economy. Depending on the elasticities of substitution
between human capital and unskiUed labor in the three activities, the overall size of
  "Note, however, that trade causn this country to specialize relatively, more than in autarky in
the production of traditional goods. So while trade must increase the country's rate of technotog-
ical progress in industry X, it may slow its average rate of technological progress, when sectoral
productivity gains are weighted by initial or final GDP shares.


                                                43
  the world R&D sector may be larger or smaller than the size of its own sector in
  autarky [see Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.9)]. If these elasticities are small,
 then the human-capital-rich country may see its rate of innovation
                                                                    slowed as the
 (long-run) result of an opening of trade and knowledge flows.


 3.3 National Knowledge Stocks
 We saw in our discussion of learning by doing that new factors enter into the deter-
 mination of the trade pattern when knowledge spillovers are local rather than global
 in reach. Global learning means shared experience and so only the traditional forces
 of comparative advantage can shape the pattern of international trade. But local
 learning means distinct national experience, which introduces a role for history in de-
 termining the trade pattern. We will see that a similar conclusion is warranted when
 technology results from deliberate investment. In this case, global knowledge means
 similar research capability and so traditional forces determine whether a country is
 competitive in the research lab. Then a country that has an appropriate resource
 base can overcome any initial disadvantage in the knowledge-intensive sector by spe-
cializing relatively in R&D. But initial disadvantages may have long-lasting effects if
a lack of local research experience means low research productivity.
    A simple model helps to reveal the novel features of a world economy with Local
knowledge capital. Let there again be two countries, A and B, and a single primary
factor of production. As before, a traditional consumer good is manufactured with
constant returns to scale. Also, a high-technology product is assembled from dif-
ferentiated inputs and research generates the blueprints for intermediates. But now
suppose the knowledge capital that determines national research productivity accu-
mulates in proportion to local R&D activity. It takes 1/KL units of labor to invent
a new intermediate in country j. Finally, with knowledge capital proportional to
cumulative R&D experience, we choose units so that 14 = n.
    Suppose first that the countries are of equal size (L' = IA) and also that
(1 — 64/br    L/(Li + p), where b is the fraction of spending devoted to good
X and p is the subjective discount rate (equal to the long-run real interest rate). The

                                          44
inequality guarantees that both countries must produce some traditional output in
order to satisfy world demand for good V. If both countries do (always) produce the
traditional good in common, then competitive pricing ensures that their wage rates
will be equalized all along the equilibrium path.
    Now consider the incentive that exists in each country to engage in R&D. With
wage rates always the same, the prices of intermediates produced in both countries
are the same. So the instantaneous profits earned by a producer of an intermediate
good are the same. And the value of a blueprint, which equals the present value of
the profit flow, is also the same, assuming that the real interest rate is the same (as it
will be if international borrowing and lending takes place). This means that the R&D
activity will be more profitable in the country that has the lower cost of innovation.
But the cost of an invention in country j equals wa,/K, and w and al are common
to the two countries. It follows that R&D is more profitable in whichever country
happens to have the larger knowledge stock; i.e., in the country that has the greater
 prior experience in R&D.
     Suppose it is country A that begins with more research experience. Then initially
 this country's researchers have a competitive advantage in the research lab, and they
 perform all of the world's R&D at time 0. But then additional knowledge accumu-
 lates in country A, while in the absence of international knowledge spillovers, the
 knowledge stock remains unchanged in country B. Country A's competitive lead in
 R&D widens and there is even greater reason for this country to conduct all of the
 world's research in the next period. In other words, the initial lead is self-reinforcing.
 Eventually country A will come to dominate production in the high-technology sector
 (see Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.8) for further detailsi.
     This example illustrates several points. First, an accident of history can have
 long.lasting implications for trade when there is a national component to the knowl-
 edge capital stock. In the example, the two countries are identical except for their
  initial conditions, and yet there is the clear prediction that the initial technological
  leader must come to dominate the world market in high-technology goods.26 Second,
    26Markusen (1991) derives a similar result in a two-period model.


                                                 45
      trade can reduce the rate of innovation and
                                                    growth in a country that begins with
     a technological disadvantage. Here, the initially lagging country would continue
                                                                                          to
     innovate (indeed, at the same pace as the leader) if it
                                                               were isolated from competi-
     tion with its more advanced trade
                                         partner. Yet, as soon as it opens itself to trade,
    competitive forces drive its resources out of the R&D activity. But
                                                                          third, the rate of
    innovation (or even the growth rate of national output)
                                                             can be a misleading gauge of
   aggregate welfare. In our example, residents of both countries
                                                                      experience the same
   wage trajectory and have access to the
                                              same investment opportunities. With free
   international trade, they can buy the same goods at the same prices. It follows that
                                                                                          a
   unit of labor enjoys the
                            same lifetime utility regardless of where the worker happens
  to reside. Not only do residents of both countries enjoy the
                                                                   same welfare levels in
  this example, but both gain from trade, even though all
                                                              innovation happens to take
  place in only one of the countries.
        While our example is one where an initial technological
                                                                 disadvantage has no ad-
  verse welfare consequences this need not always be the case. Consider,
                                                                             for instance,
  what happens when one country starts with greater
                                                          knowledge and (I —
  L'/(Li + p). Then it may be that both countries conduct R&D for a while, but
                                                                                     again
  the initial leader will widen its
                                      knowledge advantage over time and eventually come to
 dominate the world market for the
                                     differentiated inputs [see Crossman and Helpman
 (199la, ch.8)J. Moreover, the demand for the high-technology
                                                                  product is sufficiently
 great under this parameter restriction that
                                             the country producing the preponderance
of intermediates comes to enjoy a higher wage than its trade
                                                                partner. In this case an
initial national advantage in
                              research productivity translates into a higher national
standard of living. Indeed, the country that begins as the technological
                                                                          laggard might
even suffer from trade as compared to its welfare along the autarky
                                                                    equilibrium path.27
     In both of the cases just
                                    described, a country that initially lags behind in the
  27The possibility of losses from trade arist, because
                                                           the autarky equilibrium is distorted (no
compensation for the spilioven to the
                                          general knowledge stock) and the effect of trade on the
initial lagging country is to exacerbMe the distortion. The situation is similar
                                                                                 to that with national
increasing returns to scale, where a country that specializes in the constant-returns
                                                                                       sector may lose
from trade. See Ethier (1982b) and
                                     Relpman (l984a).


                                                46
technology race can never catch up. White prior experience generally does provide
an edge to a country in a world of national knowledge stocks, the prospects for
latecomers are not always so bleak. For one thing, a natural comparative advantage
in R&D—arising, for example, from an abundance of human capital—can give an
inexperienced country a cost advantage that may offset its disadvantage due to a lack
of accumulated knowledge. Even if a country does not have any natural comparative
advantage in conducting R&D, it may be able to overcome an initial lack of research
experience if it happens to be a large country. The benefit of size when there are
national knowledge stocks is similar to the one that arises when there are national
increasing returns to scale in production [Helpman, (1984a)] or national knowledge
associated with learning by doing. It arises because R&D, as we have conceived of it,
is an activity with dynamic increasing returns to scale.
   To see this point, consider further the case where there is a single factor of pro-
duction and identical input coefficients in manufacturing in the two countries. Again
assume that one of the countries has an initially larger national knowledge base. For
the lagging country to be competitive in R&D, its wage rate would have to be lower
than that in the leading country. But with a lower wage, its cost of producing tra-
ditional manufactures would also be lower, and so its firms would capture all of the
world's market for this competitively-priced good. The satisfaction of world demand
for traditional goods would absorb a portion of its labor supply, leaving only a resid-
ual supply for inventing and producing intermediate goods. Still, if the country were
large enough, that residual might be bigger than the entirety of the labor force of its
trade partner. In the event, the initial laggard could conduct more research activity
than its smaller rival and thereby overcome its knowledge deficiency.
   Our examples show that initial conditions and, indirectly, country size influence
the long-run pattern of trade when spillovers from research activity are confined to
within a nation's borders. What about the effects of trade on technological progress
under these conditions? We have seen already that trade may slow a country's rate of
innovation, if the country has an initial disadvantage in research productivity and if
there is another production sector into which its resources might be driven. Feenstra


                                          47
  (1990) shows that country size, too, can intervene in the relationship between trade
  and technological progress, Suppose there is only one final-goods sector in each
  country, which uses intermediates invented in the research lab. Now all of a country's
  labor must be used either in developing new technologies
                                                           or in producing previously
  invented goods. Innovative firms can sell to a larger market with trade than without.
  This alone serves to enhance the profitability of R&D. But global competition means
  that firms must compete with a larger number of rivals than in autarky. This tends
  to reduce the incentive for R&D. In the small country, where product development
 is less rapid than in the larger country, profits erode much faster with trade than
 without. The net effect of trade is to reduce the incentive to innovate and to slow
 the long-run rate of technological progress. In contrast, the enlarged-market effect
 dominates for the larger country. Finns there find a greater incentive to innovate in
                                                                                       a
 world with international trade and trade accelerates technological
                                                                      progress all along
 the equilibrium path, though not in the very longest of runs.

 3.4 Process Innovation and Quality Ladders
 So far, we have equated innovation with the development of new varieties of a horizon-
 tally differentiated product. Of course, finns also invest in developing new products
that are of higher quality than similar goods available on the market, and in lowering
the cost of producing existing goods. Many of our conclusions about the relation-
ship between trade and technological progress apply also to these alternative forms
of innovation.
    We describe a model with building blocks drawn from Aghion and Howitt (1992)
and Segerstrom et a.L(1990).29 In this model, a final good X again is assembled
from intermediate inputs. This time, however, the number of inputs is taken as
fixed. Research investments are intended to improve the quality of the various inputs.
  29n the very long run, the large country—with
                                                its faster pace of product development—comes
to dominate the wortd economy. Therefore the
                                                 long-mn equilibrium in this country with trade is
virtually the sante as the tong-run equilibrium without trade.
  29Tbe particular formulation follows Grossman and Helpman (1991b).



                                               48
Alternatively, these investments can be seen as attempts to reduce their production
cost. With either interpretation, a successful innovation reduces the primary resource
cost of manufacturing the final good.
   To make matters simple, suppose that final production uses a continuum of inputs
and that the assembly technology has a symmetric, Cobb-Douglas form. Then we
can write
                                   logX = A' log[i(j)]dj,                                 (15)

after arbitrarily setting the measure of different inputs to one. Here 1(j) represents
the effective quantity of input j, adjusting for the different qualities of the inputs
used.3° An input that has been improved m times from its initial condition provides
A" times as many input services as the basic version of the product, where A — 1 > 0
represents the percentage quality increment associated with each improvement.
   For every input j there is a state-of-the-art product at every moment in time.
The state of the art is the highest quality version of the input whose technology is
known. This product, and aU earlier vintages, can be produced by their inventors with
one unit of labor per unit of output. Assuming that the producers of intermediates
engage in Bertrand (price) competition, only state-of-the-art products are sold in
equilibrium. These are priced at Pr = Aw, in view of the fact that the competitor
with the ability to produce the second highest quality has a marginal production cost
of w and a product that is only 1/A times as good.
   Since only state-of-the-art inputs are used in equilibrium, the effective quantity of
input j is AmC))z, where m(j) is the number of times input j has been improved and
z is the common physical amount used of every input. The inputs are employed in
equal quantities, because they all carry the same price. Then, (15) implies X =
where fit = fJ rn(j)dj is the number of times that the average intermediate input has
been improved, and Z is the volume of intermediates employed in final production.
This production function again has the form X = A(•)Z, but the technology indicator
this time reflects the average number of successful innovations.
  30We use the "quality ladder? interpretation of innovation in the text. Only the wording would
need to be changed to describe process innovation.


                                               49
    Now assume that R&D is a risky investment. A would-be innovator who devotes
 £ units of labor to research for a time period of length dt succeeds in developing the
 next generation of some particular, targeted product with probability (€/a,)dt. Let
 i denote the average (across intermediates) instantaneous probability of a research
 success and let £ denote the average employment in R&D. Then th(t) = fJ 4r)dr =
(1/at) f l( r)dr. In other words, the productivity of the economy once again depends
upon the cumulative investment in R&D. Also, din/dt = I = K / aj. So, in a steady
state with constant employment in manufacturing and R&D, the rate of innovation
and the rate of growth of final output are both proportional to total employment in
the research activity. We see that the links between R&D investment, technological
progress, and aggregate growth are quite similar to those in the model of horizontal
product differentiation.
   Two equations describe the long-run equilibrium for a closed economy that pro-
duces only the single, final good. The first equates the cost of R&D to the expected
return. The second ensures full employment of labor, in view of the demands by
research labs and manufacturers of state-of-the-art intermediate goods. These two
equations have exactly the same form as (13) and (14), which applied to the model of
increasing specialization, except that I/A here takes the place of a there, and here
takes the place of g there. Evidently the two models share the same reduced form
[see Grossman and Helpman (1991b)J.
   The model of quality ladders (or process innovation) can be elaborated to address
trade issues. Assume, for example, that there are two countries, each capable of gen-
erating quality innovations and producing state-of-the-art inputs. Suppose, to begin
with, that there is only the single, final consumption good. Then all trade is intrain-
dustry trade. At a moment in time, firms from each country hold the technological
lead for some subset of the intermediates, because these firms were the last to succeed
in improving the particular products. The technological leaders capture the entire
world market and so must export their state-of-the-art products to the trading part-
ner. Notice that the pattern of trade fluctuates over time, as an extant home-country
leader for one input will be displaced by a successful innovator abroad, while a home


                                         50
innovator will capture the market for a good that was formerly imported. Despite this
turbulence at the product level, the aggregates trade flows are stable in the steady
state. The equilibrium investment in R&D in each country is just enough to generate
balanced trade at equal wages. In the long run, country j holds the technotogical lead
for a constant fraction L)/E1Lt of the intermediate goods.
    How does this trade affect the long-run rate of innovation in each country? The
answer is that, just as in the model of horizontal product differentiation with inter-
national knowledge stocks, each country enjoys a faster rate of technological progress
with trade than without.31 Trade stimulates technological progress, because the in-
stantaneous probability of a research breakthrough is greater when two country's
would-be inventors are attempting to achieve it than when only one set of researchers
is doing so. In other words, the research activity again is characterized by a dynamic
scale economy and international trade again enlarges the size of the relevant economy.
In the model of horizontal product differentiation, international knowledge spillovers
were necessary for world trade to generate a scale economy in research. But here
such international spillovers are an inherent feature of the environment. They occur
naturally whenever one country succeeds in making the m improvement of some
input i, whereupon researchers there and abroad cease their efforts to make that
discovery and begin to pursue instead the (in + flat improvement.
    If there are instead two final-goods sectors, the determinants of the pattern of
interindustry trade also are the same as before. Suppose, for example, that state-of-
the-art inputs are produced with unskilled labor and human capital, and that these
factors are also used to conduct R&D and to produce a traditional, consumption good
Y. Again, let R&D be the most human-capital-intensive activity and production of
the traditional good, the least so. Then the country that has a relative abundance
of human capital will specialize relatively in R&D. Firms located in this country will
win a disproportionate share of the technology races and so come to hold leadership
  311n the trade equilibrium, the average instantaneous probability of a research success in a given
industry equals (1 — t/A)ELi/a, — p/A. This exceeds the average success probability in autarky,
which is (1— t/A)LJ /ai —p/A in countryj.



                                                51
   positions in a disproportionate share of the intermediate input markets. The human-
   capital-rich country becomes a net exporter of the technology.intensjve intermediates
  in the steady state1 and a net importer of the technologicallyunsophistiate
                                                                              tra-
  ditional good. As in the previous
                                     cases with international knowledge spillovers, the
  initial conditions have no bearing on the long-run
                                                      trade pattern [see Grossman and
  Helpman (1991a, ch.7), and Dinopoulos et al.(1993)J.
      Taylor (1993) gains further insights by relaxing the assumption that all interme-
  diate inputs are symmetric in terms of their prospects for technological
                                                                           advancement,
  their unit labor requirements, and their contribution to final production. He shows
  how comparative advantage in innovation
                                            interacts with comparative advantage in
  production to determine the long-run pattern of trade. Only if the ranking of goods
 by the two countries' relative labor
                                     productivity in manufacturing matches the ranking
 by their relative labor productivity in innovation
                                                     does the long-run pattern of trade
 conform to the simple predictions of the Dornbusch et al.(1977) Ricardian model.

    In summary, we have found quite a few analogs between the theory of trade
                                                                               and
 growth that emerges when technological progress results investments in R&D and the
 theory that emerges when such progress is a consequence of learning by doing. In
 each case, considerations of natural comparative advantage determine the long-run
 trade pattern if externalities in the learning process spread rapidly around the globe,
 but size and initial conditions
                                 may also be important if the extent of spillovers varies
 with distance from (or the nationality of) the source. When knowledge spillovers
are localized—be they spillovers from learning by doing or spillovers from research
discoveries-_a small country or one that begins at a technological disadvantage
                                                                                     may
find that trade slows its
                            technological progress, as competitive forces drive its re-
sources into more traditional, slower-growing
                                                 activities. Trade may even be harmful
for such a country, as it may exacerbate the inefficiencies associated with the existence
of externalities and (perhaps) imperfect competition. On the other hand, when the
learning process is characterized by dynamic scale economies, the scope for gains from
international integration and trade may be many times larger than is suggested by


                                          52
static models of trade. It seems that the answers to many of the questions that mo-
tivated the recent research hinge on the nature and extent of technological spillovers,
about which the empirical evidence is just beginning to accumulate.


4 Further Topics
In this closing section we take up three issues that have not been treated elsewhere in
this chapter. First we consider how trade and industrial policies affect long-run rates
of innovation and national welfare. Next we examine how imperfect protection of
intellectual property rights can generate a product cycle in trade between the North
and the South. Lastly, we discuss the relationship between endogenous innovation
and the incentives for foreign direct investment and the international licensing of
technology.


4.1 Trade and Industrial Policies
Grossman and Helpman (199la, ch.6) study the efficacy of trade policies and R&D
subsidies in a smaU, open, innovating economy. In their model, R&D gives rise to
new varieties of nontraded, differentiated, intermediate goods.32 The intermediates
are combined with human capital to produce one final good, and with unskilled labor
 to produce a second, final good. Both final goods are traded at exogenously given
 world prices. Human capital is needed to perform R&D while human capital and
 unskilled labor are used in manufacturing the intermediates. In this setting, consider
 a tariff that protects the import-competing sector in a country that is relatively abun-
 dant in unskilled labor. Protection causes the human-capital-intensive manufacturing
 sector to expand, which bids up the return to human capital. This raises the cost
 of innovation and thus reduces R&D activity in the new, steady-state equilibrium.
 In contrast, a subsidy to exports of the labor-intensive final good has just the oppo-
 site effects. The wage rate rises, the return to human capital falls, and innovation
   32Grossman and Helpman also allow for the case where the intermediates are vertically differen-
 tiated and innovation involves quality upgrading.


                                                53
accelerates, as the R&D sector absorbs some of the human capital released by the
contracting, import-competing sector. Evidently, the effects of trade policy on long-
run innovation depend on whether the favored sector is a substitute or complement
for R&D in the general equilibrium production structure.
    Trade poticies sometimes can provide second-best welfare benefits in economies
with endogenous innovation, although policy prescriptions may be far from obvious.
For example, a policy that spurs innovation can nonetheless reduce aggregate welfare
in the model we have described, if the policy also causes the output of intermediate
goods to fall. Similarly, a policy that retards productivity growth can be benefi-
cial, if it promotes greater output of intermediates. The ambiguity reflects the two
market distortions that often will be present in an innovating economy. Not only
does the market fail to give appropriate incentives for innovation—insofar as private
agents generate externalities in the course of creating knowledge—but also there is
underproduction of those goods that are sold at prices in excess of their marginal pro-
duction costs. Ideally, two policy instruments are needed to target these two market
distortions.
   Rodriguez (1993) and Rodrik (1993) identify another potential use of policy in a
small, open economy similar to the one examined by Grossman and Helpman. They
assume, contrary to Grossman and Helpman, that the two final-goods industries rely
on intermediate inputs to different extents. This modification of the model creates
the possibility of multiple equilibria. If the manufacturers of the final good that uses
intermediates intensively decide to produce a great volume of output, they will have
much derived demand for intermediates. This makes entry into the intermediate-
goods sector profitable. The resulting economies of specialization raise productivity
for the final-goods producers and thus justify their great output. On the other hand,
if the producers of the final good that uses intermediates intensively decide to manu-
facture on a smaller scale, then there is less demand for the inputs and fewer varieties
will be developed. In the event, productivity will be lower, and again the produc-
ers' decisions will be justified. In such a setting, government policy (including trade
policy) often can be used to eliminate the "bad" equilibrium and thereby ensure


                                          54
coordination on the Pareto-superior outcome?
   In a world of large trading economies, the policies of one country can affect in-
novative activity in the others. Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.1O) and Ofer
(1991) study the international transmission of policy effects. Both examine world
economies with two large countries, with Grossman and Helpman assuming that in-
novation serves to improve the qualities of a fixed set of goods and Ofer assuming that
it expands the variety of differentiated products- In both cases, there are two final
goods, one assembled from intermediate inputs and the other from human capital and
unskilled labor, and in both cases R&D is assumed to be the most human-capital-
intensive activity, while the production of traditional final goods is assumed to be the
least so. In these settings, if one country introduces a small, permanent subsidy to
R&D the steady-state rate of productivity growth will fall in its trade partner. En
other words, when a country promotes its research sector, it typically does so at least
partly at the expense of innovation abroad. In the quality-ladders model, this occurs
because trade in final goods equalizes factor prices, and the R&D subsidy raises the
cost of human capital in both countries. The resulting increase in innovation costs
means a decline in the incentive for research in the country where private agents bear
the full, unsubsidized cost of R&D. In the model with horizontal product differen-
tiation, the transmission mechanism is somewhat different. There, the increase in
innovation in the subsidizing country raises the real effective cost of capital to firms
contemplating research abroad. Both Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.1O) and
 Ofer (1991) find that the negative effect on innovation in the trade partner country
 is never so large as to more than offset the positive effect in the subsidizing country.
 In each of these cases, a subsidy to R&D in one country leads to an acceleration of
 aggregate innovation in the world economy. But in Grossman and Helpman (1990a),
 where countries are assumed to differ in their productivity in the research lab, a
 different result is possible. A subsidy to R&D in the country that has a compara-
   Murphy et al. (1989), Krugman (1991),and Cicconi and Matsuyama (1993) also study multiple
 equilibria that can arise when there are increasing returns to scale and imperfect competition. Of
 these, only Krugman examines an open economy, and he does not explicitly mention the potential
 use   of policy in selecting among equilibria.

                                                  55
  tive disadvantage in this activity actually can lead to a decline in the overall rate of
  productivity growth in the world economy.
      Grossman and Helpman (199 Ia, chJO) also consider the effects of production sub-
  sidies and trade policies. A country that subsidizes production of knowledge-intensive
  intermediates with the aim of boosting
                                         profitability and thereby spurring innovation
  may be surprised to find that the subsidy actually reduces national and global in-
  novation rates. The direct effect of a subsidy to firms producing intermediates is
 to raise their demand for primary factors. Not all of these increased demands
                                                                                   can
 be met with resources released from the
                                           traditional manufacturing sector, because
 traditional manufacturing uses relatively little human capital
                                                                compared to what is
 needed to produce intermediates. This means that some of the expanded employ-
 ment of human capital in the intermediate-goods sector must come at the expense
 of R&D activity. The reallocation of resources is effected by a rise in the return to
 human capital, which causes the R&D labs to release the resources demanded by the
 subsidized producers.
    Trade policies generate more complicated responses. Of course an import tariff or
an export subsidy combines a production subsidy with a consumption tax. Consider
the effects of uniform protection of the
                                           high-technology manufacturing sector; that
is, an equal rate tariff on all intermediates purchased from abroad combined with an
equal rate subsidy on all foreign sales of domestically-produced intermediates. The
production subsidy alone would impede innovation, as we have just noted, but the
consumption tax has the opposite effect. It reduces demand for intermediates in
the policy-active country and so tends to free resources for use in other activities.
Taken together, the effect of the production subsidy and consumption tax on R&D
investment depends on the net trade position of the policy-active country. If the
country that protects its intermediate producers is one that exports these high-tech
products on net, then the subsidy component of the trade policy is more important,
and R&D activity declines. On the other hand, if the country is a net importer of
intermediates, the tax component dominates, and R&D activity expands. Since the
tong-run net trade position in high-technology products tends to go hand in hand with


                                         56
comparative advantage in R&D, protection of the high-technology sector is likely to
spur global innovation if and only if the protection is enacted by the country with
comparative disadvantage in research.
   In leaving this section, we emphasize that our discussion has focused on the re-
sponse of innovation rates, not aggregate welfare. A complete normative analysis
would need to account for the terms-of-trade effects of policy in goods and asset mar-
kets, and for the transitional effects of policy in addition to those that persist in the
steady state. No such complete analysis has yet been performed for a large, open.
innovating, economy.


4.2 Intellectual Property Rights and North-South Trade
We have noted that some protection of intellectual property rights is a sine qua non
for private investment in new technologies- Yet even where patents and copyrights are
strictly enforced, such protection is rarely perfect. There are tremendous incentives
for followers to imitate the technological leaders and little prospect that the legal
authorities will be able to prevent all forms of reverse engineering and "inventing
around the patent".
    Imitation plays an especiaUy important role in some trade between the North and
 the South. This is true for several reasons. First, firms in the South have shown only
 limited ability to develop innovative products of their own. Second, several of the
 governments of less developed nations have been somewhat lax in their enforcement
 of foreign intellectual property rights. Finally, the low wage rates of the South make
 it an especially attractive place for copying some kinds of products,because successful
 imitators can expect to earn substantial profits in their competition againstinnovators
 who bear higher labor costs.
   34The result must be qualified slightly, inasmuch as a country with comparative disadvantage in
 R&D may nonetheless become a net exporter of high-technology products in the steady state. This
 could happen if the country borrowed heavily along the path to the steady state, in which case it
 would need to run trade surplus in order to service its debt. In the event, the country might run
 positive trade surpluses in both sectors in the long run.



                                                  57
       The pattern of product innovation in the North and imitation in the South gives
rise to a product cycle in international trade. We described such trade in Section 1.3,
where we reviewed Krugman's (1979) model of exogenous product innovation and
technology transfer. Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.11) have extended Krug-
man's model to incorporate ecidogenous innovation and imitation based on profitabil-
ity considerations. They have used the extended model to study how North-South
trade affects the long-run rate of technological progress.TM
                                                                                              1/c
       Recall that Krugman posited a common CES utility function, it = [j000 c(z)adz]
for Northern and Southern households. He assumed that a unit of any good could
be produced anywhere with one unit of labor once its technology becomes known.
We maintain these assumptions here, but also assume that Northern researchers can
increase the stock of known products by dn by devoting a1/K1.., units of labor to
product development for a time dt. Here K,., is the stock of knowledge in the North,
assumed to be equal to the cumulative number of Northern research projects, it, by
appeal once more to the existence of learning externalities. In the South, a firm can
copy dn5 products previously developed by the North by devoting aM/Kg units of
labor to reverse engineering for a time di. The Southern knowledge stock K5 might
depend on the cumulative Southern experience at imitation or on that experience
plus the Northern experience at innovation, depending on whether or not there are
international spillovers of knowledge. For simplicity, we suppose here that there are
no such spitlovers, and specify K5 = it5, where ng is the number of imitation projects
previously completed in the South. Finally, we suppose that a Northern innovator and
Southern imitator who share the ability to produce the same differentiated product
engage in price competition. This means that only the low cost producer can make
positive sales and positive profits in any duopoly equilibrium.
       In the North, firms with the unique ability to produce a good that has not yet
been copied practice mark-up pricing. They charge the monopoly price PM = 11W/a,
where WN is the Northerr wage and also the unit production cost there.. In the South,

     35See also Segeratrom et a.L(1990) and Grossman and Belpinan (1991a, ch.12), who study models
of endogenous quality improvement with imitation in the South.


 •
                                                 58
successful imitators charge either the unconstrained monopoly price, PS = tog/a, or
the limit price, ps = wpj, whichever is less. Here we will suppose that the monopoty
price prevails. Then, if x denotes the sales of a firm producing in region i, the flow
of profits for a typical firm there is r = (1 — a)wx/a. Labor market equilibrium
requires 1N = (L,q —a;g)/np,r and xg = (Lg—aMgg)/ns, where L is the labor supply
in region i, n is the number of products manufactured there, g = n/n is the rate
of product innovation and gs = ñs/ng is the rate of increase in the technological
capacity of the South.
   The profit flow for a Southern imitator lasts forever. In a steady state in which
each country produces a constant fraction of the total number of products, we must
have g = g. Then the requirement that the return on investment equals the effective
cost of capital in the South implies
                               1—a IL5          \                                  (16)
                                 a     (c__9)P+9
                                        apj
where p once again is the subjective discount rate. This equation, describing labor
and financial market equilibrium in the South, appears as the horizontal line SS in
Figure 4. A Northern firm, on the other hand, faces not only the prospect of a falling
patent value due to ongoing innovation, but also the constant risk that a Southern
entrepreneur will target its product for imitation and so end its monopoly profit
stream. The latter risk raises the effective cost of capital to a Northern firm, so that
equality of the rate of return and the effective capital cost implies
                           1—afL,q        \n
                             a (——g)—=p+g+m
                               \1                                                  (17)

 where   m = is/np, is the rate of product imitation (fraction of Northern products
 copied per unit time) and also the instantaneous risk of loss of monopoly power for a
 Northern producer (assuming, as we do, that Southern imitators choose their targets
 randomly).
    In the long run, the fraction of goods produced in the North approaches the
 constant g/(g + m). Using this fact and (17), we can plot the equation representing
 Northern labor and financial market clearing as the upward sloping NN curve in Figure

                                           59
4. The intersection of NN and SS at E gives the steady-states rates of innovation and
imitation.
    From the figure it is immediate that product-cycle trade boosts the long-run rate
of product innovation in the North. The autarky innovation rate corresponds to the
point where the NN curve hits the vertical axis, because m = 0 in the absence of
Southern imitation. Since the NN curve is upward sloping, E must lie above and
to the right of this autarky point. Intuitively, Southern imitation has two distinct
effects on the incentive to innovate in the North. First, with imitation, each innovator
faces an eventual end to monopoly profits. This most obvious implication of the
imperfect protection of intellectual property rights serves to reduce the incentive to
innovate by raising the effective cost of capital on the right-hand side of (17). But
second, with imitation, some of the products originally invented in the North are later
manufactured by the South. This frees up Northern labor to produce more of the
remaining products (and also to conduct more R&D). As a result, each Northern firm
earns greater monopoly profits during its stay in the market, even though that stay is
more limited. It turns out that the second effect dominates in the model of horizontal
product differentiation with CES utility, and so imperfect protection of intellectual
property rights by the South actually serves to encourage technological progress?
   The figure can also be used to gauge the effects of region size on steady-state
rates of imitation and innovation. An increase in the size of.the North causes the
NN curve to shift upward, reducing the rate of imitation, but leaving the rate of
innovation unchanged.37 An increase in the size of the South shifts the SS curve
upward, increasing both the long-run rate of innovation and the long-run rate of
imitation. It can be shown, moreover, that the relative wage of the North rises
  36This result is not general, however. In a model of Northern quality improvements with South-
ern imitation of the current state-of-the-art, North-South trade can reduce the tong-run rate of
technological progress. See Grossman and llelprnan (1991a, ch.12).
  37This result relies on the assumption that there are no knowledge spillovers from North to South
and that the equilibrium wage gap is such that Southern firms charge monopoiy prices rather than
limit prices. If either of these assumptions is reversed, an increase in Li,, boosts the long-run rate
of innovation, g.



                                               60
when Lp., increases, while the relative wage of the South rises when Ls increases.
These results are the opposite of those derived by Krugman, who took the rates
of innovation and technology transfer to be exogenous and implicitly assumed that
product development and reverse engineering require no resources.
    Several authors have studied whether the South benefits in welfare terms from
protecting foreign intellectual property rights, and whether a failure to protect these
rights would damage the North. Chin and Grossman (1990) developed a partial-
equilibrium, duopoly model in which a Northern firm engages in cost-reducing R&D
while recognizing that its Southern competitor might or might not be able to copy its
improvements, depending on the property rights regime. In this setting, the North
always suffers from a failure of the South to protect intellectual property rights,
while the South typically gains from allowing copying? Deardorif (1992) established
similar results for product innovation. In his partial-equilibrium setting, there are
many potential new products that offer differing amounts of surplus and bear differ-
ing R&D costs. Although more new products are introduced when property rights
are protected, the South's gain from this typically is dwarfed by its loss of consumer
surplus due to monopoly pricing. Interestingly, Deardorff shows that as patent pro-
tection is extended to a larger and larger portion of the world, the effect on aggregate
 world welfare of extending protection further eventually becomes negative.
    A case where the South might wish to protect Northern intellectual property rights
 has been described by Diwan and Rodrik (1991). In their model, the North and
 South have different preferences over the direction that technological progress should
 take (e.g., the types of goods that should be invented). Then, patent protection in
 the South can induce Northern innovators to invent products more to the Southern
 consumers' liking, whereas a lack of such protection would lead to very undesirable
 products from the South's point of view.
    The analysis in Helpman (1993) is closest in spirit to what we have described
   In this partial equilibrium setting, a lack of enforcement of intellectual property rights always
 reduces the incentives to innovate in the North. The South could be harmed by the reduction in
 technological progress, but only if its share in world consumption of the product is very large.



                                                  61
 here. He considers a general equilibrium in which new goods are invented and man-
ufactured with labor in the North and old goods are manufactured with Labor in the
South. All consumers have CES preferences, so that Northern producers of goods
whose technologies have not yet been mastered in the South practice mark-up pric-
ing. Technology transfer to the South takes place at an exogenous rate m =
and requires no Southern resources. Helpman treats the rate of imitation as a policy
parameter reflecting the strictness of the South's property rights regime, and he sup-
poses that all Southern firms are able to produce any good whose technology diffuses
there, so that old goods are sold competitively. In this setting, a tightening of the
intellectual property rights regime as reflected in a fall in in spurs Northern inno-
vation upon impact, but slows the rate of innovation in the long run. If the world
economy is in a steady state before in falls, the equilibrium shift in the time profile
of new product development harms the South, as does the reallocation of production
from the low cost to the high cost producer and the adverse movement in the South's
terms of trade. In short, the South must lose from an exogenous fall in in. As for the
North, the change in the time profile of product availability and the reallocation of
production from North to South contribute to a welfare loss, but there are offsetting
effects due to an adjustment of the savings rate and a favorable movement in the
terms of trade. Still, the North must lose from a decline in in if the rate of imitation
is initially low.


4.3 Direct Foreign Investment and International Licensing
We have considered that some types of knowledge may flow across international bor-
ders as an inevitable consequence of the public-good nature of information. We have
also noted that some knowledge may flow from one country to another due to the
intentional actions of would-be imitators. But we have not examined the incentives
that innovators themselves have to transfer knowledge and technologies abroad.
   Technology transfer by innovating firms can take one of two forms. An innovator
can establish a wholly or partly-owned offshore subsidiary, and thereby maintain full
control over the use of its proprietary technology. Or it can license the technology

                                          62
in an arms-length transaction with a foreign firm, and rely on the enforcement of
contractual terms to limit the diffusion of its intellectual property. Much has been
written about the incentives firms have to engage in one or both of these types of
activities. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to review this literature thoroughly;
instead we briefly comment on a few themes and then point to some issues that the
literature has hardly addressed.
    There are two obvious reasons why a firm might wish to take its technology abroad.
First, production costs might be lower there. Second, the firm might be able to avoid
some of the costs of serving the foreign market, such as transportation chages and
tariff levies. Markusen (1984) and Helpman (1984b) have developed models of direct
foreign investment based on the first of these considerations, while Horstmann and
Markusen (1992) and Brainard (1993) provide modern treatments of the second.39
As Horstmann and Markusen show quite clearly, multinational firms are most likely
to emerge when the fixed costs of adding a plant or maintaining a subsidiary are
small, compared with the size of transport costs, trade barriers, and the fixed costs
of operating a firm. It should be noted that technology plays an important role in
these models of the multinational corporation in at least two respects. First, a theory
of multinational investment must explain not only why a firm would wish to locate
some of its activities offshore, but also why the firm would be able to compete with
locally owned establishments in performing these activities despite the disadvantages
that derive from unfamiliarity with local customs, language, business practices, etc.
Proprietary access to a unique technology provides just such an explanation. Second,
research and development is exactly the sort of firm-level fixed cost that generates
economies of multi-plant production.
   Licensing provides an alternative means to the same ends. By licensing its tech-
nology to a local firm, an innovator can reap the benefits of lower production costs, or
gain access to a protected market, without suffering the-penalties of operating in an
unfamiliar business environment.40 But licensing has its own costs and risks. First,
  39The recent Literature on the role of multinational corporations in international trade is reviewed
 by Krugman in Chapter 1 of this Handbook.
   40Feenstra and Judd (1982) have formulated a static model of monopolistic competition and

                                                 63
 since it is impossible to write a complete contract specifying every possible contin-
 gency that may arise, a patent holder may find itself unable to respond as flexibly to
 unforeseen events when it is locked into a contractual licensing arrangement as when
 it is operating its own manufacturing facility [see Ethier (1986)J. Second, an innova-
 tive firm may be unable to prevent all forms of opportunistic behavior by a licensee
 after its technology has been transferred; the licensee might, for example, use the
 technology in markets other thati the one specified in the agreement or it might use
 the knowledge it gains from the agreement as a springboard for developing a different
 or better technology of its own. Finally, the innovative firm may be unable to credibly
 commit to forego opportunities of its own. If a potential licensee expects that the
 licensor will eventually enter the market itself either by opening a local subsidiary
or with exports, its willingness to pay for the license will be diminished relative to
the case where it expects to enjoy a monopoly. Part of the incidence of any antici-
pated dissipation of profits will faU on the innovator that is looking to rent out its
technology [see Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.7)1.
    An additional risk associated with both direct foreign investment and licensing
is that they might speed up the process of imitation and diffusion. It may be that
learning spillovers are more prevalent when production takes place locally than when
goods are imported from a foreign manufacturing base. Then the innovating firm
must weigh the profit gains associated with having lower production costs against the
potential losses from losing its monopoly position more rapidly. Ethier and Markusen
(1991) study this aspect of a firm's decision problem.
    Many papers in the literature on direct foreign investment and licensing focus on
a firm's choice of how best to exploit its technological advantage once that advantage
has already been developed. In contrast, there have been very few papers that have
addressed the important question of how opportunities for direct investment and
licensing affect the pace and pattern of technological progress. For this, the static
trade in which the fixed ct of entry is interpreted to be an R&D charge arid firms can sell their
technologies developed in one country to producers in the other in order to take advantage of lower
production costs there. This model is analogous, in many ways, to Helpman's (1984b) model of
direct foreign investment.


                                               64
models—which have served well for investigating firms' optimal decisions at a point
in time—will not suffice.
   Grossman and Helpman (1991a, ch.7) have introduced direct foreign investment
and international licensing into a dynamic model; namely, the two-country model
of endogenous innovation with international knowledge spillovers that was described
in Section 3.1. They have shown that (costless) foreign investment or (costless) in-
ternational licensing of technologies can enlarge the set of divisions of the world
factor endowment that give rise to factor price equalization. In their analysis, some
firms that develop new technologies in the human-capital-rich country may find it
profitable to manufacture their newly-invented products (either themselves, or by
entering a licensing agreement) in the unskilled-labor-rich country. Then the long-
run pattern of trade may involve the human-capital-rich country as a net importer
of high-technology products, as subsidiaries of innovating firms export their finished
products back home. This, of course, is similar to the predictions about the trade
pattern in static models of multinational corporations; see, for example, Helpman
and Erugman (1985, chs.12,l3).
   The incentives for exploiting technological advantage through foreign production
are especially great in the context of North-South trade. In fact, Vernon's (1966)
seminal discussion of product-cycle trade envisioned not the production of old goods
by indigenous Southern producers, but rather the eventual shifting of production by
innovative Northern firms to their subsidiaries in the South. Lai (1992) attempts to
capture the original Vernon notion in a variant of Grossman and Helpman's (1991a,
ch. 11) model of the product cycle. He allows innovators to transfer their production
activities to the South costlessly once the technology becomes "standardized". This
happens randomly and exogenously, he assumes, some time after the new technol-
ogy has been introduced. In a similar vein, Liu (1992) introduces the possibility of
 technology licensing into the same Grossman and Helpman model. Licensing too is
 treated as costless, except that the technology must be adopted for use in the South
 before production can begin there. Adoption involves a fixed cost per product that
 varies with the stock of knowledge in the South.


                                          65
   These treatments of foreign subsidiaries and licensing pacts (including our own!)
are too simple, however. They neglect the above mentioned risks associated with
these types of activities, such as the risk of faster loss of monopoly power, the risk of
opportunistic behavior on the part of licensees, and the risk that contingencies will
arise that are not foreshadowed in the licensing agreement. The dynamic models must
be extended to incorporate these and other realistic aspects of the different modes
of technology transfer (some of which have been dealt with in the static literature),
before a convincing answer can be given to the question of how such transfers affect
the incentives for innovation.
   Another topic deserving further attention is how policies affect the transfer of
technology. Should governments in the North take actions to impede the transfer
of technology as is often suggested in the public policy debates, or would this have
adverse consequences for the rate at which new technologies are developed? And
what can the South do to encourage technology transfer to indigenous agents with-
out causing the Northern innovators to take their business elsewhere? To answer
these questions we will need models that pay closer attention to how knowledge is
transmitted within and between firms.




                                           66
References
(I) Aghion P. and P. Howitt, 1992, A model of growth through creative destruction,
      Econometrica, 60, 323-351.

[2] Arrow, KJ., 1962, Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for inven-
      tions, in: R.R. Nelson, ed., The rate and direction of inventive activity (Princeton
      University Press, Princeton) 609-626.

[3] Bardhan, PlC, 1970, Economic growth development and foreign trade (John
      Wiley and Sons, New York).

(41   Becker, G., 1952, A note on multi-country trade, American Economic Review,
      42, 558-568.

[5] Bernstein, LI. and P. Mohnen, 1994, International r&d spillovers between U.S.
      and Japanese r&d intensive sectors, National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper No. 4682.

[6] Bhagwati, J.N., 1958a, International trade and economic expansion, American
      Economic Review, 48, 941-953.

[7J Bhagwati, J.N., 1958b, Immiserizing growth: A geometrical note, Review of
      Economic Studies, 25, 201-205.

[8] Bloomfleld, A.I., 1978, The impact of growth and technology on trade in
      nineteenth-century British thought, History of Political Economy, 10, 608-635.

19] Boldrin, M. and J.A. Sheinkman, 1988, Learning by doing, international trade
   and growth: A note, in: SF1 Studies in the Sciences of Complexity (Addison-
      Wesley, Reading MA).

1101 Brainard, S. L., 1993, A simple theory of multinational corporations and trade
    with a trade-off between proximity and concentration, National Bureau of Eco-
      nomic Research Working Paper No. 4269.


                                            67
[11] Bresiz, ES., P.R. Krugman, and D. Tsiddon, 1993, Leapfrogging in international
    competition: A theory of cycles in national technological leadership, American
    Economic Review, 83, 121 1-1219.

[12] Chin, J. and G.M. Grossman, 1990, International property rights and north-
    south trade, in: R.W. Jones and A.O. Krueger, eds., The political economy of
    international trade (Basil Blackwell, Cambridge, MA) 90-107.

[13) Cicconi, A., and K. Matsuyama, 1993, Start-up costs and pecuniary externalities
     as barriers to economic development, Institute for Empirical Macroeconomics
    Discussion Paper No. 83, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis.

[14] Coe, D.T. and E. Helpman, 1994, International r&d spiflovers, National Bureau
    of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4444.

[15] Davis, D.R., 1994, Intra-industry trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo approach,
    rnimeo, Harvard University.

[16J Deardorif, A.V., 1992, Welfare effects of global patent protection, Economica,
    59, 35-51.

[17] Dinopoulos, E., J.F. Oehmke and P.S. Segerstrom, 1993, High-technology-
    industry trade and investment: The role of factor endowments, Journal of Inter-
    national Economics, 34, 49-71.

[18] Diwan. I. and D. Rodrik, 1991, Patents, appropriate technology, and north-south
     trade, Journal of International Economics, 30, 27-47.

['91 Dixit, A.K. and J.E. Stiglitz, 1993, Monopolistic competition and optimum prod-
    uct diversity: Reply, American Economic Review, 83, 302-304.

[20] Dornbush, R., S. Fischer and P.A. Samuelson, 1977, Comparative advantage,
    trade and payments in a Ricardian model with a continuum of goods, American
    Economic Review, 67, 823-839.



                                         68
[21] Eaton, J. and S. Kortum, 1994, International patenting and technology diffusion,
    mimeo, Boston University.

[22] Ethier,W.J., 1982a, National and international returns to scale in the modern
    theory of international trade, American Economic Review, 72, 389-405.

[23] Ethier, W.J., 1982b, Decreasing cost in international trade and Frank Graham's
    argument for protection, Econometrica, 50, 1243-1268.

[24] Ethier, W.J., 1986, The multinational firm, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80,
     805-833.

[25] Ethier, W.J. and J.R. Markusen, 1991, Multinational firms, technology diffusion
     and trade, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.3825.

[26] Feenstra, FL, 1990, Trade and uneven growth, National Bureau of Economic
     Research Working Paper No. 3276.

[27] Feenstra, R., and K. Judd, 1982, Tariffs, technology transfer and welfare, Journal
     of Political Economy, 90, 1142-1165.

[28] Findlay, R., 1984, Growth and development in trade models, in: LW. Jones and
     P.O. Kenen, eds., Handbook of international economics, vol.1 (North-Holland,
     Amsterdam) 185-236.

[29] Findlay, R. and H. Grubert, 1959, Factor intensities, technological progress and
     the terms of trade, Oxford Economic Papers, 11111-121.

[301 Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman, 1990a, Comparative advantage and long-run
     growth, American Economic Review, 80, 796-815.

[31] Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman, 1990b, Trade, innovation and growth, Amer-
     ican Economic Review, 80 (Papers and Proceedings) 86-91.

[32] Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman, 1991a, Innovation and growth in the global
     economy (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).

                                            69
[33] Grossman, G.M., and E. Helpman, 1991b, Quality ladders in the theory of
    growth, Review of Economic Studies, 58, 43-61.

[34] Grossman, G.M., and EL Helpman, 1991c, Trade, knowledge spillovers and
    growth, European Economic Review, 35, 517-526.

[35] Helpman, E., 1984a, Increasing returns, imperfect markets, and trade theory, in:
     R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of international economics, vol.1
    (North-Holland, Amsterdam) 325-365.

[36] Helpnian, E., 1984b, A simple theory of trade with multinational corporations,
    Journal of Political Economy, 92, 451-472.

[37] Helpman, E., 1993, Innovation, imitation and intellectual property rights, Econo-
    metrica, 61, 1241-1280.

[38] Helpman, E. and P.R. Krugman, 1985, Market structure and foreign trade (The
     MIT Press, Cambridge, MA).

[39] Hicks, J.R., 1953, An inaugural lecture, Oxford Economic Papers, 5, 117-135.

[40] Horstmann, I.J. and J.R. Markusen, 1992, Endogenous market structures in
     international trade, Journal of International Economics, 32, 109-129.

[41] Erwin, D.A. and P.J. Klenow, 1994, Learning-by-doing spillovers in the semicon-
     ductor industry, Journal of Political Economy, 102, forthcoming.

[42] Jaffe, A., M. Trajtenberg and R. Henderson, 1993, Geographic localization of
     knowledge spillovers as evidenced by patent citations, Quarterly Jowrnal of Eco-
     nomics, 108, 577-598.

[43] Jones, R.W., 1961, Comparative advantage and the theory of tariffs: A multi-
    country, multi-commodity model, Review of Economic Studies, 28, 161-175.

[44] Jones, R.W., 1965, The structure of simple general equilibrium models, Journal
     of Political Economy, 73, 557-572.

                                          70
[45] Jones, R.W., 1970, The role of technology in the theory of international trade,
    in: R.Vernon, ed., The technology factor in international trade (National Bureau
    of Economic Research, New York) 73-92.

[461 Judd, K.L., 1985, On the performance of patents, Econometrica, 53, 567-586.

[47] Krugman, P.R., 1979, A model of innovation, technology transfer, and the world
    distribution of income, Journal of Political Economy, 87, 253-266.

[48] Krugman, P.R., 1986, A 'technology gap' model of international trade, in: K.
    Jungenfelt and D. Hague, eds., Structural adjustment in developed open eco-
    nomics (Macmillan Press, London) 35-49.

[49] Krugman, P.R., 1987, The narrow moving band, the dutch disease, and the
    competitive consequences of Mrs.Thatcher: Notes on trade in the presence of
    dynamic scale economics, Journal of Development Economics, 27, 41-55.

[50] Krugman, P.R., 1991, History vs. expectations, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     106, 651-667.

[51] Lai, E., 1992, International intellectual property rights protection and the rate
     of product innovation, mimeo, Vanderbilt University.

[52] Lichtenberg, F., 1992, R&D investments and international productivity differ-
     ences, in: H. Siebert, ed., Economic growth in the world economy: Symposium
     1992 (Tubingen, J.C.B. Mohr).

[53] Lucas, RE. Jr., 1988, On the mechanics of economic development, Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 22, 3-42.

[54] Markusen, J.R., 1984, Multinationals, multi-plant economies, and the gains from
     trade, Journal of International Economics, 14, 205-226.

[55] Markusen, J.R., 1991, First mover advantages, blockaded entry, and the eco-
    nomics of uneven development, in: E. Helpman and A. Razin, eds., International
     trade and trade policy (The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA) 245-269.

                                          71
[56] Markusen, J.R., and L.E.O. Svenson, 1985, Trade in goods and factors with
     international differences in technology, International Economic Review, 26, 175-
     192.

[57] Matsuyama, K., 1992, Agricultural productivity, comparative advantage and
     economic growth, Journal of Economic Theory, 58, 317-334.

(58] Murphy, K.M., A.Shleifer and R.W. Vishny, 1989, Industrialization and the big
     push, Journal of Political Economy, 97, 1003-1026.

[59] Ofer, C., 1991, International effects of trade policy" MA dissertation, Tel-Aviv
     University (Hebrew).

[60] Posner, M.V., 1961, International trade and technological progress, Oxford Eco-
     nomic Papers, 13, 323-341.

[61] Ricardo, D., 1951-1955, in: P. Sraffa, ed., The works and correspondence of
     David Ricardo (Cambridge).

[62] Rivera.Batiz, L.A. and P.M. Romer, 1991, International trade with endogenous
     technological change, European Economic Review, 35, 715-721.

[63] Rodriguez, A., 1993, The division of labor and economic development, mimeo,
     Stanford University.

[64] Rodrik, D., 1993, Do low-income countries have a high-wage option? National
     Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4451.

[65] Segerstorm, P.S., T.C.A. Anant and E. Dinopoulos, 1990, A Schumpeterian
    model of product life cycle, American Economic Review, 80, 1077-1091.

[66] Stokey, N., 1991, Human capital, product quality, and growth, Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 425, 587-616.

[67] Taylor, M.S., 1993, Quality ladders and Ricardian trade, Journal of International
    Economics, 34, 225-243.

                                         72
[68] Vernon, R., 1966, International investment and international trade in the product
    cycle, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 80, 190-207.

[69] Wilson, C.A., 1980, On the general structure of Ricardian models with con-
     tinuum of goods: Application to growth, tariff theory, and technical change,
     Econometrica, 48, 1675-1702.

[70] Yanagawa, N., 1993, Economic development in a world with many countries,
     mimeo, Keio University.

[71] Young, A., 1991, Learning by doing and the dynamic effects of international
    trade, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 105, 369-405.




                                          73
            Figure 1




   px/py
            D
             3
                              S



3t /a
 xy
                              D3
        D



                       D2
a Ia
 xy


                                    x
    0                          L*

             ax             ax a
       Figure 2




w*/w




                  z
0
    Figure 3




                   B
               0




A
0
    Figure 4




g
               N




      E
S                  S



N




                       m
0
 To order any of these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
 Papers or the papers in a single area, see instructions inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
 Working Papers and Reprints ean be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.
 Nuniher        Author(s)                       Title

 4869           Hany Grubezt                   The Effect of Taxes on Investment and              9/94
                Joel Slemrod                   Income Shifting to Puerto Rico

 4870           Dani Rodrik                    What Does (he Pot jtjcaJ Economy Literature        9/94
                                               on Trade Policy (Not) Tell Us That We
                                               Ougbt to Know?

4871            Lan E. 0. Svensson             Estimating and Interjxeting Forward                9/94
                                               Interest Rates: Sweden 1992-1994

4872            George J.   Borjas             Immigration and Welfare, 1970-1990                 9/94
4873            JoséDe (iregorio               Credit Markets and the Welfare Costs              10/94
                Federico Sturzenegger          of Inflation
4874            Brandlce 3. Canes              Following in Her Footsteps? Women's Choices      10,94
                Harvey S. Rosen                of College Majors and Faculty Gender Composition
4875            Raglwram G. Rajan              What Do We Know about Capital Structure?          10,94
                Luigi Zingales                 Some Evidence from International Data
4876           Gene Grossman                   Foreign Investment with Endogenous Protection     10,94
               Ethanan Hetpman

4877           Gene Grossman                   Electoral Competition and Special Interest
               Ethanan Helpman                 Politics
4878           C. Keith I-lead                 The Attraction of Foreign Manufacturing           10/94
               John C. kits                    Investments; Investment Promotion and
               Deborah L. Swenson              Agglomeration Economies
4879           David M. Cutler                 Market Failure in Small Group Health Insurance    10i94

4880           Douglas Holtz-Eakin             Health Insurance and the Supply of
               John It Penrod                  Entrepreneurs
               Harvey S. Rosen

4881           Nouriel Roubini                 Taxation and Endogenous Growth in Open            10/94
               Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti      Economies

4882           Nouriet Roubini                Optimal Taxation of Human and Physical Capital
               Clan Maria Milesi-Ferretti     in Endogenous Growth Models

4883           Raquel Fernandez               Public Education and Income Distribution: A        10,94
               Richard Rogerson               Quantitative Evaluation of Education Finance Reform
To order any or these papers, see instructions at the end or the list. To subscribe to all FiBER Working
Papers or the papers in a single area, see ins*nsctions Inside the back cover. A complete list ot NBER
                                                                        our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using
                                               Title                                                Date
Number          Author(5
                                                Precautionaiy Saving and Social Insurance           10/94
4884            R. Glenn Hubbard
                Jonathan Skinner
                Stephen   P. Zeldes

                Martin Feldstein                Fiscal Policies. Capital Fonnalion and Capitalism   10,94
4885

                Oliver Hart                     Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role         10/94
4886
                John Moore                      of Hard Claims in Constraining Management

4887            Ricardo J. Caballero            Explaining Investment Dynamics in U.S.              10,94
                Eduardo M.R.A. Engel            Manufacturing: A Generalized (S4 Approach

4888            Martin Feldstein                Measuring Money Growth When Financial               10/94
                James H. Stock                  Markets Axe Changing

                 Mark Hooker                    Unemployment Effects of Military Spending:          10,94
4889
                 Michael lcnetter               Evidence from a Panel of Stales

4890             John R. Graham                 Market liming Ability and Volatility                10/94
                 Campbell It Harvey             Implied in Investment Newsletters'
                                                Asset Allocation Recommendations

 4891            W. Kip Viscusi                 Cigarette Taxation and the Social                   10)94
                                                Consequences of Smoking

 4892            Alan M. Taylor                 Domestic Saving and International                   10,94
                                                Capita! Flows Reconsidered

                 Maurice Obstield                The Intertemporal Approach to the                  10,94
 4893
                 Kenneth Rogoff                  Current Account

 4894            Michael M. Knetter              Why Are Retail Prices in Japan So High?:           10j94
                                                 Evidence fivrni German Expat Prices

 4895            Peter Diamond                   Insulation of Pensions from Political Risk          10/94


 48%             Lawrence H. Goulder             Environmental Taxation and the "Double              10/94
                                                 Dividend': A Reader's Guide

 4897            A. Lans Bovenberg               Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence      10/94
                 Lawrence H. Goulder             of Other Taxes: General Equilikium Analyses

 4898                                            Speculative Macks on Pegged Exchange Rates:         10,94
                 Bairy Eichengreen
                 Andrew K. Rose                  An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference
                 Charles Wyplosz                 to the European Monetaiy System
To order any or these papers, see instructions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all NBER Working
Papers or the papers In a single area, see instructions Inside the back cover. A complete list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints an be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at uber.harvard.edu.

Number         Author(s)                       Title                                            Date

4899           Shane Greenstein                From Superininis to Supezcomputers: Estimating   10)94
                                               Surplus in the Computing Market

49             Orazie P. Attanasio             IRAs and Household Saving Revisited:             10,94
               Thomas C. DeLefre               Some New Evidence

4901           Timothy F. Bresnahan            The Competitive Crash in Large-Scale             10,94
               Shane Greenstein                Commercial Computing

4902           Joel Slemrod                    Free Trade Taxation and Protectionist Taxation   10,94

4903           Anal Razin                      Resisting Migration: The Problems of Wage        10)94
               Efraim Sadka                    Rigidity and the Social Burden

4904           Ernst R. Bemdt                  The Roles of Marketing, Product Quality and      10)94
               Linda Bui                       Price Competilicai in the Growth and
               David Reiley                    Composition of the U.S. Anti-Ulcer
               Glen Urban                      Drug lnthisft7

4905           Thomas C. Kinnaman              How a Fee Per-Unit Garbage Affects               10,94
               Don Fullerton                   Aggregate Recycling in a Model with
                                               Heterogeneous HOUSehOLdS

4906           Daniel S. Hamennesh             Aging and Productivity. Rationality and          10,94
                                               Matching: Evidence from Economists

4907           Kooyul Jung                     Investment Opportunities, Managerial             10)94
               Yong-Cheol Kim                  Discretion, and the Security Issue
               René M. Stulz                   Decision

4908           Jun-Koo Kang                    How Different is Japanese Corporate              10,94
               René M. Stulz                   Finance? An Investigation of the
                                               Information Content of New Security Issues

4909           Robesi J. Barro                 Democracy and Growth                             l094
4910           Richard B. Freeman              Crime and the Job Market                         l0j94

4911           Rebecca M. Blank                The Dynamics of Part-Time Work                   11j94

4912           George 3. Boijas                Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human Capital      11)94
                                               Externalities

4913           George I. Borjas                Who Leaves? The Outznigralion of the             11)94
               Bernt Bratsberg                 Foreign-Born

4914           Christopher!. Ruhm              Economic Conditions and Alcohol Problems         11,94
                                                                                           NBER Working
To order any of these papers, see Instnictions at the end of the list. To subscribe to all
Papers or the papers In a single area, see instructions inside the back  cover. A complete   list of NBER
Working Papers and Reprints can be accessed on the Internet by using our gopher at nber.harvard.edu.

                                                     Title                                                 Date
Number           Author(s)

                                                     Cadillac Contracts and Up-Front Payments:             11j94
4915             Aaron S. Edith
                                                     Efficient Investment Under Expectation
                                                     Damages

                 James M. Potetha                    Government Intervention in the Markets for            11/94
4916
                                                     Education and Health Care: How and Why?

                                                     High Wage Workers and High Wage Finns                 11,94
4917             John M. Abowd
                 Francis Krarnarz
                 David N. Margolis

                 Richard B. Freeman                  An Economic Analysis of Works Councils                1li94
4918
                 Edward P. Lazear

                                                     A Model of Fiat Money and Barter                      11194
4919              Fumio Hayashi
                  Akiluiko Matsui

4920              Laurence C. Baker                   Does Competition From lIMOs Affect                    11/94
                                                      Fee-For-Service Physicians?

                  Mitchell A. Petersen                The Effect of Credit Market Competition               11/94
4921
                  Raghuram G. Rajan                   on Lending Relationships

4922              Christopher L. Erickson             Wage Differentials in Italy: Market Foites,           11194

                  Andrea lchino                       Institutions, and Inflation

                  Richard C. Marston                  Tests of Three Parity Conditions: Distinguishing      11/94
 4923
                                                      Risk Prernia and Systematic Forecast Errors

                                                      Interest 4Sflneati,.n Rules. Financing Patterns.      1 1j94
 4924             Kenneth A. Froot
                  James R. Hines, Jr.                 and the Operations of U.S. MUltinatiOnals

                  Christopher .1. Rohm                Do Pensions Increase the Labor Supply of              11/94
 4925
                                                      Older Men?

                   Gene M. Grossman                   Technology and Trade                                  1 1j94
 4926
                   Elhanan Helpman


          Copies of the above working papers can be obtained by sending $5.00 per copy (plus $10.00 per order for
 postage and handling for all locations outside the continental U.S.) to Working Papers, NBER. 1050 Massachusetts
 Avenue. Cambridge. MA 02138-5398. Advance payment is required on all orders. Payment may be made by check
 or credit card. Checks should be made payable to the NBER and must be iii llars drawn on a U.S. bank. If
 paying by credit card, include the cardholder's name, account number and expiration date. For all mail orders, please
 be sure to include your return address and telephone number. Working papers may also be ordered by telephone
 (617-868-39U)). or by fax (617-868-2742).
                                National Bureau of Economic Research




                                                                                          Furor
                                                               Academic Libraries/                  Academic Librarlesi
                                                      Standard Faculty Members           Standard    Faczthy Members
 O Fun subscriptions                                  $1300           $650              $1625             $975
Paillal subscriptions
 o Coqorate Finance                                     300             75                 350             110
 o Stodcs, Bonds, and Foreign Currency                  300             75                 350             110
 o InternatIonal Finance and MacroeconomIcs             270            135                 350             210
 o International Trade and investment                   270            135                 350             210
 0 Monetary Economics                                   150             75                 200             110
 o Economic FluctuatIons                                270            135                 350             210
 o L.ong-Aun Economic Growth                            150             75                 200             110
 0 Sources of ProductMty Growth                          70             35                  85              50
0 TaxatIon                                              270            135                 350             210
OLaborStudles                                           270            135                 350             210
OEconomlcsofHealthandHealthCare                         ISO             75                 200             110
flEconomlcsoftheElderly                                  70             35                  85              50
o IndustrIal OrganizatIon                                70             35                  85              50

o TechnIcal Working Papers                       70                     35                  85               50
o HIstorical Development of the American Econonw 70                     35                  85               50
• A full subscription Includes all topics listed under pa'liaI subscrlptlonC except for Technical Worldng Papers and papers
   on the Historical Development of the American Economy. These must be oitered In addition to the full subscription.
  Please Inquire about subsaipllon prices for Africa and Austraria.



                                              PAYMENT OPTIONS
  o YES! Please begin n subscription to the NBER Working Paper Series. I have indicated above which papers I
  would like to receive.
                                                                Please mail my papen to this address:
  By Thone     (617) 868-3900
                                                                Name _________________________________
  By FAX       (617) 868-2742
  By Mail:     Publications Depaxtment                          Address -—________________________
               National Bureau of Economic Research
               1050 Massacbusdts Ave.
               Cambridge, MA 02138                              _____
  o Payment in the amount of _______ enclosed.
  Ofleasechargemy OS/ISA              DMaste,Card
  Card Number ______                                            Th
  Card epht_______                                              FAX:
  Signature
