NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIXES: OF THE FORWARD
DISCOUNT PUZZLE

Robert P. Flood
Andrew K. Rose

Working Paper No. 4928

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994
We thank Kellett Hannah and the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco for assistance with the

data. This work was conducted in part while Rose was a consultant at the IMF Research
Department. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Finance and
Macroeconomics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Robert P. Flood and Andrew K. Rose. AU rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4928
November 1994

FIXES: OF THE FORWARD
DISCOUNT PUZZLE

ABSTRACT

Regressions of ex post changes in floating exchange rates on appropriate interest
differentials typically imply that the high-interest rate currency tends to appreciate, the "forward

discount puzzle." Using data from the European Monetary System, we find that a largepart of

the forward discount puzzle vanishes for regimes of fixed exchange rates. That is, deviations
from uncovered interest parity appear to vary in a way which is dependent upon the exchange

rate regime. By using the many EMS realignments, we are also able to quantify the "peso
problem.'

Robert P. Flood
Research Department
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER

I: Introduction
It is well known that deviations from uncovered interest parity (IJIP) are pervasive
and persistent.1/ In particular, currencies with high interest rates tend to appreciate
relative to those with lower interest rates, contrary to the hypothesis of UTP. Since foreign
exchange markets are among the deepest markets in the world, explaining UIP deviations is
an interesting and important task for international finance researchers.

In this short paper, we contribute to the literature in two ways. First, we test UIP
for fixed exchange rate currencies. Nearly all of the relevant literature has tested (and
rejected) UIP using data for floating exchange rates. A typical finding is that the slope
coefficient from a regression of the ex post change in the exchange rate on the appropriate
interest differential is usually negative, economically and statistically far below the UIP

value of + 1. We find it easy to produce such results using daily data from the 1980s and
1990s pooled across a number of countries which are floating vis-a-vis the American

dollar. However, when we use fixed exchange rate data from the Exchange Rate
Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System (EMS), we find that UIP fares much

better. Instead of being negative, the slope coefficient is typically around +.6, though still
significantly below its hypothesized value of unity.

Our second contribution stems from the fact that the ERM has experienced a number
of discrete exchange rate realignments (and other such events) since the EMS began in

1979. Many of these realignments were anticipated by the financial markets. Market
anticipations of an event which does not occur sufficiently frequently in the sample leads to

small-sample bias in UIP regressions. This bias is commonly referred to as the "peso

1/ Hodrick (1987), Froot and Thaler (1990), and Lewis (1993) provide recent surveys.

2
problem". We attempt to quantify this bias by pooling our data across currencies, and
comparing regression results when the realignments are included in the sample to those

when the realignment observations are excluded. While there is no guarantee that the 54
realignments which the ERM experienced in our sample are enough to constitute a large

sample (especially as these events are not independent across country or time), our best

guess is that the peso problem leads to a bias of around -.35, the difference between the
slope coefficient in the UIP regression when the latter is estimated with and without
realignments.

In section II of the paper, we describe our data set and empirical methodology. Our
empirical results are present and discussed in section III; a brief interpretation concludes.

II: Methodology and Data
The hypothesis of uncovered interest parity can be expressed as:

(l+i1) =

(l+i*t)E%(S%÷b)ISt

where: 1L represents the return on a domestic asset at time t of maturity

(1)

i" is the return

on a comparable foreign asset; S is the domestic currency price of a unit of foreign
exchange; and E(.) represents the expectations operator conditional upon information
available at t.
We follow the literature in taking natural logarithms and ignoring small cross terms

by considering only countries with "low' interest rates. Rearranging, we derive:

3

- s)

—> S+ S = a

(j..j*)

+ /3(i..i*) + L

where: s is the natural logarithm of s;

(2)

is the forecasting error realized at t+ from a

forecast of the exchange rate made at time t; and a and j3 are regression coefficients.
Since

is a forecasting error, it is assumed to be stationary and orthogonal to all

information available at time t, including interest rates; hence OLS is a consistent estimator

of(3.
Equation (2) has been used as the workhorse for most of the extant UIP literature.

The null hypothesis of UIP can be expressed as Ho: a=O, (3=1. Researchers have
typically estimated (3 to be significantly negative (3 estimate, and a to be non-trivial.

In practice, we modify (2) in two slight ways. First, we pool together data from a
number of different countries, an admissible way of increasing the sample under the null

hypothesis. Second, we use data of daily frequency for exchange rate forecasts of usually

three months horizon. The fact that

is greater than unity induces to have a moving

average "overlapping observation" structure. We take account of this by estimating our
covariance matrices with the well-known Newey-West estimator, with an appropriate
number of off-diagonal bands.

We estimate (2) on two different data sets: one for flexible exchanges, one for fixed
exchange rates. Both data sets consist of daily observations on exchange and interest rates;

the data have been check and corrected for various errors.1/

1'

Our data sets and programs are available upon receipt of a self-addressed ready-tomail package of four formatted high-density IBM diskettes.

4

Throughout, we use 90-day euro-currency interest rate series, observed at 10:00 am
Swiss time. We convert both interest differentials and exchange rate changes to annualized
percentages.

Our floating exchange rate data set consists of bilateral dollar rates quoted at noon in
London from 1981 through early October 1994 (the sample period was chosen to match the

EMS data set relatively closely, subject to restrictions of data availability). We include the
following countries, which float more or less cleanly relative to the United States:

Australia; Canada; France; Germany; Japan; Switzerland; and the UK.jj
In Figure 1, the 90-day change in the (natural logarithm of the) exchange rate,
regressand of equation (2), is plotted (on the ordinate) against the 90-day interest
differential (regressor of (2), on the abscissa).

The figure, like our statistical work, pools

Urn nfl,,, Market: IO4*U%0 04,0
100

together the observations from all countries
50

and time periods. Figure 1 appears to be a
cloud of observations without any clear

pattern. There does not appear to be a clear

-50

-100
20

d

P.rC.MIOgeS

EoCrange Rote Cnanges Agarnst Interest

tendency for the observations to be sloped in

40

Ditferentials

Figure 1: Floating Rate Data

any particular way.

jj Canada smooths its exchange rate; the European exchange rates are linked through the
ERM. These reasons may lead one to believe that there should not be enormous
differences between the results from our different data sets. We view the issue as
debatable, and try to let the data speak for themselves.

5

Our "fixed" exchange rate data set covers all members of the ERM from its inception

in March 1979 through early March l994./ We treat Germany as the anchor of the
ERM, and measure all bilateral rates in DM terms. The other long-term members of the
ERM have been: Belgium-Luxembourg; Denmark; France; Ireland; Italy; and the

Netherlands. Portugal, Spain, and the UK were later entrants; Italy and the UK left the
ERM in mid-September 1992. The exchange rate data are cross-rates derived from dollar

rates, observed at 2:15 Swiss time by the BIS at the official "ecu fix". For this data set,
we have both 90- and 30-day euro-currency interest rates.
The ERM has experienced a large number of "events" which have affected European

exchange rates ex post. Counting events for different countries individually, there have
been 54 realignments of bilateral DM central parities.2/ Many of these events were
anticipated by the financial markets, with varying degrees of accuracy. Comparing
estimates of /3 when (2) is estimated with and without the realignment observations is a

simple way to estimate the well-known small-sample peso problem bias. When we exclude

observations which include these events, we induce the bias. We hope that inclusion of
these observations should remove the peso problem. However, there is no guarantee that

our 54 realignments are sufficient to constitute a large sample, since they are not

independent events./

1/ We recognize that the ERM was not, strictly speaking, a perfectly fixed exchange rate
system, since it allowed minor currency fluctuations even for "narrow band" members.
2/ There have also been three entrances into the ERM, two exits from the system, one
narrowing of a bandwidth, and a number of widenings of bandwidths. In practice, we
ignore the last events, since central DM parity were not changed, and check for the
sensitivity of our results with respect to the others.
Since we either include or exclude all of the realignments from the sample, we are
really providing a maximal estimate of the peso problem bias.

I

6
Our pooled ERM data set is displayed in Figure 2. The top left panel displays the
30-day change in the exchange rate graphed against the corresponding 30-day interest rate

No Peahgr\meritS

No Pea1inrnertS
60

150

00

30

50
0

+

0

-30

-50 -[
0

20

6b

40

•

ob

0

10

20

30

40

3b

40

Three Month Market

One Month Market

PeaUgnments

Pe1iynnents
60

150
100

30

50

I
0

0

I

-50
0

&b

-30

eb

ci

ib

20

Annualized Percentages

Exchange Rate Changes Against Interest DHfenentiais
Figure 2: Fixed Rate Data
differential. Only observations which do not include an actual ERM realignment are
plotted. Immediately below is an exactly comparable graph which displays only
observations from the periods which do include an ERM realignment. The graphs to the
right are analogues for the 90-day market.

Since the data in Figure 2 are sometimes crowded closely together, we also include

"box and whisker" plots for the marginal distributions. These are displayed above (for

7
interest differentials) and to the right (for exchange rate changes) of the joint distribution

scatterplot. The line in the middle of the box marks the median; the box covers the
interquartile range (i.e., from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile). The whiskers
extend to upper and lower "adjacent values"; 150% of the interquartile range rolled back to
the nearest data point. Points beyond adjacent values are usually considered to be outliers.
For both the 30- and 90-day markets, the joint distributions for observations without

realignments resemble shapeless clouds. However, there are stronger indications of a
positive relationship between exchange rate changes and interest differentials for the

observations with realignments, particularly in the 90-day market. We now proceed to
investigate this hunch with more rigorous statistical analysis.

III: Results
We estimated (2) on our pooled sample of data. Our results are displayed in Table I.
The first lines present estimates from the data set of floating exchange rates. The
first line estimates (2) for the entire sample; the second adds country-specific intercepts to
the regression specification. Consistent with the findings of the literature, /3 is estimated to

be negative and significantly below its hypothesized value of unity, in both cases. A
negative estimate of 3 is a standard finding in the international finance literature, and

constitutes the "forward discount puzzle'. This finding implies that there is a non-trivial

correlation between ,

the

disturbance in (2), and the interest differential.

The last lines present estimates from the EMS sample of fixed exchange rate

observations. There are four set of estimates: two each from the 30- and 90-day markets.
For each maturity, there are two sets of estimates. The first is estimated using the entire

8
Table I: Estimates of (2)

Floating-Rate Sample
Three-Month Equation
Three-Month Equation, country-specific intercepts

/3

cx

N

-.28
(.33)
-1.07

-1.08
(1.14)
n/a

19,971
19,971

(.44)

Fixed-Rate Sample
One-Month Equation, including realignments

One-Month Equaion, excluding realignments

Three-Month Equation, including realignments
Three-Month Equation, excluding realignments

.58
(.11)
.18
(.05)

.31

22,828

(.43)
.62
(.27)

21,859

.58
(.09)
.25
(.06)

.20
(.39)
.02
(.26)

22,493
19,610

and /3 are OLS coefficient estimates; their standard errors (estimated with a NeweyWest covariance estimator) are in parentheses. N denotes the total sample size.
cx

data sample; the other excludes all observations which overlap EMS realignments.

In all cases, /3 is estimated to be positive with the EMS data, and significantly greater

than zero at conventional significance levels. This result stands in sharp contrast to our

estimates derived from floating rates, and is our first chief result. However, the point
estimates of /3 are still significantly below the hypothesized value of unity. Thus, there still

appears to be a non-trivial correlation between e and (ii*), but it varies by exchange rate
regime.

Our second main result stems from the fact that /3 falls by an economically and

statistically significant amount when realignments are excluded from the sample. Inducing
such sample selection leads /3 to fall by around .35, a rough estimate of the peso problem
bias.

9

We have checked for the robustness of our two results with respect to a number of

perturbations of our basic methodology. For instance, we checked to see if our results
depend on the inclusion of country- or year-specific intercept "fixed effect" terms. We
have also excluded the later ERM entrants, and, separately, all observations after 1989.

Finally, we have estimated 3 on a country-by-country basis. Our chief results
(significantly positive

estimates for fixed exchange rate data, which fall significantly if

realignment observations are excluded) are essentially robust to such changes.

IV: Conclusion
It is well known that countries with floating exchange rates and high interest rates

tend to experience appreciations. This deviation from uncovered interest panty, known as
the "forward discount puzzle' does not appear to characterize our fixed exchange rate data

set. In particular, high interest rates are associated with subsequent (though not
proportionate) currency depreciation in the EMS. Using the same data, we have also found
that excluding periods of realignment from a regression Df exchange rate changes on

interest differentials, leads to a change in the slope coefficient of about -.35. We take the
latter to be an estimate of the much discussed "peso problem" bias.
There remain significant deviations from uncovered interest parity, although these are

much smaller in the EMS regime of fixed exchange rates than in floating rate regimes. We
hope that the contrasting results across exchange rate regimes may enable others to pin
down some of the remaining deviations from UIP, especially given our quantification of the

peso-problem bias. Explanations of the forward discount bias which emphasize
heterogeneous beliefs and trading strategies on foreign exchange markets (either by central

10

banks or by traders who are not fully rational) which are regime-dependent seem

particularly plausible to us.1I

j/ McCallum (1994) has made some progress along these lines.

11

References

Froot, Kenneth A. and Richard H. Thaler (1990) "Anomalies: Foreign Exchange' Journal
of Economic Perspectives 4-3, 179-192.
Hodrick, Robert J. (1987) The Empirical Evidence on the Efficiency of Forward and
Futures Foreign Erchange Markets. Chur: Harwood.

Lewis, Karen K. (1993) "International Financial Markets" forthcoming in The Handbook of
International Economics, (Grossman and Rogoff, eds).
McCallum, Bennett T. (1994) "A Reconsideration of the Uncovered Interest Parity
Relationship" NBER Working Paper No. 4113, and forthcoming Journal of Monetaty
Economics.

</ref_section>

