NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TAXES, TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER,
AND THE R&D ACTIVITIES OF
MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

James R. Hines, Jr.

Working Paper No. 4932

NATIONALBUREAUOF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 1994

I thank Jeffrey Geppert for outstanding research assistance, and Adam Jaffe and James Poterba
for helpful comments on an earlier draft. Financial support from the NSF (Grant No. SES9209373) and NBER is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research
programs in International Trade and Investment, Productivity, and Public Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research,

© 1994 by James R. Hines, Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper #4932
November 1994

TAXES, TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER,
AND THE R&D ACTIVITIES OF
MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

ABSTRACT
Multinational firms that use domestic technologies in foreignlocations are requiredto pay
royalties from foreign users to domestic owners. Foreign governments often tax these royalty
payments. High royalty tax rates raise the cost of imported technologies. This paper examines

the effect of royalty taxes on the local R&D intensities for foreign affiliates of multinational
corporations, lookingboth

at foreign-owned

affiliates in the United States and at American-owned

affiliates in other countries. The results indicate that higher royalty taxes are associated with
greater R&D intensity on the part of affiliates, suggesting that local R&D is a substitute for
imported technology.

James R. Hines, Jr.
John J. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 John F. Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

1. Introduction.
Many governments encouragethe developmentand use of new technologies within the
borders of their countries.

It is

not difficult to understand why they do so. It is widely believed that

the positive correlation between local economic affluence and the presence of technologically
advaiced industries implies that the use of new technologies enhances overall productivity. More
direct evidence generally supports the conclusion that the economic benefits of research and
development (R&D) activity extend to local firms other than those undertaking the R&D.' Since
there are reasons to expect that externality-generatingR&D activites may be underprovided by
markets in which developers of new technologies do not capture all of the economic benefits that the
technologies provide, various governments offer R&D-related tax subsidies.2 Governments that do
not offer R&D tax subsidies are often concerned that perhaps they should. There are, however, many
open questions about the impact of tax policy on the level of R&D.
Tax systems influencethe level and content of R&D activity through a variety of
channels. This paper focuses on R&D by multinational firms, and the impact of one particular set of
taxes: withholding taxes on cross-border royalty payments. Firms that develop new technologies in
their home countries and use the technologies in foreign locations are required to pay royalties from
foreign affiliates to domestic parent companies. Governments tax these royalty payments. High tax

See Griliches (1991) and Nadiri (1993) for surveys of empirical measures of productivity spillovers

from R&D activities.

21n theory, the welfare consequences of subsidizing R&D are ambiguous, because
competitive
pressures might generate too much R&D in certain industries in the absence of a subsidy, and because
foreign competitors may benefit from domestic subsidies (or in other ways influence the domestic
market). See Dixit (1988) and Reinganum (1989) for surveys of the theory. The United States
introduced the Research and Experimentation Tax Credit, and increased the tax deductibility of the R&D
expenses of certain multinational corporations, in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981. This
legislation appears to have been motivated by considerationof economic externalities, though the focus
of Congressional sentiment as described in U.S. Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation (1981) is on
comparisons of U.S. research intensity with the research intensities of other countries.

2
rates make royalties, and the technotogy imports that they accompany, more expensive for the foreign
affiliates that pay the taxes.

to theory, higher costs of imported technology might encourage oc discourage local
R&D by affiliates of multinational corporations. If local R&D is complementary with imported
technology, then high royalty tax rates should discourage local R&D, while if local R&D is a
substitute for imported technology, then high royalty tax rates should encourage local R&D.
This paper has two objectives. The first is to identify the degree to which R&D
activity by multinational firms is sensitive to local tax conditions. The second objective is to
determine whether imported technology and local R&D are complements or substitutes.
The results suggest that R&D responds significantly to local tax rates, and that local
R&D is a substitute for imported technology. These results appear both in the behavior of American
investors in other countries, and in the behavior of foreign investors in the United States. Firms
appear to react to high royalty tax rates by paying fewer royalties and performing additional R&D
locatly. To the extent that royalty payments reflect actual technology transfer (rather than adept
accountingpractices), the behavior of multinational firms implies that local R&D is a substitute for
imported technology.
Section 2 of the paper briefly describes the tax treatment of multinational firms,
paying particular attention to technology-relatedissues. Section 3 describes a simple model of firm
behavior that traces the link between taxation and the degree of complementarity or substitutability of
local R&D and imported technology. Section 4 describes the data that serves as the basis of the
empirical work. Section 5 presents evidence on the relationship between royalty tax rates in foreign
countries and the R&D intensities of local affiliates of American multinational firms. Section 6
examines the same relationship for foreign firms investing in the United States. Section 7 is the
conclusion.

3
2. Multinational Firms. Taxation, and International Technolpay Transfer.
This section examines the role of multinational firms in international technology
transfer, and reviews the tax treatment of R&D expenditures and royalty receipts by multinational
firms.

International Technology Transfer
There is considerable interest in understanding the role that multinational firms play in
transferring technologies across borders. There are two methods by which multinational firms
provide new technologies to the countries in which they invest. The first method is to develop new
technologies locally, through R&D or other similar type of activity. The second method is to import
technologies produced elsewhere.
The foreign affiliates of American firms use both methods to bring technologies to the
countries in which they operate, and there exists sufficient information to assess quantitatively the
relative significance of each method. Direct informationon the R&D activities of the foreign
affiliates of U.S. firms is reported in surveys conducted by the United States Commerce Department.
Information on technology imports by these affiliates is considerably sketchier. One can, however,
infer the approximate magnitude of technology imports from royalties paid by the affiliates to U.S.

parent firms and third parties in other countries, since royalty payments should, in principle, reflect
the values of imported technologies.
Table 1 reports detailed informationabout the aggregate technology-related behavior
of the foreign affiliates of U.S. firms in 1982 arid 1989.

It is noteworthy that these affiliates paid

more in royalties to their parent firms ($9.8 billion in 1989) than they spent on R&D ($7.9 billion in
1919), though, as the table indicates, there was extensive use

of both methods of technology

acquisition. The survey distinguishestwo categories of R&D expenditure: R&D by affiliates for

4
themselves, and R&D by affiliates for others (the latter of which is R&D performed on a contract
basis). R&D by affiliates for themselves constitutes roughly 80% of their total R&D expenditures.
American firms spend a considerable amount of money on R&D performed in foreign
countries, but in recent years, foreign-owned firms in the United States have spent even more than
that on R&D performed here. Figure

1

illustrates the R&D expenditure levels of foreign affiliates of

U.S. firms and foreign-owned firms in the United States over the 1977-1990 period. Due to the
R&D-intensity of the U.S. economy relative to the rest of the world, and the strength of foreign
direct investment into the United States since 1973, foreign firms have spent more on R&D inside the
United States than American firms have spent on R&D outside the United States in every year since
1982, and the gap between the two expenditure levels is widening (see Figure 1)?
There is considerable interest in the role

of multinational firms in transferring

technology across borders, and the impact that government policy can have on the rate and direction
of technology transfer. Though these issues have been extensively studied,4 one of the open
questions is the degree to which imported technology is a substitute or complement for local R&D.

US Taxation

of Foreign Income5

3Exchange rate fluctuations can confound the interpretationof Figure 1, since changes in the value
to foreign currencies affect the dollar-denominated relative magnitudes of R&D
performed in the United States and abroad, even if nominal expenditures are unchanged. This
consideration is not significant in this case, however, since a simple adjustment for the changing value
of the dollar relative to a trade-weighted averageofforeign currencies produces a figure that very closely
resembles Figure 1.

of the dollar relative

4See, for example, Teece (1976), Germidis (1977), Mansfield, Teece, and Romeo (1979), Mansfield
and Romeo (1980), Davidson and McFetridge (1984), Lipsey, Blomstrom, and Kravis (1990), Zejan
(1990), Blomstrom (1991), Ethier and Markusen (1991), Wang and Blonistrom (1992), and Blomstrom
and Kokko (1993). These studies together consider the effect of a large number of variables on
technology transfer and R&D activity, though they do not considerthe effect of royalty tax rates on local
R&D intensities.
5Parts

of this brief description of the tax system are excerpted from Hines

(1991).

5
The United States taxes income on a "residence" basis, meaning that American
corporations and individuals owe taxes to the U.S. government on all of their worldwide income,
whether earned in the United States or not. The top U.S. corporate tax rate is now 35 percent. Since
foreign profits are usually taxed in host countries, U.S. law provides a foreign tax credit for income
taxes (and related taxes) paid to foreign governments, in order not to subject American multinationals
to double taxation. The foreign tax credit mechanism provides that an American corporation earning
$100 in a foreign country with a 12 percent tax rate (and a foreign tax obligation of $12) pays only
$23 to the U.S. government, since its U.S. corporate tax liability of $35 (35 percent

of $100) is

reduced to $23 by the foreign tax credit of $12. The foreign tax credit is, however, limited to U.S.
tax liability on foreign income; if, in the example, the foreign tax rate were 50 percent, then the firm
pays $50 to the foreign government but its U.S. foreign tax credit is limited to $35. Hence an
American firm receives full tax credits for its foreign taxes paid only when it is in a "deficit credit"
position, i.e., when its average foreign tax rate is less than its tax rate on domestic operations.

A

firm has "excess credits" if its available foreign tax credits exceed U.S. tax liability on its foreign
income. Firms average together their taxable incomes and taxes paid in all of their foreign operations
in calculating their foreign tax credits and the foreign tax credit limit.6
Deferral of U.S. taxation of certain foreign earnings is another important feature of
the U.S. international tax system. An American parent firm is taxed on its subsidiaries' foreign

6ln order to qualify for the foreign tax credit, firms must own at least 10% of a foreign affiliate, and
only those taxes that qualify as income taxes are creditable. Furthermore, income is broken into different
functional "baskets' in the calculation of applicablecredits and limits. Income earned and taxes paid in
the conduct of most types of active foreign business operations are grouped in one "basket;" petroleum
industry income is grouped in a separate "basket;" and there are separate "baskets" for items such as
passive income earned abroad. The "basket" distinctions imply that a firns might simultaneously have
excess foreign tax credits in the petroleum "basket" (which is common, since foreign tax rates on oil
income are typically quite high) and deficit foreign tax credits in the active income "basket." Such a firm
would have to pay some U.S. tax on its active foreign income, even though it has excess foreign tax
credits on its petroleum income.

6
income only when returned ('repatriated') to the parent corporation. This type of deferral is

available only to foreign operations that are separately incorporated in foreign countries
(subsidiaries"

of the parent) and not to consolidated ("branch") operations.

The U.S. governnsent

taxes branch profits as they are earned, just as it would profits earned within the United States.
The deferral of U.S. taxation may create incentives for firms with lightly-taxed
foreign earnings to delay repatriating dividends from their foreign subsidiaries.1 This incentive arises
in those cases in which firms expect never to repatriate their foreign earnings, or if they anticipate
that future years will be more attractive for repatriation (either because domestic tax rates will be
lower, or because future sources of foreign income will generate excess foreign tax credits that can be
used to offset U.S. tax liability on the dividends).S

It appears that, in practice, American

multinationals tend to pay dividends out of their more heavily taxed foreign earnings first.9
Consequently, the average tax rate that firms face on their foreign income need not exactly equal the
average foreign tax rate faced by their branches and subsidiaries abroad.
Branch earnings and dividends from subsidiaries represent only two forms of foreign
income for U.S. income tax purposes. Interest received from foreign sources also represents foreign
income, though foreign interest receipts are often classified within their own 'basket" and hence are

7The incentive to defer repatriation of lightly taxed subsidiary earnings is attenuated by the Subpart
F provisions, introduced in U.S. law in 1962, that treat a subsidiary's passive income, and income
invested in U.S. property, as if it were distributed to its American owners, thereby subjecting it to
immediate U.S. taxation. The Subpart F rules applyto controlled foreign corporations, which are foreign

corporations owned at least 50% by American persons holding stakes of at least 10% each. Controlled
foreign corporations that reinvest their foreign earnings in active businesses can continue to defer their
U.S. tax liability on thoseearnings. See Hines (1994b), Hines and Rice (1994) and Scholes and Wolfson
(1992) for the behavioral implications of these rules.
81t is interesting to note that the deferral of US tax liability does not itselfcreate an incentive to delay
paying dividends from foreign subsidiaries, since the US tax must be paid eventually. See Hartman
(1985).

9See the evidence presented in Hines and Hubbard (1990).

7
not averaged with other income in calculating the foreign tax credit. Royalty income received from
foreigners, including foreign affiliates of U.S. firms, is also foreign source income. Foreign
governments often impose moderate taxes on dividend, interest, and royalty payments from foreign
affiliates to their American parent companies; these withholding'°taxes are fully creditable against

an American taxpayer's U.S. tax liability on foreign income.

The Tax Treatment ofR&D Expenditures and Royalty Rece(pts
American multinational firms that perform R&D in the United States intending to use
the resulting technology both in the United States and abroad face a complex tax treatment of their
transactions, Since passage of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, American multinationals are no longer
allowed to deduct 100 percent of their U.S. R&D expenses against their U.S. tax liabilities. Instead,
U.S. law requires American firms to allocate R&D expenses between U.S. and foreign source based
on the fraction of a firm's sales that are foreign.1 The practical importance of this system is that
firms with excess foreign tax credits receive usable tax deductions for only a fraction (equal to the
ratio of domestic sales to total worldwide sales) of their U.S. R&D expenses. This system is based
on the ides that multinational firms performing R&D in the United States use only a fraction of the
output of their R&D activities to enhance their sales in the United States, and consequently, that only
a fraction of their R&D costs should be deductible against U.S-source income.

Royalties received by American parent firms for R&D used abroad represent taxable
C)Taxes on cross-border flows, such as dividends, interest, and royalties, are known as 'withholding
taxes due to some of the specifics of their administration. Strictly speaking, these taxes represent
obligations of the recipients of the cross-border flows and not the payors; this arrangement permits
immediate full crediting of withholding taxes by recipients who are eligible to claim foreign tax credits.
The taxes are called "withholding' taxes because the local payor is the withholding agent for the tax, and
is therefore liable to its host government for full payment of the taxes.

See Hines (1993, 1994a) for descriptions of the precise formulas used and quantitative assessments
of their impact on R&D spending levels.

S

foreign-source income of the American firms. American firms with deficit foreign tax credits must
pay U.S. income tax on these royalty receipts, while firms with excess foreign tax credits can apply
the excess credits against U.S. taxes due on the royalties, thereby eliminating the U.S. tax liability
created by the royalty receipts.
Most of the world's governments impose withholding taxes on cross-border royalty
payments from affiliates located within their countries. These royalty tax rates are frequently reduced
according to the terms of bilateral tax trestles. For example, the United States imposes a 30 percent
tax on royalties paid to foreign corporations, but this tax rate is often reduced, in some cases to zero,
when recipients of royalty payments are located in countries with whom the United States has a tax
treaty in force.

3. Framework mr Analysis.
This section analyzes the implications of systems of international taxation for the R&D
behavior of multinational firms.
Consider a multinational firm that establishes a foreign affiliate to produce and sell
goods in the foreign country in which the affiliate is located.12 The affiliate generates sales using
local inputs of capital, labor, and intermediateproducts; in addition, the affiliate uses technology from
its parent and the technology it generates on its own to produce goods for sale. The reduced-form

function that describes the impact of technologies on the affiliate's sales can be formalized as:
S(R, R*,

), in which S denotes sales in the local (foreign) market, R is technology provided by the

parent firm to the affiliate in this market, R* is the technology that the affiliate generates on its own,

1-'This analysis abstracts from the possibility that the activities of foreign affiliates directly enhance
the sales of its domestic parent firm. One of the practical difficulties that American firms encounter in
such situations is that royalties paid by U.S. parents to their foreign affiliates are severely taxdisadvantaged. See Hines (1994a)for a discussion of this issue.

9
and

denotes other features of the local market (as well as the affiliate's profit-maximizing

employment of local factors).
American tax law and the tax laws of most other countries'3require that foreign
affiliates pay rents or royalties to their parent firms for the fair market value of technologies
transferred from the parent firms to the affiliates. Of course, in practice is it frequently difficult to
establish the fair market value of technology transferred from one party to another within a controlled
group, since there may exist no market prices for the types of technology in question. In such
circumstances, tax-avoiding firms that transfer technology from the parent to its foreign affiliates
often have incentives to select royalty payments that transfer taxable income Out of high-tax
jurisdictions and into low-tax jurisdictions. Governmentsare aware of this incentive, and try to use
their enforcement power to prevent royalties from deviatingtoo greatly from reasonable values.'4
One way to describe government enforcement efforts is to introduce an additional cost
that firms bear when royalties deviate from market values. The cost includes the cost that firms incur
in justifying their royalty delcarations to tax authorities.

If this adjustment cost rises sufficiently with

the size of the deviation of reported royalties from market values, then

it will ultimately limit the

degree to which firms modify royalty payments simply for tax purposes.
A quadratic model of adjustment costs provides a convenient framework to use in
analyzing the impact of government enforcement efforts. One can distinguish R, the true value of
transferred technology, from r, the royalty paid to the parent firm by the affiliate receiving the
technology. If the rate of adjustment cost is quadratic in the deviation of declared royalties from the
technology's market value, then adjustment costs equal a[(R-r)2/R2]for each unit of technology
130f the twenty-five industrialized countries surveyedby Lawlor (1985), twenty-four apply the arm's
length principle to the taxation of related-party transactions; Hong Kong is the lone exception.

'4For evidence on the overall effectiveness of transfer price enforcement, see Kopits (1976), Grubert
and Mutti (1991), Harris et al. (1993), and Hines and Rice (1994).

10

transferred.

a is taken to be a constant parameter.

Total adjustment costs equal the product

of R and

this term, or a(R-r)2/R.
The affiliate's technology-related taxable income represents the difference between
sales revenue generated by the technology and the affiliate's costs. These costs include the affiliate's
own R&D expenditures, the royalties it pays to the parent firm, and the adjustment cost.'5 The
parent firm receives a royalty from its affiliate, and may incur a cost of producing the technology that

it transfers to the affiliate. In order to fix ideas for the analysis that follows, the model describes the
behavior of a multinational firm that has excess foreign tax credits and that values on a one-for-one
basis its after-tax profits in foreign subsidiaries.'6 The multinational firm maximizes after-tax
profits, iv:

iv

= (lr)[S(R, R*,

)-

R* - r - n(R-r)21R] + (l_w*)r - cR

(1)

"This treatment of the foreign affiliate abstracts from its activities that are unaffected by R&D
activitiesor technology imports. The affiliate, and not the parent firm, is assumed to bear the adjustment
cost because doing so simplifies the algebra that follows. A more general treatment that allocates
adjustmentcosts between affiliatesand parent firms yields qualitativelysimilar results. See, for example,
the treatment of adjustment costs in Hines and Rice (1994).
'6A finn values its subsidiaries' profits on a one-for-basis either if there is no tax due upon
repatriation or if the firm can use deferral strategies of the type described in Hines and Rice (1994) to
rednce the present value of repatriation taxes. A firm with deficit foreign tax credits maximizes an
expression that is similar to (1), with the difference that the terms (l_r*) and (l_w*) are replaced by (i-a),
in which r is the home-countrytax rate. The first-order conditionsdescribing the behavior of such a firm
imply that the firm sets r = R, and that, in this static setting, host-country tax rates do not influence its
behavior, in practice, the behavior of American multinational firms should reflect some kind of average
of these two extremes. The analysis that follows assumes that all American firms have excess foreign
tax credits, so, to the extent that many firms do not, the empirical estimates understate the responsiveness
of the affected group to local tax conditions. The home countries of foreign investors in the United States
have tax systems that differ considerably in their treatments of R&D expenditures and royalty and
dividend income from foreign sources. The empirical work in this paper distinguisheshome-country tax
systems only by whether firms are permitted to claimforeign tax credits, which omits some more subtle
distinctions and may, thereby, introduce measurement error in the tax variables.

11

in which

r is

the foreign statutory tax rate, w* is the withholding tax rate imposed by the foreign

government on outgoing royalty payments, and c is the per-unit cost incurred by the parent firm to
develop andlor transfer the technology represented by R. The first term in expression (1) represents
the after-foreign-tax profits earned by the affiliate; the second term is the parent firm's afterwithholding-tax royatty receipts; and the third term is the parent firm's cost of developing the
technology that it transfers to the affiliate. tn some cases, parent firms costlesslytransfer to their
subsidiaries technologies developed for other purposes, so it is possible that c

= 0.

The first-order condition describing the firm's optimal choice of r is:

(1-rt)[2re(R-r)IR - 1]

+ (l-w) =

0

(2)

which yields:

r = R{l + (r*w*)I[2a(tT*)I}

(3)

The first-order condition describing the firm's optimal choice of R is:

(lr*)[ôSIOR - a(R-r)R+r)IR1 - c

= 0

4)

Imposing (3) and simpli1'ing yields:

dSIÔR

=

cI(lr*) +

(w*_r*)I(l_r*) - (w*_r*)2/[4ci(l_r*)1

The first-order condition describing the firm's optimal choice of R* is considerably simpler:

(5)

12

asiar =

1

(6)

The conditions(3), (5), and (6) characterize
the multinationalfirm's optimal interior
choices of R, R*, and r. Inspection of (5) and (6) indicates that taxation does not affect the required
marginal productivity of R&D performed in the foreign locatidn, while taxation does affect the
required marginal productivity of R&D performed in the home country. Consequently, as long as tax
rates are set in a manner that is exogenous to the unobservable factors that determine R&D intensity,
it

is possible to use the tax variables that appear on the right side of (5) to estimate the extent to

which domestic technology is a substitute or complement for foreign R&D.

4. Data.
There are two available sources of detailed information on the R&D activities of
multinational firms located in a large number of countries. The first source is the 1989 Benchmark
Survey of the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the United States Department of Commerce.
This survey, the results of which are reported in United States Department of Commerce (1992), is
the most recent comprehensive survey of the activities of the foreign affiliates of American
multinational firms. The survey covers activities during 1989. tn order to protect the confidentiality
of survey respondents, BEA does not divulge the responses of individual firms, and reports country
aggregates only for those countries in which there are sufficient numbers of U.S. firms with sizable
activities that aggregate figures do not reveal information about individual firms. Useful R&D and
royalty data are available for affiliates in 43 foreign countries for 1989.
The second source of information is the 1987 survey of foreign direct investment in
the United States, reported in United States Department of Commerce (1990). This survey describes

the activities of foreign-owned firms in the United States during 1987. Due to data suppressions and

13

other limitations, useful data are available on investors from 27 different countries during 1987,
The goal of the statistical work is to examine the relationship between royalty tax
rates and levels of R&D activity, both for American firms investing in foreign countries and for
foreign firms investing in the United States. The difficultythat such a study encounters ia that R&D
levels differ for reasons that have nothing to do with tax rates. One nontax factor that is clearly
associated with R&D spending is the degree of R&D intensity in the countries in which multinational
firms have operations. The foteign affiliates of American multinationalslocated in countries whose
economics are R&D-intensive tend to perform more R&D than do affiliates located in other countries.

Similarly, foreign-owned affiliates in the United States tend to invest more in R&D if their parent
firms are located in technologically-intensivecountries.'7
Information is available from the National Science Foundation (1991) on the R&D
intensities of a large nsmber of countries. The National Science Foundation constructs indices that
reflect national R&DIGNP ratios; due to data limitations, these ratios are not all calculated using data

for the same year, though most observations represent the period 1986-1988." In the empirical
work that follows, the variables that influenceR&D demand are interacted with these country-level
measures of R&D intensity. This procedure represents a simple, if rather unsubtie, adjustment for
heterogeneity among countries in the extent to which their firms undertake R&D. Local R&D

'7At a first pass, this association is suggestive of a complementary relationship between local R&D
and importedtechnology, since affiliatesof multinationalfirms headquartered in R&D-intensive countries
probably face lower real costs of importing technology than do affiliates of fsrms from other countries.
But differences in the technologicalintensities of parent firms also reflect heterogeneity between affiliates
that can invalidate such an inference.

"R&DIGNP ratios change little from year to year, as evidenced by the time-series data on France,
Germany, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States presented in Table 2. These economies,
which are among the most R&D-intensivein the world, exhibit only gradual movements in R&D intensity
relative so each other. This pattern suggests that time-invariant cross-sectional differences in R&D
intensity are likely to be much more important than any differences crested by the asynchronous nature
of the data reported by the National ScienceFoundation.

14

intensity can have an important impact on the demand for imported technology as well, so the R&D
intenaity variable appears in the royalty equations. Since R&D intensity is likely to have less direct
an impact on royalties than it does on R&D expenditures, the R&D intensity variable enters the
royalty equations independentlyof the other explanatoryvariables.
Information on tax systems and tax rates is reported by Price Waterhouse (various
isaues). In the empirical work that follows, firms are assumed to face effective tax rates on their
technology-related activities equal to statutory corporate tax rates in host countries. Tables 3 and 4
report means and standard deviations of the variables used in the empirical work.

5. Foreign Affiliates of Asnerican Multinational Cornorations,
The model described by equations (fl-(6) carries the implication that technologyrelated royalty payments and R&D spending levels should respond to local tax rates. Specifically, the
model predicts that higher withholding taxes on royalties will reduce royalty payments both by
discouraging technology transfers, and by reducing the ratio of reported royalties to the valuet

of

technologies transferred.
The regressions reported in Table 5 test these implications on the data that describe
the behavior of the foreign affiliates of American multinational corporations for the year 1989. Table
5 presents estimates of the coefficients that correspond to the implied specification of the royalty
demand equation that emerges from (3) and (5). The dependent variable is a ratio, the numerator of
which is royalties paid by the foreign affiliates of U.S. firms to their parent companies, and the
denominator of which is total sales by the affiliates.'9 Data represent country aggregates.
'9The equations reported in TableS were all re-run using total royalties pald in place of royalties paid
to U.S. parents, with very similar results. (And notsurprisingly, since, as Table 1 indicates, 80 percent
of all royalties paid by the foreign affiliates of American firms go to theparent companies of the affiliates
paying the royalties.) The regressions reported in TableS use royalties paid to parent companiesbecause
only for those royalties is it clear at what rate the royalties will be taxed.

15

The estimates reported in column I

of Table 5

imply that royalty payments respond

negatively to royalty tax rates and are close to unaffected by statutory tax rates. The coefficients
indicate that, at a statutory tax rate of 35 percent, a 10 percent reduction in the withholding tax rate
on royalties stimulates additional royalty payments equal to 0.1 percent

of sales.

The implied

elasticity of royalty payments with respect to the royalty tax rate, calculated using these estimates and
mean values of the variables as reported in Table 2, is approximately -O.4.

If sales are unaffected

by changes in royalty tax rates, then this figure implies that doubling the royalty tax rate reduces
royalties by 40 percent, a sizable fraction.
Since sales may respond to tax rate changes, this calculation may understate the
responsivenessof royalties, but nevertheless strongly suggests that the true elasticity lies between zero
and -1. It is, however, important to note that the aggregate nature of the data may introduce
considerable measurement error that biases the estimated coefficient toward zero. The sign of any
bias introduced by omitted variables is ambiguous, though the magnitude could be large.
The results presented in column 2 of Table 5 indicate that royalties also respond
significantlyto differences between royalty withholdingtax rates and statutory tax rates. As
peedicted, the local R&D/GNP ratio is positively correlated with royalty payments. Alternative
specificationsreported in columns 3-5 of Table 5 yield similar conclusions:high tax rates on royalties
are associatedwith lower ratios of royalty payments to total sales.

The specificationsused to obtain the results described in Table 5 were changed in a
number of ways, in every case generating similar results. One specificationissue concerns the
appropriate choice of denominator for the dependent variable. Specifications in which labor
compensation replaces sales as the denominator of the dependent variable yield results that are almost

Exercises such as this one are fraught with dangers, since variables may exhibit considerable
differences between their conditionaland unconditionalmeans. The calculation in the text is meant only
to be illustrative.

16
identical to those reported in Table 5. Doe to the somewhat heterogeneous nature of royalties, it
seems most appropriate to scale this variable by sales. In the regressions reported in Tables 6 and 9,
the dependent variables that represent R&D expenditures are scaled by labor compensation in
manofacturing for somewhat different reasons. Manufacturing affiliates account for approximately 90
percent of the R&D activity of foreign-owned affiliates in the U.S. and of the foreign affiliates of
U.S. firms. Labor expenditures share with R&D expendituresthe feature of immediate deductibility

for tax purposes,2' and are more reasonably thooght of as the prodoct of firm choices than are sales,
which may be functions of R&D. All of the R&D demand equations in reported in Tables 6 and 9
were re-run acaling the dependent variable by labor expenditures, with results that are very similar to
those reported in the tables.

A Firsf Approach to Estimating the Impact

of Taxes on R&D

The results reported in Table 5 indicate that royalty payments by the foreign affiliates
of U.S. multinational firms respond to tax rates in the predicted manner. The model described in
equations (l)-(6) does not, however, carry a prediction about the sign of the effect of tax rates on
R&D expenditurelevels, and the object of the regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7 is to measure
the sign of any effect that may be present. The regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7 address this
measurement problem using very different methodologies, though, as it happens, the results point to
conclusions that are quite similar.
Table 6 presents regressions that estimate of the impact of the tax treatment of

"Of course, some countries (including the United States) offer tax credits and other inducements to
firms that perform R&D (and in some cases to firms that hire labor). A brief survey ofcountry practices
indicates, however, that sizable R&D subsidies are rare for example, see Hall (1993) for an analysis of
the magnitude of the marginal subsidy provided R&D in the United States by the Research and
Experimentation Tax Credit], and that the primary subsidy comes from the immediate deductibility of
R&D expenses that almost all industrialized countries provide.

17

royalties on the R&D-intensities of foreign affiliates of U.S. firms, using specifications drawn from
the model described in equations (l)-(6). The dependent variable is the ratio of R&D expenditures in
1989 to manufacturing labor compensation in 1989. The results in the table are strongly suggestive
of an important impact of royalty taxes on R&D activity, but not all of the estimated coefficients in
the table are significant. The strongest and most parsimonious specification is presented in column 2
of Table 6, and here the estimated coefficients suggest that an unfavorable tax climate for royalties is
associated with greater R&D activity. Imported technology and local R&D appear to be substitutes.
Columns 3-5 of Table 6 report the results of alternative specificationsof the modal.

Two aspects of these results are noteworthy. The first is that the estimated coefficients on the
variable [1/U .r*) (R&D/GNP)] are always insignificant. This variable appears as one part

of the

first term on the right side of (5), and the estimated coefficient captures the effect of c, the cost of
developing technology at home to transfer to affiliates abroad. The insignificanceof the estimated
coefficient implies either that firms transfer nonrival technologies to their affiliates, so c = 0, or that
the cstimating mcthodology is not powerful enough to identify an important effect. The second
noteworthy aspect of the results is that the specificationsthat include quadratic tax terms generate
insignificant results. These results may reflect the limited ability of the estimators to distinguish the
effects of collinear variables in a small sample.
Using the coefficient estimate from the equation presented in column I of Table 6, the
implied elasticity of R&D activity with respect to the withholding tax rate on royalties (evaluating all
variables at their sample means) is approximately 0.16. This figure is smaller than the implied
royalty elasticity calculated from Table 5, which is reassuring, since own-price elasticities are usually
stronger than cross-price elasticities. This estimated elasticity suggests that local R&D is a mild
substitute for imported technology, but it is helpful to consider additional evidence before drawing
any conclusions.

A Second Approach to Esthnating the Impact of Taxes on R&D
One of the difficulties that arise in estimating the impact of royalty tax rates on local
R&D levels is that many omitted variables influenceR&D spending. It is possible that these variables
are correlated with royalty withholding tax rates in a way that biases the estimated tax rate
coefficients, and generates a misleading conclusion concerning the substitutability of R&D for
imported technology. The regressions reported in Table 6 control for local technological
environments simply by interacting the tax variables with the (R&D/GNP) measure.
An alternative approach is to use available information that distinguishes the R&D
activity of foreign affiliates of American firms for their own purposes from R&D activity that they
undertake on behalf of others. Both types of R&D activity are likely to be influenced by local
economic and technological conditions.

It is, however, possible that the latter type of contract-style

R&D performed for others is generally unaffected by the availabilityof technology imports from
parent firms. If not, then R&D performed for others serves as a control group with which to
compare R&D performed by affiliates for their own purposes. Under the hypothesis that R&D
performed for others is unaffected by technology imports, the fraction of an affiliate's total R&D
activity undertaken for itselfis a positive function of royalty taxes

if local R&D and imported

technology are substitutes, and a negative function of royalty taxes if local R&D and imported
technology are complements.
There are 38 countries in the sample for which the BEA data distinguish R&D
performed by affiliates for themselves from R&D performed by affiliates for others. Table 7 presents
estimated coefficients from regressions in which the dependent variable is the ratio of R&D performed
by affsliates for themselves to total R&D by affiliates. The results once again suggest that local R&D
is

a substitute for imported technology. In the regression reported in column 1 of Table 7, the

estimated coefficient on royalty withholding tax rates is positive and significant; the same is true of

19

the coefficient on the difference between withholding and statutory tax rates
reported in column 2.
The coefficient estimates reported in colunm 2 indicate that a 10
percent change in the difference
between foreign withholding and statutory tax rates (normalized by one minus the foreign
statutory
tax rate) is associated with a 2.6 percent change in the
intensity of R&D activity by affiliates for

themselves.
Columns 3-5 of Table 7 report the results of alternative specifications of the R&D
demand equation. The coefficient estimatesfrom these specifications are consistent with those
reported in columns 1-2, and are also consistent with the results reported in Table 6. In particular,
the estimated coefficient of the variable lI(l-rt) is again insignificant. The estimates
reported in
column 1 of Table imply that the elasticity of R&D spending with respect to
royalty withholding taxes
(evaluatingall variables at their sample means) is approximately 0.11, which resembles the elasticity
calculated from estimates reported in Table 6.
The regressions reported in Tables 6 and 7 offer consistent evidence that the
aggregate
behavior of the foreign affiliates of American multinational firms exhibits substitution of local R&D

for imported technology,

it is important to note, however, that there can be more than one

interpretation of this pattern at the level of individual firms. One possibility is that tax differences
influencethe behavior of firms located in different countries. A second possibility is that tax
differences encourage specific firms to locate in certain countries and not in others, without
influencing the R&D intensities of individuatfirms.n A third, and perhaps the most likely,
possibility represents some combination of the first two. The use of aggregate data makes it
impossible to use the observed pattern of behavior to distinguish these explanations, though, for many
purposes, it many not be necessary to distinguish them.

Lipsey, Blomstrom, and Kravis (1990) examine the impact of host-country characteristics on the
attributes - particularly R&D intensitites - of multinational firms choosing to locate within the
country.
They do not, however, consider the impact of tax policies.

20
6. Foreign-Owned Affiliates

in the United States

Thebehaviorof foreign-owned affiliates in the United States offers additional
evidence on the responsivenessof R&D activity to royalty tax rates. This evidence must, however,
be interpreted with caution,owing to hetergeneouscircumstances of foreign firms that invest in the
United States and the small sample size of 27 foreign countries for wbich sufficient data are available.
Home-country tax treatments of foreign multinational firms that invest in the United
States differ according to individual circumstances and national law. There are two dimensions along
which the variation between investors is most important. The home governments
investors tax the worldwide incomes of their residents while granting credits
while other governments exempt all foreign-source income from tax.0

of some foreign

for foreign taxes paid,

A second dimension along

which tax systems differ concerns the degree of integration of personal and corporate taxes. For
some countries, their corporation taxes largely represent advanced withholdingtaxes against personal
tax liabilities.
The specification of royalty equations corresponding to the system described by (l)-(6)
is somewhat different in the case of foreign investors in the United States than
reported in Table 5. To start, the tax rate

r

it is in the regressions

is the United States tax rate, which is the same for all

foreign investors. The value of c, the cost of producing technology for export, need not be similar

for different foreign investors,

and is captured in the estmating equations by the inclusion

of

R&D/CINP as an explanatory variable. And there may be important differences between the
incentives facing investors from foreign tax credit countries and investors from countries that do not
grant foreign tax credits.
Table

S

presents estimates of the determinants of royalty payments by foreign-owned

00f course, this dichotomous breakdown greatlyoversimplifies the many distinctions and subtleties
that foreign tax systems exhibit.

21
affiliates in the United States in 1987. The coefficient on the withholding tax rate in the regression
presented in the column 2 of Table 8 implies that raising the tax rate by 10 percent reduces the
royalty/sales ratio by 0.74 percent. The estimated coefficient lies just at the margin of statistical
significance. To understand its magnitude in a different way, the implied elasticity of royalties/sales,
evaluating all variables at their population means, is approximately -0.12. If sales are unaffected by
cbanges in royalty tax rates, then this figure implies that doubling the royalty tax rate reduces
royalties by 12 percent.
Column 3 of Table 8 presents the same regression in which the withholding tax rate is
now transformed to be zero for all investors from foreign tax credit countries. The results are very
similar to those reported in column 2. Columns 4 and 5 report results of regressions in which
squares of the withholding tax rates are introduced; the coefficient estimates are insignificant,
reflecting the multicollinearity of the two tax rate variables and the limited amount of variation in a
sample of this size.
Table 9 presents estimated coefficientsfrom regressions that investigate the correlation
between the R&D intensity of foreign-owned affiliates in the United States and the tax variables that
influencethe cost of imported technology. One striking feature of all of the regressions presented in
Table 9 is the strong correlation between the R&D-intensity of foreign-owned affiliates in the United
States and the R&D-intensity of the countries in which their parent firms are located. Column 2
presents the simplest specification that includes tax rate variables; the estimated coefficient on the
interaction between the withholding tax rate and home-countryR&D intensity is positive and
significant. The implied elasticity of R&D with respect to the cost

of imported technology (evaluated

at sample means) is approximately0.3. This is a very sizable elasticity, particularly in view of the
smaller own-price elasticity of royalties implied by the estimates reported in Table 8. Furthermore,
the reponsiveness of royalties to withholding tax rates reflects changes in reporting behavior in

22
addition to changes in amounts of technology transferred. The elasticity implies that, in the absence
of an effect arising through the scale of operations, doubling the withholding tax rate raises R&D
expenditures by 30 percent. This estimated response magnitude is very large, and may reflect the
imprecision of estimaces drawn from so small a sample. Nevertheless, it is striking that the pattern of
substitutability between R&D and imported technology appears for foreign investors in the United
States as well as American investors in other countries?4
Column 3 of Table 9 presents estimates from the specification in which the
withholding tax rate is interacted with a variable that equals zero if the investor's parent company is
located in a foreign tax credit country, and equals one otherwise. The results are qualitatively very
similar to those presented in column 2, with the difference that the estimated R&D appears in this
specificationto be even more responsive to withholding tax rates. Columns 4 and 5 present
regression results for specifications that include quadratic withholding tax rate terms, which again
exhibit symptoms of multicollinesricy.
Evidence on the behavior of foreign-owned affiliates in the United States suggests
conclusionsthat are very similar to thosethat emerge from the behavior of the foreign affiliates of
American corporations. Foreign investors in the United States pay fewer royalties, and use more
R&D-intensive operations, when facing higher tax rates on royalties paid to theft home countries.
The restricted size of the sample of investing foreign countries makes statistical inference difficult, but
the estimated coefficients indicate a responsivenessthat is somewhat greater than that for the foreign
affiliates of American corporations.

24Unfortunately, BEA does not require foreign-owned firms in the United States to distinguish the
R&D they perform for their own use from R&D that they perform for others, so it is not possible to
estimate equations of the type reported in Table 7 for foreign investors in the United States.

23

7. Conclusion.
This paper uses informationon the behavior of the foreign affiliates of U.S. firms and
foreign-owned affihiases in the United States to estimate the relationship between technology imports
and local R&D. The idea is to use the tax treatment of royalty payments to identi& the degree

of

substitutability between these sources of technology. Evidence from the actions of American and
foreign firms indicates that R&D expenditures respond to local tax rates, and that technology imports
and local R&D are substitutes. The substitutabilityof these two sources of technology carries
numerous implications for the impact of tax policy on R&D activity, particularly when contrasted
with the complementarity that is sometimes thought to characterize their relationship.

References
Blomstrom, Magnus (1991), "Host Country Benefits of Foreign Investment,' NBER Working Paper
No. 3615.
Blomstrom, Magnus and An Kokko (1993), "Policies to Encourage Inflows
Foreign Multinationals, NBER Working Paper No. 4289.

of Technology through

Davidson, W.H. and Donald G. McFetridge (1984), "International Technology Transactions and the
Theory of the Firm," Journal ofIndustrial Economics, 32, 253-264.
Dixit, Avinash (1988), "International R&D Competition and Policy," in A. Michael Spence and
Heather A. Hazard eds. International Competitiveness (Cambridge: Ballinger), 149-171.

Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen (1991), "MultinationalFirms, Technology Diffusion and
Trade,' NBER Working Paper No. 3825.
Germidis, Dimitri (1977) ed., Transfer of Technology by Multinational Corporations (Paris:
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development).
Griliches, Zvi (1991), "The Search for R&D Spillovers,' NBER Working Paper No. 3768.
Grubert, Harry and John Mutti (1991), 'Taxes, Tariffs, and Transfer Pricing in Multinational
Corporate Decisionrnaking,' Review ofEconomics and Statistics, 73, 285-293.
Hall, Bronwyn H. (1993), "R&D Tax Policy During the 1980s: Success or Failure?" in James M.
Poterba ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, Vol. 7 (Cambridge: MiT Press), 1-35.
Harris, David, Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod, and Bernard Yeung (1993), 'Income Shifting in U.S.
Multinational Corporations," in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slenirod eds.
Studies in International Taxation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 277-302.
Hartman, David G. (1985), 'Tax Policy and Foreign Direct Investment," Journal of Public
Economics, 26, 107-121.
Hines, James R., Jr. (1991), "The Flight Paths of Migratory Corporations,' Journal
Auditing and Finance, 6, 447479.

ofAccounting,

Hines, James R., Jr. (1993), "On the Sensitivity of R&D to Delicate Tax Changes: The Behavior of
US Multinationals in the 1980s," in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Joel Slemrod eds.
Studies in InternationalTaxation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 149-187.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1994a), 'No Place Like Home: Tax Incentives and the Location of R&D by
American Multinationals," in James M. Poterba, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, Volume 8
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 65-104.
Hines, James R., Jr. (1994b), 'Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives," Journal
ofPublic Economics, 55, 323-347.

Hines, James R., Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard (1990), "Coming Home to America: Dividend
Repatriations by US Multinationals, in Assaf Razin and Joel Slemrod eds. Taxation in the Global
Economy (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), 161-200.
Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice (1994), 'Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and American
Business," Quarrerly Journal ofEconomics, 109, 149-182.
Kopits, George F. (1976), 'Intra-Firm Royalties Crossing Frontiers and Transfer-Pricing Behaviour,
Economic Journal, 86, 791-805.
Lawlor, William R., ed. (1985), Cross-Border Transactions between Related Companies: A
Swnmary of Tax Rules (Deventer, the Netherlands: Kluwer).
Lipsey, Robert E., Magnus Blomstrom, and Irving B. Kravis (1990), 'R&D by Multinational Firms
and Host Country Exports,' in Robert E. Evenson and Gustav Ranis eds. Science and Technology:
Lessons for Development Policy (Boulder, CO: Westview Press), 271-300.
Mansfield, Edwin and Anthony Romeo (1980), "Technology Transfer to Overseas Subsidiaries by
U.S-Based Firms,' Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 95, 737-750.
Mansfield, Edwin, David Teece, and Anthony Romeo (1979), "Overseas Research and Development
by U.S-Based Firms," Economica, 46, 187-196.
Nadiri, M. Ishaq (1993), "Innovationsand Technological Spillovers," NBER Working Paper No.
4423.
National Science Foundation (1991), International Science and Technology Data Update: 1991, NSF
91-309 (Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation).
National Science Foundation (1993), Selected Data on Research and Development in Industry: 1991
(Washington, D.C.: National Science Foundation).
Price Waterhouse (various issues), Corporate Taxes - A WorldwideSununaiy (New York: Price
Waterhouse).
Reinganum, Jennifer F. (1989), 'The Timing of Innovation: Research, Development, and Diffusion,"
in Richard Schmalenseeand Robert D. Willig eds. Handbook ofindustrial Organization, Vol. 1
(Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Scholes, Myron S. and Mark A. Wolfson (1992), Taxes and Business Strategy: A Planning
Approach (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pretice Hall).
Teece, David J. (1976), The Multinational Corporation and the Resource Cost of Internationa.l
Technology Transfer (Cambridge: Balhinger).
United States Congress, Joint Committee on Taxation (1981), General Explanation
Recovery Tax Act of 1981 (Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office).

ofthe Economic

United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Foreign Direct Investment in

the United S2ates, various issues.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1985), U.S. Direct
Investment Abroad: 1982 Benchmark Survey L)ata (Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing
Office).
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1990), Foreign Direct
Investment in the United States: 1987 Benchmark Survey, Final Results (Washington, D.C.: US
Government Printing Office).
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1992), U.S. Direct
investment Abroad: 1989 Benchmark Survey, Final Results (Washington, D.C.: US Government
Printing Office).
Wang, Jian-Ye and Magnus Blomstrom (1992), Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer: A
Simple Model, European Economic Review, 36, 137-155.
Zejan, Mario C. (1990), 'R&D Activities in Affiliates of Swedish Multinational Enterprises,"
Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 92, 487-500.

Figure 1
R&D by Foreign Firms in the US, and by American Firms Abroad, 1977-1990

• inbound

Q

outbound

12

ID

$

Billions
S

6
4

2

78

80

82

04

86

88

90

Year

Note: The vertical scale measures billions of current dollars of annual R&D expenditures.
Darkly shaded bars represent total R&D expenditures of foreign-owned firms in the United
States. Lightly shaded bars represent total R&D expenditures of foreign affiliates of
American firms.
Sources: United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, Foreign
Direct Investment in the United States, various issues, and National Science Foundation

(1993).

Table 1
R&D and Royalty Activity of Foreign Affiliates of US Multinationals
Year

R&D expenditures, total
R&D by affiliatefor its6if
R&D byaffihiateforothers
Royalty receipts, total
Receipts from
Receipts from
Receipts from
Receipts from

US parents
other foreign affiliates
unaffihiated Americans
unaffihisted foreigners

Royalty payments, total
Payments to US parents
Payments to other foreign affiliates
Payments to unaffiliated Americans
Payments to unaffihiated foreigners

1982

1989

$ 3,851

$ 7,922

3,073
778

6,307
1,615

435

l,46t

36
193
26
180

656
97
654

4,308

12,472

3,663
354

9,839
1,488
660
485

102
189

54

Note; Dollar amounts are millions of current dollars. Dsta cover majority-owned foreign affiliates of

US multinational firms.
Source; US Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1985, 1992).

Table 2
R&D Expenditure as a Percentage of GNP, 1961-1989

France

1961

1.4

1962
1963

1.5
1.6

1964

1.8

1965
1966

2.0

1967

2.2

1968
1969
1970

2.1

1971

1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980

2.1

2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8

1981

2.0

1982

2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3

1983

1984
1985

1986
1987
1988

1989

West
Germany

Japan

-

1.4

1.2
1.4
1.6

1.5
1.5
1.5
1.6
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.7
1.9
1.9
1.9

1.7
1.8
2.0
2.0
1.8
2.1
2.2
2.2

2.1
2.1
2,2
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.9
2.9
2.9

2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1

2.2
2.3

2.4
2.6
2.6
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.9
3.0

United
Kingdom

United
States

2.5

2.7

-

2.3

-

2.7
2.8

2.9
2.8

2.3
2.3
2.2
2.3

2.8
2.8
2.8
2.7

2.1
2.1
2.2
2.4
2.2

2.6
2.4

-

2.3

2.4
2.3
2.2
2.0

2.4
2.3
2.2

2.2
2.2
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5

2.6
2.7

2.8
2.8
2.8
2.7
2.7

Note: French data are based on Gross Domestic Product (GDP); consequently, percentages may be
slightly overstated compared to GNP. Omissions (-) indicate that R & D data are unavailable.
Source: National Science Board (1991).

Table 3
Variable Means and Standard Deviations, Foreign Affiliates of US Corporations, 1989
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

No. Obs.

Parent Royalties/Sales

0.00774

0.00693

41

R&D/Labor Compensation

0.05370

0.06317

43

R&D for Affiliate/Total R&D

0.89466

0.16576

38

R&DIGDP

0.01080

0.00878

41

w*/(l.r*)

0.42149

0.54876

41

r*/(1r*)

0.65270

0.29224

41

(w*_r*)/(1_r*)

-0.23121

0.46387

41

0.26339

0.27492

41

1/(1r*)

1.65270

0.29224

41

w'

0.20784

0.25274

38

0.37666

0.09167

38

[w*/(1r*)](R&D/GNP)

0.00263

0.00446

43

[r*/(1r*)}('R&D/GNP)

0.00737

0.00797

43

[(w*.T*)/(lr*)](R&D/GNP)

-0.00475

0.00752

43

[(w*_r*)/(1_r*)jZ(R&D/GNP)

0.00388

0.00641

43

[1/(1r*)J(R&D/GNP)

0.01793

0.01602

43

Note: The regressions reported in Tables 5-7 use these variables. The first three represent countrylevel aggregate activities of foreign affiliates of U.S. corporations in 1989, as reported in U.S.
Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1992). The variable (R&D/GNP)
represents country R&D/GNP ratios reported by the National Science Foundation (1991). The
variable
represents local statutory corporate tax rates, and w* represents withholding tax rates
imposed by foreign countries on royalty payments to the United States. Observations are countrylevel aggregates of the behavior of all U.S-owned affiliates.

r

Table 4
Variable Means and Standard Deviations, Foreign-Owned Affiliates in the United States,-1987
Variable

Mean

Standard Deviation

No. Ohs.

Royalties/Sales

0.00759

0.00936

27

R&D/Labor Compensation

0.08749

0.13590

27

R&D/GNP

0.01511

0.00932

27

w

0.12037

0.12805

27

w(l-FTC)

0.06481

0.11752

27

w2

0.03028

0.03998

27

w2(1-FTC)

0.01750

0.03532

27

w(T(&DIGNP)

0.00120

0.00190

27

w(1-FTC)(R&D/GNP)

0.00068

0.00181

27

w2(R&D/GNP)

0.00028

0.00056

27

w2(1-VFC)(R&D/GNP)

0.00017

0.00054

27

Note: The regressions reported in Tables 8 and 9 use these variables. The first two variables
represent country-level aggregate activities of foreign-owned affiliates in the United States in 1987, as
reported in U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis (1990). The variable
(R&D/GNP) represents country R&D/GNP ratios reported by the National Science Foundation
(1991). The variable w represents the withholding tax rate imposed by the United States on royalty
payments from the United States. The variable FTC equals unity if an investor's home country taxes
worldwide income and grants foreign tax credits to its residents, and equals zero otherwise.
Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of all U.S-owned affiliates.

Table

5

Royalty Tax Rates and Royalty Payments by Foreign Affiliates of U.S. Corporations, 1989
Dependent Variable: (Royalties Paid to U.S. Parents/Total Sales), U.S-Owned Affiliates

Constant
R&D/GNP

0.0176

0.0060
(0.0027)

0.0014
(0.0014)

0.0142
(0.0067)

0.0016
(0.0015)

(0.0078)

0.4310
(0.1201)

0.4023
(0.1215)

0.4310
(0.1201)

0.4310
(0.1282)

0.4002
(0.1240)

-0.0061
(0.0025)

-0.0068

-0.0063
(0.0025)

-0.0066
(0.0027)

-0.0027

0.0039
(0.0046)

-0.0068
(0.0027)

[r*/(lr*)]

-0.0013

(0.0042)

[(w*r*)/(1r*)]

(0.0027)

[(w*_T*)I(1T*)]2

(0.0037)

-0.0107
(0.0052)

-0.0082

[1I(1_r*)J

(0.0042)

&

log L
n

0.0053
(0.0007)

0.0055
(0.0007)

0.0053
(0.0007)

0.0055
(0.0007)

0.0052
(0.0006)

125.0988

122.8083

125.0988

123.0681

125.4541

41

41

41

41

41

Note: The columns report coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the dependent variable is the
ratio of royalties paid by foreign affiliates of U.S. corporationsto their parent companies to the
affiliates' total sales. The variable (R&DIGNP) represents country R&D/GNP ratios reported by the
National Science Foundation (1991). The variable represents local statutory corporate tax rates,
and
represents withholding tax rates imposed by foreign countries on royalty payments to the
United States. Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of all U.S-owned affiliates.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

w

r

Table 6
Local Tax Rates and R&D Intensities of Foreign Affiliates of U.S. Corporations, 1989
Dependent Variable: Local (R&D/ManufacturingLabor Compensation), U.S-Owned Affiliates

Constant

-0.0260
(0.0146)

-0.0274
(0,0150)

-0.0260
(0.0146)

-0.0208
(0.0146)

-0.0209
(0.0147)

R&D/GDP

10.0631

8.8330
(1.8161)

12.7071
(3.4801)

8.0861
(1.7744)

8.5018
(4.7042)

[(w*_r)/(1r*)].

4.2941

(R&D/GNP)

(2.0724)

3.1769
(2.1870)

0.3143
(2.9011)

0.3981
(3.0308)

-4.4628

.-42460

(2.4171)

(3.3159)

(2.0237)
[w*I(l_T*)].
(R&D/GNP)
[r*I(1_r*)I.

(R&D/GNP)

3.1769
(2.1870)
-5.8209
(2.3508)

[(w*T*)I(lr*)]2.
(R&DIGNP)

[1J(1r*)J.

-2.6440

(R&D/GNP)

(2.0200)

&

logL
n

0.0497
(0.0062)

-0.2590
(2.7136)

0.0509

0.0497

0.0487

0.0487

(0.0063)

(0.0062)

(0.0060)

(0.0060)

47.1507

46.3131

47.1507

47.9522

43

43

43

43

47.9568

43

in which thedependent variable is the
ratio of R&D expenditures by foreign affiliates of U.S. corporations to the affiliates' expenditures on
labor compensation in manufacturing. The variable (R&D/GNP) represents country R&D/GNP ratios
represents local statutory
reported by the National Science Foundation (1991). The variable
represents withholding tax rates imposed by foreign countries on royalty
corporate tax rates, and
payments to the United States. Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of all U.S.owned affiliates. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Note: The columns reportcoefficients from Tobit regressions

w

r

Table 7
Local Tax

Iate and the Own-Intensity of R&D by ForeignAffiliat of U.S. Corporations, 1989
Dependent Variable: (R&D by Affiliates for Affiliates/Total R&D by Affiliates)

Constant

0.9644
(0.1273)

w*I(1T*)

0.2654
(0.1333)

7*1(1_Tx)

-0.2048

0.9294
(0.0685)

0.9750
(0.3068)

0.2562

0.2654
(0.1333)

0.9447
(0.2065)

0.8776
(0.4103)

(0.2028)

(w*r*)I(1*)

(0.1256)

w

0.2362
(0.1509)
0.4378
(0.2333)

-0.3872
(0.5543)
-0.1071
(0. 2982)

1I(1r*)

0.0606
(0.1923)
0.2527
(0.0435)

log L
n

0.2527
(0.0434)

0.2527
(0.0435)

0.1311
(0.2766)
0.2550
(0.0439)

0.2525
(0.0434)

-12.1006

-12.1524

-12.1006

-12.5287

-12.0370

38

38

38

38

38

Note: The columns report coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the dependent variable is the
ratio of R&D expenditures by foreign affiliates of U.S. corporations for their own use to the
affiliates' total R&D expenditures. The variable represents local statutory corporate tax rates, and
represents withholding tax rates imposed by foreign countries on royalty payments to the United
States. Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of all U.S.-owned affiliates.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

r

Table

8

Royalty Tax Rates and Royalty Payments by Foreign-Owned Affiliates in the United States, 1987
Dependent Variable: (RoyaltiesPaid/Total Sales), Foreign-Owned Affiliates

Constant

-0.0012
(0.0008)

0.0005
(0.0011)

-0.0004
(0.0008)

0.0007
(0.0011)

-0.0003
(0.0008)

R&D/GNP

0.1100
(0.0432)

0.0541
(0.0471)

0.0834
(0.0418)

0.0529
(0.0458)

0.0831
(0.0413)

-0.0074
(0.0036)

w

-0.0174
(0.0116)
-0.0073
(0.0038)

w(1-FTC)

-0.0151
(0.01 87)
0.0342
(0.0375)

w

w2(1-FTC)

0.0269

.

(0.0630)

logL
n

0.0018
(0.0003)

0.0016
(0.0003)

0.0016
(0.0003)

0.0016
(0.0003)

0.0016
(0.0003)

77.1371

79.3389

79.1162

79.7464

79.2077

27

27

27

27

27

Note: The columns report coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the dependent variable is the
ratio of royalties paid by foreign-owned affiliates to the affiliates' total U.S. sales in 1987. The
variable (R&DIGNP) represents country R&DIGNP ratios reported by the National Science
Foundation (1991). The variable w represents the withholding tax rate imposed by the United States
on royalty payments from the United States. The variable FTC equals unity if an investor's home
country taxes worldwide income and grants foreign tax credits to its residents, and equals zero
otherwise. Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of all foreign-owned affiliates.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table 9
Royalty Tax Rates and R&D Intensitiesof Foreign-Owned Affiliates in the United States, 1987
Dependent Variable: (R&D/ManufacturingLabor Compensation),Foreign-Owned Affiliates

Constant
R&D/GNP

-0.1844
(0.0697)

-0.1716

(0.0565)

-0.1345
(0.0456)

-0.1625
(0.0547)

-0.1387
(0.0472)

14.6146
(3.5479)

12.1191
(2.9640)

10.5524
(2.3883)

12.2114
(2.8594)

10.6242
(2.4134)

30.8403
(11.9140)

w(R&D/GNP)
w(1-FTC).
(R&D/GNP)

-5.6039
(42.1940)
45.4557
(10.0257)

w2(R&D/GNP)

72.9530
(63.4897)
128.6451
(142.4354)

w2(1-FTC)'
(R&D/GNP)

logL
n

-93.2700
(212.7782)

0.1335
(0.0225)

0.1094
(0.0190)

0.0891
(0.0153)

0.1060
(0.0185)

0.0892
(0.0154)

6.7117

9.2883

13.0824

9.6807

13.1794

27

27

27

27

27

Note: The columns report coefficients from Tobit regressions in which the dependent variable is the
ratio of the U.S. R&D expenditures of foreign-owned affiliates to the affiliates' total US.
manufacturing labor compensation in 1987. The variable (R&DJGNIP) represents country R&DJGNP
ratios reported by the National Science Foundation (1991). The variable w represents the withholding
tax rate imposed by the United States on royalty payments from the United States. The variable FTC
equals unity if an investor's home country taxes worldwide income and grants foreign tax credits to
its residents, and equals zero otherwise. Observations are country-level aggregates of the behavior of
all foreign-owned affiliates. Standard errors are in parentheses.

