                            NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         PHYSICIAN FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
                         AND CESAREAN SECTION DELIVERY




                                      Jonathan Gruber
                                       Maria Owings




                                  Working Paper No. 4933




                   NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMiC RESEARCH
                            1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                              Cambridge, MA 02138
                                 November 1994



We are grateful to Ed Bacon, Peter Diamond, Victor Fuchs, Marty Gaynor, Tom McGuire. Joe
Newhouse, Robert Pokras, Jim Poterba, Richani Zeckhauser, Jon Skinner, seminar participants
at MIT, Harvani, and the NBER, and to the editor and two anonymous referees for helpful
comments. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Health Care and Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed axe those of the authors and not those of the National
Center for Health Statistics or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

   1994 by Jonathan Gruber and Maria Owings. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper #4933
                                                                              November 1994


                           PHYSICIAN FINANCIAL INCENTIVES
                           AND CESAREAN SECTION DELIVERY


                                          ABSTRACT


        The "induced demand" model states that in the fact of negative income shocks physicians

may exploit theft agency relationship with patients by providing excessive care in order to

maintain their incomes. We test this model by exploiting an exogenous change in the financial

environment facing obstetrician/gynecologists during the 1910s: declining fertility in the U.S.

We argue that the 13.5% fall in fertility over the 1970-1982 period increased the income pressure

on ob/gyns, and led them to substitute from normal childbirth towards a more highly reimbursed

alternative, cesarean delivery. Using a nationally representative micro-data set for this period,

we show that there is a strong correlation between within state declines in fertility and within

state increases in cesarean utilization. This correlation is robust to consideration of a variety of

alternative hypotheses, and appears to be symmetric with respect to periods of fertility decline

and fertility increase.




Jonathan Oruber                                              Maria Owings
Department of Economics, E52-274c                            National Center for Health Statistics
M.I.T.                                                       3700 East West Highway
50 Memorial Drive                                            Hyattsvilte, MD 20782
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
         A standard model of physician behavior in the health economics literature is that of "induced

demand'. This model states that in the face of negative income shocks physicians may exploit their

agency relationship with patients by providing excessive care in order to maintain their incomes.

Such a model has traditionally been tested by assessing the effects on the utilization of medical

procedures of two alternative changes in the environment facing physicians. The first is reductions

in the fees paid to physicians, generally by government payers. The second is variations., in the

physician/population density across areas; increased density lowers the income of the existing stock

of physicians, and will lead to increased utilization of medical procedures in an inducement-type

model.

         Each of these approaches faces important problems, however. Fee changes cannot identify

supply responses because there may be a contemporaneous demand response to changing prices; that

is, if quantity rises when fees fall, this could reflect either induced or true increases in demand.

Using fee changes to identify inducement also raises the problem that substitution and income effects

go in opposite directions; even if there is no measured utilization response, there may be inducement,

but substitution and income effects may simply be cancelling. Studies that use physician density

differences to proxy for income shocks also face a fundamental identification problem. If there is

some unobserved area characteristic which is correlated with taste for medical interventions, an area

will feature both higher procedure utilization and more physicians, regardless of the extent of demand

inducement An obvious candidate for such sit omitted variable is the average coinsurance rate in

the area.

         In this paper, we propose a new means of identifying the effect of induced demand on

procedure utilization. We exploit a plausibly exogenous change in the financial environment facing
                                                   2

obstethcianlgyttcologists during the 1970s: declining fertility in the U.S. Fertility (births/100

population) fell by 13.5% during the 1970-1982 period. We argue that declining fertility increased

the income pressure on ob/gyns, and led them to substitute from normal childbirth towards a more

highly reimbursed alternative: cesarean delivery. Used in only 5.5% of births in 1970, cesarean

delivery rose by over 240% over the subsequent 12 years, and it is now the second most frequently

performed major surgical procedure in the U.S., with a rate of 23.5 cesarean deliveries per 100

births.' This time series correlation between the fertility declinc and the cesarean utilization increase

raises the possibility that inducement played an important role in the substitution of cesarean delivery

for normal thildbirth.

        The primary purpose of this paper is to test for a causal role of financial incentives in the use

of cesarean delivery over the 1970-1982 period. We do so by exploiting the          dramatic change in

fertility patterns across the U.S. states during this era. Conditional on the characteristics of the

mother and of the birth, statewide fertility changes should provide exogenous measures of the

financial pressure on ob/gyns in that state. Thus, we ask: in states where fertility was falling the

most, did cesarean delivery rise the most?

        Our teat is carried out using a rich dataset of individual birth records from the 1970-1982

period. The National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS) is a nationally representative survey of

hospitals which collects information, for a sample of discharges, on the nature of the hospital stay,

procedures performed during that stay, and the demographic characteristics of the patient. There is

data on approximately 20,000 deliveries annually from a wide cross-section of hospitals. We match

this data on individual births to information on changes in fertility levels by state and year, and

examine the effect of within state changes in fertility on the use of cesarean delivery. We use both



    1Unpublished tabulations, National Center for Health Statistics.
                                                     3

individual lent and state level data to control for a number of other characteristics of mothers and

births, such as age, birth order, and infant health, which may be spuriously correlated with both the

fertility rate and the use of cesarean delivery.

       To summarize, we find a strong correlation between within-state fertility declirts and within-

state increases in cesarean section delivery rates: a 10% deciS in the fertility rate is associated with

a 0.97 percentage point increase in the cesarean delivery rate. This finding is robust to a wide

variety of specification checks. It implies that financial incentives do play an important role in the

substitution of cesarean delivery for normal childbirth. This role was a small one relative to the

rapid growth in cesarean delivery, however; increased ob/gyn income pressure can only explain

between 16% and 32% of the substitution of cesarean delivery for normal childbirth during this era.

        We begin, in Part   1,   by discussing the causes and consequences of the diffusion of cesarean

childbirth in the l970s. In Pan II, we summarize the literature on the induced demand hypothesis,

and present a brief model which notes the implications of this hypothesis for the use of cesarean

delivery when the fertility rate falls. Part III describes the data sources and the empirical framework

used. Paxt IV presents the basic results and specification checks. Part Vassesses whether cesarean

delivery responded asymmetrically to fertility rises and falls. Part VI concludes.



                                 Part I: Background on Cesarean Delivery

Cesarean Delivery in the United Suites

        The upper IS in Figure 1 charts the growt in the cesarean section rate (c-sections per 100

births) nationally over the 1970 to 1991 period. The rate doubled from 1970 to 1975, and doubled

again by 1984. Utilization of the procedure flattened out in the mid-1980s, and fell somewhat atthe

end of the decad& This rapid growth in c-section utilization was not restricted to any particular
                                                  4
region, type of hospital, race, or age group (Placek and Taffel, 1980), The lower line shows the
growth in the primary cesarean section rate; until recently, women who had received previous c-

sections were almost universally c-sectioned on all future birth!.2 The trend is similar, although a

growing fraction of cesarean births over time is due to repeat cesareans.
       There is no consensus view a to the cause of this rapid increase in cesarean utilization.

Perhaps the most frequently cited explanation is the introduction of technologies for diagnosing fetal

distress, such a electronic fetal monitoring. The percentage of deliveries with no reported

complication fell from 70% in 1970 to 39% in 1984 (Shiono et aL, 1987). and Williams and Hawes

(1979) document a suong correlation between the percent of deliveries by cesarean-section and the

proportion of labor electronically monitored across California hospitals in 1977. However, cesarean

section rates grew within diagnosis as well. In 1970, 11.6% of breech presentations were delivered

by c-section; by 1984, 80% were delivered in this fashion (Shiono et al., 1987). The NIH (1981)

shows that almost one-half of the growth in primary cesarean rates was within diagnosis growth,

       Another important cause of c-section adoption was thought to be the legal environment.

Marieskind (1979) reports that the most frequent reason given by physicians for performing a

cesarean section was the threat of a malpractice suit. She cites a National Association of Insurance

Commissioners study which reports that, in 1975-76, ob/gyns faced 10 times the probability of suit

of other physicians. Recent econometric work which examines the regional correlation between

malpractice "threat, a measured by malpractice premiums or previous malpractice claims paid, and




    31n 1970,98.3% of women with previous caesaream received c-sections; by 1984, the rate had
fallen slightly to 96.1% (Shiono et al., 1987).
                                                  S

cesarean utilization has produced mixed results, however.3




Finwwiai Incentives for Cesarean Delivery

       The hypothesis to be tested in the empirical work is that declining fertility led to a

substitution towards cesarean delivery, in order to alleviate the income pressure on obfgyns. A

necessary precondition for this hypothesis is that cesareans be reimbursed more highly than normal

childbirth, which has traditionally been true. The Health Insurance Association of America (1989)

reports that physician charges for cesarean delivery in 1989 were $2,053. compared to $1,492 for

vaginal delivery. While no such systematic data are available for the 1970s, Marieskind (1979)

reports fee differences for a sample of cities for the late 1970's: the average differential was

approximately 40%, which is similar to the 1989 differential.

       These higher reimbursement levels are not necessarily justified by increased physician inputs.

In terms of the time invesunent only. cesarean delivery is much more efficient for the ob/gyn; unlike

normal childbirth, cesarean deliveries can be scheduled in advance, and they often take less time than

a normal childbirth with extended labor. Of course, cesarean delivery is a more difficult procedure.

However, the 1993 revision of the resource-based relative value scale (RBRVS). which measures

physician workloads by the product of intensity and time, concluded that the workload for vaginal

delivery is actually higher than that of cesarean delivery (Keeler and Brodie, 1993).'



    'See Keeler and Brodie (1993) for a review, and Localio et al. (1993) and Tussing and
Wojotocz (1992) for results. Furthermore, none of these studies has been able to surmount the
problem that there may be omiued regional variables correlated with both of the malpractice threat
measures and cesarean utilization.

    'This discussion does not account for any disutility from the extra training necessary for cesarean
delivery; however, Marieskind (1979, p. 121) notes that obstetricians were not even trained in
vaginal breech delivery by the late 1970s, so that these training costs have presumably already been
paid by practicing ob/gyns.
                                                   6
                                                                                                            -

       Furthermore, the structure of private insurance coverage during the 1970s may               have

contributed to the financial rewards to cesarean delivery. A commonly accepted feature of health

insurance benefits before the rnid-1970s was limited coverage for childbirth. Maternity coverage was

sometimes excluded from basic health benefits; if included, it was often subject to flat rate cash

amount limits regardless of the cost of delivery. Many policies, however, limited coverage of

normal childbirth only, and hilly covered the costs of cesarean delivery. In this case, there would

be an incentive for the physician to substitute cesarean childbirth for normal delivery. This

differential coverage was outlawed by several state mandates in the 1975-1978 period and then by

Federal statute in October, 1978 (Gruber, 1992).'

        There have been two types of previous studies of the role of financial incentives in the use

of cesarean delivery. The first focuses on differences in cesarean utilization by insurance coverage

type. The relative rewards for cesarean delivery for the privately insured are much higher than for

the publicly insured or uninsured.        Using data in American College of Obstetricians and

Gynecologists (1989), we calculate that the average reimbursement differential for cesarean delivery

in 1989 under Medicaid was only $230, which is 40% as large as the average differential in

physician charges discussed above. For uninsured patients, the financial rewards may be lower still,




    51n theory, these state and federal laws changed the financial incentives of physicians in a testable
way, by levelling the playing field between normal childbirth and cesarean delivery. This test runs
into two problems in practice, however. First, while most private insurance did limit coverage of
normal childbirth, many policies limited coverage of cesarean delivery as well. (3ruber (1992) finds
that 30% of private insurance plans in 1977 paid less than the physician's usual charges for childbirth
than for other procedures. Thus, these laws, which typically introduced first dollar coverage of a
physician's usual charge for both normal and cesarean childbirth, simultaneously increased the
incentives for both types of delivery. In addition, as noted below, we cannot identi' privately
insured patients in our data before 1977, which does not leave much variation in the legal
environment before the federal statute of October, 1978. Perhaps due to these problems, we were
unable to find significant effects of these law changes on cesarean utilization. The inclusion of these
variables, however, did not affect the coefficient on fertility in the regressions reported below.
                                                      7

as   there is a reasonable probability that the bill will not be paid at all. Epstein ci at. (1989) find for

a sample of Massachusetts hospitals that 80% of total charges to self-pay patients are not paid.

While similar figures for physicians charges are not available, this suggests that physicians may be

unable to recoup from uninsured patients the differential charge for doing a cesarean delivery.

          Stafford (1990) examined cesarean rates by payment source in a sample of California

hospitals, aix! found results which lütd up quite well with these financial incentives: cesarean rates

were highest for those with private insurance, followed by the publicly insured, and then the

uninsured. It is difficult, however, to draw causal inferences from this fact because there may be

omitted characteristics by payer class which are correlated with the cesarean decision (ie. birth

severity).

          The second test focuses on the supposition, made for example by Marieskind (1979). that a

declining fertility rate and increases in ob/gyn density may have led to increased use of cesarean

delivery in the 1970s; this point is developed theoretically below. Tussing and Wojotowycz (1992),

examining New York data, find no evidence that cesarean delivery rates are higher where there is

a higher obgyn density. Once again, however, such a study suffers from the fact that there may

be omitted regional differences which are correlated with both higher obfgyn density and cesarean

utilization.



Consequences of C-Section D{ffisIon

          One potential cause of the diffusion of cesarean sections was the belief that they were

instrumental in improving birth outcomes. There is a strong time series correlation between the

rapid improvement in birth outcome in the U.S. and the diffusion of cesarean sections. From 1968

to 1983, the infant mortality rate in the U.S. was halved; this is the exact time period that saw rapid
                                                   8

diffusion of cesarean sections. However, Marieskind (1979) is critical of this interpretation of the

time series data, noting that there were many other technological advances in the treatment of

childbirth, such as the development of neonatal intensive care units.

        Micro-data evidence on the effectiveness of cesarean delivery is mixed. Williams and Hans

(1979) studied a sample oIhospitals in California in 1977, and found a correlation between increased

use of technology in childbirth, including fetal monitoring and cesarean delivery, and the
demographically-adjusted perinatal mortality rate. On the other hand, in a sample of mature (>2500

grams) breech births in New York City, the NIH (1981) found no change in survival probabilities

over time, despite a sizeable rise in the cesarean delivery rate. And Finkler and Wirtschafter (1993)

find no relationship between cesarean section use and risk-adjusted birth outcomes across their

sample of eight California hospitals.

        While we are unaware of any randomized clinical trials to evaluate the effectiveness of

cesarean sections, there have been several trials wtiich randomly assigned the availability of

electronic fetal monitoring. Three of the four studies found that monitoring was associated with

higher c-section rates, but no improvements in perinatal outcomes (NIH, 1981).

        Cesarean delivery is also more costly than vaginal childbirth, along two dimensions. The

first is physiological costs. Maternal mortaiity is very low overall (approximately 1 death per 10,000

births), but it is two to four times as high for cesarean as for vaginal deliveries (NIH, 1981).'

There are a nwnber of less severe but more common risks as well, such as post-operative infection

and   hemorrhage. There    are   also potential physiological costs to the infant, such   as   respiraotY

distress syndrome in infants who are delivered prematurely by c-section (Marieskind, 1979)-



    'More recent data on mazental mortality may show a smaller differential between vaginal and
cesarean deliveries.
                                                      9
          The second is financial   costs. In   1989, the total (doctor and hospital) costs of a cesarean

delivery were 66% higher than the costs of a normal delivery (Health Insurance Association of

America, 1989). In that year, there were 938,000 cesarean section deliveries in the U.S. (Graves

arid   Kozack, 1992). If these deliveries had been as costly as the average normal childbirth, then this

accounts for a differential of $2.7 billion dollars in medical spending. While this is clearly an upper

bound, since cesarean deliveries are likely to be more severe, it does highlight the large differential

expenditure on cesarean delivery in the U.S.



                           Part 11: Induced Demand - Theory and Evidence

An inducement Model

          The induced demand hypothesis has been explored by a number of studies over the past

twenty years. The building block of this theory        is   the notion that, as the agent of the uninformed

patient, physicians are able to determine the level of demand for their product.' Physicians are

generally posited to have utility functions which depend positively on their income, leisure,       and   on

delivering the 'appropriate' amount of care. The last factor can enter either through the physician's

'internal conscience' (McGuire and Pauly, 1991), or as a result of a reputation process by which

physicians who excessively induce demand are punished through future reductions in true patient

demand (Dranove, 1988).' Inducement can be defined as the deviation of treatment levels from that

which equates the marginal benefits and costs to patients (Fuchs, 1978).

           A natural             of inducement models is that a fall in the birth rate will lead to adoption




       'Dranove (1988) correctly notes that induced demand models can be equally well applied to other
agency relationships between buyers and (expert) sellers.

       'For earlier models of this type of provider behavior, see Evans (1974) and Newhousc (1970).
                                                  10

of more highly reimbursed procedures such as cesarean delivery. This is readily illustrated in a
sample inducement model, along the lines of McGuire and Pauly (1991)! We take the number of

births as given to the ob/gyn.1° We also assume that the only margin for inducement is to increase

intensity by shifting the nature of the delivery from a normal childbirth to a cesarean delivery. This

is not strictly true, since ob/gyns appear to earn only about one-half of their income from obstetrics

on average." Introducing other dimensions of inducement into the model would not change the

direction of our prediction, however; whether inducement in fact takes place through the type of

delivery is ultimately an empirical question.

         We posit that the ob/gyn has a utility function of the form:

(1)      U   =   U(Y,   1)


where Y is full income, earnings minus the value of foregone leisure, and I is the extent of

"inducement", which cwses the physician disutility through either the "internal conscience' or

"demand reduction" channels (U > 0, U, < 0; Un, U0 < 0). The number of births is B, and the

level of inducement per birth is i, so that I = Bi; the total disutility from inducement depends on the

total amount of inducement across all patients. The fraction of cesarean deliveries is a(i), a' > 0,

a" = 0. Thus, the budget constraint is:




     'We are grateful to Tom McGuire for suggesting this formulation of the McGuire/Pauly model
for our case.

      '°This may be particularly inappropriate in the 1970s, since most insurance plans did not cover
the cost of normal childbirth, so that demand may have been somewhat price elastic. However, even
if the number of births for a given ob/gyn is price elastic, changes in the stock of births in the state
still provide an exogenous shock to the income of the average ob/gyn in that state.

      "ACOG (1992) reports that56% of ob/gyns earn at least 40% of their incomes, and 76% earn
at least 25%of their incomes, from obstetrics. Furthermore, data in ACOG (1992) indicates that
55.8% of ob/gyn visits are for pre-nalal or post-natal care, and the American Medical Association
(AMA, 1992) reports that one-half of all surgical procedures performed by ob/gyns are childbirth.
                                                     11

(2)        Y=YN+YC             -
           C = Ba(i)

           N = B(1 - a(i))

where N is the number of normal births, and C is the number of cesareans. Y, and I'0 are the full

incomes from performing normal and cesarean deliveries, respectively. We assume that Y,.> Y•.

That is, we assume that the reimbursement premium for ceurean deliveries is sufficiently high to

compensate the physician for any toss in leisure from perfos-nsing a cesarean. This seems reasonable

given the data presented above that cesarean fees are much higher, that cesarean delivery takes less

time, and that the increased difficulty of cesarean delivery does not, in the judgement of the experts

who developed the RBRVS, compensate for the time reduction.

           We follow McGuire and Pauly in assuming separable utility. The first order condition

becomes:

(3)        Uycr'[Y-YJ +       U10
           That is, the physician trades off the net disutility from inducement against the net utility from

increasing income through shifting to cesarean delivery. Suppose now that the number of births, B,

is exogenously reduced. Fully differentiating (3), we obtain:

(4)   i
      ÔB
           =   iUfl7B)a'Ct - Vi
                       U
                                      <0
That is, as births fail, inducement per birth rises, so that the rate of cesarean delivery rises. We

discuss the magnitude of this incentive in more detail in Part III.




Physician Pype. MobiWy, and Entry

           Two imponant further assumptions underlie this model. First, we have assumed that all

births are delivered by ob/gyns. If in fact a non-tivial share of births are delivered by practitioners
                                                  12

other than ob/gyns. then ob/gyns may be insulated from changes in the birth rate. That is, deliveries

by non-ob/gyns may hilly absorb fluctuations in the number of births, so that ob/gyns have no

change in inducement incentives. If only ob/gyna perform cesarean deliveries, then this scenario

could in fact lead to a spurious (from our perspective) negative correlation between fertility changes

and cesarean utilization.

       The vast majority of births, however, are delivered by ob/gyns. During our sample period,

over 99% of all birth! were delivered by a physician in a hospital setting (Vim! Statistics). Of

physicians, the AMA (1993) reports that ob/gyns perform 13.8 deliveries per month, while general

and family practitioners (the second largest category) perform only 0.7. The number of general and

family practitioners is approximately twice that of the number of ob/gyns, so that ob/gyns deliver

over 90% of all babies by this calculation. Similarly, using data on the fraction of dollars derived

from delivery services for a large Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan in a major U.S. city, we tabulate that

87% of delivery dollars were attributable to ob/gyns.

        Second, we have assumed that ob/gyns are immobile. If ob/gyns are mobile, then their

location may respond to fertility changes in a way which partially offsets the inducement incentives

documented above. In fact, it does appear that ob/gyns respond to changes in fertility rates in

making their locational decisions; a regression over the 1970-1982 period of the log of the number

of ob/gyns on the log of the fertility rate, including a full set of state and year dummies, yields a

significant and positive coefficient of roughly 0.2. To the extent that ob/gyns are offsetting fertility

declines by their locational choices, it will lead to a smaller effect of fertility changes on the use of

cesarean delivery in the empirical work below. Whether these locational choices are sufficient to
                                                  13

fully undo the need for inducement in response to failing fertility is an empirical question)2

       There is also a simple fact which seems to contradict the contentions of this model: entry into

obstetrics and gynecology continued unabated during the era of fertility decline, with ob/gyns per

capita increasing by   38% from 1970 to 1982. If fertility decreases were increasing the financial

pressure on ob/gyns, why should they have continued to enter this field at such a rapid rate? There

are a number of other factors, however, which may have affected the attractiveness of medical

professions during this era, such as the general decline in returns to higher education of the 1970s

(Freeman, 1976). A more relevant question is whether entry into this field relative to other medical

sub-specialties responded to fertility changes. In fact, there is a strong positive correlation (p 0.75)

between annual fertility rates and the ratio of ob/gyris to other physicians in the U.S. over the 1970-

1982 period. This suggests that, conditional on choosing to enter the medical profession, individuals

were considering the relative rewards of this field in making their specialty decision.



Induced Demand - Past Evidence

        As noted above, induced demand effects have been posed and tested in two different contexts.

The first is reductions in the fees paid to physicians, generally by government payers. In this case,

inducement operates through both the substitution and income effects, so that the net effect on the



    '21t is possible that ob/gyn mobility could lead to a correlation between fertility and the cesarean
rate that was independent of induced demand. Suppose that there were two types of obfgyns, high
quality and low quality, and that high quality ob/gyns performed more cesareans. If the fertility fall
leads to a fall in demand for low quality ob/gyns, they may leave the state, raising the measured
cesarean delivery rate through a compositional effect. Given the estimated mobility response,
however, this effect will in general not be large enough to explain our findings below. For example,
if initially 112 of ob-gyns are Low quality and do 10% cesarean deliveries and 112 are high quality
and do 20% cesarean deliveries, and there isa 10% fertility decline which leads to a 2% net outflow
of ob/gyns, and all of the outflow conies from the low quality sector, the cesarean delivery rate
would rise from 15% to 15.1%. This.is much smallerthantheeffectestilnatedbelOW, which is on
the order of a 1 percentage point rise in the c-section rate for a 10% fertility fall.
                                                  14

quantity of services is unclear. However, most previous studies have tested for inducement by

assessing whether quantity increased when fees were reduced (that is, under the assumption that

income effects dominate substitution effects); in the limit, with a "target income", quantity increases

fully undo the price reductions.

       There   is some evidence that fee reductions lead to increases in quantities, although the

magnitude of inducement is very uncertain. The strongest evidence for induced quantity increases

is Rice's (1984) study of a Medicare fee reduction in Colorado; he found that a 10% decline in

physician reimbursements led to a 6.1% increase in intensity of medical services and a 2.7% increase

in intensity of surgical services. However, a similar study by Hurley, Rice, and Labelle (1990) for

Ontario found mixed responses to fee changes across procedures. Evidence from the experiences

of the U.S. and Canada with fee controls offers a similarly mixed picture of the role of induced

demand; see Wedig, Mitchell, and Cromwell (1989), Feldman and Sloan (1988, 1989), and Rice and

Labelle (1989) for a discussion.

        The second context for testing induced demand is the response of procedure use to variations

in the physician/population density across areas. Evidence on the use of surgery in response to an

increased supply of surgeons is presented in Fuchs (1978) and Cromwell and Mitchell (1986). Both

authors looked at a cross section of locations over several years, and found strong evidence for

demand inducement; the latter findings are about one-third as large as the former. Birch (1989) and

Grytten ci aL (1991) also find very strong positive relationships between dentists/capita and

utilization of dental services)3

        As discussed in the introduction, both of these methodologies face important identification



  '3For reviews of the induced demand literature, see Feldman and Sloan (1988) or Dranove and
Wehner (1994).
                                                  15

problems. The problem of omitted variables correlated with physician density is discussed in Auster

and Oaxaca (1981), Phelps (198), and Feldman and Sloan (1988). Both Fuchs and Cromwell and

Mitchell attempt to surmount this problem by finding instuments correlated with physician density,

such as population disthbution acrou nco and non-rico areas, average wages, and other socio-

economic characteristics of the area. It is unclear, however, whether these instnsments are also

uncorrelated with taste for surgery; wealthier or more urban areas may feature different average

coinsurance rates.14

        In this paper, we propose an alternative means of identifying an inducement effect for

ob/gyns: using changes in the fertility rate. The model above shows that changes in fertility will

have inducement-type incentives. And, conditional on the characteristics of the mother and the birth,

statewide changes in fertility should be an exogezus shock to the income of ob/gyris. In the

empirical work below, we will consider this exogertity assumption in more detail, by controlling

for a number of potential omitted correlates of fertility rate changes and cesarean delivery rates.

       In some specifications below, we will also follow the previous literature in using changes in

ob/gyn density to proxy for income pressure. We potentially improve on previous estimates of the

effect of physician density on procedure utilization by including location (state) fixed effects in the

regression, thus controlling for any omitted variables which are constant over time. Nevertheless,

writ of the identification problems noted by the critics of this approach are difficult to surmount

simply by using within-area changes. Thus, we will primarily rely on fertility changes to proxy
income pressure on ob/gyns in the estimation.




    "This criticism is levelled most damningly by Dranove and Wehner (1994), who find that, using
a similar instrumental variables methodology to Mitchell and Cromwell (1986), increasing the
number of ob/gyns in an area increases the number of births!
                                                    16

                              Part III: Data and Empirical Framework
Data

        zr primary data source is the National Hospital Discharge Survey (NHDS) conducted by

the National Center of Health Statistics (NCHS) annually since 1965.                This is a nationally

representative survey of over 400 hospitals, wtith contains information on approximately 200,000

discharges in each year.         The survey collects information on some limited demographic

characteristics of the patient, features of the hospital, primary and secondary diagnoses, and primary

and secondary procedures. We use information on patients with a primary diagnosis of childbirth

in the years 1970-1982; the final sample consists of over 250,000 births. The public use (lie of the

NHDS only identifies the region of the hospital. These files were augmented with state identifiers,

and all analysis was carried out at the NCHS.'5

        The means for the dasaset are presented in Table 1, for both the fill dataset, and for those

births which did and did not get delivered by c-section." Approximately 11.9% of births are by

cesarean section over this tint period. While the mority of births are to younger women, the

majority of c'sections are performed on older women. There are relatively few deliveries in (or-

profit hospitals in this time period. The most striking differences between the cesarean and non-

cesarean columns are in the figures for hospital size and for severity codes; cesareans are much more

likely in large hospitals, and are strongly correlated with a complicated delivery. Since our

identifying variation will come from state level changes in fertility, it is comforting to note that we



    '5fl-e NHDS does not collect data (or three low population states so these states were dropped
from the analysis. The NHDS also provides weights to cap'ure the probability that a given discharge
was sampled. All results were computed both weighted and unweighted, and were very similar in
every case. The results reported below are unweighted.

     "The NHDS only identifies expected source of payment from 1977 onwards, so we do not use
that variable in our basic analysis. We do use it in one specification check below.
                                                     17

have a reasonably large average sample size of deliveries for each stale/year. The mean number of

deliveries by state/year is 837, aM the value ranges from a minimum of 17 to a maximum of 2767.

       In order to examine the effect of fertility on the use of cesarean delivery, we exploit the

substantial variation across states in fertility changes in this era. Data on the number of births in

each state and year   is    available from the NCHS' Vital Statistics of the United Staus)7 Figure 2

graphs the average fertility raze, births per 100 population, by year for our sample period. There

is a striking decline in fertility from 1970-75, and a moderate rise from 1977-1982. Over the entire

period, fertility falls from 1.84 births/lO0 persons to 1.59 births/100 persons, a decline of 13.5%."

       These national trends mask substantial heterogeneity in fertility changes within states over

dire. Figures 3A and 38 illustrate two examples of this heterogeneity. In both North Carolina and

Kansas. there were steep fertility declines in the early years of the sample period. However, while

fertility declined until 1976 and was flat thereafter in North Carolina, fertility dropped much more

rapidly in Kansas,    and   rose thereafter, so that by 1982 fertility levels were actually higher than in

1970. Approximately 10% of the total variation in fertility rates from 1970-1982 is within state

variation in fertility over time. Ranking states by their fertility rates in 1970 and again in 1982,

there is only a 0.58 correlation in the ranking across the two years, and 28 stales changed their


    'ideally, the fertility rate would be calculated as the ratio of births to the female population of
child-bearing age. However, population estimates by stale/sex/age group are not available between
1970 and 1980, so we use total population in our basic estimates. Attempting to correct our
regressor for txtnds in the demographic composition of each state's population has little effect on the
results.

     "Fertility fell dramatically as well from 1960-1965, and then was roughly constant until 1970.
Data are not available for this earlier period. Our assumption is that cesarean utilization had adjusted
to the earlier transition by 1970, so that we can assess the net new contribution of the change from
1970 onwards. But the fact that the earlier fertility decline did not lead to widespread adoptionof
cesarean delivery highlights the crucial interactions between the incentives explored here and other
factors determining technological adoption, such as the evolution of complementary technologies like
fetal monitoring.
                                                      18

ranking by more than 10 positions during this period.

           What drove these differential fertility changes across the states? There are a number of

hypotheses     for the nationwide changes in fertility during this period, although we are aware of rio

state-specific analyses for these years: postponement ofmarriage and rising divorce rates; increasing

use of reliable contraceptives; liberalized laws on abortion;" concern about environmental issues and

overpopulation; increased entry into and opportunities in the labor force for women; and cyclical

coriditions. Gibson (1976) finds that over 80% of the decline in fertility from 1970-75 was due to

declines in marital fertility. Both Gibson and Bloom and Trussell (1984) find that this decline was

composed of both permanent fertility effects and changes in the timing of births; sont of the
 bounceback       in fertility in the later part of the decade may have been a result of these timing

effects.

           This paper   will not explore the determinants of these cross-stale fertility changes: rather, we
ill take them     as    exogenous local shocks to the income of ob/gyns which can be used to test the

induced demand model. A number of alternative hypotheses can be suggested for a fertility/cesarean

correlation, and we address these at length in Part IV. While it is difficult to convincingly refiute

all possible alternative hypotheses for this correlation, we find it to be remarkably robust to any

alternative considered.

           How large is the financial incentive arising from these differential fertility changes? We



    "Westoff and Ryder (1977) document a large decline in unwanted births during the 1960s, and
conjecture that this continued into the 1970.. Statistics Canada (1984),       analyzing parallel
demograpisic trends in Canada, noted that in 1968, 16% of couples in Quebec did not want their last
child; by 1976, this ratio hal declined to 7%.
     3°Bucz and Ward (1979) docwnent countercyclical fertility, which they explain as a function of
fertility responding to changing labor market opportunities of women. While there was a recession
during the tail end of this period of fertility decline, the economy was growing at its start.
                                                  19

noted above that one-half of ob/gyn income is from obstetrics, and fertility felt by 13.5% during the

1970-1982 period. Assuming that, in the absence of a behavioral response, the decline in income

from obstetrics would parallel the decline in the birth rate, the implied fall in ob/gyn income of

6.75%, which is non-trivial, lithe change in ob/gyn density is taken to be exogenous, then the

pressure on ob/gyn income is even greater: ob/gyns per birth rose by 58% in this era. Moreover,

ob/gyn density increases could affect both income from obstetrics and gynecology, so that this

represents a negative income shock on the order of 30% or more.

        As Table 1 shows, the means for ob/gyn density and fertility support our hypothesis of

induced demand: cesareans are more likely where there are more obstetricians and fewer births.2'

However, this hypothesis is most appropriately tested in a multivariate regression framework, which

we describe next.



Empirical Framework

        In order to assess the effect of financial incentives on the cesarean decision, we initially run

logit regressions of the fonn:

(5) CSECII = f(a + $,X. + $2PREV11 + $,Z + $4LOBK1D + $ö + $; +
where CSEC1. is equal to one if individual i in hospital h in state j in year treceived a c-section,
                and zero otherwise
      X is a set of individual demographic characteristics
       PREy is an indicator for previous cesarean delivery
       Z is a set of hospital characteristics
       LOBKID is the log of the number of ob/gyris per birth
         is a full set of state dummy variables
       r1 is a full set of year dummy variables

        In this regression, the cesarean decision is modelled as function of a number of characteristics


    2tDataon ob/gyn density in each state and year is from the AMA's Physician Characteristics and
Distribution In the U.S.
                                                    20

ofthemothersndthehospital,aswellastheob/gyndensity(ob/gyn3perbirth)inthestate. If
ob/gyn locational choice can be taken as exogenous, then the ob/gyn density provides the appropriate

measure   of the negative income shock for ob/gyns; cesareans are snore likely to be induced where

either the supply of ob/gyns are rising or the birth rats is falling. However, as documented above,

we are concerned that the number of obfgyrts does not provide an exogenous measure of financial

pressure, so that our preferred specification is:

(6) CSEC. = ((cx +             + $2PREV     + ft3Z, + $4LFERT, +            + $6; +
where LFERT is the log of the state/year fertility rate (births/100 population). In this specification,

we identify the eulect of financial pressure solely from changes in fertility. We normalize births by

population becasise, since we are no longer explicitly including the number of ob/gyns in the state,

population growth provides an exogenous indicator of the trend growth in ob/gyns (and thus the

underlying growth in births needed to maintain ob/gyn income)!

        We control for the age of the mother with a series of dummy variables, since the likelihood

of cesarean delivery rises sharply with age; we include dummies for 5 year age intervals from 20-45,

and for 45 and above (the omitted group being those under 20). We also include indicator variables

for whether the mother is white or black (other non-white being the excluded group), and an

indicator for married mothers.

        We control for whether the mother is coded as having a previous cesarean, since cesarean




    DOur conclusions are not sensitive to the use of this normalization. Appendix Table Al presents
the basic regression results using log births, log births along with log population, log fertility, and
the level of fertility. In each case, the coefficient on the regressor of interest is highly significant
in the expected direction, although the magnitudes of the effects vary somewhat across the columns.
When log birth and log population are entered separately, they have almost identical and opposite
(statistically significant) coefficients, supporting the contention that a normalization by population is
appropriate.
                                                   21

delivery is almost certain in this case? In some specifications, we also control for several
indicators of birth severity, in order tp capture any spurious correlation between fertility rates and

severity. The measures that we use are: breedi presentation, fetal distress, maternal distress, and

other complications. There are two problems, from our perspective, in including these controls.

The first is that, since they are coded by the ob/gyn, they are also potentially endogenous to the same

economic factors determining the cesarean decision. If physicians are going to induce demand for

a cesarean, they must indicate a diagnosis which justifies the use of this more intensive technique.

Numerous      studies have documented such coding creep' within the context of Medicare's

Prospective Payment System (ie. Carter, Newhouse, and Relies, 1990). Second, there was a major

change in the diagnosis coding system in the middle of our sample period (1978). The tint series

for some of the severity indicators show marked changes between 1978 and 1979, So long as these

changes are occurring nationwide, however, they will be captured by our time controls. Neither of

these   problems are likely to be important for the previous cesarean indicator.

         Table 1 indicated that cesareans are more likely in larger hospitals, so we control for hospital

bed size; we also control for whether the hospital is for-profit or government owned (non-profit

being the excluded group)Y We include a full set of year dummies in all regressions, since there

was a strong trend in cesarean delivery over this period. Finally, we include a full set of state

dummies, so that we can control for fixed differences across areas which might be correlated with



    Thin our sample, 97% of women with previous cesarean childbirth had their births by cesarean
delivery. The previous indicator may also be capturing some effects of birth order, since previous
is zero by definition for the first birth, and first births are imwe likely to be delivered by cesarean
section (Marieskind, 1979).

    24unfortunately data on teaching status of the hospital is not available, although there is likely
to be little within-state change in teaching status over this period that is not captured by changes in
hospital size or ownership.
                                                     22

both fertility and the cesarean decision.



                                             Part IV: Results

Basic Results

        Table   2 presents the basic regression results. The first column reports the results from

running equation (5). There is a significant positive relationship between the log of ob/gyn density

and the probability of cesarean delivery: a 10 percent increase in the ob/gyn density raises the

probability of a cesarean by 0.6 percentage points.

        The likelihood of cesarean delivery rises with age, as indicated by Table 1. The increase is

monownic until the highest age group, where there is sont reduction; however, this category

contains only a very small number of observations, and an overall increase with age cannot be

rejected. Cesarean delivery is more likely for married mothers and white mothers. Previous

cesarean delivery, as expected, is an incredibly strong predictor of current cesarean delivery.

Cesarean delivery is much more likely in large hospitals, a relation which has been documented at

length in the literature. Cesareans are also somewhat more likely at for-profit hospitals, and much

less likely at government hospitals, than at non-profit hospitals. The state and year dummies (not

reported) are highly jointly significant.

        In column (2). we disaggregate the doctor/birth ratio into the log of ob/gyns per 100

population and the log of the fertility rate. Both coefficients ate supportive of the induced demand

view; that is, cesarean rates were rising both where the number of ob/gyns was increasing and where

the birth rate was declining. Both coefficients are statistically significant. In column (3) we exclude

the ob/gyn   ratio altogether. The effect of fertility is sontwhat strengthened; a fall in the fertility rate

of 10% is associated with an increase in the likelihood of cesarean delivery of 0.97 percentage
                                                 23

points. In column (4), we exclude the fertility rate, and examine the effect of changes in ob/gyns

per 100 population. The effect of ob/gyn density increases somewhat.

       How Large are these effects? A 10% decline in the fertility rate approximately translates to

a 5% drop in the income of ob/gyns, if they do not change their behavior. In 1989 cesarean delivery

was reimbursed $561 more highly than normal childbirth, and the typical physician performs 168

births per year (AMA, 1993). A one percentage point rise in cesarean utilization translates to 1.68

more cesarean deliveries per year, or an income increase of $943. In 1989, the average ob/gyn

income was $194,300 (Medical Economics. September 3, 1990), so that this represents an income

rise of only 0.5%. This suggests that the shift to cesarean delivery only offset a very small part of

the negative income shock facing ob/gyns!

       An alternative means of scaling the result is to calculate the implied contribution of the 1970-

1982 fertility decline to the growth in cesarean utilization over this period. Viewing ob/gyn density

as exogenous, our finding in column (1) implies that the increase in ob/gyn density over the 1970-

1980 period can explain 2.9 percentage points of the 9.1 percentage point increase in primary

cesarean delivery rates (32%). Alternatively, viewing only the fertility differences as exogenous,

we find that fall in fertility experienced by the U.S. from 1970-1982 can account for 1.45 percentage

points of primary cesarean increase, which is only 16% of the growth raze of cesarean delivery over



    UnfortunaSely, data does not exist to permit a comparable calculation for the 1970s, but the
inference is undoubtably quite similar 'in that era, given that Marieskind (1979) reports similar
cesarean delivery fee premiums for the late 1970s (as noted above).

    ln this calculation and the ones to follow, we compare the estimated effect of our inducement
indicators to the growth in primary cesarean deliveries, not total ceurean deliveries, This Is
because, by conditioning on preview cesarean delivery, we are modelling the effect of inducement
on the primary cesarean decision. In fact, if these models are estimated only on the samplewithout
previous cesarean delivery, the results are almost identical, as would be expected given the very
small likelihood of vaginal birth after cesarean.
                                                  24

this period.

        To summarize, our basic findings are very supportive of the hypothesis that ob/gyris

responded to falling fertility in this era by performing more cesarean section deliveries. The

estimated response is small, however, relative to the shock to ob/gyn income, and the finding implies

that the general fertility decrease during this era can explain only a small part of the overall growth

in cesarean utilization




Specjflcarion   Qiecks

        We find the results in Table 2 to be striking evidence for inducement. It is important to note,

however, that there are a number of alternative interpretations of this finding than the one we have

given. We are unable to refute all of these alternatives. In this section, we consider several of the

most natural ones.

        The first is that the average riskiness of births increases as the number of births decline. In

this case, the use of cesarean delivery may change, not due to physician financial incentives, but due

to the natural correlation between high-risk births and the use of c-sections." Micro-data studies

have shown that very low or high birthweight or gestation are correlated with the use of cesarean

delivery (Marieskind, 1979).

        We have already controlled for some characteristics of the mother (ie. age) which might

indicate a high risk birth. In Table 3, we consider two further steps; in each case, we only report


    "For example, suppose thai there are two types of mothers: those wtio are both careful with
contraception and take good care of their fetuses ("prudenC mothers), and those who do neither
(imprudent mothers). Fertility among imprudent mothers in this model will be roughly constant,
so that, as fertility drops, a higher fraction of births will be represented by imprudent mothers. This
will lead to a positive correlation between the fertility rate arid the quality of the fetus, and thereby
a spurious (from our perspective) negative correlation between the fertility rate and the cesarean
section rate.
                                                    25

the coefficients of interest, as the other covariates see little change in their marginal effects. In the

first cotumn, we control for three indicators of the underlying riskiness of births in state j in year

t: the fraction of live births that die Within 28 days (the neonatal mortality rate), the fraction of births

that are low birth weight at birth (ten than 2500 grams). and the fraction of births that are very high

birthweight at birth (more than 4500 grams). These data are reported by state and year in the

publication Vital Switsdcs. If changes in fertility affect the use of cesarean delivery only through

changes in birth severity, then including these regressors should substantially reduce our coefficient

of interest.

        In fact, the inclusion of these state level severity controls has tithe effect on our result. The

coefficient on fertility is virtually unchanged. The results indicate that both more low and high

birthweight births lead to more cesarean deliveries, which is consistent with our priors.

Interestingly, there is a negative correlation between neonatal mortality and the cesarean rate. This

could refute the hypothesis that more high risk births lead to more cesarean delivery. Alternatively,

it could provide evidence that cesarean delivery itself lowers the neonatal mortality rate, despite the

lack of convincing previous evidence described above. In the absence of a convincing instrument

for cesarean delivery, however, we are reluctant to assign such a causal inference.

        An alternative approach to controlling for underlying riskiness is to include diagnosis

indicators for the severity of the individual birth. While these are potentially endogenous, it may

still be insiructive to examine the effects of their inclusion on our findings. In fact, as column (2)

of Table 3 shows, our finding is somewhat strengthened when these controls are added. This further

mitigates against an explanation for these results based on underlying riskiness. The severity

indicators themselves are all highly significant. Conditional upon individual severity, the effects of

 state level severity measures are weakened; the only significant remaining correlation is with high
                                                   26

birthweight births, and the coefficient on mortality is now positive.

        In the remaining column of Table 3, we directly examine the relationship between two of

these severity indicators and the fertility rate. There is a significant risc in the rate at which both

fetal distress and maternal disaess are diagnosed as fertility deceases. This could be construed as

evidence that fertility affects the underlying riskiness of the birth. Alternatively, it could be evidence

that financial incentives affected physician coding decisions; increased use of cesarean delivery must

be justified by increased coded severity. This would be consistent with past evidence from the

Medicare PPS (Caner, Newbouse, and Relies, 1990). It is also consistent with the very rapid rise

in documented birth severity over the 1970s, despite no obvious deterioration in this era in the health

of pregnant women. In any case, even when we condition on individual severity in column (2), the

inducement relationship remains.

        A second alternative hypothesis is that the fertility effect is operating through correlations

between birth order and cesarean delivery. A number of studies note that cesareans are more likely

for first births, as well as births which are the fifth or higher (Marieskind, 1979; Placek and Taffel,

1980; Tuning and Wojotowycz, 1992). Furthermore, as fertility declines, a larger fraction of births

will be first births, although a smaller fraction will be of a higher order. Thus, there is a potential

for omitted variable bias from our not having birth order data.

        We address this potential problem using state aggregate information on the distribution of

births across birth order. In the final column of Table 3, we include, along with the state/year

severity controls, state/year controls for the fraction of births of order 1, and the fraction of order

5 or more. Including these variables has little effect on the results. The variables themselves are




    21'The effect on order 1 is much larger; summing the fraction of births that are of order 1 and
order 5 or more, there is a strong negative correlation with fertility.
                                                  27

insignificant. The result is similar if the individual level severity controls are included as well.

       A third alternative is that our findings are not the result ala robust correlation, but rather

are driven by the experience of one or two outlying states. Alternatively, our findings may simply

reflect the experience of one outlying region where fertility was falling and taste for cesareans was

rising. In results not reported, we have tried both excluding from our sample the five states with

the largest fertility fall and the five stateswith the largest fertility rise over the 1970-1982 period,

and allowing each of the four census regions to have its own specific time trend in fertility. In both

cases, the correlation between fertility and cesarean delivery was robust.

        Finally, this finding could be a function of changing insurance coverage of mothers.

Unfortunately, we have been unable to control for source of payment in the regressions thus far

because it is missing before 1977. As noted above, cesarean delivery is more likely for Insured

mothers, and I.eibowitz (1990) shows that births are likely to be moved forward if insurance

coverage becomes more     generous. This evidence suggests that any bias from omitted insurance

status measures is going against our finding of a negative correlation between fertility and cesarean

delivery. Nevertheless, we can use the data on payer source for the period from 1977 onwards to

examine the effect of omitting insurance type from our regression.2'

        In the first column of Table 4, we present our regression results for the 1977 to 1982 period




     2'A related economic omitted variable is the labor force participation of the mothers in our
sample. Female labor force participation was also increasing dramatically during the period under
study. Increased labor force participation is likely to be correlated with reduced, or delayed, fertility
(Olsen, 1994). The correlation between labor force participation and the desire for cesarean is
unclear: on the one hand, cesarean delivery offers increased predictability in the timing of delivery;
on the other hand, the recovery tints for cesareans are generally longer than for normal childbirth.
We do not have information on labor force attachment for our sample, and there is not even data
available for the 1970s on female labor force participation rates by state/year. As a proxy, we have
tied in earlier work controlling for the state unemployment rate and state average income. This had
                                                                                -
no effect on our relationship of interest.
                                                   28

oniy. The relationship of interest is robust to this sample period restriction; the coefficient is almost

identical to that in Table 2. and is statistically significant. In the next colunm we include dummy

variables for being privately insured or being uninsured. These variables have their expected signs,

but the control for being uninsured is small and Significant. There is little effect on the coefficient

of interest, suggesting no bias from omitted insurance status variables.

        The surprising finding of an equal rate for publicly insured (the excluded group) and

uninsured patients may be a function of omitted characteristics correlated with payer status. A large

literature documents the fact that the uninsured are in worse health along a number of dimensions

(it. Kasper, 1986), whith would bias them towards having more cesarean deliveries conditional on

financial incentives. In column (3) of Table 4, we control for individual severity using the measures

listed in Table 3. Doing so substantially reduces the coefficient on private pay and raises (in absolute

value) the coefficient on uninsured, althougJ the latter remains insignificant

        The data on payer source allow a further test of our hypothesis. If physicians are inducing

cesarean delivery for financial purposes, then this response should be greatest among those with the

most generous insurance coverage, and smallest for those with the least generous. That is, for

uninsured patients who can be expected to only pay a small portion of their bill, there is little

expected reward to performing a cesarean relative to a normal childbirth. For privately insured

patients, where the fee differential is greatest, the rewards will be the greatest as well. Therefore,

if financial incentives are driving the fertility/cesarean relationship, we should see that this

relationship is strongest for those with private insurance and weakest for the uninsured.

        WedemonstratethatthisisthecaseintheremainingcoluntnsotTable4. Wedosoby
augmenting our basic regression framework with interactions between payer status and the fertility

rate. As we show in column (4), the private payer interaction is negative, indicating that fertility
                                                   29

fails h their greatest impact on this population, and the uninsured interaction is positive, indicating

the smallest impact of fertility changes on this group. That is, for the privately insured, the net

effect of a 10% drop in fertility is * rise in the cesarean rate of 1.15 percentage points; but for the

uninsured, the net effect is a rise in the cesarean raze of only 0.65 percentage points. Neither

interaction is significant, however, perhaps due to the collinearity in the insurance measures. In the

next two columns, we therefore include these interactions separately, and they achkve significance

in each case.

        In the final three columns, we repeat this exercise including the severity controls. The story

is similar; the findings   are stronger, albeit   less precisely estimated!0 In fact, in this case we

estimate that a 10% fall in fertility led to a rise in the cesarean rate for the privately insured of 1.1

percentage points, but a rise for the uninsured of only 0.27 percentage points. Thus, overall, the
results are supportive of our contention that the fertility coefficient measures   a response to financial

incentive incentives; fertility falls induced cesarean increases in the very groups where the financial

incentives were strongest.



                 Fart V: Is There an Asymmetric Response to Fertility Changes?

        In the initial interpretation of our results, we applied the coefficient on fertility to its 1970-

 1982 trend in order to assess the contribution of fertility declines to the growth of cesarean delivery.

 However, sudi an interpretation is only appropriate if the use of cesarean delivery reacts
 symmetrically to increases and decreases in the fertility rate. In fact, there is reason to suspect an

 asymmetric response of cesarean delivery to inducement incentives. Even if ob/gyns would like to


     *The coefficients on the main effects (private pay and uninsured coefficients) are actually wrong
 signed, in columns (4)-(9), but at the mean fertility rate the partial derivatives are correctly signed
 when the severity controls are included.
                                                   30

switcj back to normal delivery, it may be difficult to do so once cesartan delivery has become an

accepted mode of delivery for a given type of birth. The most likely explanation for such an

asymmetry would be the evolution of malpractice rules, which use local standards ofcare in deciding

whether treatment was appropriate. If cesarean delivery had evolved to be the standard of care for

that type of birth, then this built-in irreversibility of malpractice standards will make it difficult to

revert to vaginal childbirth." More generally, a model with evolving practice "norms" could also

yield a similar prediction of technological 'stickiness'.

        If technological diffusion is "sticky', it has important implications for the evaluation of

economic incentives; such hysteresis suggests potential long run effects of short run economic

changes. It may also imply asymmetric responses to declines and increases in fertility, with the
declining fertility of the early 1970s leading to differential adoption of cesarean delivery across areas,

but the subsequent increase having no effect. Indeed, the time series evidence would suggest that

this is the case, as cesarean delivery continued to grow after 1976 despite a rise in the fertility raze.

The time series evidence, however, does not prove that there is an asymmetric response, because our

analysis controls for general time effects in considering the effect of differential state fertility

changes.

        In this section, therefore, we test for an asymmetric response of the use of cesarean delivery

to rising and falling fertility rates. We do so by creating for each state two subperiods: a "falling"

period, and a "non-falling' period. Nationaily, these periods would be represented by 1970-1975,

and   1975-1982 respectively; for North Carolina, 1970-1916 and 1976-1982; for Kansas, 1970-1973

and 1913-1982 (refer to Figures 2-3b). One potentially problematic issue is how to treat the "turning


    '10f course, if the irreversibility was symmetric, then practice patterns would never change. But
there may be a systematic bias in evolving standards of care towards the newest standard, at the cost
of possible reversibility to the old standard.
                                                  .31

poinC year, in which the rapid decline ended and (for most states) a gradual rise began (Ic. 1976 lot

North Carolina). In the analysis below, we try three different approaches: including this year in the

 falling period, including it in the 'non-falling period, and dropping it altogether.

        We run regressions of the form:

(7) CSEC, = ((a + $1X + $2PREV +               $,Z +    $4FALL, + $3FERT.        + $6FERT,FALL,
                         + $.5 + $,; + Ejj)

where FALL, is a dummy which is equal to one if state jis in the failing sample in year t, and

o otherwise. In this framework. $6 measures the differential effect of fertility on cesarean delivery

in the period where fertility is falling. If there is a symmetric response to falling and rising fertility,

then $ should be equal to the previous estimates for the fertility effect, and $ shoutd be equal to

zero. There is some heterogeneity in the tinting of the turning points across stales: 21 states have

their turning points in 1976, 7 in 1975, 3 in 1974, 17 in 1973, and 1 in 1972.

        The results of estimating this equation are presented in Table 5, for the three different

treatments of the turning point year. In no case is there evidence of an asymmetric response. The

 response to fertility is equally strong in the period where fertility is risingand falling. This suggests

 that, at the margin, physicians are able to both increase and decrease intensity in response to

 financial incentives.



                                          Part VI: Conclusions

         Rising medical costs have been a primary impetus for health care reform in the U.S. Yet,

 despite the concern of public policy-makers over this phenomenon, the causes of these cost increases

 are not welt understood. Attempts to account for this increase in costs byfactor! such as the aging

 of the population, increased income, and the growth in insurance coverage leave well over half of
                                                  32

the cost rise unexplained (Newhouse, 1992). This residual is often attributed to the diffusion of

costly new medical technologies (Newhouse, 1992; Weisbrod, 1991), and recent theoretical work

(Goddeeris, 1984; Baurngardner, 1991)      has   even suggested that such technological advance in

incdcine may be welfare reducing. A key question for evaluating these models is whether physician

financial incentives play any role in the adoption of new medical procedures.

       We have investigated the role of physician financial incentives in the substitution of cesarean

childbirth for normal delivery in the 1970-1982 period. Cesarean delivery is fairly inexpensive

relative to other 'replacement' medical technologies. Yet, its very rapid adoption despite a lack of

convincing evidence that it leads to improvements in birth outcomes raises the possibility that this

was not simply the case of a higher quality technique replacing an inferior one. Our results suggest

that, in fact, physician financial incentives did play a significant role in the substitution towards

cesarean childbirth. However, this role was a small one relative to other factors explaining the rapid

growth in cesarean utilization.

       This work can be usefully extended in at least three directions. First, similar tests could be

carried out for the adoption of other medical technologies in different time periods. This would be

particularly useful for cases of very expensive replacement technologies with little convincing

evidence of improved outcomes. Second, our paper leaves largely unanswered the question of why

cesarean delivery, which could be done fairly successfully from the start of the 20th century onwards

(Marieskind, 1979), spread so rapidly after 1970. Finally, there is a general sense in the medical

literature that the level of cesarean delivery is 'too high1 (NIH, 1981). Such a conclusion can only

be drawn after weighing more carefully the costs and benefits of this procedure. While there is

considerable evidence on the physiological and financial costs of cesarean delivery, there is little

convincing evidence on its benefits. Assessing these benefits should be a high priority for future
            33

research.
                                              34
                                          References

American College of Obstetricians and GynecoLogists (1989). "MediCaid Reimbursement for
      Obstetric Care (Specialist) by State. Washington, D.C.: ACOG.

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (1992). "The Economics of Ob/Gyn Practice
      in the United States, 1990-91", Economic Inyact. ACOG: Department of Health Economics
      Analysis.

American Medical Association (1993). PhysIcian Marketplace StatUdcs. Chicago: AMA.

Mater, Richard D. and Oaxaca., Ronald L. (1981) "Identification of Supplier Induced Demand in
       the Health Care Sector," Journal of Hwnan Resources, 337-342.

Baumgardner, James (1991).    Interaction Between Forms of Insurance Contract and Types of
     Technical Change in Medical Care," RAND Journal ofECOnOmIC, 22, 36-53.

Becker, Gary (1992). A Treatice on the Fami'. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Birth, Stephen (1988). 'The Identification of Supplier-Inducement in a Fixed Price System of
        Health Care Provision: The Case of Densdsty in the United Kingdom," Jounwl of Health
       EconomIcs, 7, 129-150.

Bloom, David E, and James Trussell (1984). "What are the Determinants of Delayed Childbearing
      and Permanent Childlessness in the United Stales?," Deitography, 21, 591-611.

Btztz, Michael P. and Ward, Michael P. (1979). 'The Emergence of Countercydical U.S. Fertility,"
       American Economic Review, 69, 313-328.

Caner, G.M. J.P. Newbouse, and D.A. Relies (1990). "How Much Change in the Case Mix Index
       is DRG Creep," Journal of Health EconomIcs, 9,411-428.

Cromwell, Jerry and Mitchell, Janet B. (1986) "Physician-Induced Demand for Surgery," Journal
     of Health Economics 5, 293-313.

Dranove, David. (1988) "Demand Inducement and the PhysicianlPatiena Relationship," Economic
      InquIry, 281-298:

Dranove, David, and Paul Wehner (1994). "Physician Induced Demand for ChildbIrths," Journal
      of Health Economics, 13:61-75.

Epstein, Aronld M. and Joel Weissman (1989). "Characteristics of Patients wtio Contribute to
       Hospital Free Care and Bad Debt Write-Off". Mimeo, Harvard School of Public Health.

Evans, Robert A. (1974).        "Suppplier-Induced Demand: Some Empirical Evidence and
                                              35

       Implications,' in The Economics of Health and Medical Care, Mark Perlman, S., London:
       MacMillan.

Feldman, Roger. (1988) 'Competition Among Riysicians, Revisited," Jounial of Health Politics.
      Policy wsd Law, vol. 13. no 2., 239-261.

Feldman, Roger. and Frank Sloan (1989) "Reply from Feldman and Sloan,' Journal of Health
      Politics, Policy and Law, vol 14., no.3. • 621-625.

Finkler, Merton D., and David D. Wirtachafter (1993). 'Why Pay Extra for Cesarean-Section
       Deliveries?," Inguixy, 30. 208-215.

Freeman, Richard (1976). The Owredzscated American. New York: Academic Press.

Fuchs, Victor. (1978). "The Supply of Surgeons and the Demand for Operations," Journal of
       Hwnan Resources, XIII, Supplement.

Gibson, Campbell (1976). "The U.S. Fertility Decline, 1961-1975: The Contribution of Changes
      in Marital Status and Marital Fertility," Family Planning Perspectives, 8,249-256.

Gooderis, John (1984). "Medical Insurance, Technological Change, and Welfare," Economic
      Inquiry, 22, 56-67.

Graves, E. J., and L.J. Kozack (1992). "National Hospital Discharge Survey: Annual Summary,
       1989," Vim! Health StatistIcs, 13. 109-120.

Gruber, Jonathan (1992). "The Efficiency of a Group-Specific Mandated Benefit: Evidence ftom
       Health Insurance Benefits for Maternity". NBER Working Paper #4157.

Grytten, Jostein, Dorthe HoIst, and Petter Laake (1990). "Supplier Inducement: Its Effect onDental
       Services in Norway," Journal of Health Economics, 9, 483491.

Health Insurance Association of America (1989) "The Cost of Maternity Care and Childbirth in the
       United States, 1989'. Research Bulletin of the Health Insurance Association of America.

 Hurley, Jeremiah, LtheIIe, Roberta, and Rice, Thomas. (1990) 'The Relationship Between
        Ptiysician Fees and the Utilization of Medical Services in Ontario," Adwinces in Health
        Economics and Health Services Research, vol. 11, 49-78.

 Kasper, Judith D. (1986). "Health Status and Utilizatso . Differences by Medicaid Coverage and
        Incont," Health Care Financing RevIew, 7(4), 1-17

 Keeler, Emmett B., and Mollyann Brodie (1993). "Economic incentives in the Choice Between
        Vaginal Delivery and Cesarean Section," The Milbank Quarterly, 71, 365404.
                                              36

Leibowisz, Arleen (1990). "The Response of Births to Changes in Health Care Costs,' Journal of
      Hwnan Resources, 25:697-711.

Localio, A. Russell, et. al. (1993) 'Relationship Between Malpractice Claims and Cesarean
      Delivery,' Joun,al a/the American Medical Association, vol 269, no. 3, 366-373.

Marieskind, Helen 1. (1979) 'An Evaluation of Caesarean Section in the United States' Final
       Repon Submitted to the Depwenent of Health1 Education and We4'are Office a/the Assistant
       Secretary for P/wining and Evaluation/Health.

McGuire, Thomas 0. and Pauly, Mark V. (1991) 'Physician response to fee changes with multiple
      payers,' Journal of Health Economics, 10, 385-410.

National Institutes of Health (1981). Cesarean Ozlldbinh. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of
      Health and Human Services

Newhouse, Joseph (1970). 'A Model of Physician Pricing,' Southern Economic Journal, 37, 174-
       183.

Newhouse, Joseph (1992). 'Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?,' Journal of Economic
     Perspectives, 6, 3-21.

Phelps, Charles. E. (1986). 'Induced Demand--Can We Ever Know its Extent?,' Journal of Health
       Economics 5, 355-365.

Placek, Paul 1., Taffel, SlaM. (1980). 'Trends in Cesarean Section Rates for the United States,
        1970-1978,' Public Health Reports. 540-548.

Rice, Thomas (1984). Physician-Induced Demand for Medical Care: New Evidence from the
       Medicare Program,' Adw.znces In Health Economics and Health Services Research, vol 6,
       129-160.

Rice, Thomas H. and Labelle, Roberta J. (1989). 'Do Physicians Induce Demand for Medical
       Services?, Journal of Health Politics, Polity and Law, vol 14, no. 3.

Shiono, Patricia H., Mcflellis, Donald, and George U. Rhoads (1987). 'Reasons for the Rising
      Cesarean Delivery Rates, 1978-1984,' Obstetrics & Gynecology, 696-700.

Stafford, Randall S. (1990). 'Cesarean Section Use and Source of Payment: An Analysis of
       California Hospital Discharge Abstracts,' American Journal a/Public Health, 313-315.

Statistics Canada (1984). Fertility in Canadw From Baby-Boom to Baby-Bust. Ouawa: Minister of
         Supply and Services.

Tuning, Dale A., and Wojotowycz, Martha A. (1992). 'The Cesarean Decision in New York State,
                                              37

       1986,' Medical Care, 529-540.

Wedig, Geraid, Mitchell Janet B., Cromwell, Jerry (1989). 'Can Price Controls Induce Optimal
       Physician Behavior?,' Jounwi of Health Politics, Policy aM Law, vol. 14, no. 3. 6O1-19.

Weisbrod, Burt (1991). 'The Health Can Qiadrilemma: An Essay on Technological Change,
       Insurance, Quality of Care, and Cost Containment,' Journal of Economic Liieransre, )OCIX,
       523-552.

Westoff, Charles F., and Norman B. Ryder (1977). The CantracepaveRevolution. Princeton, N.J.:
       Princeton University Press.

Williams, Ronald and Hawes, Warren (1979). 'Cesarean Section, Fetal Monitoring, and Perinatal
       Mortality in California,' American Jotenwi of Public Health, vol. 69, no. 9, 864-870.

Yip, Winnie (1994). 'Physician Responses to Medicare Fee Reductions: Changes in the Volume and
       Intensity of Supply of Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABO) Surgery in the Medicare and
       Private Sectors'. Mimeo, MIT.
                                                  38

                                     Table 1: Means of the DaMseL

                                            All Births            No C-Section   C-Section

           Ceure.nDeliveey                    0.119                    0             I

              Age C 20                        0.171                  0.183        0.134
              Age 20-25                       0.341                  0.346        0.308
              Age 25-30                       0.296                  0.293        0.321
              Age 30-35                       0.132                  0.128        0.165
              Age 35-40                       0.041                  0.039        0.055
              Age 40-45                       0.010                  0.009         0.014
               Age 45 +                       0.002                  0.002         0.003
               Manied                         0.793                  0.792         0.798
                White                         0.693                  0.692         0.698
                Black                         0.163                  0.163         0.161
           Number of Beds                     360.5                   356.8        388.2
                                             [301.2]                 (302.5]      [389.4]
              For-Profit                      0.035                  0.035         0.041
             Government                       0.261                  0.264         0.237
           Previous Ceasrean                  0.035                  0.001         0.286
          Breech Pnsentasion                  0.028                  0.011         0.107
             Fetal Distress                   0.045                   0.015        0.272
           Mstcrnai Distress                  0.022                   0.014        0083
          OUtr CompIlations                   0.329                   0.305        0.509

        Ob/Gyns per 100 births                0.621                   0.614        0.67!
                                              [0.24.8)               [0.246]      (0.2611

       Ob/Gyn per 100 population              0.954                   0.946        1.020
                (10')                         (0.304J                (0.301]      (0.319]
       Births pa 100 population                1.59                    1.60         1.57
                                              [0.23]                  [0.241       [0.23]
        Number of Obeervations                255593                 225202        30391


•': Data Irons NHDS dataset sad other sources described in tnt.
                                                    39

                            -      Table 2: Bask Regression Results
                          Depa3dalt Variable isa Dummy for Ceurean Delivery

                                          (1)                (2)               (3)              (4)

   Log Ob/Gyn per 100 births             0.578
                                        (0.126)

          Log Fertility                                    -0.888             -0.923
   (Biztbs per 100 population)                             (0.202)           (0.201)

        Log OJ,/Qyn per                                     0.342                              0.410
         100 population                                    (0.174)                            (0.174)
            Ag. 20-25                    0.001              0.001             0.001           0.001
                                        (0.022)            (0.022)           (0.022)          (0.022)

            Age 25-30                    0.081              0.081             0.082            0.082
                                        (0.023)            (0.023)           (0.023)          (0.023)
            Age 30-35                    0.153              0.153             0.153           0,154
                                        (0.027)             (0.027)          (0.027)          (0.027)

            Age 35-40                    0.419               0.418            0.418            0.419
                                        (0.037)             (0.037)          (0.037)          (0.037)
            Age 40-45                    0.616               0.616            0.616            0.615
                                        (0.065)             (0.065)          (0.064)          (0.064)

            Age 45+                      0.341               0.341            0.342            0,342
                                        (0.143)             (0.143)          (0.143)          (0.143)
             Married                     0.018               0.019            0.019            0.018
                                        (0.020)             (0.020)          (0.020)          (0.020)

              WhiLe                      0.025               0.026            0.026            0.024
                                        (0.022)             (0.022)          (0.022)          (0.022)

              BLACk                     -0.003              0.003            -0.003            -0.004
                                        (0.030)             (0.030)          (0.030)          (0.030)

        Previous Cesarean                5.760               5.761            5.761            5.760
                                        (0.064)             (0.064)           (0.064)         (0.064)

         Number ci Beds                  0.263               0.264            0.263            0.264
              (/10,)                    (0.025)             (0.025)           (0.025)         (0.025)

            For-Profit                    0.091              0.092             0.094           0.093
                                         (0.039)            (0.039)           (0.039)         (0.039)

           Government                    -0.197              -0.198           -0.198          -0.197
                                         (0.020)            (0.020)         (0.020)           (0.020)
j: Siandard errors in parentheses. Regressions .rc run as logits. All regressionsinclude full set of state and
yeas dummies. N 255,593.
                                                       40

                             - Table 3: Spccificañoc Uiccb - Birth Seventy

                              (1)              (2)              (3)              (4)         (5)
    Dq,eodcat Var.          Cesarean        Cesaresn          Fe4al          Matinal      Cesarean


     Log FinAlity            -0S34           -1.015           -0A95             -0.951      -0.883
                            (0.205)          (0.230)          (0.274)           (0.347)    (0.211)
       Neonatal             -0.018            0.015           -0.031             0.0fl      -0.019
       Mortality            (0.012)          (0.015)          (0016)            (0.023)     (0.014)
    Low Rurthweigbi          14.12            7.152           7.634              13.50       15.52
    (C 2500 grams)          (4,67 1)         (5.713)          (6.213)           (8.388)     (4.706)

   High Birthweight          12.10            18.65           0.674             -3.131       12.32
    (>4200 grams)           (7.481)          (9.173)          (9.691)           (13.48)     (7.505)
       Previous              5.761            7.421           -0.483            -0.476       5.761
       Ciesrean             (0.064)          (0.066)          (0.060)           (0.088)     (0.064)
        Breech                                2.951
      Presentsüon                            (0.032)
     Fetal Distress                           4.368
                                             (0.028)
       Matiernal                              2.001
       Distress                              (0.037)
         Other                                1.997
     Consplicaiiona                          (0.021)
      Fraction 1st                                                                           0.300
                                                                                            (0.652)
     Fraction 5th or                                                                        -0.722
      More Births                                                                           (1.570)

jg: Standard won in parentheses. All regressions include set orregressose presented in Table 2. along with
full set of date and year dummies. All regressions nsa as Iogita. N =255,593.
                                                                           41


                                                     Table 4: Specification Check. - Payer Status

                           (I)           (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)              (7)            (8)          (9)

     Log Fertility       -0.901         -0.967         -0.830         -0.855         -0.758          .0.989            -0374          -&463       -09l4
                        (0.430)        (0.431)        (0.548)         (0.452)        (0.440)         (0.432)          (0374)         (0360)       (0.549)

     Private Pay                        0.159          0.088          -0.839         -1.190                            -1.893        -2.249
                                       (0.027)        (0.034)         (0.719)        (0.590)                          (0.891)        (0.736)

      lininswed                        -0.016         -0.057           0.966                          1.523            1.241                      2.594
                                       (0.034)        (0.043)         (0.956)                       (0.792)           (1.187)                    (0.989)
   Private Pay •                                                       -0.240        -0.326                            .0.476        -0.568
    Log Fertility                                                     (0.172)        (0.142)                          (0.213)        (0.177)
    Uninmsred•                                                         0.239                         0.398             0.318                      0.657
    Log Fertility                                                     (0.231)                       (0.191)           (0.289)                    (0.240)

        Standard ernnl in parentheses. All regressions include ad of rtgrwon      prvsitS    in Table 2, along with full       ad of Mate and yesr dummies. All
                                                                                                              N   —
regressions run as logits, for the 1977-1982 period only. Depaidnit variable is aresn section dummy.                  114,917.
:
                                                      42


                                       TiM. 5: Asymmetric Respcose?

   Trnhwlo(Twtng                        (1)                         (2)                        (3)
        Point   Yen               Include in Fill             Include in Rise                 Drop

       Iag Fatility                   -0.929                      -0.874                     -0.881
                                      (0.202)                     (0.207)                    (0.212)
          Falling?                     0.234                      -0.029                     -0.005
                                      (0.580)                     (0.634)                    (0.650)
      FtilityFmlling                   0.055                       0.002                      0.003
                                      (0.137)                     (0.150)                    (0.153)
      Number of Cbs                  255,593                     255,593                     236,950

NS: Standsxdenom in paraitheses. MI regrissions include set of regressors presented in Table 2, along with
full set of state and year dummies. All regressions nui u logits. Dependent variable is cesarean section dummy.
Regression specification is equation (7) in text.
             0 total                 a    primary
     241 -

rL
      2) -
0
0
U,


0
>
0
0
C
C)
r0
U,     B
0
      4.2
            1970       1975                         1985
                                   year
            Figure 1: Cesarean Deliveries in the U.S.
     1.84 -




C
0
0     1.7   -


0.
C
0
C
0
            -
CD    1.6
C
L


      1.5 —


     2.45 -i
                       I      I       I         I      I
            I 970    972     1974    1976      1978   1980   i 9e2
                                     year
                    Figure 2: Fertility Over   Time
     .93 H
               N




cC    1.8_i


0.
2o    1.7-1
C
C
      Lb-i
CD

      1.5 -i


      1.4
                   1972   1974    1976   1978    1980      1982
                                  year
     Figure    3A: Fertility Over Time in North Carolina
     t.3 -t




C
C
Iv

a0    1.8 -
C-
00

L
0


         —I-
                                                    I      I
                 1972    1974   1955    iqSe      1980   1982
                                year
          Figure 3B: Fertility Over Time in    Kansas
                                                      43


                            Talk AL: Varying IS Speciftcatiaa o( Births/Fertility
                            Dependent Variable isa Dummy ka Cesarean Delivery

                                            (I)                 (2)               (3)             (4)

             Log Births                    -0.447             -0.901
                                          (0.121)            (0.20$)
           Log Population                                     0.852
                                                              (0.3 12)
            Log Fertility                                                       -0.923
       (Birtha/IG) population)                                                  (0.20!)
               FertilitY                                                                         -0.516
                                                                                                (0.124)

"S: Standard errors in parentheses. All regressions include set of regressors presented in Table 2, along with
lull set of state and year dummies. All regressions nan as logits. Dependent variable is cesarean section dummy.
N = 255,593.
