                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS
                                OF LIABILITY REFORM:
                              SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE




                                     Thomas J. Campbell
                                      Daniel P. Kessler
                                     George 13. Shepherd




                                  Working Paper No. 4989



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   Januaiy 1995


We thank James Alt, Geraid Carlino, Morris Fiorina, Robert Hall, Gary King, Keith Krehbiel,
Ralph Landau, Roger Noll, Al Pross, Robert Rabin, Scott Stem, and Stanford seminar participants
for generousEy providing comments and data. Campbell and Shepherd are grateful for support
from the Center for Economic Policy Research at Stanford University. Kessler received generous
support from the Harvard/M.I.T. Research Training Group in Positive Political Economy, the
John M. Olin Foundation through the Olin Program at M.I.T., and the State Farm Companies
Foundation. All errors are our own. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Law and
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Thomas J. Campbell, Daniel P. Kessler, George B. Shepherd. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4989
                                                                               January 1995


                               THE CAUSES AND EFFECTS
                                 OF LIABILITY REFORM:
                               SOME EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE


                                         ABSTRACT


       We provide empirical evidence both on the causes and the effects of liability reforms.

Using a newly collected data set of state tort laws and a panel data set containing industry-level

data by state for the years 1969-1990, we (1) identify the characteristics of states that arc

associated with liability reforms and (2) examine whether liability reforms influence productivity

and employment.

       We present two central findings. First, reductions in liability levels are associated with

increases in measured productivity and employment in most industries that we studied. Second,

liability reforms that reduce legal liability are generally positively correlated with measures of

political conservatism.



Thomas J. Campbell                                          Daniel P. Kessler
Graduate School of Business                                 Graduate School of Business
Stanford University                                         Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015                                     Stanford, CA 94305-5015
                                                            and NBER


George B. Shepherd
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
I.     Introduction

       In two waves, the first in the mid-1970's and the second in the mid-1980's, state

legislatures and courts adopted reforms that sought to reduce the level of legal liability. A

well-established empirical literature (e.g., Carroll (1987), Danzon (1986), and Kessler (1994))

suggests that these liability reforms have altered the outcomes of the legal system.

       However, altered court outcomes may not influence aggregate economic performance;

instead, impacts may be only distributive in nature. Considerably less empirical work

addresses the causes or impacts of legal rules on economic outcomes) In particular, the

comprehensive literature on state and regional differences in productivity, output, and

employment (e.g., Beeson (1987), Beeson and Husted (1989), Carlino and Voith (1992)) has

given little attention to the influence of state-level liability reforms. In addition, although

Epstein (1988) offers theoretical insight into the adoption patterns of liability reforms, the

literature lacks detailed empirical analysis of the patterns' causes.

       This paper attempts to fill the two gaps. We provide empirical evidence both on the

cause and the effect of liability reforms. First, using a newly collected data set of state tort

laws, we identify the characteristics of states that are associated with liability reforms. Second,

using a panel data set containing industry-level data by state for the years 1969-1990, matched

with data on state tort laws, we examine whether liability reforms influence productivity and

employment in a number of industries.

       We present two central findings. First, liability reforms that reduce legal liability are



    'With some notable exceptions. For example, Dertouzos and Karoly (1992) examine the
impact of changes in wrongful termination law on employment, and Viscusi and Moore (1993)
consider the influence of products liability law on research and development.
generally postively correlated with measures of political conservatism: more politically liberal

states are less likely to adopt "tort reforms." In addition, states with high numbers of lawyers
                                                                      as are states with low numbers
per capita are more likely to adopt liability reforms of all types,

of doctors per capita. Second, the adoption of liability-reducing reforms is associated with

increases in productivity and employment in most industries that we studied. In contrast, the

adoption of liability-increasing reforms is associated with declines in macroeconomic measures

of productivity and employment.

       We proceed as follows. Part II describes the eight legal reforms that we examine. Part

III discusses our data and two models. Part 111(a) describes our political-economy model of

the causes of liability reforms; Part 111(b) presents our model of liability reforms' influence on

productivity and employment. In Parts IV and V. we present our empirical results and

conclusions.




II.    Liability Reformsin the 1970s and 1980s

       Until recently, judge-made common-law rules governed most states' liability systems.

The traditional rules, which had remained relatively unchanged for many years, governed most

aspects of procedure, burdens of proof, and damages. However, in recent years, states have

changed several common-law rules. Both legislation and judicial decisions caused the reform

tide to begin to rise in the late 1960's. The deluge then came: state legislatures flooded the

statute books with two waves of liability reforms, the first in the mid-1970's and the second in

the mid-1980s.

       Most of the first wave's reforms applied only to medical malpractice actions: in the



                                                 2
1970's, some legislatures responded to doctors' claims that excessive legal judgments had

caused their malpractice insurance rates to rise. The second wave was more general. In the

1980's, a broader group of doctors, manufacturers, and other producers asserted that a lawsuit

deluge had increased their insurance and liability costs, and threatened their competitiveness

and survival. Again, some legislatures responded.2

          We investigate eight legal reforms, discussed in detail below. The second half of Table

I presents, for each two year period from 1969 - 1990, the fraction of states adopting each

reform.

          I. Caps on Contingency Attorney Fees.

       Traditionally, a client and his or her attorney were free to agree to any size attorney

fee. Several states have altered this rule by imposing limits on the contingency fee fraction.

This change to tort law may reduce liability by restricting plaintiffs' ability to obtain

representation and sue, because contingency-fee attorneys bear fixed costs of representation.

       2. Reform of the Collateral Source Rule.

       The collateral source rule, an old common-law tort doctrine, states that the defendant

must bear the full cost of the injury suffered by the plaintiff, even if the plaintiff were

compensated for all or part of the cost by an independent or "collateral" source. This means

that defendants liable for personal injuries, for example, must always bear the cost of plaintiffs'

medical care, even if the treatment was financed by the patient's own health insurance. Either



    2Several reports argue that increased liability caused insurance rates to increase. See U.S.
Department of Justice (1986) and ABA (1987). In contrast, Abraham (1988) and other studies
indicate that the insurance rate increases' causes were declines in interest rates, insurance firms
raised insurance rates, not because of increased liability, but instead to compensate for the
lower returns on their assets from lower interest rates.

                                                 3
 the plaintiff enjoys double recovery (the plaintiff recovers from the defendant and his own

 health insurance for medical expenses attributable to the injury) or the defendant reimburses

 the plaintiff's health insurer, depending on the plaintiff's insurance contract and state or federal

 law. Reforms to the collateral source rule may reduce the extent of defendants' liability for

 plaintiff's' injuries in either case by reducing the defendant's responsibility to finance damages

 arising out of an insured injury.

        3. Damages Caps.

        Several States have placed dollar limits on the amount that a plaintiff can recover, either

in total or for damages due to pain and suffering. For example, a reform statute might state

that, regardless either of the severity of a plaintiff's injuries or of defendant's culpability, the

plaintiff can recover no more than $250,000.

        4. Periodic Payments.

        At common law, a plaintiff would receive compensation for damages from future losses

in a lump sum at the time of judgment, calculated by the jury without instruction or expert

assistance. It has been argued that juries do not discount future losses; thus, requiring that

future damages be paid periodically may reduce liability.
       5. Reform of Joint and Several Liability.

       Traditionally, if several defendants' acts combined to injure a plaintiff, then each

defendant was liable for the judgment's full amount, regardless of how minor a defendant's

contribution was to the injury. For example, if a first defendant was 95 percent responsible for

a plaintiff's injury and a second was only 5 percent responsible, joint and several liability

required the second defendant to pay the entire judgment if the first defendant lacked sufficient



                                                 4
resources to pay her or his share. The rule's rationale was that, if a defendant became

insolvent, then other culpable defendants should suffer, not the innocent plaintiff. The

elimination or qualification of the rule reduces defendants' liability by not holding any

defendant liable for the acts of another defendant because of insolvency.

       6. Punitive Damages Reform.

       Several states have reduced liability by eliminating punitive damages or limiting them,

by means either of dollar limits or of maximum ratios of punitive to compensatory damages.

For example, a statute might limit punitive damages to $250,000, or might limit them to three

times the amount that the jury awards in compensatory damages. Although we have tracked

other punitive damages modifications, for clarity, we catalog as reforms only those statutes that

either eliminate punitive damages or impose dollar or ratio limits on them.

       7. Contributory Negligence to Comparative Negligence.

       Regardless of a defendant's culpability, the common law doctrine of contributory

negligence completely denied recovery to a plaintiff who had been at all negligent.

Comparative negligence modified this sometimes-harsh result so that the negligent plaintiff's

recovery would decline not to zero, but would decline only by plaintiff's fraction of the total

negligence: if plaintiff had been 15 percent negligent and defendant had been 85 percent

negligent, then plaintiff would recover 85 percent of her damages.3 Comparative negligence

increases defendants' liability as a class relative to contributory: under comparative, no

plaintiff receives less compensation and some plaintiffs receive more.


    3Some states adopted "pure" comparative negligence: a plaintiff would recover for
defendant's share of the negligence regardless of plaintiff's share. Other states enacted
"modified' comparative negligence, which denies recovery to a plaintiff whose negligence
exceeds 50 percent.
                                                5
       8. Prejudgment Interest.

       The common law entitled a plaintiff to interest on the value of a loss only from the

date of judgment, not from the time of the loss. If a plaintiff did not receive judgment until

two years after a loss, the plaintiff received no interest on the loss for the two-year period.

Several states have altered this rule to entitle plaintiff to interest either from the time of injury

or from the time plaintiff filed suit, which increases defendants' liability.

        Liability reforms, then, are of two kinds. Theory predicts that certain reforms will

increase the level of liability by increasing the expected size of trial judgments and settlement

amounts. We call these reforms "increase" reforms. In contrast, "decrease" reforms are

predicted to decrease judgments' size. The eight reforms can be categorized as follows:

        Decrease Reforms                              Increase Reforms
        (hypothesized to decrease              (hypothesized to increase
        judgment size)                                       judgment size)

        Contingency fee limits                 Comparative negligence
        Elimination of collateral              Prejudgment interest
               source rule
        Limits on damage awards
        Periodic payments
        Punitive damages reform
        Elimination of joint and
               several liability

        Some states have enacted decrease reforms that apply only to medical malpractice tort

actions; other states have enacted decrease reforms that apply to all legal claims. In contrast,

the increase reforms that we track apply to all claims; none applies only to medical claims.

Thus, we study 14 reforms: two generally-applicable increase reforms; six general decrease

reforms; and six decrease reforms that apply only to medical-malpractice claims.




                                                   6
Ill.     Models and Data

         We model two processes: the process by which legal reforms are adopted, and the

process by which legal reforms affect productivity and employment.

         A.     A Political Economy Model of the Adoption of Liability Reforms

         Our political economy model of states' adoption of liability reforms has two purposes.

First, we seek to measure the importance of various influences on the adoption of reforms.

Second, in order to account for endogeneity in our productivity and employment models, we

identify instrumental variables that associated with states' adoption of liability reformsbut not

with employment or productivity. The political economy model tests our instruments' power.

          We model the enactment of liability rcforms as the outcome of the interaction between

the supply of and demand for the reforms. Those who bear the costs of the reforms determine

the supply; those who benefit from the reforms determine the demand.4 For example,

attorneys might bear the direct costs of a cap on contingency fees. In contrast, groups that are

often defendants, such as doctors and automobile manufacturers, might enjoy the benefits.

          The market for reforms clears by means of legislation and judicial decisions: we

assume that both lawmakers and judges respond to these political supply and demand forces.5

When the political demand price for a particular legal reform exceeds the political supply

price, the reform is enacted, and remains in effect until the demand price falls below the

supply price.
          We use the following variables to explain the political supply of and the demand for


       4Sce Stigier (1971), Posner (1974), and Edwards (1978).

   3Other work employs this approach and these assumptions. See Edwards (1978) and
Dertouzos and Karoly (1992).
                                                 7
legal reform, and hence the probability of reform.

       Lawyers per capita. The greater the number of lawyers, the greater will be the political

power that lawyers will exert against reforms that harm lawyers, and for reforms that help

them. Decrease reforms may impose costs on lawyers because smaller judgments and

settlements harm lawyers; increase reforms provide corresponding benefits to lawyers. An

attorney who receives payment from a client under a contingency agreement suffers directly

from smaller judgments that decrease reforms cause. In addition, smaller expected judgments

deter potential plaintiffs from filing suit; expected judgments will exceed expected litigation

coss iii fewer disputes. The fewer lawsuits will harm all attorneys, whether they receive

payment by the hour or under contingency agreements, and whether they represent plaintiffs or

defendants. According to this reasoning, lawyers would want more increase reformsand fewer

decrease reforms.

       Omi the other hand, if all changes in the law, whether they increase or decrease liability,

require lawyers to interpret and implement them, then lawyers may favor both increase and

decrease reforms. Lawyers benefit from any change in legal regime if the change increases

demand for lawyers' expertise.

       Physicians per capita. As with lawyers per capita, theoretical predictions about the

impact of a state's number of doctors per capita on the state's adoption of liabilityreforms are

uncertain. Doctors will have greater political strength, all else equal, in states with high

concentrations of doctors. Smaller judgments benefit doctors by reducing both pecuniary and

nonpecuniary malpractice expenses, because smaller awards lead to fewer malpractice lawsuits.

Accordingly, the greater the number of physicians in a state in comparison to thestate's total



                                                 8
population, the greater physicians political power both to obtain decrease reforms and to

defeat increase reforms. On the other hand, doctors' risk aversion might cause them to oppose

even decrease reforms: since the magnitude and even the direction of legal reforms' impacts

can sometimes be indeterminate, doctors may prefer a sure status quo to changes that offer

both benefits and uncertainty.

       In addition, the preferences of the residents of a state may influence both the number of

doctors per capita and the demand for legal reforms. If some states have high demand for

medical services, and the market for medical services is not perfectly competitive, residents of

states with a high number of doctors per capita may also demand less in the way of decrease

reforms and more in the way of increase reforms in order to recapture some of the extra

producer surplus that may accrue to physicians.

       Importance of manufacturing exports. The political economy model predicts that a state

that exports a large fraction of its manufacturing output should have less in the way of increase

reforms and more in the way of decrease reforms. In states with high exports, consumers'

demand for increase reforms will be lower. Some nonresident plaintiffs will choose to sue the

state's firms within the state, and they will do so increasingly as the level of liability in the

staic rises. Thus, increase reforms may transfer relatively more from residents to nonresidents

in states with high exports. Because the reforms benefit many nonresident plaintiffs, rather

than just residents, resident voters will provide less support for the reforms. Likewise,

consumers' supply of decrease reforms will be higher than in states with low manufacturing

exports. This is because the costs to residents of decrease reforms will be lower;relative to

low-export states, nonvoting nonresidents will bear a greater fraction of decrease reforms'



                                                 9
costs.
         These forces help to explain why Hawaii has eliminated hotels' and other landowners'

liability for injuries that arise from recreational use of lands and beaches.6 Hawaii's limits

help local hoteliers, but harm guests. Because hoteliers vote in Hawaii, demand for liability

elimination was high.1 In contrast, many hotel guests are nonresident, and do not vote in

Hawaii. Thus, supply of the reform was also high; Hawaiian voters would bear few of the

reform's costs. Hawaii adopted the reform because Hawaiians reap the reform's benefits;

nonresidents pay the costs.

         Liberal or conservative political attitudes. In general, Republicans and other

conservative politicians both represent business interests and favor decrease legal reforms more

strongly than do Democrats and other liberal politicians. Thus, states that have chosen

Republicans or other conservatives as political representatives should be more likely to enact

decrease reforms and less likely to adopt increase reforms. We use as proxies for a state's

conservative or liberal political nature the party of the state's governor, and whether Democrats

control one or both houses of the state legislature. Our other proxy for whether a state is

likely to be pro-business or pro-consumer is the average Americans for Democratic Action



    6Hawaii Rev. Stat. § 520-1 - 520-8. See Viess v. Sea Enterprises CQf, 634 F. Supp.
226, 227-232 (D. Haw. 1986) (statute eliminates hotel's liability for injuries of hotel guest who
fractured neck on hotel's beach). We discuss this statute only as a striking example of the
political economy of liability reforms. Because the statute applies narrowly, we do not use it
in our empirical models. Our models address only statutes that apply more generally.

     7Hoteliers' demand would have been still higher if all potential plaintiffs were Hawaiian
citizens. The greater the number of suits to which the reform applies, the greater the benefit to
hoteliers. A fraction of suits of non-citizen plaintiffs will be tried in other states' courts in
which the reform would not apply. In contrast, the reform would apply to most all suits by
Hawaiians. However, if all plaintiffs were Hawaiian citizens, then supply would also be lower.
                                                 10
rating of the state's United States Senators. Americans for Democratic Action is a liberal

organization that rates politicians based upon their voting records.

       We now develop the model formally. If q = l...14 different legal reforms exist, a


linear probability model of the determination of legal reform is:9


                                 ZJ=a7+b7+XG+t4,                                                (I)



where z      is a discrete 1/0. or "dummy,' variable that indicates whether a given liability




reform q was in place in state i during year t; a and           are state and year dummy




variables, which vary across reforms; X is a vector of the variables discussed above that



influence a state's propensity to reform its legal system;      is a parameter vector; and




    8We also include an interaction term to control for whether Democrats control the
governorship and one or both houses of the state legislature. Use of affiliation with the
Democratic party as a proxy for liberalism is imperfect; southern Democrats can be more
conservative than many Republicans. However, apart from ADA and other interest-group
scores, no better data exist.

    9We cannot model the enactment process as a simple logit or probit model, because such
models give inconsistent parameter estimates in the presence of fixed-effects. See Chamberlain
(1980) for discussion. We could model the process as a conditional logit model, but doing so
would require assumptions surely violated by our data. See Card and Sullivan (1988) for an
empirical application and discussion of this class of models.

                                                11
is the error term. Because u     in the linear probability model is heteroskedastic, we report




White (1980) heteroskedasticity-conSiStent standard errors. In addition, we estimate (1) with

four aggregate dependent variables: the number of increase reforms; the number of decrease

reforms; a dummy variable that equals one if a state in a given year had adopted any increase

reforms; and a dummy that indicates whether a state had adopted any decrease reforms.

       B.     The Influence of Liability Reforms on Employment and ProductiviW

       We employ a log-linear model of liability reforms' influence on several industries'

employment and productivity, with state- and time-fixed-effects:


                         ln(P) = c( + d    +          +            +,                        (2)




and


                                                                   + w,                      (3)
                         1n(L)    ef +     +          +




where p represents productivity, as measured by output per worker, in state i and industry j


during year t; L represents the size of the labor force; c( and ef are fixed state


effects; d' and / are fixed time effects;           and      are coefficient vectors; vf and


      are i.i.d. normal error terms; and H1 and ; are the numbers of increase and


decrease reforms that apply in state i and industry j during year t. The legal reform variables


                                               12
are lagged one year; we assume that a liability reform's impact on productivity and

employment will occur with a delay of at least one year. As we discuss below, we have

adjusted the variables for differences in reforms' effective dates.

       In order to investigate liability reforms' influence on economic growth, we also

estimate equations (2) and (3) with the growth rates of both productivity and employment as

the dependent variable.

       We estimate equations (2) and (3) for 17 industries. All of these industries except

manufacturing were selected because their outputs are likely to be the most responsive to legal

reform. This is because, for each industry, production and consumption occur in the same

state, so that the state in which production occurs is the same as the state in which liability

accrues. That is, theory predicts that liability reforms in state i would have the greatest impact

on productivity or employment in state i in those industries in which liability and production

are locationally coincident. For example, Michigan's tort law would not he especially relevant

to Michigan's automobile manufacturers. Instead, California law would be more important.

Because the Michigan manufacturers sell more cars in California than in Michigan, the

manufacturers defend lawsuits in California most often. In contrast, Michigan law will govern

most all of a Michigan construction contractor's business; the structures that the contractor

builds are all within Michigan.'°

       We also include the manufacturing sector as a check. Liability reforms' impact oii

manufacturing should be less pronounced than liability reforms' impact on more-local

industries; because goods often sell in many states, the law of the state where a good is



    '°See Epstein (1988).
                                                13
manufactured often does not govern a product-liability action that involves the good.

Accordingly, we expect that the coefficients on the reform variables will be less substantial and

less statistically significant for this industry than for other industries.

       OLS estimates of (2) and (3) may be inconsistent, because E(uv)          o and


 E(uv)        o for some q, j; that is, the unexplained component of productivity or

employment may be correlated with the unexplained part of liability reforms. For example,

inconsistency could occur if liability reforms were not exogenous: although liability reforms

may influence output and employment, output and employment may also influence liability

reforms' adoption. A state that suffers an extraordinarily-deep recession may blame lawyers,

and so enact decrease liability reforms.

       To correct for this, we estimate (2) and (3) by instrumental variables. We use as

instruments the variables in the vector X, , which determine states' propensity to enact

liability reforms. We assume that the instruments are uncorrelated with output and

productivity." In addition, we test the hypothesis that OLS estimates of the effect of legal


    "In order to eliminate correlation between the instruments and output and employment, we
exclude lawyers per capita from the set of instruments X in estimation for the legal services
industry; for the health care services industry, we exclude doctors per capita from the
instrument list.
        We assume that a state's political liberalism or conservatism, by any of the measures, is
not correlated with the state's economic performance. We realize that this identifying
assumption may be violated. In particular, certain California politician/law-school professors
believe that Republican economic policies enacted at the state level promote economic growth.
Other specifications that use only doctors per capita, lawyers per capita and the percentage of a
state's manufacturing output that is exported as instruments give qualitatively similar results.
Quantitatively, estimates of the influence of tort reform on employment and productivity is
both larger and less precise in models that allow state political characteristics to affect both
output and legal reform.
                                                   14
reform on productivity and employment are inconsistent. Under the null hypothesis that OLS

is consistent, tests will fail to reject h0:   =   0 and 6 = o from the following OLS

regression of productivity or employment on fixed effects, legal reforms, and estimated

residuals from the regression of the number of increase and decrease reforms on the

instrumental variables:

                            ln(P) = c + d,'    +                +              +
                                                                                                   (2a)
                                                                i-
                                                   —
                                                       llH,1)        !R11..,
                                                                                   —
                                                                                       flR1)   +




                                     =     +   +                +              +
                             1n(L)                                                                 (3a)
                                               —                + 6'R(Ri — flR1) +

where   n = x(xxy'x' with X defined to include state- and time-fixed effects.

        C.     Data

        We use yearly data for 1969-1990, a period that extends from before the first wave of

liability reforms until substantially after the second wave.

        No reliable catalog of liability reforms existed. Thus, we assembled information on

which states adopted the various liability reforms, and when they adopted them, by careful

review of each state's statutes and published judicial decisions. Electronic research tools

helped us to confirm our information. We identified both reforms that apply generally and

reforms that apply only to claims for medical malpractice.

        Reforms differ in whether they apply to cases that go to jl after the reforms'

adoption; to lawsuits that are fJ after adoption; or to injuries that occur after adoption. In

particular, reforms effective as to all subsequent filings and trials apply to some claims arising


                                                   15
out of existing injuries. If higher levels of liability result in increased precautionary behavior

both before and after an injury occurs, then tort reforms that apply to claims arising out of

existing injuries will be fully effective sooner than tort reforms that apply only to claims

arising out of new injuries. Thus, we adjust for the reforms effective date, although the

adjustment does not change the empirical results.'2

         Data on output by industry are from a recent data set from the Department of

Commerce' Bureau of Economic Analysis. Bureau of Economic Analysis (1985) describes the

data further. As Ciccone and Hall (1993) notes, "These data are conceptually far superior to

those used in previous work on spatial differences in productivity."3



IV.      Empirical Results

         Tables 1 and 2 present descriptive statistics for several of the variables in our model.

For every two years in the 1969-1990 sample period, Table I provides descriptive statistics

both for the variables that we expect to influence the adoption of liability reforms and for the

reforms themselves. The means of the variables that measure state politics vary substantially

over the period. For example, the fraction of states that had both Democratic legislatures and

Democratic governors rose to a peak of 54 percent in the post-Watergate years of 1975-1978.

As the country became more conservative, this fraction fell, and descended to 26 percent by

1989- 1990. Over the sample period, the numbers of doctors and lawyers per capita have

increased substantially: average doctors per capita increased 69 percent; lawyers per capita


    '2We assume that reforms that apply to filing and injury influence the economy
respectively one and two years later than statutes that apply to trials.

      '3Appenciix A describes our data further.

                                                  16
increased 80 percent.

         Patterns of adoption differed among the liability reforms. The fraction of states that

had enacted the two increase reforms, comparative negligence and prejudgment interest,

increased gradually over the entire period, except for a 20 percentage point jump in the states

with comparative negligence in 1973-1974.

         The fraction for generally-applicable attorney fee caps also increased gradually. In

contrast, the remaining decrease reforms occurred in two waves. Many states enacted reforms

that applied only to medical-malpractice suits in 1975-1976: fractions for medical-malpractice

fee caps, collateral source rule reform, damages caps, and periodic payments jumped during

those years. The second surge hit in 1985-1986 and continued through the decade's end. In

the second surge, some states enacted general reforms; others chose reforms that controlled

only medical-malpractice actions. Fractions for each general reform increased. Fractions of

states that had enacted general j medical-malpractice reforms, which Part B of Table 1

reports, increased even more.

         Table 2 presents means and standard deviations of output, employment, and

productivity for each of the 17 industries that we consider. As we discuss above, we chose the

industries because production and consumption for the industries tend to occur in the same

state.




                                                17
       A.        The Influence of Liability Reforms on Employment and Productivity

       Table 3 presents IV estimates of (2), which models liability reforms' impact on

productivity. The model addresses each of the seventeen industries separately, and includes

state and time fixed effects. We use two aggregate measures of liability reforms as

explanatory variables: each state's number of increase reforms and number of decrease

reforms. Each row reports the industry, the influence of the number of increase reforms on

that industry's productivity, the influence of the number of decrease reforms, and an F statistic

that indicates whether to reject the consistency of simple OLS estimation. In order to save

space, we do not report coefficients for the state and time dummies.

       Reforms that decrease judgments are associated with increases in productivity. In

thirteen of the seventeen industriesb coefficients for decrease reforms are positive. Ten of the

thirteen positive coefficients are statistically significant at a 90 percent level, eight of the ten

also at the 95 percent level. Similarly, in eleven of the seventeen industries, the coefficients

for decrease reforms are statistically significant. In all but one of the eleven, the relationship

was positive.

       In contrast, reforms that increase judgments are associated with decreases in

productivity. In fourteen of the seventeen industries, coefficients for increase reforms were

negative. Of the fourteen negative coefficients, eleven were statistically significant, ten of

them at the 95 percent level. Likewise, coefficients for increase reforms were statistically

significant in twelve of the seventeen industries. Of the twelve significant correlations, eleven

were negative.

       The magnitude of liability reforms' estimated impact on productivity is substantial. For



                                                 18
example, Table 5 suggests that, in a state with the average level of liability, the adoption of an

additional decrease reform would cause an increase in output per worker of 3.1 percent in the

retail trade industry, 7.6 percent in the miscellaneous repair services sector, and 8.9 percent in

amusement and recreation. The impacts of increase reforms were equal or greater, although in

the opposite direction.

       As theory predicts, reforms' estimated impact on productivity is smaller and less

significant in the health care and manufacturing industries. For the health care industry, the

coefficients for both decrease reforms and increase reforms were small and insignificant)1

This is consistent with doctors' responding to increased liability, not solely by reducing output

as in other industries, but by performing additional procedures to protect themselves from

liability. Doctors may often pass additional costs on to insurers. The net impact of the two

opposing forces was insignificant.

       In contrast to strong effects in other industries, decrease reforms' impact on

manufacturing output was insignificant. Increase reforms are associated with lower

productivity in manufacturing, even though much manufacturing output travels to other states,

and so is not subject to local tort law. However, as theory predicted, the effect of increase

reforms is smaller in manufacturing than in many other industries, and the coefficient is

significant only at the 90 percent level.

       The impact of both decrease and increase reforms on productivity in the legal industry

is positive, but insignificant. The reforms affect legal productivity little, if at all. Even if



    '41n our health care estimations, we examined the impacts of all liability reforms that
applied either to all claims only to medical malpractice claims. For other industries, we
considered only generally-applicable reforms.
                                                 19
decrease reforms reduce legal income in the short run, as judgments shrink and plaintiffs file

fewer suits, the decrease reforms' coefficient's positive sign and insignificance suggest that the

reforms' beneficial impacts on other industries may, in the long run, also benefit the legal

industry. As output rises in other industries, the other industries use more legal services.

       The third column of Table 3 suggests that, under the assumption of the exogeneity of

the instruments, instrumental-variables is appropriate. For fourteen of seventeen industries, F-

tests reject at the 95 percent significance level the hypothesis that ordinary least squares

estimation would be consistent. For a fifteenth industry, transportation services, we reject OLS

at the 90 percent level. We do not reject OLS only for two industries for which theory

predicted ambiguous results: legal services and manufacturing.

       Tables 4 presents results for the model of productivity growth. Liability reforms'

impacts on productivity growth are consistent with their impacts on productivity levels, in both

magnitude and direction. Reforms hypothesized to decrease judgments are associated with

increases in productivity growth. For fourteen of seventeen industries, decrease reform

coefficients are positive, although only one coefficient is significant.

       In contrast, reforms that increase judgments are associated with lower productivity

growth. Fourteen of seventeen increase reform coefficients are negative. Of the five

statistically significant coefficients, all were negative. The coefficient for legal services is

negative and significant: although reforms that increase judgments had an insignificant impact

on legal services productivity levels, the reforms appear to retard the industry's growth.

       As Table 5 indicates, estimated effects of liability reforms on employment follow the

productivity models' patterns. States that adopt decrease reforms experience higher levels of



                                                20
employment than states that do not; and states that adopt increase reforms experience lower

levels of employment than states that do not. For fourteen of seventeen industries, decrease

reforms' coefficients are positive. Twelve of the'fourteen positive coefficients are significant,.

ten of the twelve at the 95 percent level. As theory helps to explain, the coefficients for legal

services and manufacturing are insignificant. In contrast, for fourteen of seventeen industries,

coefficients for increase reforms are negative. Seven of the negative coefficients are

significant, six of the seven at a 95 percent level. Increase reforms reduce employment even in

the legal industry; the industry's coefficient is negative and significant.

       F-tests reject the consistency of OLS at the 95 percent level for thirteen of seventeen

industries.

       Results for employment growth follow a slightly different pattern. The impacts on

employment growth of reforms that decrease judgments differ among industries. However,

reforms that increase judgments decrease employment growth. For sixteen of seventeen

industries, coefficients for increase reforms are negative. Seven of the negative coefficients are

significant, six of them at the 95 percent level. Every statistically significant coefficient is

negative.
       For nine industries, we reject OLS at a 95 percent level of significance.'6

       Our results are generally robust to changes in estimation method. We estimated our

four productivity and employment models using OLS. OLS estimates of the impact of the

number of decrease and increase reforms on productivity and employment were generally


    'We reject at 90 percent for a fourteenth industry: electric, gas, and sanitary services.

   '6For three more industries, we reject OLS at the 90% level of significance: construction,
motion pictures, and legal services.
                                                 21
similar to our instrumental-variables estimates. Holding constant time and state fixed effects,

decrease (increase) reforms were generally associated with higher (lower) productivity and

employment in the industries that we studied. However, the impacts of decrease and increase

reforms are less uniform than in the instrumental-variables estimates. In addition, the

magnitude of liability reform's impact on economic performance is smaller in the OLS

regressions. To illustrate these patterns, Appendix B presents OLS estimates of reforms'

impact on employment.

       In addition, we estimated the four productivity and employment models with eight

individual liability reforms as explanatory variables. Both OLS and instrumental-variables

estimates were inconclusive. Comparative negligence tended to depress levels and growth of

productivity and employment, for all industries, in both OLS and IV estimation. However,

results for other reforms varied among industries and among models. Results for dummy

variables that indicate whether a state had enacted any increase or decrease reforms were

similarly inconclusive.

       B.      Political Economy Models of Liability Reform

       Tables 7 and 8 report estimates of equation (1), our model of adoption of liability

reforms. Table 7 reports estimates of the influences of several state characteristics on the

probability of adoption of generally-applicable reforms. Each of the first eight columns reports

the various characteristics' impact on the probability of adoption of an individual reform. For

dummy explanatory variables, a coefficient of .01 indicates that the presence of that

characteristic in a state increases by I percentage point the probability that the state had

adopted that reform. For continuous variables, a coefficient of 1.0 indicates that an increase of



                                                22
.01 in the variable corresponds to a .01 percentage point increase in reform's probability. The

model controls for fixed state and time effects. However, in order to save space, the tables do

not report the coefficients for the state and time dummy variables.

        States' political characteristics influence adoption of many, but not all, of the liability

reforms in the predicted manner. The first five characteristics, in the table's first five rows,

measure the dominance of Democrats in a state's politics. The model measures the effect of

each of these characteristic's impact relative to a state that has elected both a Republican

governor and a Republican-controlled house and senate. The sixth characteristic, the average

of the Americans for Democratic Action ratings of the state's U.S. Senators, measures the

liberalism or conservatism of the state's federal representatives.

       For several liability reforms, the coefficients for the political variables have the

anticipated signs and are significant. This is especially true for decrease reforms that limit

legal damages directly, such as damages caps, limits on punitive damages, and elimination of

joint and several liability. For example, states with Republican-controlled legislatures or

conservative U.S. Senators are more likely to adopt damages caps than liberal states.

Democratic control of state politics is negatively associated with adoption of damages caps: all

five coefficients for variables that measure Democratic control are negative; three of the five

coefficients are statistically significant. Similarly, states with liberal U.S. Senators are less

likely to adopt damages caps: the ADA coefficient is negative and significant.

       Working control of a state's governorship and legislature is a more important

determinant of the adoption of liability reforms than is the general liberalism that ADA scores

measure. Holding constant state and time fixed effects and other political factors, a state with



                                                 23
a Democrat-controlled legislatures is 6.9 percentage points less likely to adopt caps on

damages than a state with Republican governor and legislature. in contrast, a 10 percentage

point upswing in a state's liberal attitudes--for example, a change in ADA scores from .8 to

.9--would cause only a .85 percentage point decrease in the probability that the state adopts

damages caps.
       For both comparative negligence and prejudgment interest, which are increase reforms,

coefficients on state political variables generally have the predicted positive signs, although

few of the coefficients are significant. However, for prejudgment interest, the ADA coefficient

is, contrary to our theoretical predictions, negative and significant.

       The politics that underlie the adoption of attorney fee caps, collateral source rule

reforms, and mandatory periodic payments statutes appear to be more complicated. States with

split-party legislatures and Democrat governors are, other things equal, more likely to adopt

these reforms than Republican-controlled states. In a state that splits power between

Republicans and Democrats, these reforms, which limit liability only indirectly, may be a

political compromise; the indirect reforms serve as a compromise between reforms, such as

damages caps, that limit liability directly and no reform.

       The last two columns of Table 7 present results from regressions that use as dependent

variables the number of increase and decrease reforms. The signs on the political variables'

coefficients generally fulfill our theoretical predictions: states with liberal, Democratic officials

tend to adopt reforms that increase liability but to reject reforms that limit liability. In the

model that uses the number of increase reforms as the dependent variable, all but one

coefficient are positive; in the regression for number of decrease reforms, all but one



                                                 24
coefficient are negative.

       The number of doctors per capita is negatively correlated with the adoption of both

increase   and decrease reforms. For each of five of six decrease reforms, the influence of the

number of doctors on the probability of enactment is negative; three of the negative

coefficients are significant. Similarly, the doctors coefficient for the aggregate variable is

negative and significant. Thus, the data do not paint a picwre of a powerful medical lobby

imposing laws that transfer wealth from the public to physicians. However, the coefficients on

the doctors variable are negative both for the two increase reforms and for the aggregate

number of increase reforms.

        A simple political economy model, which posits that states with a higher density of

physicians will enact laws that result in greater transfers to doctors, cannot explain this result.

However, a more complex model can account for the negative influence of physicians on all

types of liability reform. First, if doctors are risk averse, they may oppose any liability

reforms at all, if the impact of liability reforms is uncertain. Second, doctors may oppose

increase reforms and favor decrease reforms, but only be politically effective in preventing

increase reforms because of the different process by which states adopted the two types of

reforms. States adopted most all of the six decrease reforms by means of legislation after

pitched political battles, central opposing warriors in which were lawyers and doctors. In

contrast, state courts often adopted the two increase reforms, comparative negligence and

prejudgment interest, by means of judicial decision or court rule. Thus, because the adoption

of increase reforms was less visible, individuals from states with high demand for medical

services (and high numbers of physicians) who wished to transfer wealth from physicians to



                                                 25
the public may have focussed on preventing decrease reforms rather than enacting increase

reforms.

        The greater a state's number of lawyers per capita, the greater the state's tendency to

adopt both increase and decrease reforms. For five of six decrease reforms, the lawyers

coefficient is positive and significant. The lawyers coefficient for the sixth reform is

insignificant. Similarly, the !awyers coefficient for the aggregate number of decrease reforms

is positive and significant. In addition, the coefficients for both comparative negligence and

the number of increase reforms are positive and significant; the coefficient for the other

increase reform, prejudgment interest, is insignificant.

        Again, a simple political economy model does not account for the positive association

between the density of lawyers and all types of legal reform. However, if lawyers benefit from

all changes to the legal system, because the changes increase the demand for legal services,

then states with a higher density of lawyers would experience more frequent shifts in legal

regime.

        Table 8 reports results for liability reforms that apply to medical-malpractice cases, and

for several other consolidated reform variables. The table indicates that medical decrease

reforms are more strongly associated with states' political characteristics than are general

decrease reforms. For example, in regressions for which the aggregate number of medical

decrease reforms is the dependant variable, four of six measures of political liberalism are

associated with fewer decrease reforms; three of the four coefficients are statistically

significant.

        As with the general reforms, medical reforms that limit liability directly -. such as



                                                26
damages caps, periodic payments, and joint and several liability -- are most strongly linked to

political characteristics. For each of the three reforms, the ADA coefficient is negative and

significant, and most or all of the state-politics variables are negative. For example, all six of

the political coefficients for medical damages caps are negative and statistically significant.

       Just as for the general reforms in Table 7, coefficients for the variable that measures

states' fraction of exported manufacturing output exhibit different signs for different industries.

Also, as before, coefficients for the doctors variable are negative and significant. Coefficients

for the lawyers variable again are generally positive and significant.




V.      Conclusion

        Using annual state-level data on seventeen industries' output and employment, we

estimate the impact of liability reforms on levels and growth rates of productivity and

employment. In addition, our political economy model investigates empirically the

determinants of states' adoption of liability reforms. Throughout, we employ a data set that we

have created of the times and places of liability reforms' adoption among the United States

during the last three decades.

        We present two major findings. First, IV estimates indicate that liability-reducing

reforms are associated with higher levels of output per worker and employment, in a broad

range of industries. In contrast, the adoption of liability-increasing reforms is associated with

lower productivity and employment. As theory predicts, the estimated effect of liability reform

is greatest in industries in which production and consumption occur in the same sLate.

        Similarly, states with a greater number of liability-decreasing reforms exhibit higher


                                                27
 productivity growth, while states with a greater number of liability-increasing reforms exhibit

 lower growth in productivity and employment. However, the impact of reforms on growth

 rates of productivity and employment is somewhat weaker than their impact on productivity

 and employment levels.

        These results are consistent with the hypothesis that reductions in liability from the

 current common-law levels improve efficiency. However, the results are also consistent with

 three other alternative hypotheses. First, the observed association between liability law and

productivity and employment may be due to other state-level public policies that are correlated

with both the instruments and the status of liability law but not captured by the fixed effects.

For example, politically conservative states or states with high densities of lawyers may adopt

policies other than liability reforms that increase employment or productivity. Second, even if

there is no omitted variable bias, the results may be due to a 'Delaware effect' in liability law

whereby capital migrates from high-liability to low-liability states. If the Delaware hypothesis

is true, then the observed positive association between output per worker, employment, and

liability reductions could be due to zero-sum flows of capital among states rather than the more

efficient use of resources. In this world, liability reforms affect the distribution of wealth but

do not affect true productive efficiency. Third, the results may not account for externalities

created by reductions in the level of liability. Specifically, firms from states with relatively

low levels of liability may have relatively low costs because they do not bear the true costs of

production; this could cause a positive association between observed productivity, employment,

and liability reductions even if liability reductions result in the inefficient deployment of

resources into externality-intensive uses.



                                                28
        Our second major findings address the political economy of the adoption of liability

reforms. States' political characteristics tend to influence reforms' adoption in the manner that

a simple political economy model predicts. States with Republican governors, Republican-

controlled legislatures, or conservative U.S. Senators are, other things equal, generally more

likely to adopt liability-decreasing reforms and less likely to adopt liability-increasing reforms.

Political characteristics influence with special force states' adoption of reforms that limit legal

damages directly, such as caps on damages. Among the political variables, Republican or

Democratic control of a state's governorship or legislature has a larger impact than the

conservatism or liberalism of the state's U.S. Senators.

        However, simple political economy models can not explain the relationship between the

number of doctors or lawyers in a state and the adoption patterns of liability reforms. Greater

density of physicians is associated empirically with a lower likelihood of adopting both

liability-increasing and liability-reducing reforms; however, a simple model would predict that

physicians benefit from reductions in liability, and therefore that states with a greater density

of physicians would enact a larger number of liability-reducing reforms and fewer liability-

increasing reforms. Greater density of lawyers is associated empirically with a higher

likelihood of adopting both liability-increasing and liability-reducing reforms; however, a

simple model would predict that lawyers benefit from increases in liability, and therefore that

states with a greater density of lawyers would enact a larger number of liability-increasing

reforms and fewer liability-reducing reforms.

       The failure of simple political economy models to explain completely adoption patterns

of liability laws is evidence that further research into the forces that generate the empirical



                                                29
regularities outlined in this paper remains to be done. Analysis of the choice and timing of

state legislatures in the enactment of liability reform might provide a vehicle through which to

test different theories of legislative (and, in some cases) judicial politics. In addition, better

integration of our analysis of the impact of liability reform with models found in the regional

economics literature may lead to a better understanding of the process by which the civil

justice system affects state and regional economic outcomes.




                                                 30
                  Table 1:  Average Level of State Characteristics Influencing Liability Reform and
                                       Liability Reforms in Effect, 1969-1990
                  (statistic for discrete variables is fraction of states in which variable is one)

                             69-70   71—72   73-74   75-76   77—78     79—80   81-82   83-84   85—86   87—88   89—90
Variable Name

Characteristics
                               12     .06     .02      04     .08       .08     .06     .05     .06     .05      04
Split dem./rep.
legislature
                              .09     .14     .18     .10     .12       .16     .16     .16     .16     .08     .08
Dem. governor only

                              .21     .14     .19     .20     .16       .19     .24     .18     .18     .29     .32
Dem. legis.      only
                                      .10     .10      08         08    .06     .04     .04     .18     .16     .18
Split   leg.     dem.         .04
gov.

                              .21     .35     .35     .54     .54       .41     .34     .49     .34     .28     .26
Dem. gov.    &   leg.

                              .47     .43     .47     .46     .44       .47     .44     .48     .43     .S3     .47
Avg.   ADA  of US Sen
Pct.                          .28     .28     .30     .31     .32       .33     .34     .33     .30     .30     .30
       rnfg. exported

                              .13     .14     .14     .15     .16       .17     .18     .19     .20     .21     .22
Doctors per 100
population
                              .15     .16     .17     .17     .20       .21     .22     .23     .25     .26     .27
Lawyers per 100
population
Reforms In Effect

A.Genera]. Reforms.
 (apply to all
cases)
                              .23      .32     .53    .65      .66       .70     .77     .83    .88      .88     .88
Comparative
negligence
                               .19     .23     .24    .27      .28       .33     .41     .43    .48      .53     .55
Prejudgnent
interest
                               .03     .04     .04     .05     .06       .06     .08     .08    .10      .14     .14
Fee caps



                                                             31
Variable Name         69—70   71—72   73—74   75-76   77-78    79-80   81-82   83-84   85-86   87-88   89—90

Collateral source       0      0        0       C)         0     0       0       0      .09     .35     39
rule

Damages caps            0      0        0       0      .02       0       0       0      .08     .23     .21

Periodic payments       0       0       0       0          0     0       0       0      .05     .13     .12

Joint and several      .01     .02     .07     .10     .11      .13     .14     .15     .31     .6].    .69
liability
Punitive damages       .10     .10     .10     .10     .10      .10     .10     .10     .3      .27     .30

B.Refor7ns that
Apply to Medical
Malpract. Actions.
(apply to all cases
or only to med.
mal. cases)

Feecaps                .03     .04     .04     .17     .22      .23     .23     .22     .27     .32     .32

Collateral source       0       0       0      .21     .34      .34     .29     .29     .39     .57     .61
rule

Damages   caps          0       0      .01     .19     .26      .25     .21     .20     .35     .54     .5].


Periodic payments       0       0       0      .06     .10      .10     .08     .09     .25     .34     .38

Joint and several      .01     .02     .07     .10     .11      .13     .14     .15     .32     .63     .81
liability
Punitive damages       .10      .1     .10     .10     .10      .10     .10     .10     .15     .31     .33




                                                      32
                                   Table 2.
    Means and (Standard Deviations) of Output ($millions in 1982 dollars),
Labor Force (l000s of workers), and Productivity (output ($l000s) per worker)
                            by Industry, 1972-1990.


Industry                      N        Output      Labor Force    Productivity

Construction                950        3234.0           116.0           27.5
                                      (3789.2)         (121.2)          (8.7)

Local and interurban        931            138.7          7.0           18.8
passenger transit                      (221.7)           (9.8)          (3.8)

Transport. services         902            180.7          5.5           31.8
                                       (322.9)           (8.8)         (10.0)

Electric, gas, and          931        1994.6            17.7          104.8
sanitary services                     (2276.7)          (17.8)         (23.7)

Wholesale trade             950        4801.7           112.7           40.6
                                      (6052.5)         (131.7)          (5.0)

Retail trade                950        6628.1           367.0           17.5
                                      (7775.5)         (391.0)          (2.4)

Insurance agents,           950         393.1            16.3           22.5
brokers, and services                  (521.3)          (18.9)          (4.5)

Hotels and lodging          950         537.0            26.6           18.1
places                                 (697.5)          (29.3)           (4.3)

Personal services           950         475.2            39.6           11.8
                                       (547.7)          (43.1)           (2.0)

Business services           950        1914.3            93.3           18.8
                                      (3134.2)         (138.9)           (4.4)

Auto repair, services,      950         523.4            19.9           25.5
garages                                (682.9)          (23.6)           (4.4)

Misc. repair services       950         212.0            11.9           16.6
                                       (289.0)          (13.3)           (3.3)

Motion pictures             934         176.2             5.7           15.9
                                       (711.9)          (14.1)           (8.7)

Amusement and                948        385.5            24.1           13.5
recreation services                    (643.8)          (30.2)           (4.0)

Health services             950        3012.1           123.7           23.4
                                      (3872.5)         (143.9)          (16.2)

Legal services              950         714.2            17.6           36.5
                                      (1198.5)          (25.5)           (5.4)

Manufacturing               950       14810.7           398.34          35.9
                                     (16964.5)         (432.6)           (6.6)

Note: for some industries, the number of observations is less than 950 because
labor-force data were unavailable for certain industries for certain years.


                                      33
Table 3: Instrumental-Variables Estimates of Effects of Liability Reforms on
                Productivity (Standard Errors In Parentheses)


         Industry           No. of increase No. of decrease   F (2, 950)
                                reforms        reforms        Reject OLS?
                                                              (.05 level)

Construction                    _.212**           .034           17 .38
                                (.043)           (.032)           yes

Local and interurban            _.117**          — .006           9.07
passenger transit               (.035)           (.027)           yes

Transport. services             —. 194**          .076*           2 .77
                                (.056)           (.042)            no

Electric, gas, and                  .130"        — .073*          3.99
sanitary services               (.053)           (.041)           ye
Wholesale trade                 —   Q44**         .059**         10.34
                                (.021)           (.015)           yes

Retail trade                    —   .043"         .031**          3.63
                                (.018)           (.013)           yes

Insurance agents,               —. 121**          .054"          12.27
brokers, and services           (.029)           (.022)           yes
Hotels and lodging places       —   .041          .097"          10.57
                                (.031)           (.023)           yes

Personal services               —.111"           -.018           21.23
                                (.023)           (.017)           yes

Business services               _.216**            Ø79**         17.10
                                (.049)           (.037)           yes

Auto repair, services,          —   .055"         .043**         5.59
garages                         (.022)           (.017)          yes

Misc, repair services          _.080**            .076"          7 .80
                                (.032)           (.024)           yes

Motion pictures                - .001             .079*          3.26
                               (.053)            (.041)          yes
Amusement and recreation         .011             .089**         7.66
services                        (.032)           (.024)           yes
Health services                -.028              .009           3.66
                                (.018)           (.008)          yes

Legal services                   .010             .026           1.10
                                (.025)           (.027)           no

Manufacturing                  _.043*            —.003            .86
                                (.023)           (.018)            no

**Sjgnjfjcant at .05 level.
Significant at .10 level.


                                            34
Table 4; Instrumental-Variables Estimates of Effects of Liability Reforms on
             Productivity Growth (Standard Errors rn Parentheses)



           Industry            No. of increasoN..,. of decrease   F(2,950)
                                    re forms        reforms       Reject OLS?
                                                                  (.05 level)

Construction                       _.036**           -   .007        5.20
                                   (.015)            (.011)           yes
Local and interurban               —.027                 009          .56
passenger transit                  (.020)            (.016)              no

Transport. services                - .022             .049           1.
                                   (.041)            (.030)              no
Electric, gas, and                     .019           .005            .49
sanitary services                  (.037)            (.028)              no
1holesale trade                    _.028**               .003        4.70
                                   (.010)            (.007)           yes
Rerail   trade                     - .003             .007           1.10
                                   (.007)            (.005)              110

insurance   agents.
                                   - .017                .023*       1.22
brokers, and services              (.018)                .013)           no

hotels and lodging places          —   .031**          .003          3.02
                                   (.014)            (.010)           yes
Personal   services                 .003             - .011           .91
                                   (.010)            (.007)              no
Business services                  —   .024               003         .38
                                   (.023)                .017)           no
Auto repair, services,             - .017                 013        1.73
garages                            (.011)                .008)           no
Misc. repair services              - .010              .008           .21
                                   (.017)            (.013)              no

!oticn pictures                    -.018               .002              .33
                                   (.052)            (.040)              no
'.musemenr and recreation          - .004            - .009              .96
services                           (.018)            (.014)              no
(ea1th services                    —
                                       .011            .004               37
                                   (.008)            (.004)              no
Legal services                     —.   031**            .003        2   .81
                                   (.013)            (.014)              no
            ig                     —   .028*
                                   (.016)
                                                         .004
                                                     (.012)
                                                                     1.   69
                                                                         no
"Significant at       .05 level.
Significanr at .10 level.

                                                35
Table 5: Instrumental-Variables Estimates of Effects of Liability Reforms on
                 Employment (Standard Errors In Parentheses)


            Industry        No. of increaseNo. of decrease    F(2,950):
                                reforms        reforms       Reject OLS?
                                                             (.05 level)

Construction                    —   .216**         .170"        8.74
                                (.073)            (.054)        yes

Local and interurban            —.051              .291**       25.08
passenger transit               (.067)            (.053)         yes

Transport. services             —.090             —.002          .66
                                (.065)            (.049)         no

Electtic, gas, and              —   .016           .061*        2.56
sar.itery   services            (.042)            (.033)

Wholesale trade                 _.079*             .105**       8.24
                                (.041)            (.031)         yes

Retail trade                    _.132*.            .132**       22.03
                                (.040)            (.030)        yes

Insurance agents,                .007              .060"        5.69
brokers, and services           (.036)            (.027)         yei

Hotels and lodging places       _.204**            .118"        9.40
                                (.059)            (.044)         yes

Personal services               —.022              .181**       36.4C
                                (.046)            (.034)         yes

Business services                .005             .060*         1.07
                                (.044)            (.033)         no

Auto repair, services.          —.053              .125**       16.68
garages                         (.039)            (.029)        yes
Misc. repair services           _.lls**            .1°79**
                                (.051)            (.038)

Motion pictures                 -.229''            .25''        26.70
                                (.075)            (.058)         yes

Prusemet and recreation         —.095              .234''       2€.7
services                        (.064)            (.048)         ye
Health services                 —.041              .011
                                (.031)            (.014)

Legal services                  —.073"            -.004         3.51
                                (.034)            (.037)         yes

Manufacturing                    .074*             .052         8.06
                                (.043)            (.032)        yes

"significant at .05 level.
*Significant at .10 level.


                                             36
Tbi 6:     :nstrumental-Variables Estimates of Effects of Liability Reforms on
                  EisployTflent Growth (Standard Errors In Parentheses)


          Industry            No. of increaseNo. of decrease       F(2,950):
                                  reforms        reforms          Reject OLS?
                                                                  (.05 level)

Construction                       _.063**          —.007             2.81
                                   (.030)           (.023)             no

Local and interurban               -.029             .001             1.33
passenger transit                  (.023)           (.018)                no

Transport. services                -.026            _.055*            3.82
                                   (.037)           (.028)            yes

Electric, gas, and                 _.039**           .032**           3.51
sanitary services                  (.019)           (.015)            yes

)holesa1e trade                    _.036**           .017             3.40
                                   (.016)           (.012)            yes

Retail trade                       —.012            _.012**           C86
                                   (.008)           (.006)            yes

Insurance agents,                  —.014            _.032**           3.33
brokers, and services              (.020)           (.015)            yes

Hotels and lodging places          _.044**           .021             3.10
                                   (.020)           (.015)            yes

Personal services                  _.030**           .008             4.77
                                   (.011)           (.008)             yes

Business services                  _.053**          -   .007          5.12
                                   (.022)           (.016)            yes

A.:ro repair, services,            —.005            -.010             1.69
                                                    .010)                 no
ja rages                           (.013)

isc.   rer'a.r    services         —.025            —.015             4.27
                                   (.017)           (.013)            yes

Potior pictures                    —.023            _.044**           2.36
                                   (.031)           (.024)             no

.musemenr and recreation           —.022             .014             1.33
cervices                            (.015)          (.012)             no

Health services                    —.002            -   .007              .65
                                    (.008)          (.003)                no

Legal services                                       .001             2.73
                                    (.009)          (.010)             no

Hariufacturirig                      .010           -.003             1.14
                                    (.011)          (.908)                r.o


 'significant at .05 level.
'Significant at .10 level.


                                             37
            'rablc 7:      Effects of State Characteristics on the Probability of Liability reform,                             1969-9G.
                                General Reforms and Numbers of Increase and Decrease Reforn.
                                               (Standard Errors In Parentheses)
                                                                                      Reform-

Variable Name                  Compar. Prejudg. Atty. fee            Collat.       Damages Periodic Joint & Punitive No. of   No. of
                                negi.  interest caps                 source         caps   payments several damages increase decrease
                                                                      rule                          liabil.          reforms reforms

Split dem./rep.                     .020        .076*       -.009     -.005                     .Ø33*     -.063                     .096
legislature                        (.050)      (.045)       (.028)    (.034)        (.023)      (.020)    (.042)    (.018)         (.073)     (.090)

Dem. gov. only                      .013        .011         .028      .042         —.028        .031"    - .035    —   .045*       .025      — .007
                                   (.038)      (.035)       (.017)    (.028)        (.024)      (.012)     (.031)   (.024)         (.056)     (.073)

Dem    ].egis.   only               .015        .063         .009      .020                     —.012       .012    —.015           .078      -.056
                                   (.048)      (.047)       (.027)    (.033)        (.023)      (.021)     (.037)   (.020)         (.076)      (.088)

Split ].egis., dem.                 .023        .014         .042*     .103*t                    •Ø49**   -.042     -.007           .037        .097
gov.                               (.044)      (.040)       (.024)    (.035)        (.024)      (.021)     (.037)   (.025)         (.064)      (.094)

Dem. gov. & legis.                 -.001        .049         .010      .051         —.018       - .027      .003    - .038*         .047      -.018
                                   (.050)      (.051)       (.029)    (.035)        (.026)      (.026)     .040)    (.021)         (.079)      (.100)

                        Sen.       —   .050    —   .290**    .035     —.046                      .002     - Q97**    .075**        —. 34Q**   -
vg. ADA of US                                                                                                                                     .118
                                   (.054)      (.046)       (.026)    (.037)        (.031)      (.021)     (.043)   (.030)         (.072)      (.099)
                               .
Pct. mfg. exported                     .932"                 .020      .158          .024        .192**     .388*                   .233)       .502
                                   (.244)      (.170)       (.158)    (.141)        (.109)      (.073)     (.234)   (.117)         (.267)      (.393)

Doctors per 100                                2.078"        .388    —3.030' —1.686             —.309     —7.054
population                         (.912)      (.866)       (.535)    (.809)       (1.242)      (.552      (.S1C)   (.715)        (1.304      (2.658)

Lawyers per 100                    2.436**     —.184        1.46**    2.965**       2.577"       .833"     3Q39**   -.542          2.252** 10.332"
populalion                         (.574)      (.651)       (.418)    (.540)        (.515)      (.394)     (.620)   (.426)         (.939)     (1.648)

N                                  1100         1100        1100      1100          1100        1100       1100     1100           1100        1100

Adi.    R                              .65.        .762      .719      .428          .316        .246       .€39        .784        .755          .633

•*significant at .05 level.
*significant at .10 level.




                                                                              38
           Table          8;      Effects of State Characteristics on the Probability of Liability reform,                              1969-90.
                                      Medical Malpractice Reforms and Other Consolidated Indicators.
                                                      (Standard Errors In Parentheses)
                                                                                                Reforms

Variable Name                       Medical         Medical    Medical Medical Medical Medical Medical, General, General, Medical.
                                    fee caps collat.           damages periodic joint & punitive no. of    any       any     any
                                                    source       caps  payments several damages decrease increase decrease decrease
                                                     rile                       liabil.          reforms reforms, reforms reforms
                                                                               —                          -.025     -.242'     .053       -.067       .120**
Split dem./rep.                        .046           .022      - . 176"           .049        -.061
                                      (.051)         (.051)     (.046)         (.038)          (.042)     (.021)    (.126)    (.053)       (.045)    (.051)
legislature
                                                                                                                              -.005       —           .001
                                     —                                                                                                        .029
                                                                               — .030          -.030       .047**   - .233*
Dem. gov. only                           .019        — .020     —.  083"
                                                     (.046)     (.040)         (.049)          (.031)     (.024)    (.131)    (.037)       (.032)    (.040)
                                         .037)

Dem                                    .092**         .030      —.      140"    .015            .013       .022      .063     —.008         .013      .206"
       legis.   only
                                      (.045)         (.049)     (.044)         (.043)          (.037)     (.024)    (.128)    (.048)       (.041)    (.046)

                          dein.      —   .037        - .053     —.137''        — .026          —.047      —.002     -.303"    —.052       —.029      -.074
Split legis.,                                                                                                                                         (.049)
                                      (.041)         (.052)     (.042)         (.039)          (.037)     (.026)    (.132)    (.041)       (.040)
gov.

                &                        -   091'     .076      —   .131"        .040           .006       .008       .090    —.010           .016     .197"
Dezu. gov.          legis.
                                      (.047)         (.052)     (.047)          (.045)         (.039)     (.025)     (.135)   (.051)       (.042)     (.050)

Avg.    ADA   of    (35    Sen.       - .003          .067      —. 184**       —.112" —.082'               .091"    -.223     -.161"       - .171"   -.184"
                                                     (.055)     (.052)          (.048)         (.043)     (.031)     (.152>   (.050)       (.047)     (.055)
                                      (.051)

Pct. mfg. exported                    - .089         —.509"      .015              .16].        .423'     —.183     —.1,1      .866**      - .001    - .813"
                                                     (.215)     (.200)          (.167)         (.236)     (.114)     (.548)   (.228)       (.176)     (.206)
                                      (.185)

Doctors per 100                       - .345        4. 130"       .071         _2.714** —6.801"                               -2.146" -3.825"
                                      (.998)        (1.057)     (1.23)          (.862)         (.915)     (.721)    (3.002)    (.921)     (1.209)    (1.255)
population
                                      2.861"         5.392"       .720         1.442" 2.540"               .114     13.068"   —.238         .878      1.094'
Lawyers per 100
                                      (.601)          (.568)     (.625)         (.625)         (.614)     (.453)    (1.907)    (.655)      (.596)     (.625)
population
N                                        1100         1100       1100              1100        1100        1100      1100      1100        1100       1100

                                                       .601         •   570        .449         .642       .757       .680      .640          .719     .663
Adj. R2                                      .589

''Significant at .05 level.
'Significant at .10 level.


                                                                                          39
                                          Appendix A

                                        Sources of Data


        We obtained information on liability reforms from state statutes and judicial decisions.

Appendix C lists the reforms by state and adoption date. Data on output by industry are from

the Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce. Data on employment are

from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Data on state and federal politics are found in primary

sources.

       Manufacturing output by state exported to other states: total exports by state from the

Statistical Abstract for the years 1969, 1971, 1975, 1976, 1980, 1982, 1984-1987, and 1990,

with linear interpolation in intervening years. Total manufacturing output obtained from the

Department of Commerce, as part of the GSP data set.

        Lawyers per capita: by state, for 1970, 1980, 1985, and 1988, from American Bar

Foundation, Chicago, Illinois, The 1971 Lawyer Statistical Report, 1971; The Lawyer

Statistical Repqr, 1985; Supplement to the Lawyer Statistical Report, 1991. See also

Statistical Abstract. We calculated intervening years by linear interpolation.

       Physicians per capita: by state for the years 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, and 1990 from

the Statistical Abstract and from Physician Characteristics and Distribution in the U.S., annual

(American Medical Association, Chicago, Illinois). We calculated intervening yeais by linear

interpolation.




                                               40
                                   Appendix B

               Ordinary Least Squares Estimates of Effects of
                       Liability Reforms on Employment
                      (Standard Errors In Parenthese.)


                  Industry            No. of increaseNo. of decrease
                                          reforms        reforms


          Construction                      -   . 028    -   .002
                                            (.014)       (.010)

          Local and interurban              -   .003         •   039**
          passenger transit                 (.011)       (.009)
          Transport. services               -   .015     —.O32
                                                .016)    (.012)

          Electric, gas, and                -   .009      .001
          sanitary services                 (.009)       (.007)

          Wholesale trade                   -   .010      .002
                                            (.008)       (.006)

          Retail trade                      -   . 017     .004
                                            (.006)       (.005)
                                            -   .008     - .004
          Insurance agents,
          brokers, and services             (.008)       (.006)

          Hotels and lodging places         -   .008         .017* *
                                            (.011)       (.008)
          Personal services                  .001            .009
                                            (.007)       (.006)

          Business services                      022     —   .015*
                                            (.010)       (.007)

          Auto repair, services,            -   .003         • 001
          garages                           (.007)       (.005)

          Misc. repair services             - .038**         .001
                                            (.008)       (.006)

          Motion pictures                   -   .022*    -       .003
                                            (.011)       (.009)

          Amusement and recreation          -   . 052     .011
          services                          (.011)       (.008)


          Health services                   -   .006     - .001
                                            (.006)       (.005)

          Legal services
                                            -   .002             .005
                                            (.007)       (.005)

          Manufacturing                     _.020**      - .008
                                            (.009)               .007)

*Sign:ficant at .05 level.
'Signif.cant at .10 level.


                                       41
References

Abraham, Kenneth S., "The Causes of the insurance Crisis," in New Directions in Liabilily
      Law: Proceedings of the Academy of Political Scic Walter Olson, ed, 37 (1988),
       p.54.

American Bar Association, Report of the ABA Action Commission to Improve the Tort
      Liability System (1987).

Beeson, P. E., 'Total Factor Productivity Growth and Agglomeration Economics in
      Manufacturing, 1959-1973," Journal of Regional Science. 27 (1987), pp. 183-198.

Beeson, P. E. and S. Husted, "Patterns and Determinants of Productive Efficiency in Sate
      Manufacturing," Journal of Regional Science. 29 (1989), pp. 15-28.

Card, David and Daniel Sullivan, "Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training
       Programs and Movements In and Out of Employment," Econometrica 56:3 (1988),
       pp. 497-530.

Carlino, Gerald A. and Richard Voith, "Accounting for Differences in Aggregate State
       Productivity," Regional Science and Urban Econorn$c, 22 (1992), pp. 597-598.

Carroll, S. J., Assessing the Effects of Tort Reforms (Rand: Institute for Civil Justice, 1987).

Chamberlain, Gary, "Analysis of Covariance with Qualitative Data," Review of Economic
     Studies 47 (1980), pp. 225-238.

Ciccane, Antonio and Robert E. Hall, "Productivity and the Density of Economic Activity,"
      National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 4313 (April 1993), pp.
       19-20.

Cross, Frank B., "The First Thing We do, Let's Kill All the Economists: An Empirical
       Evaluation of the Effect of Lawyers on the United States Economy and Political
       System," Texas Law Review, 70 (1991), p. 645.

Danzon, Patricia M., New Evidence on the FreQuency and Severity of Medical Malpractice
      Claims, (Rand: Institute for Civil Justice, 1986).

Dertouzos, James N. and Lynn A. Karoly, Labor-Market Responses to Employer Liability
      (Rand, Institute for Civil Justice: Santa Monica, 1992).

Edwards, Linda N., "An Empirical Analysis of Compulsory Schooling Legislation, I 940-
      1960," Journal of Law and Economics, 2 1(1) (1978), pp. 2 15-216.

Epstein, Richard A., "The Political Economy of Product Liability Reform," American
       Economic Review, 78(2) (May 1988), pp. 311-315.


                                               42
Galanter, Marc, 'Reading the Landscape of Dispute; What We Know and Don't Know (and
      Think We know) About Our Allegedly Contentious and Litigious Society," UCLA
       Law Review, 31 (1983), p.4.

Galanter, Marc, 'News from Nowhere: The Debased Debate on Civil Justice,' unpublished
       manuscript, January 20, 1993, delivered as Martin P. Miller Centennial Lecture,
       University of Denver College of Law, October 2, 1992.

Huber, Peter, Liability: the Legal Revolution and its Consequences (New York: Basic Books,
       1988), p. 4.

Kakalik, James S., and Nicholas M. Pace, Costs and Compensation Paid in Tort Litigation
      (Santa Monica: Institute for Civil Justice, 1986), pp. vi-vii, 66.

Kessler, Daniel P., "Fault, Settlement, and Negligence Law," Massachusetts Institute of
       Technology mimeograph, (1994).

Litan, Robert E., "The Liability Explosion and American Trade Performance: Myths and
       Realities," in Peter H. Schuck, Tort Law and the Public interest: Competition,
       Innovation and Consumer Welfare (New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1991).

Magee, Stephen P., William A. Brock, and Leslie Young, "The Invisible Foot and the Waste
     of Nations: Lawyers as Negative Externalities," in Black Hole Tariffs and Endogenous
     Policy Theory: Political Economy in General Equilibrium (Cambridge: Cambridge
     University Press, 1989).

O'Connell, Jeffrey and James Guinivan, "An Irrational Combination: The Relative Expansion
      of Liability Insurance and Contraction of Loss Insurance," Ohio State Law Journal, 49
      (1988), pp. 757, 759.

Posner, Richard A., "Theories of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics 5 (1974),
       p. 335.

Stigler, George J., "The Theory of Economic Regulation," Bell Journal of Economics 2
        (1971), p. 3.

Sturgis, Robert W., The Cost of the U.S. Tort System (Darien, CT: Tillinghast, Nelson and
       Warren, Inc., 1985), p. 22.

United States Bureau of Economic Analysis, Staff Paper 42, "Experimental Estimates of
       Gross State Product by Industry," Bureau of Economic Analysis, Washington. D.C.,
       1985.

White, ilalbert, "A Heteroskcdasticity-Consistcnt Covariance Matrix Estimator and a Direct
       Test for Heteroskedasticity," Econometrica 48 (1980), pp. 817-830.



                                             43
U.S. Department of Justice, Tort Policy Working Group, "Report on the Causes, Extent, and
      Policy Implications of the Current Crisis in Insurance Availability and Affordability,"
      (1986).




                                              44
