                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  DIVERSIFICATION,
                             INTEGRATION AND EMERGING
                              MARKET CLOSED-END FUNDS




                                       Geert Bekaert
                                      Michael S. Urias




                                  \\'orking Paper No. 4990



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   January 1995


We are grateful to Lewis Aaron at S.G. Warburg for generously providing data and many helpful
conversations, and to the Miller Research Fund of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford
University for financing the purchase of some of the data. We thank Campbell Harvey, Robert
E-Iodrick, Jack McDonald, Peter Reiss, Bill Sharpe and Ingrid Werner for many useful comments
and suggestions. Rohit Kumar provided computational assistance. Bekaert acknowledges the
financial support of an NSF grant, and the Financial Services Research Initiative and the Bass
Faculty Fellowship of the Graduate School of Business at Stanford. This paper is part of
NBER's research program in Asset Pricing. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 1994 by Geert Bekaert and Michael S. Urias. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper #4990
                                                                               January 1995

                                   DIVERSIFICATION,
                              INTEGRATION AND EMERGING
                               MARKET CLOSED-END FUNDS


                                         ABSTRACT


       Using an extensive new data set on U.S. and U.K.-traded closed-end funds, we examine

the diversification benefits from emerging equity markets and the extent of their integration with

global capital markets. To measure diversification benefits, we exploit the duality between

Hansen-Jagannathan bounds [1991] and mean-standard deviation frontiers. We find significant

diversification benefits for the U.K. country funds, but not for the U.S. funds. The difference

appears to relate to differences in portfolio holdings. To investigate global market integration,

we compute the reduction in expected returns an investor would be willing to accept to avoid

investment barriers in six countries. We find evidence of investment restrictions for Indonesia,

Taiwan and Thailand. but not for Korea, the Philippines or Turkey.



Geert Bekaert                                               Michael S. Urias
Graduate School of Business                                 Graduate School of Business
Stanford University                                         Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015                                     Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
1 Introduction
The diversification benefits from exposure to emerging financial markets recently have at-
tracted enormous attention among individual and institutional investors in the U.S and
abroad. By some estimates, almost 90 billion dollars have flowed into the financial markets
of developing countries since 1991, much of it in the form of closed and open-end mutual
funds. Closed-end mutual funds, whose shares trade on an exchange different from the funds
assets, were the original vehicles for foreign investment in emerging financial markets.1
    The distinguishing feature of closed-end funds is that fund share prices generally deviate
from their portfolio value (known as 'net asset value' or NAy), and often trade at a premium
when the assets are invested in closed or restricted markets. As a result, the returns from
holding the fund shares may differ from those of the (possibly unattainable) portfolio in which
the funds invest. The first objective of this paper is to formally assess the diversification
benefits from holding the shares of closed-end funds investing in emerging markets and
to compare them to the benefits from holding the emerging market indices. Our second
objective is to use information on the differences between emerging market fund returns and
net asset value returns to assess the degree of global capital market integration of emerging
markets.
    DeSantis [1993], Divecha et al. [1992], Harvey [1994] and other authors document sub-
stantial diversification benefits from investing in emerging equity market indices, but they
ignore the high transaction costs and other constraints associated with investing in emerging
equity markets. By contrast, a number of studies, including Bailey and Lim [1992], Urias
[1992]. Bodurtha et al. [1993], Chang et al. [1993] and Diwan et al. [1993], cast doubt
on the diversification benefits from emerging market closed-end funds, but offer no format
assessment. The diversification gains from holding shares of closed-end fund portfolios can
actually be achieved by foreign investors at relatively low cost when compared with holding
emerging market shares directly.
    To accomplish our first objective, we rely on the market-subset methodology developed
by De Santis 11992] and Snow t19921. A set of asset returns provides diversification benefit'
relative to a set of benchmark returns if adding these returns to the benchmark returns leads
to a significant shift in the mean-standard deviation frontier. We characterize the economic

    1For example, The Korea Fund, launched in 1984 and trading on the New York Stock Exchange. was
first financial vehicle through which foreign investors gained access to the Korean stock rnarbet.
importance of the frontier shift and we test its statistical significance using a mean-variance
spanning test. The test exploits the duality between Hansen-Jagannathan [1991] bounds
and mean-standard devatiori frontiers of asset returns to derive the mean-variance spanning
restrictions as a function of the marginal rate of substitution of representative investors. The
test is robust to conditional heteroscedasticity and autocorrelation and can easily incorporate
conditioning information. We propose a Wald test alternative to the likelihood ratio-type
tests of DeSantis and Snow, and investigate the small sample properties of the two methods
using Monte Carlo experiments.
   The degree to which a particular market is integrated with global capital markets may
have some bearing on the diversification potential of that market. Researchers generally
conduct tests of market integration using different assets from different markets, conditioning
on an asset pricing model that may or may not account for investment restrictions.2 Bekaert
and Harvey [1994] propose an alternative framework that accounts for time-variation in
capital market integration using a regime-switching model. They document the difficulty in
inferring the degree of capital market integration from the restrictions imposed in particular
markets. Differences in the local and global pricing of equities have the potential to better
describe the incidence and effectiveness of investment barriers. Hence, our second objective
is to exploit the price segmentation inherent in country fund premia for information on the
extent of global market integration for a number of countries.
    We begin by specifying and estimating the discount factor which prices all traded assets
in the U.S. and the U.K., including the emerging market funds. Using this discount factor
then estimate the expected return a global investor is willing to forego in order to avoid the
investment barriers in individual countries. In effect, when investment barriers are binding
except for the country funds, price segmentation may arise forcing investors to give up sonic
of the diversification benefits from emerging markets.
   Surprisingly, there have been few attempts to use country fund data to address questions
of market integration. Bonser-Neal et al. [1990] use event study methods to determine the
impact of specific investment liberalizations on country fund premiums, while Diwan et a].
(1992) and Eun et al. [1994) analyze country fund price segmentation in the context of static
mean-variance models of fund prices when direct access to the local market is restricted to

   2Examples of models that assume global integration are Harvey (1991] and Wheatley (1988]. Errunzi
and Losq [1985] and Stulz[1981] among others, propose models that specifically incorporate certain marki
frictions.


                                                   2
some constant fraction of outstanding shares.
   The richness of our data set makes our approach to diversification benefits and market
integration feasible. Our tests are applied to a sample of over 40 U.S. and U.K. traded
emerging market closed-end funds. We are able to compare the diversification benefits of
U.S. and U.K. funds in light of measured differences in portfolio holdings. In our examination
of market integration, we have typically several funds that target the same emerging market
country or region, which should enhance the power of our tests. To control for the special
features of closed-end fund pricing, we also carry out tests that use country funds investing in
the equity markets of developed countries (what we call 'mature market' funds) and domestic
funds (funds holding assets of the market where they trade) as benchmark assets. Hence we
dd-not take a stand on what explains the discounts on domestic closed-end funds (see, for
example, Lee et al. [1991) and Bekaert and Urias [1994a) for potential explanations).
   The main results of the paper can be summarized as follows. We find significant diversifi-
cation benefits for the U.K. country funds, but not for U.S. funds. Holding the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) Investable indices corresponding to the funds in our sample pro-
vides significant diversification gains. Using price and NAV information for funds targeting
six countries, we find evidence of effective barriers to investment in Indonesia, Taiwan and
Thailand, but not in Korea. the Philippines or Turkey.
    Of course, since our analysis is based on an historical sample, the results may have no
bearing on future performance. In particular, as the emerging financial markets covered in
our sample move to increase accessibility and improve eciency, diversification benefits may
decline.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and
some of the different characteristics of the U.S. and U.K. closed-end fund markets. Section
3 details the tests for mean-variance spanning and results from the tests. Section 4 presents
our measure of market integration and applies it to the data, and Section 5 concludes.


2 Data Description
Table 1 summarizes emerging equity market fund assets at the end of 1991 and 1993. The
last two years have seen a 300 percent increase in mutual fund assets invested in emerging
equity markets. Recall that mutual funds can be characterized by their open or closed
format. Unlike open-end mutual funds, closed-end funds issue a fixed number of shares that

                                               3
trade on an exchange, freeing portfolio managers from trading to meet net redemptions or
net purchases of fund shares. The advantages of a closed format are especially relevant for
funds investing in illiquid or volatile markets, and often local market regulations will favor
the ciosed format early in the liberalization process. As Table 1 demonstrates, open-end
fund assets have increased sharply in certain regions since 1991, but closed-end funds remain
an important component of foreign capital invested in emerging financial markets. Closed-
end funds primarily trade on organized exchanges in the U.S., London and Hong Kong, and
over-the-counter in London.
    Table 2 contains some details of our sample of U.S. and U.K. closed-end funds. The
sample consists of forty-three U.S. funds and thirty-seven U.K. investment trusts for the
period beginning January 1986 through August 1993. Twenty-three of the U.S. funds and
nineteen of the U.K. trusts are classified as emerging market funds, corresponding to the
emerging markets defined by the TFC. The remainder of the funds in each group includes
country funds investing in the securities of 'mature' markets as defined by inclusion in the
FT-Actuaries World Indices,3 and a smaller group of closed-end funds that do not invest
internationally. The sample attempts to include all emerging market U.S. funds and U.N.
investment trusts with initial offerings prior to 1992. In all but two cases, the entire trading
history àf the emerging market funds is included in the sample.4
    U.K. investment trusts are the equivalent of U.S. closed-end funds, but there are a number
of institutional differences. While U.S. closed-end funds are required to distribute 90 percent
of realized gains to shareholders in a given year to qualify for exclusion from corporation tax.
investment trusts must retain capital gains for reinvestment. In addition, fund expenses are
deductible from taxable income for U.K. trusts, but not for U.S. funds. British institutions
 are the primary holders of investment trusts, in part because of their inclusion in the FT-
Alishare Index, which is commonly indexed by large shareholders in Britain.5 U.S. closed-end
funds, by contrast, are largely the realm of individual investors, although institutions make
up a larger share of the ownership of emerging market funds than of countryfunds investing
in mature markets. See Bekaert and Urias [1994a] for more details.
   For each fund, the sample contains weekly price, NAy, exchange rate, dividend, and

  3There are two exceptions. Mexico and Malaysia are part of the FT-Actuaries World Indices and the JF(
emerging markets. We classify th'm as emerging markets.
  4The Mexico Fund and The Korea Fund, both listed on the NYSE, began trading prior to 1986.
  5Table 2 details which funds in our sample are included in the FT-Ailshare Index.


                                                  4
volume information for the life of the fund. For the U.K. trusts, 'diluted' NAV and warrant
prices are also included. It is customary in Britain to quote diluted NAy, which is the net
asset value per share diluted to the level that would result if all outstanding warrants that
are in the money were exercised immediately. Warrants trade for U.S. funds as well, but
are much less common. Our analysis of NAV characteristics uses 'undiluted' NAV in all but
five cases.6 The U.S. data was obtained from primary sources including Barrons and the
CRSP database. Data on investment trusts was obtained from County NatWest Securities
and S.G. Warburg.
    Diversification benefits are measured in relation to a set of mature market benchmark
returns. Individual country and regional total return indices for the mature markets were
provided by Goldman, Sachs & Co.7 To assess the exposure of emerging market fund port-
folios to the local market, we use three weekly total return dollar indices available from the
Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB) maintained by the IFC. These include local market
indices representing a broad cross-section of shares in each country, the IFC Global Indices
representing a set of the largest capitalization and most liquid shares in a given country
or region, and the IFC Investable Indices. The IFC Investable Indices represent a value-
weighted subset of the equities in the IFC Global Indices for which ownership restrictions
are not legally binding. The Investable Indices are better than the Global Indices as proxies
for local market exposure that is actually attainable, and hence they are more relevant in
comparisons with closed-end funds. Nevertheless, they only include assets satisfying certain
liquidity requirements, and high transaction costs and other market frictions limit the effec-
tive availability of investable shares. Additional details of the sample are contained in the
Data Appendix.
    Table 2 also includes information about the average departure of prices from NAV (know!i
as the premium) for each fund. This aspect of the 'closed-end fund puzzle' is well known for
U.S. funds (see, for example, Lee et al. [19911 and Hardouvelis et al. [1993]). Ammer [1990)
documents premium characteristics for U.K. investment trusts. The average premiums are
0.92% for the U.S. emerging market funds and —9.51% for U.K. emerging market trusts. For
the mature market funds, the numbers are —7.09% for the U.S. and —13.06% for the U.K.

     The five investment trusts in our sample for which only diluted NAV is available are indicated in Taht
2.
  7The FT-Actuaries World Indices (TM/SM) are jointly compiled by the Financial Times Limited Gold-
man, Sachs & Co., and County Nat West Securities in conjunction with the Institute of Actuariesand tlip
Faculty of Actuaries.

                                                     5
For the U.S. funds investing in domestic securities, the average premium in our sample is
—8.25%, and for U.K. domestic market trusts the average is —14.64%.
    The premiums on closed-end funds, while potentially informative about market integra-
tion, could bias our tests for diversification benefits. If closed-end funds in the U.S. or the
U.K. contain a fund-specific risk factor not spanned by the benchmark assets, our inferences
could reflect only the gains from exposure to this factor and not the enhancement from
emerging market assets added to the benchmark portfolios. We control for this possibility
by using a sample of mature market and domestic closed-end funds from the U.S. and U.K.
as the benchmark assets.
    Finally, Table 2 lists the value of fund assets in April of 1993, the volatility of fund price
returns, and a variance decomposition of fund returns showing the proportion of fund return
variance due to NAV returns and premium change variance. The variance decomposition
indicates that in the majority of cases, and in each fund category, the change in the log fund
premium explains a larger share of price return variance than NAV returns explain. Hence
the premium anomaly is clearly evident in the second moment properties of fund returns.


3 Diversification Benefits
3.1 Mean-Variance Spanning
We perform tests of mean-variance spanning based on the market subset methodology stud-
ied by DeSantis [1992] and Snow [1991]. The tests exploit the duality between Hansen-
Jagannathan bounds [1991] on investor marginal rates of substitution and the mean-standard
deviation frontier of asset returns. They are related to the mean-variance spanning tests of
Huberman and Kandel [1987] and Ferson et al. (1993] (see Appendix A).
    We apply this test to the question of whether emerging market country fund returns
are spanned by index returns from mature financial markets. Returns from the mature
financial markets serve as the benchmark or spanning assets, and the emerging market fund
returns are the test assets. The test assesses whether the leftward shift in the mean-standard
deviation frontier is statistically significant.
    We begin with the general conditional asset pricing restriction:

                                  E[(R1 + l)ru+j I7] =                                        (1)


                                                6
where R+1 represent a vector of security returns, mt+1 is an investor's marginal rate of
substitution or discount factor, t is the unit vector, and     is the information available
at time t. The distinguishing feature of an asset pricing model is its specification for the
discount factor, m.
    Using the law of iterated expectations and equation (1), we can write the unconditional
asset pricing restriction:
                               E[R+irnt+i] + E[mg÷1] —      = 0.                            (2)
Note that (1) and (2) assume frictionless markets and that the Law of One Price holds. The
equality becomes an inequality if transaction costs are introduced (see Luttmer [1991]).
    Hansen and Jagannathan [1991] show that the linear projection of m1+i onto the set of
asset returns being priced has minimum variance in the class of all discount factors that
satisfy (2). The discount factor m1 + [R+1 — E(Rt+i)1'/3, formed from the projection
of m+1 onto one-period returns, then satisfies (2) and may be substituted for m:+l:

                               E[Rt+m+11 + E[m1) — = 0.                                     (3)

Conditional on a value for o, rn can be used to place bounds on the standard deviation
of random variables which satisfy the asset. pricing equation for the asset returns R since
it is the minimum variance discount factor. From these bounds comes the duality with the
mean-variance frontier of asset returns.
  Now we can examine whether or not a subset of the assets to be priced, say the suhvector
R'+1 from R+1 [R1, R.1]', prices all of the a.ssets in R+1. Let there be n1 returns iii
R+1, the benchmark returns, and n2 returns in           the test returns. If we restrict (he 1?2
coefficients 132 on R?+1 in equation (3) to be zero, we can test the overidentifying restrictions
implied by (3):
                        E{R+1[ + (R1 — E[R+1WI31]} + a — = 0.                                (4)

Given a value for a, there are n1 + n2 moment conditions and n1 parameters to estimate.
hence there arc n2 overidentifving restrictions.
   When a risk-free asset is known, the test is equivalent to a test that the mean-standard
deviation frontier formed from the set of assets R intersects the mean-standard deviation
frontier formed from Rm at the point with the highest Sharpe ratio. DeSantis [1993 propo.
prespeifving two different values for u to test jointly for frontier intersection at t\vo p01l
along the frontier. From two fund separation the test is equivalent to a test of mean-variance
spanning. The sample moment conditions in the test for mean variance spanning are:


           h(911
                            i, fc {R+j[1 + (R1 — E[R41])'/311J} + c —
                    I2) = 1/T                                                            1   = o.      -
                                                                                                      (:)
                                     {R÷1[c2 + (R1 — E[R1])'j912]}            + c2 t J
In the empirical work, we choose o to be the mean of one divided by one plus the condition-
ally riskiess rate. Using the duality between mean-standard deviation frontiers of discount
factors and asset returns, this choice for ce enables us to approximate the change in the
Sharpe Ratio for a given set of test assets.8 Hence we accompany the test results for diver-
sification benefits with a measure of the economic importance of these benefits.
    Consistent estimates for       and /312 can be computed analytically from (5) using a
two-stage Generalized Method of Moments (GMM) estimator. Following Hansen [19S2], an
optimally chosen weighting matrix WT and sample moments hT are evaluated at second stage
estimates of /3 and /312. Define b11 and h12 to be the estimates. Then the quadratic form
ThT(bIl,&12)'WThi-(bII,b12) has an asymptotic x2 distribution with 2n2 degrees of freedom
under the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the test assets in the discount factors are
equal to zero.
    There are several advantages of the market-subset approach compared with the mean-
variance spanning tests proposed by Huberman and Kandel [1987]. It allows us to easily
incorporate conditioning information for tests of conditional mean-variance spanning. The
test does not require a distributional assumption on asset returns, and it is robust to genera]
forms of conditional heterosced asti city and autocorrelation.9
    We incorporate conditioning information into our tests by scaling asset returns in equation
(I) by variables in the information set at timeL Consider a vector of predetermined variablec.
z. Applying the law of iterated expectations, the moment conditions we exploit are:

                                          1)0 zj]mj+j} — E(t 0      z) = 0,                            (6)

where ® denotes Kronecker product. As with many of our tests, the conditional tests will

   8The approximation comes from the fact that we do not observe an unconditionally risk free rate. so ly
Jensen's inequality we do not obtain the exact Sharpe Ratio using ai
   9Ferson et al. [1992] proposi a test of mean-variance spanning using ('.MM as a special case of a tv for
latent variables.


                                                    S
employ indices of fund returns for benchmark and test assets instead of individual fund
returns. Let z be the unit vector augmented by the index of individual fund premium
changes (price returns minus NAV returns) corresponding to each index return in R+1 (:
has dimension ni +n2+ 1). To keep the dimensionality of our test small, we consider a subset
of the vector (R+1 ® z), taking only each return scaled by the unit vector and its own index
of individual fund premium changes, which doubles the number of overidentifying restrictions
in the spanning test to 4n2. Scaled asset returns have been interpreted as managed portfolios
by a number of authors. Many authors, including Thompson [19781 and Brauer [1988], have
argued that U.S. closed-end fund discounts predict fund returns and can be used to construct
abnormal portfolio returns.


3.2 Test Statistics
We can rewrite the orthogonality conditions (5) as
                                              T
                         hT(bll,b12) = 1/Tfj(bi)        Crbj + dT,                       (7)

   with

                                                                 0
          T—
                                 0                 1/TY R+1(R1 — E[R1])


                           b11              cxi[l/TEj(Rt+j + 1)] — L
                    b1               dT =
                           b12              2[1/TEi(Rt+i + 1)] —
   Conditional on the weighting matrix, WT, the GMM-estimator is


                                 b1 = —[CWrCT]1[C,.WrdT].                                (8)

   The weighting matrix is chosen to be a consistent estimate of the inverse of the spectral
density at frequency zero of the orthogonal conditions, S =           E[ff'_]. A popuLi




                                               9
estimate uses Bartlett weights (Newey and West [1987]):

                   = 1/T        (l -
                           f=j+1y'1
                                            ')[ff• + ff + l/Tff.
   Although the DeSantis test is easy to compute, many choices remain that could affect its
small sample properties. Under the null hypothesis, ft should have zero mean and be serially
uncorrelated. Hence p could be set equal to 0 n the expression for . However, removing
the mean of f and allowing for some serial correlation in S can improve the reliability of
the estimators (see Cochrane [1994] for a general discussion). Furthermore, iterating on the
weighting matrix might also improve the small sample properties of GMM-estimators (see
Ferson and Foerster [19941). In a Monte Carlo experiment described below, we examine 5
sub-statistics MTV (i = 1    5). The properties of the different statistics can be summarized
as follows:


                                        Test Statistics
                    Statistic Demeaned p Correction # stages
                       MV1            no               no              2
                       MV2            yes              no              2
                       MV3            no              yes              2
                       MVI            yes             yes              2
                       MV.s           yes             yes              7
                                       —
                                                      yes              1

                      MVw2             —              no               1




   To choose p in the serial correlation correction, we use the "optimal bandwidth" procedure
described by Andrews [1991]. In the applications below, we found that after 6 to 9 iterations
in the GMM estimation, the weighting matrix changed very little.
    Given our concern with small sample properties, we also investigate a Wald test,             ac
an alternative to the tests A1%' (i = 1,. .. , 5). In the Wald test, the stochastic discount factor
is a linear function of both the benchmark and test assets. The orthogonality conditions for
the test are similar to equation (6), except that

                                                10
                  1/ f's' T n In'
                          t=i 1tt+it1t+i   —   tn 1'
         T
                                     0                 1/TE, R÷1(R÷1 — E[R1})
             =
             —
                  0    E
   where ER is the variance-covariance matrix of the returns.
   As Appendix A shows, there is a simple, analytical expression for MVw. Let A be a
2rz2 x 2(ni + 2) matrix that selects the elements of the 2(ni +n2) x vector that are zero
under the null. Let QT = C.Wi-Cr. Then

                                 —
                                     T(AC1dT)'[AQ'A']'(AC'dr).                             (9)

Hence, computation of MV requires an estimate for S, but no multiple stage estimation is
necessary. Moreover, since the GMM system is exactly identified, the mean of the orthogo-
nality conditions is zero. We compute two Wald statistics, MV, (j = 1,2). For j = 2. there
is no serial correlation correction. For j = 1, we construct S using the optimal bandwidth
procedure.
    Appendix B describes in detail a Monte Carlo experiment that examines both the size
and power of the test statistics M%ç (i 1. . . ,5),         (j = 1,2). lii our brief discussion
here, denote the n benchmark asset returns by R and the n2 test asset returns h R. The
benchmark returns are assumed to follow a vectorautoregressive process with conditionally
heteroscedastic errors. The test asset returns are then a linear function of the benchmark
returns and an error term such that their mean and variance dynamics are completely driven
by the benchmark returns and the mean-variance spanning restrictions are imposed. The
model is estimated from the data and then used to generate samples of length 152 for [R,
on which the mean variance spanning tests are performed.
    To investigate the power of the tests, we assume that an additional factor generates the
test assets beSi(le5 the benchmark assets. For the additional factor we use the JFC Jnvestable
Composite index return as a proxy for emerging market-specific risk (Section 2 describes thii.
indexL The alternative is calibrated so that the variance of the test assets explained 1w the
new benchmark is 20% higher than under the null. I)etaiis are provided in the Appendix.
   The Monte Carlo resnlts. rerorted in Appendix B. are ctriking Employing a serial

                                                 11
correlation correction according to the optimal bandwith scheme of Andrews [1991]. but not
de-meaning the orthogonality conditions, leads to dramatically superior size properties for
MV3. Although its power is weaker compared with some of thc other tests, the relative loss
in power is only significant for large GMM systems.
    In general, both the size and power properties seem to deteriorate substantially as the
number of assets is increased. We conjecture that the saturation ratio (see Gallant and
Tauchen [1991]) of the GMM system is the driving factor in the results. The saturation ratio
is the total number of observations divided by the number of parameters to he estimated
(including the parameters of the weighting matrix). When n2 7, the saturation ratio drops
below 10. Unfortunately, GMM-systems with such low saturation ratios are common in the
empirical finance literature. In the empirical work to follow, we use the M1' statistic. vithi
the caveat that the power may be weak when many test assets are included in the test.




                                              12
3.3 Empirical Results
In this section, we test whether adding emerging market assets to a number of different
benchmark portfolios significantly shifts the investment opportunity set. Specifically, we
examine the hypothesis of mean-variance spanning by testing whether the frontier of bench-
mark and test assets intersects the frontier of benchmark assets at two distinct points. In
addition, we document the change in the approximate Sharpe R.atio corresponding to the
shift in the mean-standard deviation frontier of asset returns when the test assets are added
to the benchmark assets. The Sharpe Ratio measures the slope of the line from the riskless
rate to the tangency portfolio on the efficient frontier, commonly known as the 'reward to
risk' ratio (see Sharpe [1994]). It gives the largest mean return per unit of standard-deviation
risk attainable for the assets in question. For a particular rejection of mean-variance span-
ning, the change in the Sharpe Ratio measures the economic importance of the shift in the
efficient frontier.
   Using the monthly IFC Global Indices and Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI)
indices for mature markets, DeSantis [1993] finds that the frontier of IFC indices along with
the U.S., European or World market portfolio does not intersect the frontier of the U.S..
European or \Vorld market benchmark, but that the mature markets do intersect the frontier
of the benchmark. Similarly, Harvey [1994] rejects the hypothesis that the Global Indicec
and the mature markets intersect the frontier of all eighteen MSCI mature market indicc.
Both authors examine mean-variance intersedion at only one point on the efficient frontier.
    \Ve compare the diversification benefits from emerging market closed-end funds with liii
benefits from holding the corresponding IFC Investable Indices.10 As described in Section
2, the IFC Investable Indices correct for foreign ownership restrictions and exclude illiquid
stocks to some-extent, hut t.he' do not account for other barriers to investment such as high
transaction costs or poor accounting standards.
    Recall that our test. of mean-variance spanning produces a chi-square statistic with do-

  10There are at least three index funds which attempt to match the performance of the IFC Invest able
indices or some comparable. There is the open-end International Equity Index Fund Emerging Market'
Portfolio managed by Vanguard Group, which tracks a Morgan Stanley index, a 'semi-open' fund managed
by the IFC tracking the IFC Investable Composite Index, and a closed-end fund, Baring Securities Emerging
Market Index Tracker Fund, which trades over-the-counter in London and tracks an index published by
Baring Securities. Of course, an investor could buy the stocks in the index directly at some nontrivial coct
A comparison between holding portfolios of country funds and holding investahk indices presumes that tlir
marginal investor in country fund can obtain the theoretically investahie portfolios.


                                                    13
grees of freedom equal to two times the number of ovcridentifying restrictions whcn we
impose the restriction that a set of test asset returns and benchmark returns is priced by the
subset of benchmark returns. The following table summarizes the test assets we examine in
Tables 3 and 5h1 In all cases, we report the probability value for the mean-variance spanning
test statistic MV3, which incorporates a serial correlation correction but no demeaning of
the sample moment conditions, and 2 stages in the GMM estimation. Where available
also report the probability value according to the empirical distribution under the null.


                                   Mean-Variance Spanning Tests
                        Test Assets
                        U.S. Emerging Market Funds              12
                        -Corresponding IFC Investahies          12
                        U.K. Emerging Market Trusts              7
                        -Corresponding IFC Investables           7
                        U.S. & U.K. Funds Emerging Market Funds 19
                        U.S. Emerging Market Fund Index          1

                        -Corresponding IFC Investables Index     1

                        U.K. Emerging Market Fund Index          1

                        -Corresponding IFC Investables Index     1

                        U.S. & U.K. Emerging Market Fund Indices 2


   The first set of benchmark assets cousists of the FT-Actuaries World Index for the U.S..
the U.K., Europe excluding the U.K., and the Pacific. The benchmark was chosen to repre-
sent the portfolio of a globally diversified investor in 1990, the start of the test period. Most
combinations of individual country indices are spanned by this benchmark. The test period
was chosen to maximize the number of funds included in the tests.
   Table 3, Panel 1 presents results from mean-variance spanning tests where we restrict
investors t.o hold only funds which have corresponding IFC Investahie indices, and only one
fund for a particular country or region if there are multiple such funds, to enhance the power

    Note that the countries and regions covered by the set of U.K. emergilg market trusts is a subset of
those covered by the U.S. funds.


                                                  14
of our tests.12 In our discussion, we will use 5% as the size of the test. Given that the power
of our tests ranges between 13% and 73%, readers concerned about Type-2 errors may wish
to employ a higher size. We fail to reject mean-variance spanning for the twelve individual
U.S. emerging market funds. The test statistic falls within the third decile of the empirical
distribution under the null. We also fail to reject spanning at the five percent level using
all nineteen funds. However, we do reject strongly mean-variance spanning for the seven
individual U.K. emerging market funds, according to both the chi-square distribution and
the null empirical distribution at the 5% level.
    The same tests were performed using equally-weighted indices of country fund returns.
reducing the dimensionality of the problem considerably. We fail to reject spanning for the
U.S. fund index at the five percent level, but we reject spanning for the U.K. fund index and
the two indices together using the chi-square and empirical distributions.
   It is possible that closed-end fund industry factors could affect the results. If the test
asset returns contain a closed-end fund-specific risk factor not spanned by the benchmark
FT-Actuaries returns, our tcsts could produce rejections of mean-variance spanning which do
not reflect international diversification benefits. Since we are interested in whether emerging
market funds provide diversification benefits relative to a worldwide mature market portfo-
lio, we wish t.o control for closed-end fund effects. To do so, we construct a set of benchmark
equally-weighted index returns from domestic closed-end funds and mature market country
funds. This controls for the presence of closed-end fund-specific factors in the U.S. and
the U.K. while providing a benchmark of mature market assets similar to the FT-Actuaries
benchmark. It turns out that the closed-end fund benchmark spans the FT-Actuaries bench-
mark, but not vice versa.
    Panel 1 of Table 3 reports test results using the control benchmark. We again fail to
reject mean-variance spanning for the twelve U.S. funds and for the U.S. fund index. The
rejection for the U.K. fund index and the U.S. arid U.K. fund index together no longer holds.
but we stil reject spanning for the seven individual U.K. emerging market funds using the
chi-square and the empirical distribution under the null. Overall, the results from Panel
1 suggest that the individual U.K. emerging market funds together provide diversification
benefits relative to the benchmark portfolios. Apparently, constructing an index of these
funds changes the distribution of returns so that they no longer provide such benefits. Using

  '2Choosing alternate funds from the same market does not change any of the results.


                                                  15
an equally-weighted index could bias the results against finding diversification benefits if
the index is not efficient in the space of test asset returns. In fact, the results are not
materially different when we use value-weighted indices, except that we can reject mean-
variance spanning for the index of U.S. funds using the control benchmark.'3 This result
appears to be due to large weights on MXF and KF during the test period.
    To assess whether our results are robust to the currency in which returns are expressed,
we performed tests with the U.S. and U.K. funds expressed in British pounds. Using the
closed-end fund benchmark, the rejection for the seven U.K. funds remains using the chi-
square distribution and the empirical distribution computed in dollars. As before, there are
no other rejections for fund indices or individual U.S. funds.
    Table 3, Panel 2 presents results from mean-variance spanning tests for the IFC In-
vestable Indices corresponding to the test funds. The U.S. Investables are the individual
IFC Investable indices corresponding to the countries and regions covered by the U.S. funds.
and the U.S. Investables Index is the equally-weighted index of those index returns. For both
the FT-Actuaries and the control benchmark, we can reject strongly mean-variance spanning
for the individual IFC indices corresponding to the U.S. and U.K. emerging market funds
using the chi-square distibution under the null. When we construct their equally-weighted
indices, we can still reject the spanning hypothesis at the five percent level. These rejections
remain valid using the empirical distribution generated for Panel i.' It is notable that we
obtain a rejection of the spanning hypothesis for the indices corresponding to the U.S. funds.
while we were unable to reject the hypothesis using the funds themselves. It appears that
the Investable indices offer superior diversification benefits compared with the U.S. emerging
market funds. Of course, there are considerable costs associated with obtaining the index
performance relative to the costs of holding the funds.
    The economic impact of differences in performance for the U.S. and U.K. funds and the
IFC Investable indices is represented by the change in the Sharpe Ratio that accompanies
each test. For example, the rejection of mean-variance spanning for the individual U.K. funds
and the control benchmark (Table 3, Panel 1) is associated with a Sharpe Ratio change of
about 0.096. By contrast, the rejection for the corresponding IFC indices (Table 3, Panel

  '3The value-weighted indices are constructed using the value of individual fund assetsin dollars in April,
1993 (see Table 2).
  '4There is no reason to expect the empirical distribution to be substantially different for the statistics
generated with the IFC indices as test assets.


                                                    16
2) is associated with a Sharpe Ratio change of 0.28. This difference indicates that the slope
of the line with intercept (approximately) at the mean of the conditionally riskiess rate and
tangent to the efficient frontier becomes three times more steep when the IFC indices are
included with the benchmark than when the U.K. funds are included with the benchmark.
    What explains the performance differences between U.S. and U.K. funds? First, since
the U.S. sample covers emerging markets not included in the U.K. sample, the results could
reflect in part the different composition of the samples. In fact, using the control benchmark
and seven U.S. funds corresponding to the U.K. coverage, we still fail to reject spanning
using the chi-square distribution and the empirical distribution for the seven asset case.
Again, this result is robust to the funds we choose when there is duplicate coverage, and to
the benchmark used. When we exclude the global and regional emerging market funds from
each sample (leaving four single-country funds in the U.S. and the U.K.), we reject spanning
for the U.K. funds but not. for U.S funds. Figure 1 plots the mean-standard deviation
frontiers of the U.S. and U.I<. funds with common coverage (scvcn in each market), and the
IFC Investable indices covered by the funds, with both benchmarks. \Vhile standard errors
are associated with each of the frontiers, the frontier formed from the U.K. funds and the
benchmark assets appears well to the left of the frontier formed from the U.S. funds.
    A second possible explanation relates to differences in managerial skill. These differencec
could be reflected in the NAV compositions of two funds investing in the same market, or
the market timing abilities of different managers. Our framework is not suitable to investigate
market timing ability, hut we can address differences in fund portfolio risk exposure. Table
4 contrasts the portfolio exposure of U.S. and U.K. funds that. invest in the same emerging
market or region during the test period. The table presents the risk exposure of each funds
NAV to the local market index, the IFC Global index, and the IFC Investable index, as the
coefficient from a multivariate regression of NAV returns on the returns of the indices.' The
residual from a linear projection of the local market index and the IFC Global index ret un
onto the IFC Investable index return represents the component of those returns iincorrclatel
with the IFC Investable index. r'' and rGl. respectively. The results clearly suggest that
the risk exposure of U.K. and U.S. funds investing in the same emerging market differs. Fo
example. 13G.I for the U.S. funds investing in Indonesia (IF and JGF) is less than 0.2. vli'

  '5Note that nontrading problems could affect the consistency of our estimates of risk exposure to ih
indices. In addition, dynamic trading strategies by fund managers might reduce the explanatory power of
the indices.


                                                  17
for the U.K. fund JAVA,       is 1.226 and significant. However the sensitivity of the U.S.
Indonesian funds to the IFC Investable is greater than that of JAVA, 0.454 and 0.481 versus
0.269. The index returns explain a large share of the variation in NAV returns for most
funds, as indicated by R2. The results in Table 4 suggest that the superior diversification
benefits from U.K. emerging market funds could arise from portfolio selection.
   Table 5 reports results from conditional mean-variance spanning tests using the control
benchmark of domestic and mature market funds and emerging market fund indices as the
test assets. Recall that we scale each index return in the benchmark and test assets by
the unit vector and its own index of individual fund premium changes (price minus NA\
returns), which doubles the number of overidentifying restrictions in the spanning test to
4n2. Interestingly, we reject spanning for the scaled U.S. fund index as well as the scaled
index of U.K. funds, and for the U.S. and U.K. fund indices together, using the chi-square
distribution. Apparently fund premium changes predict all fund returns in our sample and
induce diversification gains for U.S. funds not present from holding only the funds themselves.
    In sum, results from unconditional mean-variance spanning tests for U.S. and U.K. emerg-
ing market funds indicate that there are diversification benefits from holding the individual
U.K. emerging market funds. Constructing an index of emerging market funds appears to
weaken the benefits from the U.K. funds. The results do not change when we control for
closed-end fund-specific factors, and they are robust to the currency in which we express
returns. By contrast, the TFC investable indices corresponding to the U.K. and the U.S.
funds provide unequivocal diversification benefits. While the U.S. funds appear to perform
poorly compared with the smaller set of U.K. funds, the NAV composition of U.S. and U.K.
funds investing in the same market seems to be quite different. The use of conditioning
information leads to diversification benefits for the U.S. as well as the U.K. funds.


4 Market Integration
4.1 Price Segmentation
4.1.1 Framework
Despite recent capital market liberalizations, most emerging equity markets are not corn
pletely integrated in global capital markets. Investment restrictions of various forms persist


                                              18
and poor liquidity or political risk often serve to effectively segment emerging markets from
world markets (see Bekaert [1994) for a detailed analysis). As Bekaert and Harvey [1994]
stress, the degree to which a national capital market is integrated with world capital markets
is very difficult to measure. Looking at investment restrictions is problematic because there
are numerous types of restrictions with some being more important than others in different
countries. In addition, statutory investment restrictions may not be binding.
    Our data on country funds offer a unique opportunity to measure the effective degree of
market integration. With closed-end funds we observe two prices for the same assets: fund
price and NAy. All other things constant, binding investment restrictions will raise the price
of a fund's shares relative to its net asset value by approximately the amount the marginal
investor is willing to pay to avoid these restrictions. This intuition was used by Bonser-
Neal et al. [1990], who tested whether announcements of changes in investment restrictions
were related to changes in the price/NA\T ratios of funds investing in those countries. They
document significant decreases in fund premiums following announcements of investment
liberalizat ions.
   The main purpose of this section is to develop a measure of market integration that
exploits the apparent price segmontation between funds and NAVs. The measure we propose
can be interpreted as the reduction in expected return a representative world investor would
be willing to suffer in order to obtain barriers-free exposure to emerging equity markets.
We will compute this measure for six countries: Indonesia, Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan.
Thailand and Turkey.
   Our framework builds heavily on the rational asset pricing framework used to test for
diversification benefits. As will become clear below, we are able to control for the closed-end
fund puzzle in our computations. Domestic funds also trade at prices that differ from their
net asset values and discounts vary both across funds and over time. Hence, country fund
premiums and discounts cannot solely be due to investment restrictions. It is important to
note that some researchers have claimed that the behavior of premiums on country funds
defies rational explanations. Indeed, the empirical facts seem puzzling at first sight. Country
fund returns show high positive correlation with the trading market (see Bailey and Lim
[1992], Diwan et al. [1993] and Bekaert and Urias [1994b]), and Hardouvelis et al. (1991)
find a large common component in the premiums on country funds. This is true despite (lie
fact that the funds invest in equity markets whose returns show low correlation with U.S.
returns. This has motivated Bodurtha et al. (1993] and Hardouvelis et al. [1993] to claim

                                              19
that country fund premiums are primarily driven by investor sentiment.
    On the other hand, Diwan et al. [1992) and Eun et a!. [1993] explore the effect of
investment restrictions on country fund pricing in the context of static mean-variance models.
When the underlying assets of the fund are not spanned by the world assets and cross-
border arbitrage is not possible, country fund premiums can arise in these models. The
main variables driving premiums are the different degrees of risk aversion in the local and
world markets and the different portfolios against which systematic risks are measured in
the world and local markets. Note that to prevent arbitrage, the local investors must also
be prevented, for example, from freely short-selling U.S.-traded country funds and buying
local stocks.'6
    Rather than using a fully specified model, we base our measure directly on the intertern-
poral relationship between stochastic discount factors and asset returns that underlies our
spanning tests in Section 3. Consider a world in which arbitrage between country funds awl
the underlying assets is difficult and costly. If the markets are effectively segmented, world
investors will price the country funds, whereas local investors will price the local assets. Both
the fund and the underlying assets are claims to identical cash flows. Hence, the difference
between local and global pricing can be completely described by the differences in the pricing
kernels that price net asset values and country funds, respectively.
    Time-variation in these discount factors can explain some of the salient features of coun-
try fund premiums described above. For example, a rise in U.S. interest rates may decrease
discount factors in world capital markets, without much effect on discount factors in seg-
mented markets. This in turn leads to lower fund prices for all country funds, without much
of an impact on NAVs. Hence, one potential measure of market integration could he based
on the difference between the stochastic discount factor that prices country funds in the
trading market and the discount factors that price the assets of the funds, used by local
investors.'7 Recall that the fundamental asset pricing equation (1) places no restrictions oh
the form of the discount factor. We assume that the stochastic discount factors are lineor
functions of a limited number of benchmark returns.1 Unfortunately, we cannot identify

  160f course, since such arbitrage will likely involve costs and since there is no guarantee that country fund
price5 will actually return to their net asset value, it may not be truly risk free (see Tuckman and \'ila [1.993)
for a format model).
  '7Thjs is in fact the basic idea behind the non-parametric measure of market integration developed h
Chen and Knez [1994).
  '8Bansal et at. [1993] study the properties of non-linear pricing kernels in an international setting.


                                                       20
the discount factor that prices local assets. The net asset values of the country funds in
our sample are not spanned by local indices. Portfolio managers clearly do not index the
local indices in our dataset (see also Table 4). However, we can identify the discount factor
(pricing kernel) that prices world assets, including country funds.
    Define the discount factor pricing country fund returns to be

                                  T—
                                   —       TjpBT —PIPBT1VaT
                                             ——    -i +1v 5' ,

where RAT denotes a benchmark of investable assets. We identify aT as the mean of one di-
vided by one plus the conditionally riskiess rate. The conditionally risk free rate is measured
as the one week dollar LIBOl rate. As benchmark assets, we use the closed-end fund control
benchmark and a mimicking portfolio for the IFC Investable Composite index constructed
from global funds trading in the U.S. and the U.K.'9 Hence, we control for the presence of
possible closed-end fund-specific pricing factors by including closed-end fund returns in the
benchmark assets for fund ret urns. The mimicking portfolio for the IFC Investable Compos-
ite is constructed by forming the weighted sum of returns on the global closed-end funds that
spans the IFC index. These weights are computed using the fact that when mean-variance
spanning holds. the test returns can be written as a linear function of the benchmark returns
with the coefficients summing to one (see also Appendix A).
    Ideally, this benchmark should span all individual country fund returns. Since there are a
total of 16 funds investing in the six countries of interest, it is impossible to test this hvpoth-
esis in a meaningful way. Instead, we impose the weaker requirement that the benchmark
prices six indices of the individual country funds for our six countries. We cannot reje( 1
that our benchmark spans the six NAV value-weighted indices of fund returns representing
each country. The benchmark also spans the set of local index-mimicking portfolios of fund
returns. These mimicking portfolios are constructed from the spanning weights for the IF('
Investable index in each country using the individual NAV returns as benchmark assets.
The resulting portfolio can he interpreted as that portfolio of individual country funds with
exposure closest to the IFC Investable index.20

  The global emerging market funds used to span the Investable Composite are EMF, ABTST, PGF.\l
and TMPLT. These funds may invest in aoy emerging market.
  '°This interpretation remains valid when mean-variance spanning is rejected, as it is for a number of
countries. Note that we do reject mean-variance spanning of the equally-weighted index of fund returns for
the six countries. Using the FT. .kctuaris benchmark with the Investable Cornpositeniirmcking portfoho

                                                   21
   If the discount factor m correctly prices all traded assets in the U.K. and the U.S., all
returns available to U.S. and U.K. investors should satisfy equation (1). That is, viewing
the returns as payoffs. their prices should be one. Our integration measure arises from using
the definition for covariance to rewrite equation (3) and solving for the expected return21:

                                          1
                                              — — Cov(mT+1,Rt+i)                         (1 )
                             E, +]       0y            0T
When returns covary positively with the discount factor, expected returns are lower. \Ve
first compute the expected return for country fund returns, E[R1}. Although our pricing
kernel does not price NAV-returns, we also use (11) to compute the expected return for net
asset values. E[R.1}. We denote the difference by        E[R.1J — E[R1J.
    We expect      to he positive when investnient restrictions are binding. If the market
was fully open. net asset valtie and country fund returns would be priced similarly, and
the difference in expected returns would be small. If investment restrictions are effectively
binding and investors cannot freely access the local market except through the country
fund, price segmentation arises and investors "give up" part of the diversification benefits
of emerging market exposure. The statistic L measures the reduction in expected return
investors are willing to "pay" to receive the original exposure.
    The measure is not perfect for several reasons. First, identifying mT÷i as a function of
benchmark returns is dicult. For example, when an emerging market is opened up through
a country fund and its stock returns are not spanned by world assets, the investment oppor-
tunity set of world investors changes and so will their pricing kernels. Second, the measure is
potentially affected by factors such as local market inefficiencies, foreign exchange risk. and
political risk, that ma' affect the local and global pricing of the underlying assets so that
investment barriers have to be interpreted very broadly. In fact, our framework of stochas-
tic discount factors which price returns in equation (1) is strictly valid only in complete.
frictionless markets (see, for example, Hansen and Jagannathan [1991J and Luttmer [19911).
Third, the measure is affected by the extent of diversification benefits the underlying assets
offer. For example, it is conceivable that a fully segmented market only trades stocks thai
have perfectly correlated cash flows with companies in developed countries. In this case.
will probably he low or negative, despite the market being fully segmented. Implicitly.

provides similar results.
  21Cochran [1994) provides a tlinro,ih development.

                                                 22
assume that local emerging market, returns are not spanned by developed market returns.
Of course, this is exactly the claim made by DeSantis [1993] and Harvey [1994]. In what.
follows we also show that net asset value returns for our six countries are not spanned by
the benchmarks we used in Section 3.

4.1.2 Empirical Results
We begin by reporting simple mean-variance spanning tests for the six countries of interest.
using the country fund benchmarks from Section 3. Table 6, Panel 1 reports tests for both
net asset value (NAV) returns and country fund returns. For the NAV and the country fund
returns, we form a value-weighted index of funds targeting each country. Therefore, each
test has two degrees of freedom. Note first that only the net asset value returns for Turkey
are spanned (marginally) by the benchmark. When the test employs the NAV returns for
the individual Turkish funds rather than an index, we reject spanning at the 5% but not
at the 1% level. Hence, the returns in the six countries do offer diversification benefits.
conditional on their markets being open. More surprisingly, for five of the six countries.
the country fund price returns do not offer diversification benefits.22 The exception is the
value-weighted portfolio of Korea funds. When individual funds are used, the Turkish and
Thai funds also offer diversification benefits. Hence, for three countries, the differential
pricing between country funds and the underlying assets has led to the disappearance of all
diversification benefits. In our pricing framework, it is natural to expect some reduction iii
the diversification benefits of funds relative to net asset values because of time-variation in
the stochastic discount factor. m1, which is common to all funds. It is not clear why they
should completely disappear for some countries but remain for others, although this may
depend on the nature of investment restrictions.
    We also report the weights on a mimicking portfolio of the benchmark assets for the
price returns. As above, these weights are computed by exploiting the fact that when mean-
variance spanning holds, the test returns can be written as a linear function of the benchmark
returns with the coefficients summing to one (see also Appendix A). The mimicking portfolim.
for fund returns p]ace large weights on mature market closed-end funds.23
    Results on expected returns and the market integration measure, , are reported in Table

  "These results are similar using tltC FT-Actuaries benchmark.
  '3For the FT-Actuaries benchmark, the Pacific Index receives a large weight for Thailand, Taiwan and
Turkey.

                                                 23
6, Panel 2 for each country. We identify m'1 as the discount factor which prices the six
value-weighted indices of fund returns, using the closed-end fund benchmark described in
Section 4.1 (recall equation (10) and the ensuing discussion). We also computed the market
integration measure for each country using the rn1 that prices the six IFC Investahie-
mimicking fund portfolios, and the results are very similar. The A measure is computed for
value-weighted indices of fund returns targeting each count.ry.
    The segmentation measure A is relatively high (greater than 5%) for three countries
(Indonesia, Thailand, and Taiwan), and low or negative for the three remaining countries
in the analysis (Korea, Philippines and Turkey). As an aid in interpreting the results.
Table 7 lists some characteristics of the six stock markets. Table 7 illustrates the difficulty
in gauging the degree of market integration from general market characteristics and the
regulatory framework of different countries. For example, Korea, Taiwan and Thailand are
relatively large, liquid markets with low political risk, stable exchange rate policies and
numerous possibilities for indirect access by foreigners using country funds and American
Depositary Receipts (ADRs). However, there are foreign ownership restrictions in all three
countries. Thailand maintains two separate listings for common stocks which have reached
foreign ownership limits, one for locals (the "Main Board") and one for foreigners (the "Alien
Board"). Prices on the Alien Board are typically higher than prices on the Main Board (see
Bailey and Jagtiani [1994]). Our finding of A = 5.75% for Thailand confirms the findings in
Bailey and Jagtiani who document the effectiveness of foreign ownership restrictions in the
Thai capital markets.
   Taiwan also has strict limits on foreign ownership. In January 1991, Qualified Foreign
Institutional Investors (QFIIs) were allowed to invest directly in Taiwan's stock market. In
the aggregate, foreign investment in each of the listed companies is limited to 10% of the
shares outstanding, and QFIIs can buy no more than 5% of the shares. In addition, there is
a ceiling on total foreign invest rnent which was recently raised to $10 billion (in March 1993).
The value of 6.60% for A confirms the effectiveness of these restrictions. The surprising result
is for Korea, where A is only 1.4 1%. Regulations on foreign participation prohibited direct
access to the Korean market until January 1992. Foreign ownership is limited to 10% in
so-called unlimited industries and 8% in limited industries (which includes communications
and defense). Recent]. the 10% ceiling was raised to 25% for 45 firms which hit the 10
cap. However, the low numbcr may reflect the many country funds available (.0 investors.
Bekaert and Harvey [1904] also find that the Korean market appears to be integrated with

                                               21
global capita] markets. The f.ict that both Korea and Taiwan underwent capital market
liberalizations during the sample may affect the results and we address this issue in Section
4.2.
   From Table 7. Indonesia. the Philippines and Turkey appear less developed, less liquid.
and more prone to political and currency risk than the preceding three markets. In addition.
they have fewer country funds and ADR programs. On the other hand, none of these
countries appears to have binding foreign ownership restrictions. Our segmentation measure
implies that Indonesia is the most segmented of the six markets. It is also the only country
for which A is significantly different from zero. Since 1988, foreigners have been able to buy
up to 49% of shares in listed companies. However, certain blue chip shares frequently reach
that limit and foreign investors are forced to pay a premium for these shares. Investors are
only willing to forego about 1% in expected return to obtain barriers-free exposure to Turkey.
For the Philippines, A is act iial]v negative. The results for Turkey and the Philippines niav
reflect the fact that these markets are effectively integrated with global markets24, or it could
reflect idiosyncratic features of the funds. As an example of the latter, Diwan et a]. [1993]
find that the U.S-traded Turkish Investment Fund (TKF) held a large share of its portfolio
in U.S. Treasury hills early after inception, a period included in our sample.


4.2 Investment Liberalizations and Mean-Variance Spanning
It has sometimes been argued that the movement toward market integration will reduce the
diversification benefits of emerging markets. While our sample is too short to allow a fully
dynamic analysis. for four heavil restricted markets a significant investment liberalization
takes place in the middle of the test period. An investment liberalization can be viewed as
a move toward market integration. Closed-end country funds often receive special rights to
invest in closed markets before restrictions are lifted for other foreign investors, so we might
expect that the test assets are not spanned by the benchmark before but they may he after
the liberalization. To test this conjecture, we modify the specification of the discount factor

  24Although foreign investors wer given complete access to shares in the Philippines with the Foreign
Investment Act of November 99]. some companies have subsequently been given foreign ownership limits
The restricted shares now trade at substantial premiums to local shares.




                                                 25
as follows. Recall that

                          =•   +   . (+,   —
                                               E{Rj) + /32i (R÷, - E[R+I1),                (12)


for i = 1,2, where a1 is prespecified and does not affect the test statistic for mean-variance
spanning. Instead of testing the hypothesis /32k = 0 (i = 1,2), we redefine /321
where D+1 is equal to I before the liberalization and 0 afterwards. If the hypothesis /32, = 0
(i =  1,2) cannot be rejected, the benchmark spans the test assets before and after the
liberalization. On the other hand, if /32 0 (i = 1,2), then the test assets are spanned by
the benchmark assets after the liberalization but not before.
   The results for the invest ment liberalizations are contained in Table 8. The table considers
funds investing in four countries: Brazil, India, Korea and Taiwan. In the first column, the
table reports a Wald statistic for the test that /32i 0 (i = 1,2). estimated from the GMM
system. In all four cases we cannot reject the hypothesis that /3 = 0 (i = 1,2) at the
five percent level. Failure to reject this hypothesis is not surprising since in genera] the /3
coefficients in the discount factor are not estimated precisely.
    Table 6 also reports results from mean-variance spanning tests before and after the lib-
eralization. If the investment restriction was a binding constraint before the liberalization.
we would expect to reject spanning befoTe but not afterwards. In fact, we are unable to
reject spanning before or after the change for two of the four countries we consider. \Ve are
able to reject the liberalization hypothesis for Taiwan: the Taiwan funds are not span nec]
before but are spanned after the liberalization. For Korea, however, we reject spanning after
the liberalization but not before. In sum. examining specific investment liberalizations for
heavily restricted markets revcils that only the opening of Taiwan's market had a significant
negative impact on the diversification benefits from holding closed-end funds.


5 Conclusion
The fanfare surrounding emerging equity markets continues to attract international investors.
Most studies that address the portfolio benefits from emerging markets gloss over the trans-
action costs and other barriers to investment associated with these markets. In the preent
study we examine the diversification benefits from holding closcd.end country funds vlucl
invest in emerging markets, and compare them to the diversification benefits associated with

                                                 26
the IFC Investable indices. Emerging market closed-end funds represent exposure to emerg-
ing markets that, is actually attainable by foreign investors at relatively low cost, while the
IFC Investables arc attainable in theory but ignore all effective investment costs or restric-
tions with the exception of foreign ownership restrictions.
    We find that U.K.             market funds provide statistically significant diversification
gains in unconditional tests, while comparable U.S. funds do not. The IFC lnvestable indices
corresponding to the funds in our sample yield unequivocal diversification benefits. A Monte
Carlo experiment demonstrates that our tests have fairly low power against one interesting
alternative for large GMM systems, but the power is about 70% for smaller systems. Nev-
ertheless, the performance result is robust to a number of extensions, and appears to derive
from differences in portfolio selection by fund managers. Using lagged fund premiums a'-
conditioning information produces significant gains for both U.S. and U.K. funds.
     Our analysis of price segmentation and diversification benefits suggests that the differen-
tial pricing of fund shares and NAVs has contribut.ed to the disappearance of diversification
benefits for half of the countries we examine. Despite the existence of substantial prerni-
urns on Korean funds, they continue to provide strongly significant benefits. We propose a
measure of market segmentation which captures the notion that investors may be willing to
forego expected return for direct access to a fund's NAV instead of the fund's shares. Tite
measure suggests that harriers to investment, broadly interpreted, are especially effective in
Indonesia, Taiwan, and Thailand. hut not in Korea, Turkey and the Philippines. Finally, the
opening of Taiwan's stock market t.o foreign investment in January, 1991, had a significant.
negative impact on the diversification benefits from holding its country funds.
   The power and small sample properties of our meanvariance spanning tests descrv
further study. In particular. the mean-variance spanning hypothesis is closely related to
the mean-variance efficiency hypothesis used in tests of single or multifactor asset pricing
models. Our results suggest that tests using large GMM systems may have considerable size
distortions and poor power properties.




                                              27
References
[11 Ammer, J., 1990, "Expenses, Yields, and Excess Returns: New Evidence on Closed End
       Funds Discounts from the UN," LSE Financial Markets Discussion Paper No. 105.

[2] Andrews, D.W.K., 1991, "1-leteroscedasticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covari-
       ance Matrix Estimation,' Econometrica 59, 817-858.

 [3] Bailey, W. and J. Lim. 19Q2, "Evaluating the Diversification Benefits of the New Coun-
       try Funds.' Jour-na! of Porlfolio Management, Spring 1992, 74-80.

 [41   Bailey, W. and J. Jagtiani, 1994, "Foreign Ownership Restrictions and Stock Prices in
       the Thai Capital Market." Journal of Financial Economics 36, 57-87.

 [5] Bansal, R., Hsieh, D. and S. Viswanathan, 1993, "A New Approach to International
     Arbitrage Pricing," Journal of Finance 48, 1719-1747.

 [6] Bekaert, G.. 1994. "Market Integration and Investment. Barriers in Emerging Equity
     Markets," ThE World Bank Economic Review, forthcoming.

 [7] Bekaert, G. and C. Harvey, 1994, "Time-Varying World Market Integration," working
     paper. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

 [8] Bekaert, G.. Garcia, M. and Harvey, C., 1994, "The Bole of Capital Markets in Economic
       Growth," working paper, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

 [91 Bekaert, C. and M.S. Urias. 1994a, "The Closed-End Fund Puzzle Revisited: Evjclencp
    from U.K. Investrncut Trusts and Offshore Funds," research notes, Graduate School of
    Business. Stanford University.

[10] Bekaert, C. and MS. rias. 1994b, "Emerging Market Diversification Using Country
    Funds," research notes. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

[11] Bodurtha. J.N., Kim. 1).. and C.M.C. Lee, 1993, "Closed-End Country Funds and U.S.
       Market Sentiment," working paper, University of Michigan.

[12] Bollerslev, T., 1990, "Modeling the Coherence in Short Run Nominal Exchange Hates;
     A Mu]tivariate Generalized ARCH Mod'l," Review of Economics and StahsI,cs 7.
       498-505.

                                              28
[131 Bonser-Neal, C., Brauer, C., Neal, R., and S. Wheatley, 1990, "International Investment
    Restrictions and Closed-End Country Fund Prices," Journal of Finance 45, 523-548.

[141 Braijer, C, 1988, "Closed-End Fund Shares' Abnormal Returns and the Information
    Content of Discounts and Premiums," Journal of Finance 43, 113-127.

[151 Chang, E., Eun, C., and R. Kodolny, 1993, "International Diversification Through
    Closed-End Country Funds." working paper, College of Business and Management.
    University of Maryland.
[16] Chen, Z. arid P. Knez, 1994. "Measurement of Market Integration and Arhitrage.
    working papPr. Graduate School of Business. University of Wisconsin-Madison.

[17] Cochrane, .J.H., 199. "Discrete Time Empirical Finance," manuscript, Graduate School
    of Business, University of Chicago.
[181 DeSantis, C.. 1992. "Volatility Bounds for Stochastic Discount Factors: Tests and Im-
    plications from International Stock Returns," working paper, University of Southern
    California.

[191 DeSantis. C.. 1993. "Acsei Pricing and Portfolio Diversification: Evidence from Emei'g-
    ing Financial Market'. Symposium on Portfolio Investment in Developing Countries.
    World Bank.

[20] Divecha. A.B., I)raeh. .T, and D. Stefek, 1992, "Emerging Markets: A Quantitativ
    Perspective," Journal of Portfolio Management, Fall 1992. 4 1-50.
[211 Diwan, I., Errunza, V.. and L. Senbet., 1992. "The Pricing of Country Funds and Their
    Role in Capital Mobilization for Emerging Economies," working paper No. lOSS. W'orld
     Bank.

[22] Diwan. I., Errunza. V.. and J.. Senhet, 1993, "National Index Funds - Empirical Pci-
    sprctives," working paper. World Bank.
[23] Dumas, B. and 13. Solnik. 1993, 'The World Price of Foreign Exchange Risk. working
    paper, H.EC. School of Management.

[24] Errunza. V. and C. Losq. I 95T. "International Asset P1 icing Under Mild Scgnitiitat ion:
     Theory and Test," Journal of Finance 40, 105-123.

                                             29
[25] Eun, C.S.. Janakiramanan, S., and LW Senbet, 1994, "The Design And Pricing of
    Country Funds Under Market Segmentation," working paper. College of Business and
    Management, University of Maryland.

[26] Ferson, W.E., 1993, "Theory and Empirical Testing of Asset Pricing Models," forth-
     coming in: Jarrow. WA.. Ziemba, W.T. and V. Maksimovic, The Finance Handbook
    (North-Holland, Amsterdam).

[271 Ferson, W.E. and S. Foerst.er, 1994, "Finite Sample Properties of the Generalized
    Method of Moments in Tests of Conditional Asset Pricing Models," Journal of Financial
    Economics 36, 29-55.

[28] Ferson, W.E.. Foerster, S. and D.B. Keim, 1993, "General Tests of Latent Variables and
     Mean-Variance Sparining. Joirna1 of Finance 48, 131-156.

[29] Gallant. R. and U. fauchen. 1992, "Semi-Nonparamet.ric Estimation of Conditionally
     Heterogeneous Procosses: Asset Pricing Implications," Econometrica 57, 1091-1120.

[30] Hansen, L.P., 1982. Lage Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moments Es-
     timators," Econometnca 50, 1269-1286.

[31] Hansen. I..P. and H. .Tagannathan, 1991. "Implications of Security Market 1)ata for
    Models of Dynamic Ecnnomies," Journal of Political Economy 99. 225-262.

[32] Hanseti. L.P. and S.F. Richard. 1987, "The Role of Conditioning Information in Deduc-
     ing Testable Restriction Implied by Dynarnir Asset Pricing Models," Economdrtca 55.
    587-613.

[33] Hardouvelis, C.. La Porta. H.. and T. Wizman. 1993. "What Moves the Discount on
     Country Equity Funds'. working paper No. 93-24, Federal Reserve Bank of New York.

(341 Flarvey, C., 1991, "The World Price of Covariance Risk," Journal of Financc -16. 111-
    157.

[35] Harvey, C., 1993, Portfolio Enhancement Using Emerging Markets and Condition-
    ing Information," Svmpo'iim on Portfolio Investment in Developing Countries. World
    Bank.


                                            30
[36] Harvey, C., 1994, "Predictable Risk and Returns in Emerging Markets," working paper.
     Fuqua School of Business. Duke University.

[37] Huberman, G. and S.A. Kandel. 1987. "Mean-Variance Spanning." JolLrnai of Finaner
    42, 383-388.

[38] Jobson, J.D. and B. Korkie, 1989, "A Performance Interpretation of Multivariate Tests
     of Asset Set Intersection, Spanning and Mean-Variance Efficiency," Jotirnal of Financial
     and Quanti(ative Analysis 24, 185-204.

[39] Lee, C.M.C., Shleifer, A., and R.H. Thaler. 1991, "Investor Sentiment and the Closed-
    End Fund Puzzle." Journal of Finance 46, 75-110.

[40] Luttiner, E., 1991, "Asset Pricing in Economies with Frictions," working paper. l.'ni-
    versity of Chicago.

[41) McCloskey, D.N., 1985, "The Loss Function Has Been Mislaid: The Rhetoric of Signif-
    icance Tests, AEA Papers and Proceedings, 201-205.

[42) Newev. W.K. and KB. West, 1987a, "Hypothesis Testing with Efficient. Method of
    Moments Estimation." international Economic Ret'ew 28. 777-787.

[43] Newey, \V.K. and NI). West, 1987b, "A Simple, Positive Semi-Definite, Heteroscedas-
     ticity and Autocorrelation Consistent Covariance Matrix" Eeonornelrica 55. 703-708.

[44] Sharpe. \V.F., 1994, " , Journal of Portfolio Management..

[45] Snow, K., 1991, "l)iagnosing Asset Pricing Models Using the Distribution of Asset
    Returns," Journal of Fiin'icc 16, 955-983.

[46] Stulz. R.M., 1981, "Omi the Effects of Barriers to Internal ional Investment." Journal of
     Finance 36. 923-934.

[47] Thompson. H., 197$, "The Information Content of Discounts and Premiums on Closed-
     End Fund Shares," .Jnnrnol of Pmnancrnl Economics 6, 151-18G.

[48] Tuckman, 1. and Vila. 1994, "holding Costs nd Equilihrium Arbitrage." vorkinr.
     paper, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


                                             31
[49] Tjrias, M., 1992, "Explaining the Time-Variation in Closed-End Country Fund Returns.
     working paper. Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

[50] Wheatley, S., 1988, 'Some Tests of International Equity Integration," Journal of Fi-
     nancial Economics 21. 117-212.




                                           32
</ref_section>
                               Table I
                Emerging Market Funds: Total Net Assets
         Country or Region Closed-End Open-End                           Total
                                      End 1991
         Southeast Asia                     10367.5          7886.3 18253.8
         Latin America                       3272.3            367.4     3639.7
         Global                              2730.4             85.7     2816.1
         Other                               3234.0               1.2    3235.2
         Total                              15815.1          7129.0 22944.1
                                      End 1993
         Southeast Asia                     12340.8         34121.7 46462.5
         Latin America                       5569.4          9266.4 14835.8
         Global                              9379.7         18271.2 27650.9
         Other                               3655.2           1496.0     5151.2
         Total                              30945.1         63155.3 94100.4

Notes;
Figures are in millions of US dollars. There is no overlap between country and regional
totals. Includes all funds worldwide that invest in equity or fixed-income markets. Less
than 20 percent of total fund ascs in 1993 are fixed-income, with the majority of tho.e
invested in Latin American issues. There is a group of funds which invests in emerging Asia
and Japan, with total assei uf about $21 billion in 1993, that is excluded from the totals.
Source is Lipper Emerging Markets Fund Service
                             Table 2
            Country Fund Sample General Characteristics:
                               January 1986-August 1993
Fund                  Symbol        Start   Aaaeta Premium %O(e) VRI VU2
                           Panel 1: U.S. Emerging Market Fonda
Argentina             AF           911021        55.9     12.833    4.780   1.121   0.308
Asia Pacific          APR          870424       184.1      -4.426   5.554   0.774   0.414
Brazil                BZF          580331       191.4     -11.143   6.193   1.532   1.806
Chil                  CR           890926       165.0      -5.455   5.470   0.822   0.268
Templeton EM                       870226       192.5      3.775    4.961   0.782   0.270
First Philippine                   891108       137.8     -17.282   4.407   0.803   0.155
                      IF           900301        40.3       7.563   5.609   0.886   0.152
india Growth                       880812        54.2      -3.634   5.447   1.180   0.584
Jaka.rta Growth                    900110        35.6       5.712   5.290   0.943   0.157
Kors                  KF           860102       2.54.7    54.816    6.109   0.916   0.247
Latin Am. Invt        LAM          900725        73.9      -6233    5.178   1.049   0.314
Latin Am Equity       LAQ          911022        83.9      -5.773   3.956   0.967   0.437
Emerin Mexico         51FF         901002       103.9      -8.153   5.395   0.654   0.345
Malaysia              MF           870508       131.2      -2.185   6.785   0.633   0.210
Morgan Stanley EM     51SF         911025       164.4      4.998    2.998   1.099   0.273
Mexico                MXF          810608       697.7     -17.154   7.074   0.767   0.553
Portugal              pcr          891101        51.1      -5.278   5.352   0.866   0.187
HOC Taiwan            HOC          890512       251.1      -1.714   5.585   0.759   0.451
Scudder New Asia      SA           870618       123.1     -10.701   4.841   0.808   0.423
Thai Capital          FC           900523        75.6      -7.992   4.954   0.866   0.508
Thai                  THF          880217       210.4     14.310    5.578   0.940   0.400
Turkish bvestment     TKF          891215        50.0       1.336   5.595   1.208   1.145
Taiwan                TWN          861216       161.7     26.897    6.992   1.534   0.915
                       Panel 2: IJ.IC. merglng Market Trupta
Abtru.it New Thai     ABTi-IAI     891222        28.2     -16.876   5.259   0.612 0745
Abtrut New Dawnt      AR 1ST       890512        59.0     -12.315   3.963   0.799   0.622
Beta Global EMt       AGEM         900306        62.8     -9.961    2.962   1.296 0832
Rraiil                BRA IT       92051         65.9     -11.643   4.881   0.762   0.730
Drayton Korea         [)FIKi       9112(         43.0     -13.358   3.745   0.897   0.948
EFM Dragont           EFM!iH       880311       240.1      -9.243   5.702   0.986   0.306
FIemin8 EMt           FEMR         910726       120.8      -2.925   2.473   1.328   0.900
First Philippinet     FF1          891215        51.8     -30.048   4.635   1.330   1.030
Garimore Pjir         CIT          000119       1;2.9     -14.663   3.822   0.850   0.657
EFM Java              JAVA         000518        15.7      -5.361   4.211   1.328   0.624
Korea Liberalisatin   Kt.F         900615        34.5     20.012    5.710   1.424   0.679
Korea Europe          KORFUP 890623             153.8     24.985    .541    0.788   0.348
Latin Am.rica         LATIT   9007(13           153.8      -6.227   5.207   1.149   0.555
Pacific Horiron       PHIT    890829             28.1     -14 816   4.404   1.081   0.411
Schrnder Korea        SCHPVT 911213              47.1      -2.818   8.600   0.718 0391
Siam Select           SlAM         900406        41   9    -7.048   2 718   2.124   1.831
Thornion A5iaflt      TA EMIT      890728       I64.      -11.809   3.740   0.927   0.759
Temptton FM           TSIP!.Tt     890929       375.0      -1.097   3.086   1.228   0.782
Turkey                TIIRK        900803        39.8     -14,566   3.050   2.557   2.401



                                            2
                                       Table 2
            Country Fund Sample General Characteristics:
                                January 1986-August 1993
Fund                   Symbol Start Asseta Premium                   %c(rt)     VRS     VR2
                        Panel 3: U.S. Mature Market Funda
Europe                 EF          900427         95.2     -7.411     3.783     1.032   0.269
France Growth          FRF         900511     18.3.5      -13.328     4.415     0.923   0.256
Emerging Gennaziy      FRG         900329         114.6   -12.504     4.502     0.954   0.416
Germany                GER         860718     142.6          3.805    5.933     0.912   0.200
New Germany            GF          900125     331.2       -13.272     4.712     1.004   0.480
Growth Fd Spain        GSP         900215         172.3   -13.602     3.684     0.721   0.461
First Autra1ia         LAF         860102         98.2    -12.687     4.819     1.310   0.605
First Iberia           IBF         880419          51.4     -4.926    5.302     0.929   0.220
Irish Investment       IRL         900330          45.4   -17.186     3.496     1.090   0.441
Italy                  ITA         860226          58.0     -9.906    5.205     0.932   0.297
Japan OTC              JOF         900314          79.0      6,267    5.376     1.016   0.597
Austria                OST         890922         64.8     .4985      6.320     1.062   0.399
Singapnre              SCF         900725          66.3    .7.599     4.058     0.932   0.205
Spain                  SNF         880621         90.0     13.093     6.06.6    0.970   0.339
Swiss 1-lelvetia       SWZ         870859         160.1    -5.202     3.945     0.911   0.331
United Kingdom         UK          870807          45.0   -14.047     4.470     0.811   0.392
                        Panel 4: U.K. Mature Market Trusts
fleming Americant      FAMN        870206         378.2   -14.978     3.469     0.603   0.598
F & C Eurotrustt       FCEIT       870502         191.4    -2.730     3.249     0.717   0.522
fleming Far E&ett      FFFT        870102         811.2   -17.096     3.792     0.556   0.502
First 1.reland         FIC         900316           NA    -17.825     2.867     1.389   1.193
Fleming J.ipane.'      FLJA        870206         426.8   -13.317     4.002     0.615   0.579
First Spankh           FSPAN       880805          40.8   -10.740     3.508     0.799   0.670
Germant                GRMIT 900302                54.9   -14.734     3.332     0.792   0.582
German Smaller Cosi GRMS            870102         62.8   -18.375     3.044     0.888   0.727
GT Japan1              GTJA         870102        222.8   .12.332     3.996     0.666   0.645
Govett Oricnt.alt      LVIT         870102        855.2   -16.834     3.953     0.563   0.661
Paribas French1        PRRS         870515         58.1     -9.845    3.332     0.784   0.497
TR Pacific'            TRIPT        871127        152.2     -7.963     4.194    0.887   0.535
                        Panel 5: U.S. DomestIc Market Funds
Adams Express          ADX          860102        832.2    .7.197      2.409    0.957   0.678
Raker Fentress         BKF          871127    427.3       -17.127      2.433    0,753   0.453
General Am. 1nset.     CAM          860102    514.0       -11.301      3.259    0.558   0.54!
Source Capital         SOR          860102    277.3         3.547      '2.052   0.828   0.420
Tricontinental Corp.   TY           860102   2047.8        -9.177      2.298    0.805   0.956
                       Pane.! 6: U.K. Domestic Market Trusts
Alliance'              .Al,'iCT     870102    1399.6      -15.952      2.195    0.431   0.857
                       EI)l'.       870102    1696.2      -17.575      2.801    0.333   0.533
Edinhurgh
Fleming Claverhour     ECLVIt       870102        147.5     .9.226     2.939    0.543   0.820

Foreign k Colonialt
Scottih Mortga
TR City of t,ndon'
                       lI
                       HCI

                       TJtL.
                                    870101
                                    870102
                                    870102
                                              2168.7.
                                              l.549...
                                                  459.7
                                                          .14.444
                                                          -i 7.690
                                                            -7.211
                                                                       3.057
                                                                       2.880
                                                                       3.0.3
                                                                                0.439
                                                                                0.344
                                                                                0.289
                                                                                        0.521
                                                                                        0.631
                                                                                        0.933
                       ViA'         80102     1404.3      -21 383      2.735    0.362   0.763



                                             .3
Notes (Table 2):
All US. funds trade on the NYSE. except for IAF and IRF. which trade on the AMEX. AU investment trusts trade on the
Lclois Stock Exchange. Fund net aseta &r in millions of U.S. dollars, computed in April 1993. The source for investment
trust assets is the A,,t,c,xtsc,n ef Jsee.tmesf Ti-sit Comp.sxiea Mc,at)ii Jnformstvn Service. NA' indicates not availahlc
Other statistics are computed in the currency in which the fund trades. The investment trusts in the sample are quoted in
pence except For RA!T, KOREIJR, LATIT and SCHRKT, which are quoted in dollars.
Start is the date when fund coverage begins. It corresponds to the rPO date for U.S. funds offered after 1985 and for U.K.
funds offered alter 1986.
PRM, is the premium, defined by: P NAVIPRM,. Premium is 100 times the a'erage of (PRM1 — 1).
c(r1') is the percentage sereldy standard deviation of log price returns.
The log premium change is then the difference in log price (rr) and log NAV (rf) returns: log(PRM1) = r11' — r('.
VR1 is the variance ratio c( log(PRM ))/c2(r[), and \'R2 is the variance ratio
   indicates investment trusts for which diluted NAy is used. A superscript t indicates U.K. funds in our sample thai air
included in the FT-AIIshare Index as of January. 1994. See Section 2 for detaili.




                                                              4
                                        Table 3
                       Unconditional Mean-Variance Spanning Tests
                                      September 1990 - August 1993

                          Panel 1: U.s. and U.K. Emerging Market
                                      Test Asaets: p-value MV3 (p-value Empirical Distrib
                                                     [Change in         Ratio]
Benchmark                        U.S.      U.K.    U.S.         U.S.  Fund  U.K Fund U.S. & U.K.
                                 Funds         Funds     Funds                       Index       Fund Indic
Assets
                                0.6743         0.0109   0.4178        0.1215         0.0325          00213
U.S , U.K.,
                                (0.7910) (0.0280)                    (0.1280)                       (0.0255)
Europe,
Pacific                         (0.1618]   [0.12941     [0.2405]     [0.06801        [0.0564]       [0.0875]
                                0.6015         00002     0.5382       0.1001          0.2721         0.1032
U.S. [)ornestic Index,
U.K. Domestic Index.            (0.7280)   (0.0010)                  (0.1150)                       (0.1150)
U.S. Mature Market Index,       [0.1311]   [0.0958]     [0.19881     [0.0473]        [0.0246]       [0.0578]
U.K. Mature Market Index

                                     Panel 2: IFC Investable Indices
                                U.S. Investables U.K. Investables U.S Investables               Investables
Benchmark
                                                                          Index                 Index
Assets
                                     0.0006             0.0030            0.0007                0.0016
U.S., U.K..
                                     [0.4126]           [0.3051)         [0.0940]               [0.0239]
Europe,
Pacific
                                                        0.0014            0.0078                0 .00 11
U.S. Domestic Index.                 0 .0080
U.K. Domestic Index,                 [0 3732]           (0 .280           (0.0584]              [0.0117]

U.S. Mature Market Index.
U.K. Mature Market Index

          Notes:
          The p-value is the probability value of the chisqusre statistic MV3. Numbers in parenthe-
          ses are approximate probability values from the empirical distribution of MV3 under the
                                                                            square brackets indicate
          null See Section 3.2 or the Appendix for details. Numbers in
          the approximate change in the Sharpe Ratio from adding the test assets to the
                                                                                         benchmark

          assets
                                                                                    The tests employ
          All returns are computtil iii dlkr. and all indices are equally-weighted.
          152 weekly observations.
Notes (Table 3):

                                        Panel 1

The U.S. funds included as tests assets are: APB, BZF, CH, EMF, FPF, IF, LAM, MF,
MXF, PGF, THF and TKF. The U.K. funds are: ABTHAI, ABTST, EFMDR, FPT, JAVA,
LATIT and TURK. These funds make up the fund indices as well. In cases where more
than one fund covers a particular country or region, the longer-lived fund was chosen. The
same rule applies to the mature market fund benchmarks.
FT-Actuaries World Indices make up the fir8t set of benchmark assets. The Europe index
does not include the I1nitd h'ingdoni. ThA sennd set. of benchmark assets contains indic's
of closed-end funds.

                                        Panel 2

The IFC test as-sets wer' chosen to rover the same markets as the corresponding country
funds assets. Both indces of IEC lnvestable returns are equally-weighted.




                                           6
                                Table 4
               Country Fund Portfolio Risk Characteristics:
             Common U.S. and U.K. Emerging Market Coverage
                            October 1990-August 1993

Country/Region Fund          Domicile              f3j.;     13GI                2
Asia-Pacific        APR      U.S.        0.002              -0.019     0.622    0.385
                                        (0.001)             (0.068)   (0.055)
                    EFMDR U.K.           0.001               -0.126    0.626    0.354
                                        (0.001)             (0.085) (0.078)
                    GE!'     U.K.        0.002              -0.004     0.639    0.353
                                        (0.001)             (0.074) (0.073)
                    PIIIT    UK          0.001               0.129     0.559    0.252
                                        (0.001)             (0.072) (0.073)
                    SAF      U.S.        0.000               0.455     0.617    0.394
                                        (0.002)             (0.166) (0.097)
                    TAEMIT U.K.          0.000               0.042     0.610    0.174
                                        (0.002)             (0.097) (0.080)
Global              ABTST    U.K.        0.002               0.270    0.435     0.151
                                        (0.002)             (0.111)   (0.092)
                    RCEM     U.K.        0.001               0.223     0.454    0.201
                                        (0 001)             (0.093)   (0.059)
                    FMF     U.S.         0.004               0.039     0.708    0.509
                                        (0.001)             (0.059)   (0.047)
                    TMPLI    U.K.        0.004              -0.026     0.388    0.092
                                        (0.002)             (0141) (0.078)
Irilonesia          IF       U.S.       -0.001    0.331      0.009    0.454     0.586
                                        (0.001)   (0.131)   (0.172)   (0.030)
                    JAVA     U.K.       -0.000     -0.046    1.226     0.269    0.168
                                        (0.002)   (0.419)   (0.412)   (0.083)
                    JCF      U.S.       -0.000     0.532     0.114     0.481    0.69.1
                                        (0.001)   (0.163)   (0.172)   (0.029)
Latin America       LA\1     U.S.        0.003               0.048     0.536    0.245
                                        (0,001)             (0.064)   (0.088)
                    LATIT    U 1<       .0001                0.065     0.798    0.40-1

                                        (0.001)             (0.050)   (0.076)
Philippines         FPF     U.S.         0.003    -0.009     0.408     0.241    0.4 17

                                        (0(101) (60581      (0.115)   (0.040)
                                           Table 4
             Country Fund Portfolio Risk Characteristics:
           Common U.S. and U.K. Emerging Market Coverage
                                October 1990-August 1993

Country/Region Fund               Domicile         a               I         3GI                 2
Philippines          FPT          U.K.           0.002         0.162        0.895     0.414     0.330
                                                 (0.003)       (0.184)      (0.318)   (0.089)
South Korea          KF           U.S.           0.00           0.796                  0.439    0.595
                                                 (0.001)       (0.111)                (0.057)
                     KLF          U.K.            -0.003        0.169                  0.327    0.067
                                                 (0.003)       (0.307)                (0.152)
                     KOREUR U.K.                  0.001         0.922                  0.476    0.463
                                                 (0.002)       (0.143)                (0.050)
Thailand             ABTIJA!      U.K.            0.000         0.331       0.552      0.755    0.609
                                                 (0.002)       (0.173)      (0.362)   (0.043)
                     SIAM         U.S.            0.001         0.064        -0.668    0.463    0.268
                                                 (0.002) (0.306) (0.647)              (0.091)
                     TC           U.S.           0.000         0.282         1.150    0.761     0.790
                                                 (0.001) (0.134) (0.508)              (0.033)
                     THE          U.S.           0.000         0,170        0.908      0.815    0.909
                                                 (0.001) (0.087) (0.259) (0.022)
Turkey               TKF          U.S.           0.002         0.523        0.138     0.799     0.806
                                                 (0.002)       (0.125) (0.360) (0.035)
                     TURK         U.K.            0.003        -0.026       0.719     0.258     0.100
                                                 (0.003)       (0.125) (0.375) (0.080)
Notes
To compare the risk exfo.-ure of fund portfolios we estimate the following muit ivariai
linear time series regression using OLS:

                            = o + $i        +              +        + C,.


The dependent variable is t} return on NAV for the fund. r1 and r are the residuals
from a linear projection of IFC Local and Global index returns on the Investable Index,
and r'  is the return on th Investable index. Numbers in parentheses are Newey-Wesi
[1987b] standard errors cnmpntcd using three lags. All returns include dividends and are
measured in dollars Blank spaces indicate that the corresponding index was unavailahie
or of insufficient, length. The South Korean Investable index is available only late in the


                                             8
sample, so r' " is replaced with rL   and   r' with rG. 2 is the R2 adjusted for degrees of
freedom.




                                             9
                                 Table 5
                 Conditional Mean-Variance Spanning Tests
                              September 1990 - August 1993

                                                 Test Assets: p-value MV3
                                                 [Change in Sharpe Ratio
                                         U.S. Fund U.K. Fund U.S & U.K.
           Benchmark Assets                Index         Index     Fund Indices

           U.S. Domestic Index,            0.0000       0.0000        0.0002
           U.K. Domestic Index,           [0.0380]      [0.0270]      [0.0514]
           U.S. Mature Market Index,
           U.K. Mature Market Index


Notes:
Each country fund index in the benchmark and test assets was scaled by a vector of ones
and an index of its own lagged premium changes (the difference between price and NA\'
returns), doubling the degrees of freedom in the test to 4n2.
The p-value is the probability value of the chi-square statistic MV3. See Section 3.2 or the
Appendix for detafls. Numbers in square brackets indicate the approximate change in the
Sharpe Ratio from adding the test assets to the benchmark assets.
Alt returns are computed in dollars, and the indices are equally-weighted. The tests employ
152 weekly observations




                                            10
                                             Table 6
                                     Market Integration
                               Panel 1: Mean-Variance Spanning
                              Indonesia     Korea      Philippines    Taiwan      Thailand     Turkey
—
Return                                       p-value MV3 [Change in Sharpe Ratio]
Price                           0.9847     0.0078          0.1141      0.9224      0.8877      0.4441
                               [0.00001    [0.0014]        [0.0409]   [0.0003]    [0.0034]     [0.0014
NA                              0.0000     0.0045           0.0004     0.0100      0.0070      0.0724
_______                        [0.0056]    [0.0003]        [0.0331]   [0.0000]    [0.0141]     [0.0031]
Benchmark                                            Weights for Price Returns
U.S. Domestic Index             0.3973     0.2912          0.3755      0.2623     0.4625       -0.0530
U.K. Domestic Index             0.0196     0.1539          0.1857      -0.1821    -0.7293      -0.2784
U.S. Mature Market Index        0.2529     0.3660           0.1887     0.4840      0.4779      0.7119
U.K. Mature Market Index        0.3302     0.1888           0.2501     0.4357      0.7888      0 6195
                           Panel 2: Cost of Barriers to Investment
                              Indonesia     Korea      Philippines Taiwan         Thailand     Turkey
                                                          (Standard Error)
E[R11'4.1]                      18.3935    11.8572         12.0525     19.9329    15.9425      11.8455
                               (84980)     (7.8532)        (7.7457)   (10.2335)   (9.5493)    (10.3070)

E[Ri.I]                         I 0870     10.4492         13.0712     13.3198    10.1680      10.7808

                               (2.9520)    (5.5802)        (4.5110)   (5.2301)    (6.9726)    (8.1578)
                                17.3065     1.4080         -1.0187     6.6131      5.7745      1.0646

                               (73065)     (5.6596)        (5.3308)   (8.0604)    (5.3666)    (7.9335)

Mean(R)                         18.4450    14.7772         37.3945     21.7580    22.7877      9.1602

Mean(R1)                        -1.9817     5.8931         23.7340     10.2454    21.0070      0.6624


     Notes:


                                              Panel    1


     The p-value is the probability value of the chi-square statistic MV3. Sec Section 3.2   or the

     Appendix for details
     The teat assets are a value-weighted price or value-weighted NAV index return, and the
     control benchmark is used Numbers in square brackets indicate the approximate change in
     the Sharpe Ratio from adding the country index to the benchmark assets. Spanning weights
     (thit sum to one) are given for the teats using the index of fund price returns




                                                 11
Notes (Table 6):

                                          Panel 2

E[R1] and E[R1J are computed according to equation (11) in the text using the discount
factor that prices the six value-weighted country fund indices. i is the difference between
expected price and NAY returns. It represents the cost, in terms of a reduction in expected
return, that investors would be willing to accept in exchange for direct access to the assets
of the funds.
To compute standard errors for       and the expected returns, we first derived the GMM
variance-covarjance matrices for b11 (see Section 3.2) and the covariance between benchmark
returns and price and NAY returns for the six countries. Denote the latter moment estimates
as COV. Since the expected returns and are a function of b11 and COV, the mean value
theorem was applied to derive their standard errors. We assumed a block-diagonal structure
for the variance-covariance matrix of 6u and COV.
Mean(.) denotes the time series average of returns.
All expected return           arp multiplied by 5200,




                                            12
                              Table 7
       Stock Market Characteristics and Investment Restrictions
    Measure         Indonesia     Korea     Philippines    Taiwan     Thailand     Turkey
   Market Cap        14385.0     94289.7      14077.1     124818.0     48252.4     11291.1


  Market Cap/         0.09        0.25           0.17          0.32     0.35        0.12
     GDP
    Turnover          N.A.       123.19          22.19     192.80      149.25      72.68

    Percent           47.6         9.6           47.3          3.0      27.0        97.3
   Investable
   Exchange         Managed      Pegged          Free     Managed      Pegged       Free
  Rate Regime        Float      to Dollar        Float     Float,     to Basket    Float
   # Country           12          16              5            10       17          2
      Funds
     #ADR               1           6             7             5        5           3
   Programs
     Credit           50.         67.6           25.2          77.5     61.3        43.9
     Rating                                                                    ,


    Inflation         NA.          6.3           9.0       N.A.         5.8         28.0
   Variability
Notes:
Market Cap is the average dollar market capitalization of the local market index for each
country, in millions (see the Data AppendLx for specific indices). Turnover is the annual
value of traded local stocks divided by Market Cap. GDP data are taken from the IMF
International Financial Statistics, except for Taiwan. For Taiwan, GNP obtained from
its Central Bank Annual Report is substituted for GDP. The Market Cap, Turnover
and GDP data are measured in 1992, approximately the middle of our sample, except for
Indonesia's Market Cap, which is measured in March 1993.
Percent Investable is the ratio of the IFC Investable index, which controls for foreign
ownership restrictions, and the IFC Global index. Figures are taken from the IFC Index
Methodology in March, 1993. Section 2 describes the indices.
The Exchange Rate Regime is taken from the 199.j IMF Annual Report on Exchange
Agreements and Exchange Restrictions.
# Country Funds aiid # ADR Programs is taken from Table 6 in Bekaert, Garcia
and Harvey [1994). Only publically-traded country funds focusing on the target market are
included.


                                            13
Notes (Table 7):
The Credit Rating is taken from Insiisiional Invesior, March 1992. A value of 100
represents a perfect credit rating.
Inflation Variability is the standard deviation of monthly rates, taken from the IMF
Iniernational Financial Staisics for the period 1986-1992, multiplied by 1200.
N.A. indicates the number is not available.




                                              14
                              Table 8
         Mean-Variance Spanning and Investment Liberalizations
                              December 1989 - August 1993

                                       p-value [Change in Sharpe Ratio]
         Test Assets                     0   Before Liberalized After Liberalized


         BZF                     0.6512             0.6631              0.7563
                                                   (0.0032]            [0.0021]
         IGF                     0.2710             0.2500              0.9731

                                                   [0.0009]            [0.0008]
         KF                      0.3229             0.2722              0.0176
                                                   [0.0242]            [0.0002]
        TWN     ROC TnJr:        0.1116             00082               0.5085
                                                   [0.0040]            [0.0003]

Notes:
Information on restricted markets was obtained from Bekaert [1994] and the IFC Inder
Mei5odology, 1993.
Country funds normally receive special permission to trade in the securities of restricted
markets before the markets arc opened to all foreign investors. Foreign institutions in
addition to country fiin'1 wer granted accss to 49 percent of voting common stock itt Brazil
in May 1991. In January 1992, foreign investors were allowed to acquire up to 10 percent
of Korean company securities in January 1991, foreign investors were granted permission
to hold 10 percent of Taiwanese company securities. India opened to foreign investors in
November, 1992, with a 2 percent cap on holdings by registered foreign institutions. A
variety of overriding restrictions apply in all cases. The test period begins in December
1989.
The hypothesis, [i3.i3] =    0, is tested using a GMM Wald statistic. The mean-variance
spanning hypothesis before and after the liberalization is tested using the statistic Ml/t.
The p-va'ue is the probability alue. See Section 3.2 or the Appendix for details. Numbers
in square brackets indicate the approximate change in the Sharpe Ratio from adding the
test assets to the benchmark assets.
All returns are computed in dollars, and all indices are equally-weighted. The benchmark
assets are the closed-end fund mature market and domestic indices
                                      Appendix

A A GMM-Based Wald Test of Mean-Variance Span-
       fling
Huberman and Kandel [1987] define mean-variance spanning in a linear regression model.
Let R denote a vector of benchmark asset returns. To test whether these returns span the
vector of returns R = [Ri', R']', consider the linear regression:

                                    R=o'+BR+u.                                           (1)

Hubermari and Kandel show that testing for spanning of R by R is equivalent to testing:

                                     o=O         Bt=t,                                   (2)

with i a vector of ones.
    In this appendix, we will first write the De Santis test in an alternative way to prepare
for the derivation of the Wald test. Since these 0MM-based tests seem very different from
the standard Huberman and Randel [1987] tests, we then demonstrate how the \Vald test
and the Huberman and Kandel test are tests of particular restrictions on the first and second
moments of R1 = [Ri', Rfl'. A similar derivation can be found in Ferson [1993].
    The orthogonality conditions for the De Santis test are given in equation (7) in the
text. As above, let R = [R'. R]' and let the dimension of R(R?) be ni(n2) x 1. Denot'
n = n1 + p22. Let /3 be a 2n x I vector. The orthogonality conditions for the Wald test can
be written as:
                                    hr(fl)=/3+d                                          (3)

where the dimensionaltv of hT is 2n x I and CT is a square matrix. Hence,

                                                                                         (1)

Let A be a 2n x 2n matrix that, selects the elements of the 2n x I vector /3 that are zero
under the null of spanning. When the weigthing matrix in the 0MM-system, WT. is chosen


                                            16
optimally (Hansen [l982fl, the variance-covariance matrix of /3 equals (CTWTC.)'. The
expression for the Wald test in equation (9) in the text follows straightforwardly.
    The De Santis test is nothing more than a likelihood ratio-type test which requires estima-
tion under the null. It is useful to think about the De Santis test as arising from a restricted
estimation. Let denote the restricted estimator of /3 (i.e., with the zero restriction on the
coefficients of the test assets imposed). Then,

                                  d=        argmin hT(/3)'W7' hT(/3)
                                                 s.f.          ,1j3=O
                                     = CT/3+dT.                                               (.))

Note that the orthogonality conditions are linear in the parameters and so is the constraint -
Consequently, Proposition 4 in Newey and West [1986] implies that the Wald test and the
likelihood ratio-type test are numerically equivalent. Denote the De Santis test statistic by
L. It is given by:
                                   L = ThT(/3)'W'J-hT(/3).                                    (G)

Of course, the equivalence relies on the use of the same weighting matrix. As our Monte
Carlo results show, the choice of the weighting matrix is one important determinant of the
small sample properties of the test statistics.
   Finally, let's consider the moment restrictions implied by mean-variance spanning tests.
We will first rewrite the spanning restrictions derived by Iluberman and Kandel [l9S7J.
reproduced in equation (2). Let            denote EEl?I'] and     let 2 denote E[Rfl. Using leact
squares algebra, the restrictions in equation (2) are equivalent to:

                                 P2ER(EJ?)/11 =                   0

                                               (")        i.    = i.                          (7)

where ER is the covariance matrix of the set of returns R = [R', R']', partitioned as:

                                      -'
                                                'I1
                                                '-SR
                                                        c'12
                                                        '-'R
                                     -'R        r21
                                                '-'R    '-'R




                                                 17
      The Wald test, on the other hand, imp!ies:

                                      A=0=_AC1dT.                                                (9)

Recall the expressions for CT and dT (see equation (7) in the text):

                                                 ER      0
                                    CT=
                                                  0 ER
                                                 üi(/L+t)—L
                                    d    =
                                                 U2(p   + i) —
                                                                    ,                           (10)

where    p=
      Using (10) and the partitioned inverse formula in (9), we find:


                               () '[(ps + L)O —              = (P2 + t)u —

for   j = 1,2.
      This   can only be true for both j =   1   and j =     2   if the Huberman-Kandel restrictions
proposed in equation (7) hold.




                                                 Is
B Monte Carlo Experiments
The Date Generating Process (DGP) for the returns [Ri, Rfl under the null of mean variance
spanning is assumed to be:

                                  R' =
                                         = BRH-ut
                                                    s.t. Bt =    .                        (1)

The restriction Bi =    imposes mean variance spanning (see Appendix A). Let

                                              -    N(O,E)
                                        uj -       N(O,E),                                (2)

where       follows a constrained correlation GARCH-modcl (Bollerslev [1991]), or

                                    = w + a(_1)2 +
                                                  i=1...,n1
                                    =                   i   j,                            (3)

where the superscripts indicate the position in the matrix or vector.
   The parameter vector [p', vec(A)', vec(B)', vech(E)']' is estimated from our data set using
GMM. We use the residuals e to estimate the multivariate GARCH model in equation (3).
In the estimation of (3), we constrain w, to match the unconditional sample variance of .
i.e., we let:
                                        tL'
                                                   1(i)2                                  (-1)
                                                  1—ut —
    We consider two sets of four benchmark returns (see Section 3.3). Hence, the number of
parameters to be estimated in the inultivariate GARCH process becomes 14 under the null.
When no ARCH effects were found for residual i, the estimation was redone constraining
   = fi, = 0. So the returns {]?.Rfl have time-varying conditional means and variances.
but the mean and variance dynamics for R? are completely driven by R. Estimation was
performed using the MAXLIK package in GAUSS.


                                                   19
   Under the null of mean variance spanning, all test statistics have a x2 distribution with
2n degrees of freedom. The choice of n2 is guided by our empirical work. We set n2 = 1.
  = 2, n2 = 7 and rz2 = 12, to correspond to the dimension of the test assets described in
Section 3.3 of the text.'
   Table Al reports the percentage of the 2,000 experiments constructed under the null
hypothesis for which the values of the test statistics are greater than the five percent critical
values of the null distribution. A standard error for the empirical size can be computed as
                                                        1/2
                                       (0.05)(0.95)           —0   0049
                                          2,000

The table shows that the size properties of the statistics are very different. First of all, de-
meaning the orthogonality conditions (compare MV2 to MV, and MV4 to MV3) invariably
worsens the size distortion. Second, a serial correlation correction leads to an empirical size
close to 5%, only if the orthogonality conditions are not de-meaned. That is, A1V performs
better than MV, but MV2 performs better than MV4. Note that by using the optimal
bandwidth scheme of Andrews [1991], the serial correlation correction may not always be
applied. The use of a fixed number of Newey-West (1987] lags would probably lead to inferior
size properties. Iterating on the weighting matrix marginally improves the size properties
of the test. The Wald statistic with no serial correlation correction, MVw2, performs better
than MVv,, but the size properties are poor when compared with MV3.
    For n2      I and n2 = 2, a]l test statistics perform reasonably well, and the empirical
sizes of M%', MV3 and M2 are within two standard error bands around the nominal size.
For n2 = 7, the size distortions become problematic for most test statistics and the superior
small sample behavior of Al V3 stands out. We conclude that MV3, the test statistic with a
serial correlation correction and the orthogonality conditions not de-meaned, gives the least
small sample distortion.
    We also examine the power of the tests. In order to do so, we need to formulate a
DGP under an alternative hypothesis. To make the alternative easy to interpret, we let the
benchmark assets follow the same process as under the null. The new factor is assumed
independent of the old factors and follows a univariate AR(1) process. Its error terms are

   'We did not perform the Monte Carlo analysis for n2 = 19. As will become clear, the test statistics ar
likely to be ill-behaved for such a large number of test assets.


                                                   20
normally distributed with the conditional variance following a CARCH (1,1) process. To
estimate parameters for this process, we usc the IFC Investable Composite index return as
a proxy for emerging market-specific risk (Section 2 describes this index).
    Finally, we have to determine the new matrix B. For each return in R, the corresponding
row in the B matrix can be interpreted as the portfolios weights on the different benchmark
assets that span it. Indeed, the weights sum to one but they need not be positive. For
each test asset, we choose the new weights starting from the matrix B under the null, but
redistribute some of each weight (say y) from the original benchmark assets to the new
benchmark asset. Hence, the weight on the new benchmark asset becomes 4y, since there
are four benchmark assets under the null. The redistribution is such that the proportion
of test asset variance explained by the new benchmark is 20% higher than the proportion
explained by the benchmark under the null. Note that this is not a particularly strong
alternative. If the R2 were 30% under the null, our alternative implies an increase in R2 to
36%. In the actual data, including the IFC Investable Composite index in a regression of
country funds indices onto the null benchmark assets increases the R2 by 40% rather than
20%.
    In order to prevent the implied weights on the new factor from becoming too large, we
had to scale up its variance by a factor of 3. The resulting variance is of the same magnitude
as that of the individual country fund with the lowest sample variance in our sample. The
implied weights on the new benchmark asset vary between 0.26 and 0.66.
    To summarize the DGP under the alternative, let R7 denote the new benchmark return.
and define R = [R', Rfl'. Then,

                                      =
                                  R =
                                               .5_i.                                      (3)

with
                            p             A0               E0
                                          0 0e              0   (e)2
The way we construct B implies that B = [B     b/I, hJ, where b is a rm2 x I vector containing
                                              —-


the weights on the new factor. It turns out that in order to satisfy the explained variance


                                             21
criterion, each element in h must satisfy a quadratic equation with two real roots. \Ve take
b,Vi to be the positive root of this equation.2
    The power of the test statistics hovers around 70% for n2 = 1 and n2 = 2, and drops
below 50% for most test statistics when it2       7. For n2 = 12, the null and alternative
distributions are quite close to each other. The MV3 statistic — the test with the best small
size properties — has the worst power for n2 = 12, but not for smaller n2. The \Vald tests
seem to have poor power properties in general compared with the likelihood ratio-type tests.
To maximize power, orthogonality conditions should be de-meaned but serial correlation
corrections should be avoided as is demonstrated by the superior performance of MV2.
    In general, both the size and power properties seem to deteriorate substantially as
number of assets is increased. We conjecture that the saturation ratio (see Gallant and
Tauchen [19911) of the GMM system is the driving factor in the results. The saturation ratio
is the total number of observations divided by the number of parameters to be estimated
(including the parameters of the weighting matrix). When n2 > 7, the saturation ratio
drops below 10. Unfortunately. GMM-systems with such low saturation ratios are common
in the empirical finance literature. To conclude, MV3 has significant superior size properties
relative to the other test stat ist ics. Although it has poor power for n2 = 12, its power (loe'
not differ substantially from that of the other statistics for smaller systems.3 Thereforr.
we use M for all our tests wit ii the caveat, that all the tests perform poorly when the
saturation ratio is low.




   2Anotber potentialty interesting alternative would let i1 be serially correlated but keep the nuriiber of
benchmark assets intact. We intend to explore the power of our tests against such an alternative in the
future. We also plan to investigate the sniall sample properties of alternative mean variance spanning tesc
(Huberman and Xandel [1987), Jobson and Korkie [19891, and Ferson et al. [1993) are examples).
   31n weighing the relative advantages and disadvantages of the various test statistics, power should he
more important consideration especially since our alternative (exposure to an 'emerging market factor) js
an economically interesting one. See McCloskey [1985] for a critique on the misuse of "significance tesk
and their lack of power, and other considerations in hypothesis testing by economists.

                                                    22
C Data Appendix
For each country fund, the sample contains weekly price, NAV, exchange rate, dividend, and
volume information for the life of the fund. For the U.K. trusts, 'diluted' NAV and warrant
prices are also included. The price, dividend and volume data was obtained daily from the
CRSP database for U.S. funds; NAV information was obtained weekly from Barrons and Th
Wall Street Journal, and daily for several funds from Scudder, Stevens and Clark. County
Natwest Securities supplied the weekly price, NAV and diluted NAV numbers for the U.1<.
funds, and S.G. Warburg provided daily price, diluted NAy, warrant prices, and volume.
Dates for individual fund coverage are given in Table 2.
   For the emerging market funds we use three weekly total return dollar indices compiled for
the Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB) maintained by the IFC. They are a local market
index, the IFC Global index, and the IFC Investable index. Weekly coverage for the IFC'
indices begins in December 1988. As there are some exceptions in coverage, the adjoining
table details the date when the series begins for each of the three IFC indices. The table
also indicates the name of the local market index. For the emerging markets we obtained
weekly exchange rate data from the IFC, and daily rates from Tradeline International. Local
market and regional total return indices and exchange rates for the mature markets were
provided by Goldman, Sachs & Co.; for the mature markets represented in our sample. daily
coverage begins in January, 1986.
   The database also includes information on capital changes, warrant exercise, the com-
position of dividend payments, and missing values for each fund. Missing values are only a
problem for the U.S. NAV series for a few funds. In cases where we were unable to completc
the series using alternate sources, we used the previous week's figure.
   In constructing weekly fund data, the correct U.S. price was paired with the weekly NAV
data, which normally is computed on Friday, but also Wednesday or Thursday in several
cases. Where possible the timing of indices was matched to the price and NAV information.
A similar procedure was followed to construct weekly U.K. files from daily series.
   Seven-day deposit LIBOR rates in dollars and pounds were obtained from Bloomberg
and The Financial Times of London.




                                            23
              Market Indices for Emerging Equity Markets
                                Through August 1993

Country                  Local Index       IFC Global IFC Investable
                               Latin America
Argentina         Bolsa Indice         881230         881230           881230
Brazil            BOVESPA              880331         881230           881230
Chile             IGPA                 881230         881230           881230
Mexico            BMV General          881230         881230           881230
                                       Asia
India             FE Bombay       881230              881230           921106
Indonesia         JSE Composite   881230              900928           900928
Korea             KSE Composite 860102                881230           920103
Malaysia          KLSE Composite 881230               881230           881230
Philippines    Manila Corn/md 881230                  881230           881230
Taiwan, China TSE Average      881230               881230             910104
Thailand       SET             881230               881230             881230
                               Europe/Mideast
Portugal          BTA                  881230       881230             881230
Turkey            ISE                  881230       881230             890804

Notes:
AU indices are taken from the Emerging Markets Data Base. Supplementa' dates for the
KSE Compoeite were oht.aind from the KSE Fact Book and for the BOVESPA from the
Sao Paulo Stock Exchangr.




                                        24
                                     Table Al
                          Empirical Size of Test Statistics

                                     Panel 1:
                       Closed-End Fund Benchmark Assets
                            2(2)     2(4)     2(14)                X2(24)

            MV1               5.55         5.80        10.45         16.80
             MV2              6.00         7.15        17.30         36.65
             MV3              5.60         4.80         7.55          6.60
             MV4              8.00         9.40        26.30         53.15
             MTV               7.65        8.90        22.70         48.05
             MVw1              7.00        7.90        19.40         40.90
                              o.95         5.95        12.30         26.05
             CV(2)            5.99         9.49        23.69         36.42
             CV(MV3)           6.25        9.42        25.20         37.57

                                    Panel 2:
                 FT-Actuaries World Indices Benchmark Assets
                          2(2)        2(4)       2(14)    2(24)
           MV                 5.85          7.00          10.45        13.05
           MV                 6.10          8.00          17.35        34.15
           MV                 5.85          6.50           9.25         7.30
                              6.50          8.90          21.80        45.40
           M1                 6.45          8.50          19.30        41.60
                              6.30          7.80          16.15        33.55
           M1w2               6.15          7.00          12.85        23.85
           CV(2)              5.99          p.49          23.69        36.42
           CV(MV               6.27        10.01          26.06        38.57


Notes:
The empirical size (in percent) is for a 5%-size test. The test statistics and Monte Carlo
design are described in the tcxt. The benchmark assets are further described in Section
3.3. In the column heading "2(n)," n12 is the number of test assets used. The experiment
for n = 2, uses a U. S. index of country funds. The results for U. K. indices are similar.
CV stands for critical value. \Ve report the 5% critical value for each 2distrihut ion and
for the empirical distributions generated for the MV3 test statistic.
                                    Table A2
                              Power of Test Statistics

                                   Panel 1:
                       Cjosed-End Fund Benchmark Assets
                           2(2)        2(4)        2(14)          2(24)
             MV            71.50       74.80         49.85         19.85

             MV2           71.70       75.15         52.45         27.95
             MV            68.45       71.90         46.05         13.10
                           68.35       71.50         44.65         21.00
             MV            67.95       71.05         41.30         20.60

                           GS.80       70.10         36.75         14.80

                           71.35       72.30         40.10         17.95



                                  Panel 2:
                 FT-Actuaries World Indices Benchmark Assets
                                                       x2(14)       2(24)
           MV              73.15         70.00          51.75        19.45
           MV              73.15         70.85          54.00        27.85
           MV3             72.25         69.50          46.75        13.30
           MV              73.10         70.00          49.10        26.85
           AI             72.50          69.30          47.15        25.00
                          70.75          67.15          39.35        17.60
                          71.40          42.75          18.85        13.55



Notes:
The test statistics and the DGP under the alternative are described in the text. The
benchmark assets are further described in Section 3.3. In the column heading "2(ri)."
n/2 is the number of test a.qsets used. The experiment for n = 2, uses a U. K. index of
country funds. The power using the U.S. index is slightly lower. The table reports the
percent of 2,000 Monte Carlo replications that yield a higher test statistic than the 5Z
critical value from the empirical distribution under the null.
                                   FIGURE 1
          Unconditionol .4ean—Varionce Sponnin: fl—Actuaries Benchmark




C

'I
C
0
V




                               Standard Devotion



            Uncontona Meon—Varonce SpanninQ: Control Benchmark




C

V
C
0
V




     44                               60           64                    72   76

                               Stondord Devtin
