                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DETERMINANTS OF PRIVATIZATION
                                       PRICES




                                    Florencio LA5pez-de-Sijanes




                                       Working Paper 5494



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1996



My special thanks to Andrei Shleifer for his
                                             advice throughout the project. I thank Olivier
Blanchard, Richard Caves, Gary Chamberlain Edward Glaeser, Igal Hendel, Michael Kremer,
Rafael La Ports, Enrico Spolaore, Aaron Tomell, and Guillermo Zamarripa for their comments.
I also thank seminar participants
                                  at Harvard, the University of Chicago, Columbia, New York
University, Stanford, U.C.L.A., U.C. San Diego, and the NBER for their comments and
suggestions, and the Government of Mexico for allowing me access to the privatization files.
This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Corporate Finance and Public Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 1996 by Florencio López-de-Sjlanes.
                                      All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5494
                                                                                    March 1996

                              DETERMINANTS OF PRIVATIZATION
                                        PRICES

                                            ABSTRACT

         Generating government revenue is a common objective in
                                                                      privatization. This paper asks:
  what determines privatizag ion prices? Pursuing this query helps resolve the current
                                                                                       controversies
  at)out the bearing of speed and the role for government actions prior to
                                                                             privatization. The data,
  gathered from primary sources, encompass 361 privatized Mexican companies in 49
                                                                                  four-digit
 mdustzy codes. The dctenninants of auction privatization
                                                          prices are divided into three groups:
 (1) company performance and industry parameters; (2) the
                                                               auction process and its requirements;
 and (3) the prior restructuring actions taken by the government.
                                                                      Controlling for company and
 industry effects reveals the significant impact of the costs and characteristics of the labor force.

 Minority control packages carry large discounts. Auction requirements that allow foreign
 investors result in higher sale premia, while
                                                 restrictions constraining participation or payment
 forms reduce net prices. The speed of privatization substantially influences net prices: the
                                                                                         longer
it takes to put the company on the block, the more severe the deterioration in performance,
                                                                                             and
the lower the premium obtained. Pre-sale reductions in labor force, and particularly the
                                                                                          firing
of CEOs, lead to significantly higher
                                      premiums. Debt absorption, investment, and performance
improvement programs do not increase the net price, while de-investment measures prove more
beneficial. Overall, the results show increased premia for government actions that stimulate
bidder participation and expedite the privatization process.



Florencio L6pez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBfR
                                            1. INTRODUCTION

   An auction of public enterprises is a standard mechanism for achieving a fundamental objective of
 privatizatiort: the generation of goverrunent revenue (see Bolton and Roland [1992) and Maskin (19921).
 This paper examines n'ha determines auction prices in privuizatio,s.
                                                                          Three types of determinants are
 considered: (I) company and industry characteristics; (2) the auction process and its requirements; and
 (3) prior restructuring policies of the government. The analysis ofprice determinants resolves some of
 the current controversies about the role of speed of sale and of gove.rnment actions prior to privatization
(see Laffout [19941, Sachs (1992], Shleifer & Vihny [1994). and Tirole
                                                                           [1991]). This study provides
answers to several questions concerning privatization: I-low is privatization affected by other residual
claimants of the firm? Do the timing and specifics of the process matter? Should the government attempt
to manipulate the auction? What types of prior restructuring policies are worth implementing? Is speed
a key ingredient precluding further government intervention during the sale? To address these questions
I have created an exhaustive database from primary sources of all
                                                                  companies privatized in Mexico during
the period between 1983 and 1992.


  The paper is divided into seven sections. Following the introduction, section 11 outlines the framework
of the analysis: the government, subject to political and social constraints, acts with the hope of increasing
the expected value of a public enterprise. These policy actions encompass a wide array of restructuring
measures and auction requirements. Section II also frames some of the key questions surrounding
privatization in terms of the different groups of determinants of prices. Finally, this part describes the
econometric methodology used in the rest of the study.


  Section 111 briefly describes the sample and construction of the database. This study covers the Mexican
privatl7ation program, which involves 361 companies in 49 four-digit industry codes. The data
encompass company characteristics, bids and bidders in the auction, and all government actions before
and resulting from each privatization. These variables are used to detennine the net price obtained by the
government and an approximation of Tobin's Q. here termed Privatization Q (PQ).

  The fourth section presents a cross-sectional analysis of the data and interprets the first category of price
determinants: firm and industry characteristics. The results reveal the positive impact on net prices of
the finn's past performance in tern of net and operating income, capacity usage, and market share.
Privatization involves the sale of fixed assets along with a labor contract. A labor union's power.
measured by the number of strikes and the cost of contingent labor liabilities, has a significant negative
impact on net prices. Industries in which State-owned enterprises (SOEs) produce a large share of total
output carry a premium, reflecting the continuation of favorable regulation and entry barriers, as well as
possible previous underexploitat ion of market power. Finally, in line with findings in related work on
private companies (Zingales [1993)), control leads to large premia for majority blocks.

  Section V examines the variables related to the process of privatization and auction characteristics.    Net

                                                      2
 prices rose in the second phase of the program (1988-1992) when privatization became a central item on
 the governments agenda and the economy underwent a stabilization program. The data show that
 companies' profitability and market penetration significantly deteriorate as the sale day approaches.
 Longer internal times of sale, defined as the period between the first rumor of privatization and its public
announcement, lead to larger deterioration in performance, resulting in lower premia. The number of
bidders involved in the auction positively influences the price, indicating the relevance of wide
participation and the need to eliminate requirements that decrease bidder involvement. Several of these
requirements are shown to affect PQ negatively.


  Section VI examines the role of government actions prior to privatization by analyzing the third set of
price determinants: restructuring actions before the sale. Prior policies depend on some of the same
variables that comprise the bidders' price function. Given the endogeneity of prior actions, a two-stage
process is required to evaluate their final impact on price. In the first stage, discrete or limited dependent
variables methods are used to determine the probability that a restructuring measure occurs, revealing the
main factors that influence the government's decisions.             In the second stage, the predictors of
restructuring actions are used as generated in'ruments to account for the effect of such policies on PQ.

  I analyze six areas of company restructuring prior to privatization: management, labor, debt, efficiency
programs, investment, and dc-investment. An evaluation of their final impact on net prices provides
guidelines for dos and don'ts in SOE restructuring. For instance, the results suggest that it is worthwhile
to replace the CEO with a "privatizer" whose task is to clean up the company, to reduce the waste of
resources, and to get the firm on the block as quickly as possible. Labor downsizing before selling has
a positive marginal effect on PQ, while debt absorption has no impact. Investing or embarking on
efficiency programs before the sale actually decreases PQ; the government does not get its money's worth
and the performance of the company remains the same, In contrast, cutting the flow of resources and
postponing large investment programs, or dc-investing, fares better in terms of premiums.

 Section VU summarizes the findings. These results shed light on the privatization process and provide
empirical evaluation of some theories about privatization.



                  H. PRIVATIZATION PRICES AND THEIR DETERMINANTS

11.4. Methodology and Privaüzarion Q


  Although various national privatization programs outline a multiplicity of goals, a closer look reveals
that most governments pursue two basic objectives: (1) efficiency enhancement, in terms of depolitization
of slate-owned enterprises (SOEs) and improvement of corporate governance (see Shlejfer and Vishny
(1994)); and (2) revenue generation, either to get out of fiscal crises or to achieve redistribulive purposes.
An evaluation of privatizatjon practice also suggests that, subject to certain political and social constraints.


                                                       3
 generating government revenue is a fundamental objective. In Mexico. for
                                                                          example, price was the key
 factor in selecting the winner in over 96% of all privatized SOEs.

   When all relevant costs of privatization are considered, the net
                                                                                 transaction price is often very different
from the announced price in the sale contract. A failure to account for these costs in the price measure
could lead to a significant bias. Adjusting the prices reported in the official statistics requires an analysis
of the sale contract and all restructuring costs incurred prior to and connected to the sale. A measure of
the net price Qbtained by the government for each company privatized. i. is created as follows:


                                             GNPP,      =   B,   - P*R - GC - Adj
                                                                                                                            (I)

GNPP,, or Government Net Privatization Price for company i, is constructed by
                                                                              calculating the present
value of the nominal sale price as registered in the sale contract (B,) and making the following
adjustments:
   (a) subtracting the cost (Pj of the restructuring measures (R,) undertaken by the government before the
       sale;
   (b) subtracting of the costs of the "Government Commitments and the "Special Clauses'
                                                                                         promised by
       the government at the time of the sale (GC); and
  (c) adding or subtracting of the adjustments made to the sale contract (Ad),), such as reimbursements
       on both sides when the financial statements differ from the ones given to the bidders before the
      sale.'


  Based on GNPP,. I calculate an approximation of average Tobin's Q as follows:
                                                                                                                            (2)
                                                                 GNPP.
                                                                        '÷TD.
                                                                  sh.
                                                  PQ,
                                                                      TA.
                                                                         'Jo


where PQ is defined as Privatization Q for company i. PQ considers GNPP as the proxy for market
value of stock. adjusts it by the percentage of company shares sold (sh,), and controls for total liabiljties
(7D,) and total assets (TA,,0) of the firm right before privatization. This allows us to calculate a price
measure similar to Tobin's Q despite the limited data available for SOs.




       Several other variations of GNPP were also calculated. First, a more comprehensive GNPP was created including
parameters such as investment commilments made by the bidder and any benellis obtained (or the workers in terms ol shares
or commitments of the bidder not to incur labor cuts. Only 12 cases had formal investment commitmeins of a specific amount
in the sate contract. In another 3 cases, a minority percentage of shares, va,ying Irom t to tO%. was given lo the labor union.
The correlation between GNPP and this new measure is 0.9852, A third variation of GNPP subtracts the implied toss to the
government when winners default on their payments or when contract renegotiations take place. The paper does not use this
approximation in the analysis since this adjustment is an c'-post effect for price determination.

                                                                  4
   Like other measures of Tobin's Q. PQ is not free from biases.
                                                                      Linderberg and Ross t198i1 point out
 that firms with valuable intangible assets in addition to physical capital tend to have higher Tobin's Os.
 An upward bias may also exist since many SOEs experience financial or economic difficulties, so that
 the market value of debt could be below book value. Finally, the ideal measure for the denominator of
 PQ would be the replacement cost of the firm's plant and inventories but this number is
                                                                                          available only
 for 58% of the sample, most of which are privatized in the final years of the program. The econometric
 analysis of this paper was also performed for this reduced set of observations using the value of the
 replacement cost as the denominator. Since the results do not significantly change, and the correlation
 of PQ with su:' a measure is 0.837, I kept total assets as the denominator of PQ.

  The estimation of the determinants of privatization prices in the following sections considers PQ as the
dependent variable of what I call the PQ equation:


                                     PQ = pq(X.A,R1)                                                    (3)

where PQ1 for company i is a function of company characteristics (X), including financial and
perfrrmance data, information about the other residual laimants of the
                                                                            company (labor, management,
minority shareholders, etc.), and industry, trade and market characteristics. Bids, and therefore PQs, are
also affected by the auction process itself (A1), including requirements imposed in the auction, the number
of bidders and rounds, etc. Finally, in determining theirbid, potential buyers also take into account the
restructuring measures implemented by the government on company I (R,). The PQ equation allows us
to break down the determinants of auction prices in privatization and therefore to test some of the main
hypotheses in the privatization literature.



II. B. The Determinants of Privatizaijon Prices


  The above framework allows us to analyze some of the main points of the privatization debate in light
of the variables which affect privatizat ion prices. This section summarizes the main arguments shown
in Table I, which classifies the empirical predictions about the effects of different determinants of Q
implied by the existing theories and models of privatization.

Company Characterjstj

 A public company, like any private firm, is characterized by a set of contracts with its stakeholders,
including workers, managers and shareholders (Fama and Jensen 119831). Labor plays a dominant role
in public enterprises, making union dealings and collective contracts a significant determinant of
privatization prices (LOpez-de-Silanes et al.[1995)). SOEs often have excess workers, partly because
public sector Unions place greater weight on employment increases than do unions in the private sector
(see Freeman and Ichnjowskj [1988)) and because they simply are more effective in raising employment


                                                    5
                                                                          TABLE I
                              EMPIRICAL PREDICTIONS OF TIlE MAIN THEORIES ABOUT
                                  THE DETERMINANTS OF PRIVATIZATION PRICES
This table classiluen the empirical predictions implied by models tsr the effects tttdiflcrerit determinants
measure ol net price is Privatization Q? the value or the Government's Net Privatization Price (GNPP) eta       privatizarlon net prices. The
                                                                                                             adjusted
SOC shares sold plus Total Liabilities of the SOC at the time of pri' tuition, divided by Total                         by the percentage or
privalization.                                                                                            Assets of die SOC at the time iii
                                                                                                                                                                  --


  Independent Variables                                                                                                                           Empirical Predictions
                                                                Model or Dsecuretical Idea                                                        or the Effect on PQ
                                                         I, Company and Indaw-y Chancletjsars
 Strong and Active Unions


 Gruvemrusenc panicipatior.
                               e.. -
                               Slrlerfrr & Vishny (1994). Ldprc.dr-&ions'o era!. (1995): Psititic unions try to block


                               Laffo"rr (1994). Ktken to al.fl992); Higher mark-u participation entails nsore nsauket
                                                                                                                                                 Negutive Effect


 iii ur.dsslry's output        power. uneaplouted martet possibilities, or may i.e associated with naure (avsurabte                              Positive Effect
                               rcgularitsn.
 Control vs. Revenue           Grossman & lIon (IPSO), Shktfru- & Viohny (3994); The 'control' view argues that
 Privstisattons                residual rights of control are die critical detenninanr or resource allocation.
                                                                                                                                                 Higher PQ fur Control
                                l'k*ers & Van-ow (1982). Lqforas S lirole (1993); The 'incentive' view argues                                   privarizations
                                                                                                                                                 No significant dirrerence
                               privatirarion gains coatse from increased manageriat discipline; dsetefore control should                        between control and
                               twit he critical In deuenninintg poieen.
                                                                                                                                                reverarae privatiiatioat.
                                                     II. The alvcSn hve.ss and U, C*anrreef,jrs
 Leamtng Effect or             Cola! nat. (1994), KEIth no). (1992); Government leamt lsow to tell as rinse are)                                Positive Effect
                               yc pe oe
Macroeconomic Stabiliry        VatyltreLe (1988),   Kited it all) 994); Improves flout ptotpecus.                                               Positive Effect
                                                             Lt!eiconainia                                 -                      -
Length of each process.       Caves (1992), Rolron & Roland 11992);Once privatization in announced, insproved
or lack n( speed.
                              saskeholdem' incenaiven boots company perfortssaiace. Management corn about                                       Positive or No Effect
                              reputation.
                              Airtraojt (1984), Wreck 1)9%); Privatizacion news triggers performance deterioration
                              similar to that 01 finns in foaaneiat distress.
                                                                                                                                                Negative Effect
Aact.on Conspetition          Milgronr (1987); Increases likelihood that sortie bidder perceives the good's value, and                          Positive Effect
                              !?"°                                   ,.    ..      ,.         -            .-...-...              -               ..
Auction Restrictions on;      Office 4Pnvasizaviorr W Vetaezatela (1990). and other ageatcfes: Foreign buyers lersi so
IlForeign Investment          underbid because they do not value all the assets' potential arid preclude potential                              Positive Effect
                              donaesric boyem.
2)Preqoatifueationa;          Mexican Ranking Privosisadon Comnaioee (1991), and other agencies: Pre-qoatirtearion                              Positive Effect
  Bidder-type, ownership      of bidden Increase. the quality 01 the auctio,. and gives certainty to the whole
  period, investment plan.    privarisarion program.
3)Foma of Payment             Aghion, Hoes & Moore ((992), Ladders 1)992): Reastiions reduce corrupctitioa and
                          .                                                                                                                     Negative Effect
                              may prevent a bidder from acquiring the WE at its macinured valae.

                                                            lii. Prior Reslntesanij,g Policies
Management Clsangen           Solicit & Roland (2992); h,oss of experienced nsanagearwnt. Old management oct to                                 Negative Effect
                              run die tUns eflaciendy becaoae they need a rsputarion to help them lad a job.
                              Rotheris to. at (2995); Old management team would has the wrong bunsan capitat to                                 Positive Effect
    .,   ..,,,,..                                                                                 ,                                        .,
Firing Wortem                 Varrovt- 12986), Kreps and Wilson (1982): 'Use government has rrsore resources so design
 arrilor                      social safety net measures. The govervutnens in playing • repeated game with inrpedcct                            Pooartve Effect
Contract Renegotiation        inromsarion in which 'a caret to develop a reputation (or roughness.
                                                                                                                                                         .
                              Freeman (2986), Ldpez-dr-Stiaites et o!.f)995): Public uniona can influence the More of                           Ambiguous Elfecr
                              pohric ins who care about votes; therefore the      eniane
                                                                                                                                                -,--..
Debt Absorption               Newtsery (1991), BoRon & Roland 0992); SOEs could be financially distressed from
                              debt borden but Mitt economicatty viable. Debt write-olin with auctions aaaoone to a                              Positive Effect
                                    !!JE9,19e !.!!?                             Ita eve       x...S   #?!!c nare
Eflicieney Improvement        Liken en a1j1994); Anymnsetric infonnarion makes bidders underbid when eaty-to-aolve                              Positive Effect
Pmgrsmn                       bonleneek problenvs are present.
                                                                                                                                                             .
                              Boycko clot. (1995); Managers have lnccntivet to get resotarcea rot the last time its)                            Negative Effect
                                 !!5..th                                                rs.
                                                                                                                       .......-       ..                     ..
lnvetrmenr Measures           lien!. (199)), Kiktei it a! 1I994):'..Jong.plars.ned and carcAal expansions, especially for
                              welt-ron WEt..' should take place. TIre investment associated with transfotsning Or                               Postttve Effect
                    ..        large finns into viable units to improve marching opponunities with bidders.
                              SitIei/en S Vtslany ((994); The investment might riot lit the winner's ptsn. or die
                                                                                                                                                             .
                                                                                                                                                Negative Effect
                              1° ¶c?i° r.arx tnps ilical cone
De.tnvesrntent Measures       Cutting the flow rut resources could dansage the viability of the company.                                        Negative Effect
                              Managers are wasting retrsurcet.                                                                                  Posrttve Effect
levels. Public union contracts, typically generous by industry standards (Freeman (19861), exacerbate
the role of labor conditions in privatization: there are cases in our sample not only where wages are high.
but where fringe benefits triple the total wage bill. Such high wage levels may result from managers
catering to politicians (Shleifer & Vishny 11994]).

  Other stakeholders of SOEs sometimes include private shareholders. Based on the concepts introduced
in Grossman and Hart [1986). privatization schemes may be classified into control privalizations, giving
control rights as well as cash-flow rights, and revenue privatizations, giving some cash-flow rights but
no conire'. In the "control" view of privatization. shared by Boycko et al. [19961, residual rights of
control are the critical determinant of resource allocation, implying higher PQs for control privatizations.
On the other hand, in models based on the 'incentive" view (Vickers and Yarrow [19881), control should
not be critical in determining prices. According to this view, privatization gains come from increased
managerial discipline, so that there should be little difference between control and revenue privatizations.
A comparative analysis of the different forms of transfer and an estimate of their relative prices will
contribute to this discussion.

The Auction Process and its Requirements

  Prices in privatization can also result from elements of the privatizalion process itself, such as the
auction mechanism, its implementation and timing, and the order of the companies auctioned. Part of
the literature has emphasized the potential role of a "learning" effect on the part of the authority. If
learning is important, governments may start by pri'atizing companies in competitive sectors, where there
is less room for errors, and wind up with firm in oligopolistic or non-tradeable industries (Galal et al.
[1994)). Other authors, such as Kikeri ci al. 119921, suggest that as privatization and its results become
better known by the public. "credibility'" increases, translating into higher premiums. Similarly, as
suggested by Vuylsteke [1988), macroeconomic stability may affect prices since the firms' prospects
change with such conditions.


 Speed or swiftness may also influence sale prices. The announcement, even the rumor, of future
privatization of a company may trigger a change in stakeholders' behavior. Caves [1992] finds that some
to'be-privatized British companies improved their performance before privatization. However, one cOuld
argue that privalization rumors may lead to lower productivity, lower performance, wage increases, costly
liquidations, or the outright theft of assets, analogous to the situation of a firm in financial distress.
Empirical work on the causes of the loss in value of firms in financial distress (Altman [1984) and Wruck
[1990]) includes as explanations: (a) managerial distraction, incompetence, or negligence; (b) foregone
investment opportunities; (c) a drop in demand resulting from aggressive competitors or loss of consumer
confidence; and (d) reluctance of suppliers to extend credit or provida inputs. An appropriate measure
of the length of the process will help discern the benefits of speed in privatization.
  The number of bidders and auction rounds are also relevant determinants of auction prices (Milgrom
(1987)). The more bidders, the higher the price will be as a result of more competition and reduced


                                                     6
danger of collusion. Renegotiation possibilities or several rounds of auction when the bids do not cover
t; minimum price expected by the seller have an impact on the optimal strategies folk1ved by the
bidders. The few precious studies cover the auctioning of oil rights, tax-exempt bonds, and government
contracts (see Gayer and Zirnmermann [1977). Brannman et al. 11984). and Porter (1986)). Privatization
auctions offer the opportunity to look at the effect on prices of bidder participation in a wide range of
industries and among a very diverse group of bidders.


  Political concerns may prevent foreign participation in privatization thus favoring dOmestic groups.
Opening the process to foreign bidders should have an effect on prices through increased competition and
a reduction in the scope for collusion, particularly in oligopolistic industries in developing countries
(Laffont [1994]). Other auction requirements, such as bidder pre-qualifications and forms of payment,
also can have an impact on PQ. These restriction will be empirically evaluated in the course of this
paper.

Prior Restructunng Policies

  Some of the most interesting questions about privarizaton are: What actions cart the government take
prior to the sale to raise the price? Or. alternatively, should the government sell as fast as it can without
attempting to restructure the SOE? Restructuring before privatization can take place at the company.
industry, or country levels, requiring the intervention and coordination of other authorities beyond those
in the office of privatizatton. Specific areas of prior restructuring include: (1) change in management
and/or board of directors; (2) labor cutbacks and worker contract renegotiations; (3) absorption of either
outsiders' debt, cross-liabilities among SOEs, or past-due fiscal debt; (4) aid programs aimed at
improving the firm's performance; (5) investment measures in the form of rehabilitation plans.
agreements on financial restructuring tied to operation improvements, or a temporary reopening of the
plants; (6) dc-investment, or cutting the flow of resources; (7) legal restructuring, including the solution
of legal disputes or the creation of paten's and/or operation permits; (8) changes in domestic regulation,
trade barriers, or entry and exit rules; and (9) asset restructuring in terms of spin-offs. break-ups, or even
packaging of companies for the sale.

  International agencies, valuators, bidders, and government officials around the world advocate the use
of some of these measures in order to raise sale prices. For example, Kikeri et.al. [1992) suggests using
various restructuring policies according to size and industry structure. Tirole's [1991) discussion of
monopoly break-ups hints at investment and rehabilitation programs linked to competition-oriented
restructuring. Although these and others have suggested the use of specific procedures under certain
contingencies (see Frydman and Rapaczynski (1991a1. and Newbery (1991]), there is no systematic
research on the subject. This paper assesses the final impact on PQ of prior restructuring by focusing
on the first six groups of measures: management, labor, debt, efficiency-improvement programs.


         For more detailed deSripLi0n ol ihee polick% ee Appendix C.
 invesrujent prorams. and de-investment measures.


   Management shake-ups before privatization may be the cause of lower premiums if the loss of
 experienced management results in declining performance and diminished market penetration (BoRon and
 Roland (19921). On the other hand, getting rid of the old team may actually improve results or reduce
 the financial squandering often associated with public enterprises: Additionally, the old
                                                                                              managers may
 he flawed because they were good at dealing with politicians and not at facing competition and market
 conditions (see Barheris et al. (l996J).


   A fundamental difference between public and private sector collective bargaining lies in the fact that
 unions can influence the future of politicians through electoral votes (Freeman
                                                                                   [1986]). An argument in
 favor of government intervention in labor restructuring as a way of boosting privalization prices depends
 on the fact that governments also have more mechanisms than the private sector to assist workers
 displaced by structural changes: including retraining programs, job search assistance, and severance
 payments (Yarrow (1986]).


   If the govciment considers absorbing debt, it shcijld do so with a higher probability when the
company faces large financial costs or is on the brink of bankruptcy. The common argument for such
a policy claims that absorption is needed to ensure the company's viability. One could differentiate
between firms in economic distress that have only negative NPV projects, and those SOEs that, although
financially distressed from the burden of debt, still have positive NPV projects. The liquidation of the
latter firms is inefficient (Newberry [1991)). Alternatively, bidders may not benefit from debt absorption
if borrowing conditions are better once they are in possession of the asset.

  A fourth group of restructuring policies includes programs aimed at improving the performance of the
SOE before privatization. Upgrading efficiency may solve the main problems of the SOE. improve
performance, and result in a higher privatization price, particularly if there exist information asymmetries
between the government and the bidders.


  The implementation of investment programs in SOEs is sometimes a response to political constraints
imposed by pressures created by the possibility of shutdowns creating unemployment, or by the nei to
support sectors that supply basic goods or services. Additionally, according to Tirole 11991), substantial
amounts of investments are required to transform monopolistic companies and break them into
independent units before privatization. The argument against investment in SOEs before the sale holds
that it is unlikely that the government will invest more wisely just before privatization, or that the buyer
might achieve the same result at the same cost, but more in accordance with her preferences. This
argument implies that de-investing, or cutting the flow of resources and canceling investment
                                                                                                 programs,
may produce either a zero or a positive result in terms of PQs generated.




                                                    S
II. C. Estimation Procedure of the Effects of Prior Restructuring Policies on PQ

  The government may attempt to raise privatization prices by trying to restructure the SOE before tue
sale, Its strategy may be endogenous, reflecting the company's and the industry's Iraits, To take account
of (his endogeneiry, this paper uses a two-stage process to evaluate the impact of prior restructuring on
PQ. The first stage estimates probability of a restructuring measure (R,), while the second stage estimates
its impact on PQ. in the first stage, officials settle on the policies some of which take the form of a
binary choice, for example whether to fire the CEO or to renegotiate the collective union contract. Other
actions entail choice of levels, for example the amount of company debt to absorb. For the binary case.
one can think of an unobserved linear "latent variable," r',, for company i as:

                                                 = z,OL   + iz .                                         (4)


which depends on a vector z1 of observable company and industry characteristics and on an unobservable
      In this framework, r, represents the government's perceived benefit from engaging in action k and
determines the values that the observed dependent variable can take:
                                             =    1 0 if zO i- p < 0                                     5)
                                                  I / if z,'O + o
In this case, the estimation procedure uses a Frobit model where the probability of taking a"t action k on
company i is the usual P(r=I) = P(z1Oi) = 4'(z,O). with '(.) as the distribution function for the
standard normal. Maximizing the log likelihood function with respect to O gives consistent and efficient
estimators and unveils the significant factors considered by the government in undertaking a given
restructuring policy. Regarding policies requiring a choice of levels, such as the percentage of workers
to fire before privatization. the estimation uses limited dependent variables with a tobit model censored
from below at 0 and from above at I.

  I use four main groups of variables in the first stage to determine the probability that the government
restructures before privatization:
  (I) Agent banks in charge of organizing the auction:
       A total of nine different financial institutions were involved as agent banks and were dummied for
      in the regressions. The three largest domestic commercial banks handled close to 40% of all
      privatization transactions. The agent banks were responsible for obtaining the SOE's information.
      suggesting restructuring measures, and organizing the auction itself. As a result, some prior
      restructuring policies are associated with certain banks. These dummies have very low correlation
      with PQ and are close to a randomly assigned instrument, since the government did not seem to
      follow any pattern assigning SOEs to agent banks.
  (2) Ministries in control:
      Different ministries account for differences in efficiency, bureaucratic hurdles, or simply in the
      willingness of certain politicians to adopt specific measures. This set of six dummies has some


                                                      9
         industry correlation but also shows a level of randomness in the classification of SOEs across
         ministries (sometimes refleciing political considerations during different administrations). Over
         50% of privatized SOEs were classified under the Ministry of Finance or the Ministry of lndusry
         and Trade, for example.
  (3) Predetermined company characteristics or sample-relative parameters:
         Relative size of labor force, or assets within the whole population of SOEs, could influence the
         government's decision to restructure but should not have a direct effect on PQ. In fact, the relative
         size variables used here are correlated with the adoption of some prior restructuring policies, while
         their ascocialiorl with PQ is very weak.
  (4) Years or periods:
         Certain restructuring measures may have been undertaken at different times according to changes
         in budget constraints during recessionary or expansionary years. Similarly, restructuring policies
         may have changed between different administrations.


  Bound el al. (1993), Nelson and Startz [1993), and Staiger and Stock [1993) have shown that a weak
-orrlation between instruments and thc endogenous variable instrumented produces large siandrd errors,
 ,hich in the presence of even a small correlation between the instruments and the error of the second
stage give rise to inconsistent l.V. estimates. Additionally, the presence of a finite sample bias makes
the magnitude of the IV. estimates' bias approach that of the OLS estimates as the instruments are
weaker. Consequently, I calculate the F-statistics on the excluded instruments in the first-stage
regressions. Results show that consistency and finite sample biases are unlikely to be problems in this
paper.


  in the second stage, instrumental variables are used to estimate the PQ equation which includes the
restructuring policies. In this step, the policy predictor, , obtained in stage one is used as a genera/ed
instrument to account for the final impact of the policy on PQ. Newey (1984) shows thatsequential
estimators can be interpreted as members of a class of method-of-moments estimators, facilitating the
derivation of asymptotic covariance matrices for two-step estimators. This approach, applied here for the
case of a non-linear first-stage generated instrument, produces the same result in terms of covariance
matrices.



                                             III. THE SAMPLE
1/l.A. The Data


   In March of 1992, the Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (SI-ICP) granted me
authorization to review all privatization files in their archives. I also obtained data from the Ministry of
Trade and Industry (SECOFI), the Underministry of Finance and Public Credit, the Federal Treasury,
the Mexican Stock Market. several bidding companies, and some already privatized SOBs. Additional
sources include government statistics and publications, stock market data and reports. Central Bank
Statistics, journals, and newspapers.

  Most of the data was collected front primary sources. It covers 361 companies privadzed between
November 1983 and June 1992, accounting for over 98% of all privatized Mexican companies up to that
time. The database contains detailed information about the SOE being privatized, the auction process,
the bids and the bidders. The documentation coded ranges from internal memoranda between government
officials to technical and financial evaluations of the SOEs. The information is classified into the
following :ategories:

  I) History of financial and production variables: usually for the three to four years prior to
      privatizalion. The information includes data from income and expenditure statements, the general
      balance sheet, production, and installed capacity records.
 2) Oii'nership structure: before and after privatization. and any changes made during the four years
      before privatization.
 3) ''thor data: number of unionized nd non-unionized workers, union's type and affi'iation.
      description of the collective contract, wages, workers' relations, and number of strikes.
 4) Management and board of directors: number, composition, and ownership. They are classified
      as bureaucrats, experienced bureaucrats (over three years in the job and/or some qualifying degree),
      private sector managers, shareholders, and foreigners.
 5) Technology: technology contracts with third parties.
 6) Market share: includes percentage of domest.c market, and exports.
 7) Industry characteristics: type of competition. industry concentration, entry/exit barriers.
      international trade characteristics, and industry regulation (foreign investment, price controls,
     special government programs. etc.)
 8) Government's involvement: reasons for and degree of presence, type of government company in
     terms of control, ministry in charge, and reasons for privatization.
 9) Restructuring before privatization: all actions undertaken by the government after privatization was
      announced and before the sale. The costs of the measures are also available in most cases.
 10) The auction process: auction steps and requirements, iounds of sale, and the number of bidders
      involved.
  I) Technical and financial evaluations of the company: usually made by the agent bank in charge of
      the sale or by a consulting firm. The main problems and advantages of the SOE are determined
      based on these documents and some additional sources.
 12) Bidders: classified according to their nationality, the industry in which they operate, and their
      relation connection to the privatized SQE.
 13) Bids: their value, characteristics, terms, conditions, requests, and commitments offered. An
     implicit valuation of the cost of these conditions was also sometimes undertaken, based on the
       evaluation of the agent bank in charge of the sale.
  14) The sale contract: With an evaluation of its terms and conditions, such as government and buyer


                                                     II
      commitments.
 15) Post-sale adjust inents: including the costs or benefits from a post-sale financial evaluation of the
      company, as well as those cases where winners defaulted or renegotiations took place.

   The data set consists of a cross-section panel containing data for each SOE for the four years prior to
its privatization. Table II shows the distribution of SOEs sold each year. The number of companies or
legal entities being privatized and the number of transactions differs because some companies were
associations of enterprises or conglomerates or were put together in packages for privatization purposes.
Although 36! companies were sold, involved only 236 transactions or "Privatization ContractS". Out of
these contracts. I found available information for 221. Each Privatization Contract is treated as a single
unit in the analysis.4



II!. B. The Privatiza:ion Program in Mexico

  The Mexican privatization program is one of the largest in the world in terms of number of companies
privatized and their relative sizes. In 1982, there .iere 1,155 SOEs in Mexico in almost all sectors of
the economy. Thai year. subsidies and transfers to SOEs equalled 12.7% of GDP. Their output
accounted for 14% of GD?, they employed 4.4% of the country's labor force, and represented 38% of
fixed capital investment. LOpez-de-Silanes (1995) undertakes a comparative analysis of the relative
performance of SOEs to-be-privatized and private firms during the 1980s. He finds that, on average, the
privatized SOEs were money-losing operations, showed higher debt to assets ratios, had lower liquidity,
and relied heavily on short-term debt. Since the SOES to be privatized were chosen by the authorities
because of their potential to be profitable or viable businesses, the performance comparison can be
thought to represent an upper bound for the whole SOE sector in terms of profitability.

  In 1983, under large fiscal pressures, a new administration undertook a "Restructuring Program of the
SOEs" with the aim of increasing efficiency. This program involved restructuring measures for some
SOEs and a "clean-up" of the SOE sector through four main mechanisms: liquidation, merger, transfer,
and sale (privatization). Figure 1 shows the reduction in the number of SOEs by year. In the first years
of the program, the number of SOEs was greatly reduced, mainly through liquidation and mergers.
Privatization did not truly take off until 1985. By the end of 1988, the new administration had moved
away from restructuring and towards privatization. In June of 1992, the number of SOEs had been
reduced to 225, and 36! SOEs had been privatized using sealed-bid auctions of control packages. The



       The Iwo main reasons for the lack of information are: (I) 8 transactions with private majority shareholders, whh lack
many details of ihe process and information about the company itself: and (ii) 7 cases that either lick all financial statements
and production information, or bidders and bids data, or the sale contract.

       Lopcz-de-Silanes (1995c) studies all bids (totalling 839). winners and ioers, and associates bidder characteristics lo bid
pries.

                                                                12
largest firms and the most complex cases were sold under the Salinas administration slatting in 1989.
The average size of SOE sold in 1988, measured in constant 1992 US dollars. increased two-fold in 1990,
Il-fold the following year. and over 21-fold in 1992. Table Ill groups privatization contracts according
to three-digit industry codes with selected important four-digit industry codes shown. The span of the
program across industries is evident, ranging from commercial banks and steel conglomerates to sugar
cane mills and one of the most popular soccer teams.

                                                  Table II

                                        The Sample in Perspective


                   Number of            Number of            Final sample:             Sample Receipts as a
       Year   Companies Privacized      Transactions    Privatization Contracts        percentage of 1992's
                                                                                              GDP.

   1983                4                     2                      I                      0,00064%
   1984                3                     1                      1                      0.00065%
   1985               32                     tO                    9                       0.05283 %
   1986                30                    16                    II                      0.03015 %
   1987                22                    Il                    14                      0.07"30 %

   1988                66                    51                    51                      0.40936 %

   1989                37                    29                    29                       0.22178 %
   1990                91                    63                    63                       1.18034 %

   1991                65                    37                    32                       2.91338 %

 6/1992                II                    10                    10                       1.71318 %


  Total:              361                   236                   221                       6.59262 %


 By the end of the sample period, total proceeds from privatization amounted to close to 6.6% of 1992
GDP, with 91 % of that collected during the Salinas years (Table II). The proceeds are actually small
if we consider that privatized SOEs represented over 15% of the country's fixed investment. With the
country's value of capital stock close to twice that of GDP. the value of the sold SOEs should have been
close to 30% of GOP. One potential explanation for this finding could be that state-owned capital is quite
unproductive.



III. C. Privatization Q (PQ), the Dependent Variable

   Some characteristics of the dependent variable of this study are shown in Table Ill. The mean PQ for
 the   whole sample is 0.5377. or 54 cents on ihe dollar, with a standard deviation of 0.79. An initial

                                                       13
                                                         TABLE Ill
                         Privatization Contracts according to Industry Classirication
This iabk clasities Privatization Contracts across industries according to three-digit s.i.c. with selected important four-digit
industry codes also shown. BQ is the present value 01 the nominal price adjusted by the percentage of shares sold, plus Total
Liabilities of the SOE at the lime of privacization all divided by Total Assets of the SOE at the lime of privatization). PQ is the
value of the Governments Net Privatization Price (GNPP) adjusted by the percentage of shares sold plus Total Liabilities at the
time of privatizalion, divided by Total Assets of the SOE at the lime or privatization. Both BQ and PQ are the mean values for
each industry group shown.

  Industry Code       Number of                           Industry                                 BQ                    PQ
                       Contracts

      2320                 6                    Mining of Metallic Minerals                     0.7670                 0.6016
      2920                 7                 Mining of Non-metallic Minerals                     1.3832                1.1 I I?
      3112                 4                           Milk Products                            0.8693                 0.6971
      3113                 4                       Fruits and Vegetables                        0.8793                 0.8793
      3114                 12                    Canned Fish and Seafood                        0.6264                 0.2925
      3115                 9                          Grains and Oils                           0.8511                 0.7472
      3118                29                               Sugar                                0.7975                 0.7488
      3122                 10                          Animal Foods                             0.6746                 -0.1333
      3130                 2                             Beverages                              0.8656                 0.8656
      3140                 3                              Tobacco                               0.9195                 0.9195
      3210                 8                  Textiles, Clothing, and Leather                   0.4409                 0.1008
      3311                 4                     Wood and Wood Products                         0.3885                -1.4636
      3410                 4                         Paper and Printing                         0.6021                 0.5980
      3500                20             Chemicals. Oil Derivatives, and Plastics               0.9591                 0.7691
      3600                 8                  Non-Metallic Mineral Products                     0.5358                 0.1885
      3700                21               Basic Metals and Derivative Products                 0.4694                 0.0667
      3820                 7                 Heavy Machinery and Equipment                      0.7743                 0.73 15
      3830                 5                     Machinery and Equipment                        0.6972                -0.1836
      3840                II                        Automotive Industry                         0.6039                -0.0084
      3842                 2                     Transportation Equipment                       0.9331                 0.7751
      6310                 6                      Hotels and Restaurants                        0.9654                 0.7727
      6400                 7                   Laud and Sea Transportation                      0.8352                 0.6148
      6440                 3                         Air Transportation                         0.9534                 0.3789
      6520                 I               Communications (Telephone services)                  1.3398                 1.3297
      6600                18                       Commercial Banking                           1.1481                 1.1188
      6610                 4            Insurance. Warrantor & Brokerage services               1.2310                 1.2825
      6900                 4             Real Estate & Other Professional services              0.4937                 0.5730
      8000                 2              Recreational and Entertainnient services              1.2169                 0.9057

                         221                           Total Sample                             0.798)                 0.5377
finding is that when all relevant costs of privatIzation are taken into consideration, the net price of the
transaction is much less than the announced price in the sale contract. Adjusting the prices reported in
the official statistics requires a significant amount of information, an analysis of the clauses of the sale
contract, and the calculation of the restructuring costs incurred by the government prior to and connected
to the sale.5 To get an idea of the cost of the adjustments and restructuring, Table Ill also shows the
mean value of BQ for each sector, equivalent to PQ but substituting GNPP with "B" (the present value
of the nominal price in the sale contract). The mean BQ for the whole sample was 0.7981. This means
that adjustment and restructuring costs totalled 32% of the net present value of the nominal price in the
contract. Takng account of these costs is essential in ;tudying privatization for two main reasons: (1) the
correlation between GNPP and B is low (close to 0.6), which implies that ignoring restructuring costs
could lead to significant biases; and (2) the amount of resources spent by the government in prior
restructuring is so large that it becomes essential to find out whether such policies increase net prices.
the subject of section VI of this study.6



                               IV. PQ AND COMPANY CHARACTERISTICS

  Having defined the price measure, this section studies its relation to company and industry
characteristics. Appendices B and C provide definitions and summary statistics for the variables used in
the study. The econometric analysis uses 166 of the 221 available privatization contracts due to the
unavailability of some variables for some of the observations. All PQ regressions present OLS estimated
coefficients with standard errors corrected for heteroskedasticity according to White [l9801.




       The dates in which all these expenses were incurred varied widely, therefore all peso quantities arc transformed to both
constant pesos and constant U.S. dollars as of December 1992.



       For comparison, an additional price sianijardizalion is also calculated as follows:

                                                                   GNPP./sh.
                                             GNPP./E. =
                                                         " TA      .1.10
                                                                           -TDLII
where GNPP/E cakes GNPP adjusted by percentage sold hut this lime normalized by total shareholders equity deruned as the
difference of total assets and total liabilities at the time or privatizalion (It). The mean GNPP/ is 0.5868 with a standard
deviation of 1.22. Other standardizations calculated include GNPP as numerator with the Following denominators: (i) tout assets
before privalization: (ii) average tour-year sales: and (iii) twoyear average employment. Their correlations with the equity
denominator arc between 0.5356 and 0.6384. The same economeiric analysis of the following pages was also carried out for
the GNPP/E measure as dependent variable without signil'icant changes in the results.

       As an alternative, all regressions in the paper were done using GLS with no significant change (not shown). Ouilicr and
points with high leverage were excluded From the sample and regressions were rerun with no significant effect. Similarly, no
significant change is observed when the econometric analysis included all 221 Privatizalion Contracts bul omits the restricting
labor characteristics. Throughout the rest of the paper I use labor force characteristics in the analysis as they account for an
increase in the overall adjusted R5 of between 0.06 and 0.09.

                                                              14
 IV. A. Financial and performance parameters


  Financial and production characteristics of the company are divided into four groups: profitability,
activity level, liquidity, and leverage. Table IV presents the main results of a series of cross-section
regressions done for different groupings of company characteristics with and without industry dummies.
Throughout the paper we will use Regression I of Table IV as the Basic Regression, which identifies
company and industry characteristics as well as auction parameters that significantly affect Privatization
Q. Since PQ controls for debt-to-assets ratios, leverage measures are excluded from the independent
variables. Liqt.aidity measures were not significant ii' most cases (not shown in table). All regressions
in Table LV yield large, positive and significant coefficients for profitability ratios (average net income
over sales and average operating income over sales). For example, a I % increase in the net income over
sales ratio translates into an almost 2% increase in PQ evaluated at the mean.


  Regression II in Table IV shows a positive, although not significant, relation between PQ and activity
proxies such as the average capital utilization and the average rate of production growth in the period
prior to sale. Capacity utilization has a positive coefficient, suggesting that installed capacity usage
reveals in part the condition of the equipment and its eApected profitability under private ownership.8

IV. B. Industry characteristics


  Market structure and regulation in a particular industry may play a role in determining privatization
premia, In some industries, the government has a large percentage of the market through a single SOE;
several monopolies and oligopolies (e.g., airlines, telecommunications) fall in this category. In other
sectors, although the government operations supply a large percentage of the market, each of the many
plants or SOEs has only a small share of the market (e.g., sugar mills, animal foods, commercial
banking). The results in Table IV show that the government's overall market participation influences PQ
much n-tore than the individual company's share does.


  Part of this result could be explained by government regulation and protection against foreign
competition. For example, the correlation between the percentage of government's share of the industry's
output and a dummy equal to one if there is a special regulation in that sector is O.6327. Although
privalization usually entails industry deregulation, protection from competition is usually slowly
eliminated. In fact, several of these industries face price and quantity restrictions; deregulation tied to



      8 Some evidence pointing in this direction is based on the low correlation, o&y -0.0749, between installed capacity
utilitation and a dummy equal to I i the evaluation or the firm detected problems of old or obsolete machinery, or lack of
investment and maintenance. Meanwhile, the correlation of installed capacity utilization and a dummy equal to one if the
evaluation detected good conditions nt property, plant, and equipment was 0.126.

      Meanwhile, the correlation between the government's parikipation in an industry and the percent of foreign ownership
allowed in the industry is -0.1217.

                                                            15
                                                                        TABLE IV
                                 COMPANY CIIARACTERISTICS AND TIlE AUCTION PROCESS
Ordinary least squares regresaions or the cross sect jots ni SUEs pro-allied its Mesico between 1983 and
                                                                                                                  1992. The dependent variable is
 "Privasization Q." the Government"s Privatiration Price tGNPP) adjusted by the percentage of shares sold, plus Total Liabilities
privatuzasmn divided by Total Assets of the Cossspany it time of privatization. "Net Incotne/Satcs" and 'Operating Ineotne/Sales" at time of
                                                                                                                                        are the ore-
prsvalizatissn four-year averages of Net Income over Total Sales and Operating Income over Total Sales respectively; 'Growth in Producjn"
 iv the pre-privacizat ion (our-year geometric average ot'productiott growth; "Capacity Utilization" is the two-yetr average of capacity utilization
helsare privatization; "Contingent Labor Liabilities per Worker" is the average cost of firing a worker the day after privatizatson; "Number ol
Strikes" is the number of strikes in the five years Isetore privatization; "Government in Industry" is the government"1
                                                                                                                           percentage share In the
industry's output before privatization; 'Non-control Package dummy" equala I when the percentage sow does not give control       to the
o odserwise; "Company Market Share" is the three-year average market share of SOEbefore                                                   bujer and
                                                                                                privatization; "Non-iradeable Good dummy equals
 I if the main product or the company is a non-tradeable good and 0 otherwise; "Percentage Sold' is the percentage of shires sold is
privatization. "1988-1992 dummy" is equal In I when the 5013 was privatized between 1988 and 1992 and 0 otherwise; 'Total LengtlC is the
titLat number of days between Ihe first recommendation to psivatize and the pruvatization date; "Number of bidders" is the number of different
bidders involved in privatization; "EDt allowed dummy" is equal to I if the toreign investors are allowed into participate in the sale; 'Cash-sate
nutty duntnty" is equal to I if the privatiration payment had lobe made in cash. White (1980' corrected standard errors are given in parentheses




                                                                              Drpevsdeni Variable: Prlvatlaatlon Q
              Independent Variable,                 Basic RegressIon                                                  Control Privatizations
                                                               I                     II                   til                   IV
       Net Income/Sales                                      09468                                     0.9187                 0.7638'
                                                         (0.2063)                                      10.2 126)             (0.2 130)
       Contingent Labor liabilities                      -0.0159'                 00l84"               -0.0194"              -0.0192'
       per worker                                        (0.0043)                (0.0049)              tO.00491              (0.0046)
       Number of Strikes                                -0.5324"                 -43.1375"             -0.1250"              -0N35"
                                                        (0.034 4)                (0.0383)              10.034 7)             (0.0347)
       Government in      Industry                       03880                   0.4537                0.3482 -              0.4703
                                                        (0. t947)                (0.2235)              (0.188 I)             (0.2196)
       Non-Control Package dummy                        -0.4383                  -0.4239'              -0.4069'
                                                        (0. 1492)                (0.1570)              (0.1566)
       Operating Income/Sates                                                     0.5390"
                                                                                 (0. 1622)

       Growth in Production                                                       0.0380
                                                                                 (0.1951)

       Capacity Utilization                                                       01776
                                                                                 (0.1543)
       Company Market Share                                                                            0. 1743
                                                                                                       (0.2235)
       Non-tradeable Good dummy                                                                        0. 1841
                                                                                                       (0.1821)

       Percentage Sold                                                                                                       -0.3997
                                                                                                                             (03943)
       1988-1992 dummy                                   0.2075                   0.2758               0 .074 8              0.2544"
                                                        (0.1285)                 (0.1548)              (0. 13 12)            (0.138   I)
       Total Length                                     -0.0004"                 -0.0005'              -0.0004"              .0.0003'
                                                        (0.0005)                 (0.0001)              (0.0001)              (0.0001)
       Number      of bidders                           0.0884                   0.08t4                0,0819"               0.0859"
                                                        (0.0216)                 (00246)               (0.0238)              (0.0230)
       Ff31 allowed dommy                                0.2662'                  0.2362                0.1084               0. 1912
                                                         (0.1640)                (0.2 157)             (0.1911)              (0.1429)
       Cash-sale only    dummy                          -0.1889"                 -0.2529               0.1033                0. 1510
                                                         (0.1031)                (0.1092)              (0.1063)              (0.1162)

       Intercept                                         0.9189"                  0.9998"              0.8485                 0.9143
                                                         (0.23 16)                (0.2965)             (0.22 34)             (0.3005)
       Industry Dummies                                       yes                   yes                  yes                    yes
       Number of Observations                                 166                   159                  166                    ISO

       Adjusted R1                                           .4999                 .4 166               .46 19                 .4979       -

           Sugniticans at I percent. • Sugniitcattt   at 5   percent.     Significant at 10 percent.
privatization could allow companies to increase prices. The correlation between the percentage of
government's share of total production and dummies for the existence of price and or quantity
deregulation tied to privatization are 0.58 and 0.62 respectively. Alternatively, industries previously
dominated by government operations may in fact be those with the highest potential to exploit benefits
when opened to private ownership. One can therefore expect a premium to be paid for SOEs in such
industries regardless of the relative share of a particular firm at the time of its privatization. since that
share may reflect other factors, such as the government assigning production among plants following
criteria other than profit maximization, for example.

  Finally, in contrast to some of the literature on the relevance of international trade characteristics of
the industry (World Bank [1992)), this study finds no significant difference between tradeable and non-
tradeable goods sectors in terms of PQ (regression Ill of Table IV). Other trade measures such as the
share of exports in company sales and the degree of import competition in the market are not significant
(not shown in tables).

IV. C. Labor

  Privatization winners not only buy the physical capital of the company, they also acquire a labor
contract. I created two measures that capture the cost of' the labor contract and the strength of the union.
To measure how much it would cost to fire a worker, I calculate the "contingent labor liabilities per
worker," equal to the cost of firing the average employee if the new owner decides to do so the day after
buying the firm.'0 The second labor measure I use is the number of strikes experience by the SOE in
the five years before privatization. This number is associated with the pugnacity of the union and serves
as an index of labor-management relations. The correlation between contingent labor liabilities per
worker and the number of strikes for the sample is -0.0688. indicating that a combination of these two
variables is needed to cover complementary aspects of the labor situation of the firm. Supporting
Freeman's [1986] evidence on the relatively lower frequency of strikes by public versus private unions,
SOEs to be privaized suffer very few strikes before privalization. No strikes occurred in 55.6% of the
sample, while 44.4% experienced between I and 4 strikes.


  The results in all regressions of Table IV (and the following tables) show a negative sign on both the
labor variables." The coefficient on contingent labor liabilities suggests that SOEs where an average
worker costs twice as much as the mean cost have a 3% lower PQ. One of the most striking results is
that an additional strike in an SOE leads to a 18% reduction in the net price evaluated at the mean


     '° To compute this number. I include the benelils specified in thc collective union contract. On average, when a public
seclor worker is fired, these benetits take the rorm ot: (I) an average or 3 months or salary: (2) 201040 days or 'vacalions
bonus; (3) 15 to 20 days or salary tor each year the worker was employed; and (4) a special bonus which varied across SOE.s
and ranged between t and 5 months or wages.

       The adjusted R increases close 100,09 when I include these Iwo labor variables.

                                                             16
predicted PQ.' Labor factors play a central role in explaining privatization prices.

[V.0. Control versus Revenue Pris'atiations

  Privatization may involve a change in control. As already mentioned, several theories bear on the
relative merits of control and revenue privatizations. To address these issues, I created a "Non-control
Package" dummy identifying the cases when the sale did not include control. A total of 29 observations
falls in this group and all refer to government joint ventures in which private firms controlled of the SOE
before privatization. Various performance measures 4or this group are above the average of the rest of
the privatized firms. But all regressions in Table IV show once we control for performance, non-control
privadzations face a statistically significant and economically large discount. Non-control packages bring
net prices equivalent to 25% of those generated by similar packages of shares which do give control
rights to the buyer. This result shows a significant premium for obtaining control versus becoming a
minority shareholder in an already privately-controlled firm.

  Regression IV in Table IV uses the same specification as in the Basic Regression but includes the
subsample of control privatizations only. The results show that the percentage of shares privatized is not
statistically significant. This evidence makes clear that a significant premium is obtained for the
privatizacion of majority holdings which give the buyer control; once control rights are sold, the actual
percentage of shares privatized does not affect prices.'3

IV. E. Period. Order, and Learning Effects

     Macroeconomic conditions could play an important role in determining PQ. In the first phase of
privatization (1983-1987), the government emphasized restructuring the public sector. Large restructuring
packages covering investment, debt absorption, and company productivity commitments were signed in
this period. The next phase of the program (1988-1992) started not only with a lasge macro stabilization
package, but also with a shift of privatization to the center of the economic agenda. The government
created art Office of Privatization with broad powers and strong support from the President. As an
illustration, internal files of the administration show that the question directed to different ministcies
shifted from which companies should be privatized to which SOEs should remain public and why.



       All regressions in the paper were also run excluding the live outlying observations with the highest number of strikes
without observing any significani changes in the results.

       IS A final point of debate in this area is that of partial privalization or the case when the government Stays is a partner.
 Kikeri et ii. 119921 suggest the idea of keeping a 'golden share' for government in some special cases when political cOncernS
 would otherwise prevent privatization. In my sample, the government kept a minority share in eight SOEs making clear its
 intention to sell the stock to Use private sector in later offerings through the stock market. The econometric specifications
 exploring joint-ventures with the government, show a positive coefficient with ve,y large standard errors. It is haid to interpret
 this coefficient in my sample since in most of these cases, die government gave its young rights to die control group. These
  results are not shown in the paper hut are available upon request.

                                                                 17
 To test the hypothesis of the difference between the two periods, all regressions inclu3e a dummy
variable equal to one for those companies privatized between 1988 and 1992 and 0 otherwise. MI
regressions in Table IV, and throughout the rest of the paper, show a positive coefficient on the ' l98i-
1992" dummy with a 1-statistic around I. Evaluated at the mean, a company sold during the second
phase is priced between 20 and 25% higher than those privatized before 1988. This result could be
capturing the improved growth outlook during the second period.'4



                                     V. PQ AND THE AUCTION PROCESS

V.A. Speed in Privalization


Length regressions
  Studying different measures of the time spent on the sale of each SOE gives evidence on the benefits
of speed in privatization. To capture this effect, I first construct a variable labelled "Total Length," which
represents the number of days between the date of the first document within the government that mentions
the possibility of privatization of an SOE and the aate of the announcement of the buyer. The
stakeholders of the SOE likely learned the news of privatization around the date of the first memo. When
I introduce this variable in the first regression of Table V. I find evidence of a significant discount for
 onger privatizationS.

  To determine the causes of this premium for speed, total length is divided into two subperiods (detailed
in Appendix A). Public length (from the date of the first public announcement until the date of the sale)
proxies for the effect of slow "public sale time," which typically means that several auction rounds were
 needed because either the government did not accept the bids or no bids were registered in the first
 round. One might expect the worst companies to have longer public length and possibly end up with a
 lower relative price, Instead, regression II in Table V reveals that public length is not the factor which
 Leads to lower prices, pointing to the absence of a penalty for those companies with several auction
 rounds.

   internal length is defined as the number of days from the date of the first memo suggesting privatizatiOn
 of an SOE to the date of the first public announcement. This number may be related to the efficiency                           of


          It is also conceivable that the experience gained through lime could explain the positive coefficient of this dummy
 variable: that is. prices might increase as the participants gain credibility in the program and the government gains experience.
 I explored this hypothesis in three ways. First, t looked ror a learning effect throughout the whole program, with linear and
 concave functional forms of a variable which measured the order of sale, but found no statistical significance. Second. I created
 a within.industry.order variable, the coeflicieni of which shows an economically smatl though marginally statistically significant
                                                                                                                              trends
 positive trend. Finally. Iran several specirications looking br year or quarter effects to identify possible economy-wide
 that would be reflected in the price pattern. No significant effects were founiL with the exception of two quarters in the
 recession year of 1986, which had signil'icant negative coefficients associated with them. These results are not shown but are
 available upon request.

                                                                 18
                                                    TABLE V
                            LENGTH OF PRIVATIZATION PER COMPANY

Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of SOEs privatized in Mexico between 1983 and 1992. The
dependent variable is 'Privatization Q. the Govcrnment's Privatization Price (ONPP) adjusted by the percentage of
shares sold, plus Total Liabilities at time of privalization. divided by Total Assets of the Company at time of
privalization. 'Net Income/Sales' is the prc-privatizvion four-year average of Net Income over Total Sales;
•Contingent Labor Liabilities per Worker' is the average cost of firing a worker the day after privatization; 'Number
of Strikes' is the number of strikes in the live years before privatization: 'Government in Industry' is the
govcrnmenl's percentage share in the inductrys output before privatization; 'Non-control Package dummy' equals I
when the percentage sold does not give control to th buyer and 0 otherwise; '1988-1992 dummy' is equal to I when
the SOE was privatized between 1988 and 1992 and 0 otherwise: 'Total Length' is the total number of days between
the first recommendation to privatize and the privatization date: 'Public Length' is the number of days between the
first public announcement of privatization and the day of the announcement of the winner: 'Internal Length' is the
number of days between the first recommendation for privatization and the first public announcement of privatization;
'Number of bidders' is the number of different bidders involved in privatization; FDI allowed dummy' is equal to
I if the foreign investors are allowed in to participate in the sale; 'Cash-sale only dummy' is equal to I if the
privatizarion payment had to be made in cash. White (1980) corrected standard errors arc given in parentheses.


                                                                   Depesidesu Variable. Privatizatlon Q


      Independent Var,ablez                       Length of Process            Public Length        Internal Length
                                                           I                          II                     Ill


     Net Income/Sales                                  (1.8794                    0.8999 •                0.8776
                                                       (0.2038)                   (0.2290)                (0.2214)
    Con:ingent Labor Liabilities                      -0.OIN •                   .0.0190'
    per worker                                        (0.0049)                    (0.0048)                (0.0049)

     Number olStrikes                                 -0.1232 •                  -00883'              -0.1173'
                                                      (0.0340)                    (0.0368)                (0.0364)

     Government in Industry                            0.4688                     0.4292                  0.4864
                                                       (0.2034)                   (0.2399)                (0.2205)

     Non-control Package dummy                         -0.4146 •                  -0.3285 '               -0.3623
                                                       (0.1570)                   (0.1993)                (0.1913)

     1988-1992 dummy                                    0.1066                     0.2321                  0.1853
                                                       (0.1277)                   (0.1712)                (0.1574)

     Total   Length                                    -0.0004
                                                        O.000l)

     Public Length                                                                0.0000
                                                                                  (0.0002)

     Internal Length                                                                                      -0.0004
                                                                                                          (0.0001)

     Number of Bidders                                  0.0824                     0.0974                 0.0938
                                                        (0.0241)                   (0.0292)               (0.0258)

     Number of Rounds                                   0.0268                     -0.0520                 -0.0483
                                                        (OA)626)                   (00829)                 (00649)

     Ft)l not allowed dummy                             -0.0775                    -0.2621                 -0.1500
                                                        (0.1897)                   (0.2134)                (0.2020)

                                                        -0.1168                    .0.1631                 -0.1570
     Cash-sale only dummy
                                                        c°:.!.06   3)
                                                        09923                       0.5381 b               0.8426
      Intercept
                                                        (0.2430)                   (0.2651)                (0.2826)


      Industry Dummies                                     yes                        yes                     yes

                                                            166                       148                     146
      Number 01 Observations
                                                          .4669                      .4692                   .457 I
      Adjusted R1



      Sniticatit at I percent.     Significant at 5 percent.        Significant at 10 percent.
bureaucratic procedures. Additionally, this variable may hint at internal difficulties in placing the SUE
for sale, such as stakeholder opposition and management resistance to providing the evaluators with
financial information.'5 Typically, a detailed technical and financial study has been completed by the
time when the sale of the SUE is publicly announced. The financial statements thus produced bind the
government, which is liable for any discrepancies between this financial evaluation and the actual numbers
found once the firm is privatized. In regression III of Table V, the coefficient on internal length is
negative and significant. This number should be interpreted as the penalty for each additional day in
putting the company on the block. Evaluated at the mean value of PQ, a company would carry a discount
of an extra 6% if It took an additional 3 months of internal length.

  To address the concern of possible endogeneity of the length measures, I implemented the two-stage
econometric procedure explained in section II. The results, shown in Appendix D, not only preserve the
statistically significant negative relation between length and PQ, but also give a larger coefficient. In the
case of internal length, the coefficient changes frotn -0.0004 to -0.0006, raising the average penalty for
3 extra months of internal length to 9% of PQ. evaluated at the mean.


Comparative performance before privatization
  SUE performance deteriorates before privatization, and this may explain why a time-consuming process
depresses the price. Table VI contains financial and performance data of the to-be-privatized SOEs in
the t, 1.2. I.,. and t0 years before their privatization (where t0 is the year of privalizalion). As the day of
sale approaches, a decrease in profitability is clearly evident from this table. There is a 5 percentage
points decrease in the "net income to sales" ratio in years 1., and 1. Liquidity and market penetration fall
throughout the period, particularly in the last two years. As privatization approaches, the incentives of
the managers, workers, shareholders seem to collapse, severely affecting the company's activity and
profitability. Managers :ften take golden parathutes before resigning (it is fairly common for bidders
to stipulate no last minute management turnover. Similarly, workers try to extract more concessions in
the annual collective contract revisions before privatition. Current and even fixed assetsmay be lost
during the final weeks.t We cannot rule out the possibility that the observed deterioration results from
the same causes that account for lower performance of firms under financial distress, especially since
privatization very likely will change the operations, production, and running of the firm.




        Although one might expect that the largest companies have longer internal length, the correlat'ion between total assets
and internal time is very small (onty 0.084).

       To help prevent the loss or assets, at Ihe end ot the privatization program the government instituted a system by which
all heads oldepariments olan SOE had to provide periodic reports olthe assets under their controt. tn some cases, these reports
were put in a dala hank and bidders could access them electronically.

                                                              19
                                                                  Table VI

                                    Pre-privatization Performance of the whole sample
                                                                 (mean values)

                     Index

      Operating Profit / Sales
                                                         '
                                                      -0.1098
                                                                            ''
                                                                       - 0.1089
                                                                                    I
                                                                                               '
                                                                                        - 0.0998
                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                            -
                                                                                                                0.0561
      Net Income / Sales                              - 0.1968         - 0.1914         - 0.1421            - 0.1441
      Sales / Total Assets                             0.824            0.8357              0.9109              1.0636
      Tot. Liabilitiesllot. Assets                     0.4762           0.4688              0.4912              0.6223

      Capacity Utilization                             0.4987           0.5287               0.5690             0.5829

      Labor Productivity Change                       . 0.0267         - 0.0673             - 0.02 IS           ----
      Number of Observations                             197              197                 197                197



  Given these tendencies for the whole sample, TaAe VII splits the to-be-privatized SOEs into two
groups, those with internal lime less than the mean (422 days), and those with internal time greater than
the mean." At t. both groups look very similar, with tI.. beluw-me'n group composed of smaller firms
registering larger losses. Performance shifts in the year before privatization (t.,) when the SOEs above
the mean (panel b) now record the highest losses, while the group with speedy privatizations (panel a)
improves its profitability and market penetration. The leverage of the former also increases, in contrast
to the lower debt levels of the below-mean group. Thus, those companies with longer internal times of
privacization suffer greater deterioration. These results point to a premium for speed.



V. B. Number of Bidders and Renegotiation Rounds

  Auction theory predicts an increase in the premium p2id for an auctioned good as the number of bidders
increases. A total of 529 different companies, individuals, and unions were identified as bidders.' I
computed two indices: (i) number of bidders in the final sale round; and (ii) total number of different
bidders involved in all auction rounds. As shown in Table VIII, the mean number of bidders in the final
sale round is only 2.57. Almost 85% of the sample has no more than four different bidders, while 2.6%
has only I bidder but possibly multiple rounds. The vast majority of the companies were sold in the first
round, and only 14 companies needed more than three rounds.




        17 I find   no   significant changes   when using the median to split the groups.

        ua                                                          is not enough to accurately determ,nc the real owner. It is common
             As expected, the name of    the bidding group atone
 to find the same underlying shareholders bidding through different companies or in association with someone else. Ii was
 therefore necessary to go one level down atid screen the underlying structure of each registered bidder.

                                                                       20
                                                           Table VII
  Panel a: Pre-privatization performance of firms below the mean number of days of Internal time.
                                                        (mean values)

                  Index                                                 's
                                            II                                                       I

  Net Income/Sales                                 0.1583           .0.1964           -0.1610             -0.1616
  Sales / Total Assets                             0.9942            0.9705             1.1274              1.2816

  Tot. Liabilities/Tot.   Assets                   0.3940            0.4431            0.4728               0.5806
  Number of Observations                              67                67                67                  67

  Panel b. Pre-privatization performance of firms above the mean number of days of Internal time.

                  Index
                                            II                  I
                                                                        '                            I
  Net Income / Sales                              - 0.2184           - 0.1858         .0.1249             - 0.1287
  Sales / Total Assets                             0.6708            0.6948            0.7104               0.8572
  Tot. Liabilities/Tot. Assets                     0.5731            0.4966            0.5082               0.6617
   Number of Observations                             ii                71                71                  71




  PQ and the number of bidders in the auction may move together if they are both correlated to a third
set of variables that reflect the quality of the object for sale. Accordingly, the number of auction rounds
and PQ would be expected to move in opposite directions (i.e., valuable SOEs sell in fewer rounds and
attract both higher bids and more bidders). With this in mind. I use two methods to explain the influence
of competition in the auction on prices. First. I use the set of significant control variables determined in
previous section to control for the quality of the SOE.'9 The results in all regressions of Tables 4 and
5 show that for an SOE sold at the mean PQ. an additional bidder in the final round would have increased
the price by more than 15%. The bidder-premium elasticity is around 1.4 for final round bidders and
 1.55 for a bidder in the process.

  Theoretically, the possibility of renegotiation or multiple auction rounds could have an impact on the
strategies followed by the bidders, and therefore affect PQ. The coefficient on the effect of increased
number of rounds shows large standard errors, precluding clear conclusions (Table V). A variety of
reasons could explain why a company takes several rounds to sell, ranging from cases where there are
no bids, to those where renegotiation leads to extra rounds or where the highest bids are too close to
decide and participants are asked to bid again.


          The existence of mutticoltinearity between thc SOE characteristics and the number of bidders and rounds could lower
the siguilicance level or the estimated coefficients. The correlation between bidders and rounds, and the rest of the controls is
nonetheless small, ranging From 0.02 in 037 in absolute values. There(ore. since correlations are not large and the procedure
iilI gives unbiased estimates, this probleiti is considered minor.

                                                               21
                                                            Table VIII

                            Distribution 01 the number of bidders and auction rounds


 Sold in         Percentage of           Mean number of                       Total number or different bidders
 Round:           Contracis           bidders in final round                Mean                     Maximum

      I            6335 %                      2.647                          2.647                               II
      2             3.08 %                     2.333                          3058                                10

      3              7.24 %                    2.625                          4.312                               9
     4               2.71 %                    3.000                          4.000                                7

      5              1.36%                     2.333                          3.333                               4
      6              1.81 %                    2.750                          3.500                               4
      7             0.45 %                     2.000                          4.000                               4
  Total:        221 contracts                  2.577                          2.931                               Ii




  The second approach to explain the impact of auction competition on prices goes a step further
considering the possibility of endogeneity by following the two-stage procedure outlined in section II.
The results preserve the statistical significance of the coefficient on the number of bidders, though its
value is reduced from 0.09 to around 0.06 (not shown). The coefficient on the number of rounds is still
positive and insignificant as in the one-stage regression. Overall, these numbers point to higher premia
as auction competition increases.

V. C. Auction Res:rjctjo,,s


  Although alt privatizations in Mexico were first-price sealed-bid auctions, not all auction requirements
for each company were the same. Based on          internal documents and guidelines, I coded 26 auction

requirements, which can be classified into five categories: (I) foreign investment; (2) ownership or type-
of-bidder restrictions; (3) investment plan requirements; (4) contract/supply commitments; and (5) form
of payment. To determine the individual effects of these requirements, I ran several specifications of the
"Basic Regression" in Table IV including different sets of the dummies for requirements (not shown).°
Table IX presents the main results and separates the impact of requirements on PQ into two panels.
according to negative and positive effects.




     20 Attention us paid in the estimation to hugh correlation between requiremenis. In two instances, I eliminated requirements
tram the equation to avoid rnulticolliiiearily. Tomal length (instead of internal lengii) is used in the rest or the paper as ii allows
us to keep the observations covering non-control packages in the sample. n these 16 cases, no formal public announcement was
made in the newspapers, so there is ito clear boundary helwcen internal and public time.

                                                                  22
Foreign Direct Investment
 Current research has not estimated the influence of foreign investors in privatization. In our sample,
              participated actively, winning in 6.3% of the auctions and forming winning joint ventures with
foreigners
domestic firms in another 9.1 % of all privatizatiOnS. Lower PQs are associated with those cases where
foreigners were not allowed to participate (see Table IX). Opening the auction to foreign bidders
increases competition and translates into higher premia for the government.


Ownership period and type of bidders
 Evidence also shows that restrictions on period of ownership or on the allowed characteristics of
competing bidders lower PQ. Examples include the requirements of exclusive ownership for a minimum
number of years (usually 3 to 5). requirements on previous experience, or access to technology, and the
existence of a pre-qualification round. All translate into lower PQs. Table IX shows that, evaluated at
the mean predicted PQ, cases with "Ownership/Bidder Restrictions" fetch ciose to 40% lower prices.


Investment plans and contract commitments
  In 64 cases of our sample. bidders were required to submit a fairly detailed investment plan along with
taicir bid. In another 6 cases, the government required the winner to meet all the previous contracts of
the SOE. The coefficients on both of these dummies are negative, but the standard error is too large to
draw conclusions.

Form of payment
   In theory, the announcement of a minimum bid floor provides more information about the company and
 increases the number of bidders by one, since bidders have to compete against this reservation price.2'
 The estimated coefficient on this requirement (Table IX) gives no conclusive evidence. Finally, in 75
  of the 221 privatization contracts, the authorities required the bidders to pay cash. Governments have
  been imposing this requirement to try to avoid some sad experiences in other countries (notably Chile)
 where an excess of debt in the payment structure led to defaults and to the government getting the firm
 back. Aghion, Hart. and Moore (1992] suggest that cash-only auctions may preclude an interested bidder
 from acquiring the company at its maximized value because the cost of financing a cash bid may be
 significant, at least for the large transactions. In our sample, I find evidence along these lines with
 a negative coefficient but no statistical significance. The coefficient implies close to a 20% discount,
 evaluated at the predicted mean P0.

    In summary, the main effects of privatization auction requirements are negative for all conditions


       21 This assumes that the government's threat nt keeping the company ii afl bids are below the minimum bid floor is
  credible.

       21 The authors suggest tlit these costs could he in the same range as those quantified by Rifler (19871 in the case of initial
                                                                                                                       32% of the
  public offerings (IPOs). In this study. Ruler quanlifies direct expenses and underpricIng costs between 21 and
  realized market value of the issue.

                                                                  23
                                                                                           TABLE IX
                                                                               AUCTION REQUIREMENTS
  Ordinary   least  quaresregressions oldie cross Section orsoE privasised in Mexico between 1983 and 1992. The
  Privacization Price (GNP                       the             of                                                               dependeassariable is Privatization Q. the Govemmenns
-privatization. Net Income/Sales  adjusted   by      percentage      shares sold.  plut  Total Liabilmes  at tune   of
                                         is the pre-orrvatzauonfour-year average of Net Income over Total              pfivatizatjon. dtvjded by Total Assetsof the Companyattune of
                                                                                                                   Sales; Contingem Labor Labil*ies per Worker is
 firing a worker the day after privatszation:          umber of Strskes is die number of strikes iii the  five
                                                                                                                                                                            the average costof
                                                                                                                years  before  Pflvatizarjon:  Governmen,    in Industry" is the
 percentage share in the indiasttys output before privalization; Non-control Package
                                                                                                 dummy equals I when the percentage sold does not give control to thegovernments
 otherwise;1988-1992        dummy      is equal  to I when the  SOE   was  privatised between   1988 and  I      and  0                                                            buyer and 0
 first recommemfarion to privatize and the privati2atioadate; Numberof bidders" is the                                  otherwise;"Total Lcn;ds is the local number of days between the
 is a dummy equal to      Ii                                                                      mimberof different bidders involved iii
                              therewere any restrictions On period of ownershipOr on the allowed Characteristics          of competingbidders prwasizazio-:   Ownetship/Bicj4er
                                                                                                                                                  and 0 otherwise; "Cuh-sale
                                                                                                                                                                                  Restrictions"
 is  equal to I if the privarizarion             had  to be made  in
 to accept bids(a reservation
                                      payment                        Cash;  Announced     Minimum   Bid Floor"   is a dummyequal to one i(the government announced a only dummy"
                                  price)  and 0 otherwise;   lluycrs  have to  meet all                                                                                         minimum floor
 the previous contracts of the SOE and 0 otherwise; investment Plan                     Company   Contracts"  is a dummyequalto one if the                              the winner to meet all
                                                                               Required"is a dummy equalto one if bidders were requiredgovernment to submit a reiuired
 along with their bid and 0 otherwise; FDI allowed dummy is equalto
    a dummy equalto I ifthe government providedthe bidders with a calendar of
                                                                                id  the foreign investors are allowed in to                                    fasrly detailed investment plan
                                                                                                                              participate in the sale: Cashflnstallments schedule provided"
 errors arc given in parentheses.                                                        payments that had lube made in Caseof winning in the auction. White
                                                                                                                                                                     (1980) Corrected standard
                                                                          Dependem                -   PtlvatlzatloaQ
               /ndepen4ens
                                                 :                  Requirements with    Nrwiseas                                     Requirenarsta with POZiSirt Effe cs
   Net Income/Sales               0.9192
                                 (0.2065)
   C,otirtgcnt Labor             -0.0109             Ownership/Bidder             0.3814      (0.2862)     -1.333
   I.uhil. per worker            (0.0047)            Restrictions                                                       torsigr. Direct                 0.2464       (0.2056)       1.198
                                                                                                                        Investment Aik,wed
   Nuorber   of Strikes          .0.1063"            Cash-sale only              .0.1175     (0.11 IS)     -1.054      Cash/Installments
                                 (0.0320)                                                                                                               0.0901       (0.1520)      0,59
                                                                                                                       schedule provided
  Government         in          0,4019              Announced Minimum           .0.0442     (0.2072)      .0.214
  Industry                       (0.1929)            Bid Floor
  Non-controlPackage            .0.4712"             Buyers must meet all        .0.0495     (0. 1265)     -0.391
  dummy                         (0.1459)             CompanyContracts
  1988-1992 dummy                0.1889      1       Invesunent Plan             .0.0252     (0.1265)      -0.149
                                (0.1228)             Required
 Total length                   -0.0004
                                (0.0001)
  Number     of Bidders         0.1145'
                                (0.0249)
                                0.9908 • I
 Intercept
                          -—-±L                                                                          _._L_.____
                                                       Industry dummies           yes
                                                       Numberof                    167
                                                       Observations
                                                       Adjusted Rt               .5004
    Significantat! percent           Significantat 5 percent               Significant
constraining participation (such as ownership restrictions, pre-qualilications, and preference given to
selected groups of bidders) and for forms of payment and other requiremenis which reduce the flexibility
of the form of the bid.


                    VI. PQ AND PRIOR RESTRUCTURING IN PRIVATIZATION

VI.A. Sotne Dos and Don 'is in        Prior Restructuring

  As shown in Table II. restructuring costs prior to privatization are quite high averaging, 32% of the
nominal price of a privatization contract (BQ). The total cost associated to prior restructuring is not only
the direct cost of each measure undertaken, but also its direct impact on PQ and the increase in length
of time to privatize. which has been shown to impact premiums negatively. This raises the following
questions: Should the government engage in prior testructuring? If so, in what forms? Table X divides
the sample into two groups: (type a) those companies where restructuring did occur, and (type b) those
where it did not. The table also shows the results of a difference in means test for the mean PQ of these
two groups for each restructuring policy. If the data used to calculate PQ were all the available
information one had to evaluate the effect of prior restructuring actions -- a not unreasonable assumption
for policy makers -- two of the clearest policy recommendations that would emerge would be to avoid
debt absorution or union contract restructuring (Table X). But, as we will show later, since these policies
are endogenous, drawing conclusions from Table X could lead to erroneous recommendations.

                                                            TABLE X
                                       PRIOR RESTRUCTURING MEASURES
Mean values of 'Privalizalion Q of the groups of companies where: (a) the restructuring m as9re was taken' and ) the
rcstiucILi;ng measure was not taken. 'Privatization Q' is equal to the 'Governmcnls Net Pnvatization Price (GPP) aljusted
by the percentage of shares sold, plus Total Liabilities at the tune of privatization. divided by Total Assçts Or the company at
the Lime of prtvatlzailon. The exact delinitions nt other variables can be found in AppendiS C. The difference between the
ineinPQ ot group a and the mean PQ UI group •b is shown in the third column. The last columflrepOrtS die resulting t.
statistic of a difference in means tests or the mean PQs of these two groups. The number of observations in each group are given
in parentheses.


                                                  (a)                        (b)           Difference in Means
                                                                                                (a) (b)             t - slot.
                                          Measure_Taken            Measure_No_Taken
   CEO change                            0.8679         (31)            0.6064     (146)         0.2615               1.75'
                                         0.6401         (26)            0.6543     (151)        -0.0142              -0.09
   Management team change
   Labor cuts                            0.5472         (63)            0.7102     (114)        .0.1630               1.48

   UnIon contract restructurIng          0.0842         (14)            0.7010     (163)         .0.6168             .2.74

   Debt absorption                       0.0621             (70)        0.7899     (132)         -0.7278             -5.82'
   ElTkkncy measures                     0.5954             (39)        0.5239     (163)         0.0715               0.46
   Investment measures                    0.4967            (45)        0.5495     (157)         -0.0528              .0.44

   De-Investment measures                 0.8288            (41)        0.4636     (161)         0.3652               2.89'

  • Significant at I pcrceni;   Signiticaiu at 5 percent:      Significant at 10 percent



                                                                   24
 The rest of this section studies the price effects of prior restructuring measures connected to
privatization. The access to detailed information allows to estimate the impact of restructuring actions on
net prices by two methods. The first considers policy actions as exogenous and estimates PQ regressions
of the same form as those in previous sections but now including restructuring policy variables. The
second, and more appropriate, approach captures the endogeneity of prior actions by implementing the
two-stage procedure outlined in section II to evaluate the final impact of prior restructuring on PQ. This
approach is appealing because it reveals the explanatory variables influencing the government's decision
to restructure an SOE. and enables us to determine some dos and don 'Is in prior restructuring by the
government.

  Table Xl pulls together the individual restructuring measures described in Table X. The first column
of Table XI considers prior restructuring measures as exogenous and estimates directly the OLS White-
corrected regression. The second column uses the two-stage procedure to take account of the endogeneity
of prior restructuring policies. All F-tests on excluded instruments for each policy action allow us to
reject the null hypothesis and accept the significance of the instruments list or its correlation with the
endogenous explanatory variable in each case. The results shown in Table XI are also robust to
instrument specifications. The remainder of the Section will show that taking account of the endogeneity
of restructuring policies reverses some of the results in Table X and in the one-stage (OLS)
specification.

 VI.B. Management Changes

   Two policies are examined: change of the CEO and changes of other members of the management
 team.24 In several of these cases, the prospectus given to the bidders emphasized management change
 and the substitution of the "old guard" with a "young and dynamic" CEO or team of managers with the
 task of getting the firm ready for privatization.

 CEO Changes
  In 33 instances in our sample. the CEO was fired before privatization. To illustrate the results we
 obtain when we take account of endogeneily, Appendix E presents the specification used in the first stage




      " The policies analyzed in this paper occur frequently, allowing us to perform econometric tests. Some or the asset
 restructuring measures, such as the breaking up of companies, asset spin.otTs, and the packaging of several SOEs together for
                                                                                                                         was
 their sale were also explored in a similar way as the one outlined in the following pages. No significant effect on PQ
 observed for the use of these measures. López-de'Silanes (I 995a and I 995b) explore the interaclion of regulation. de.regulatiOfl.
 and privalizarion as well as their iesulls as reflected in post-privatization industry performance.

      ' In cases concerning the board of direclors. few involved creation of a board, and those involving changes in board
  composition took place only in Iwo or three industries and were usually lied tO a reclassification of the company in other sector
  for ihc purpose or privatizition.

                                                                 25
probit to obtain the predictor of the CEO change dummy. As can be inferred from the table in
Appendix E, most CEOs were fired during the Salinas administration, were career bureaucrats without
specific expertise in the business, and headed large firms. No CEO (nor any other directors) were fired
from SOEs when they had links with the union or with private shareholders. SOEs with third parties
supplying proprietory technology or distributing the company's products, or those SOEs that acted as
suppliers for other SOEs suffered fewer CEO changes.26 In the second stage panel of Appendix E, the
"CEO change' predictor is used as a generated instrument to measure the final impact of firing the CEO
on PQ. SOEs where the government changed the CEO have a substantially higher PQ. This result is
confirmed in T '1e Xl both in the one-stage and in th two-stage panels. Firing the CEO and putting a
privazizer in charge of cleaning up the company and getting it ready for sale as fast as possible is a
worthwhile strategy for increasing net prices.

Management Team Changes
  The number of cases with management team changes, other than the CEO. totals 43. The two-stage
procedure uses a Tobit censored from below at 0 and from above at I, representing the range between
o and 100 percent, to generate a predictor of the percent of manager cuts, other than the CEO. In the
second stage, il,e predictor produces a positive effect or. ?Q, bu, the standard error is too large to draw
firm conclusions (not shown in tables).27

 The results indicate that firing management without sacking the CEO does not bring a premium.
Although it is likely that the ousting of a CEO is followed or accompanied by some firing of the
management team, it is the removal of the CEO that is associated with statistically significant higher PQs.
 As will be shown below, firms where the old management team was left in place show higher occurrences
 of efficiency or investment programs. In this sense, the positive effect associated with a change in
 management could also be explained by the fact that the old CEOs are more expensive duringthe
 transition because they spend more resources on efficiency programs.

 VI. C. Labor

   Previous sections of the paper reveal the importance of labor characteristics in determining PQ and this
 section takes an additional look at the relevance of union variables in terms of the impact of labor
 restructuring measures on net prices.


         A similar procedure is loflowed For all restructuring policies but these regressions are not included in the paper.

      26 Alternative specilications ol the instrument list show that companies with large losses and tower capacity utiliLatiOn were
 targets For this measure.

      Z7 In 36 ot the 45 cases where the CEO was tired, additional management learn changes took place. Since changes of CEO
  and changes oF other members of the management learn are highly correlated (0.71). Table II shows the specification eactuding
  management team changes other than the CEO. Other specifications arc available upon request.


                                                                  26
                                                           TABLE XI
                                     PRIOR RESTRUCTURING: DOS AND DON'TS
Probit. Tobit. and OLS regressions 01 the cross-section of SOEs privacized iii Mexico between 1983 and 1992. The lirsi
regression considers prior restructuring measures as exogenous and estimates directly the OLS regressions. White (1980)
corrected standard errors are 'iven in parentheses. For the endognous process: in the )'irss Stage, Probit and Eobits are used
to get the policy cdictors o the discrete and limited dependent variables. In the Second Stage, the dependent variable is
  Privatizaiuon        e value of the. GOVernment's Net Privatization Price (GNPP) adjusted by the percentage of shares sold, plus
Total Liabilities 'at the lime of r,vatization. divided by Total Assets of the SOE at the lime of privatuzation. In the second stage
instrumental variables are impiemented: the policy predictors, obtained from the first state, are used is generated instruments.




            eCted)(ta)
All variables are as delined in previous tables. A full description can also be found in Appendix C. Standard errors ire given
in parentheses.




                                                      _____________________                       cond Stare
                                                                  D'pendent Variable: Prlvatizatlon      Q
                 Independent variables                                              — ____________________________
              Net Income/Sales                                   0.7320                            0.8175
                                                                 (0.2196)                          (0.2437)
              Contingent Labor                                  .0.0075                           -00073
              Liabilities per worker                            (00032)                           (00039)
              Number of Strikes                                 -00893                             -0.1415
                                                                 (0.0377)                          (0.0668)
             Government in Industry                              0.3614                            0.3469'
                                                                 (0.2156)                         (0.2022)
              Non-tontrol Package dummy                         -0.462,                           '0.3842 '
                                                                (0.1797)                           (0.1800)
             Total Length                                       -0.0005 •                         -0.0004'
                                                                (0.0001)                           (0.0001)
              Number of Bidders                                  0.0854 •                          0.0977
              in Final Round                                    (0.0306)                           (0.0366)
              FDI allowed dummy                                  0.2343                            0.1588
                                                                 (0.3372)                          (0.3345)
             Cash-only sale dummy                                '0.1509                           -0.1315
                                                                 (0.1269)                          (0.1648)


              CEO change dummy                                   0.2768k                           0.3129'
                                                                 (0.1392,                          (0.1758)
              Percentage of Labor Cuts                           -0.2934                           0.7441
                                                                 (0.2654)                          (0.4484)
              Union Contract Renegotialion                       -0.3365                            0.0832
              dummy                                              (0.2606)                          (0.2876)
              Debt Absorbed   / Equity                           -0.0368
                                                                           •                       -0.0015
                                                                 (0.0110)                          (0.0473)
              Efficiency Measures dummy                          -0.1428                           -0.5841
                                                                 (0.1813)                          (0.4302)
              Investment Measures dum'"v                         0.0090                            '0.420 I
                                                                 (0.1718)                          (0.4937)
              De-invesimen, Measur. . ,Iummv                     -0.0937                           0.0125
                                                                 (0.1625)                          (0.1238)
                                                                 0.8247                             0.7887
              Intercept                                          (0.3888)                          (0.4623)


              Industry Dummies                                      yes                               yes
              Number or Observations                                132                               132

              Adjusted R1                                          .5258                             .4731
              F-stat. (overidentiticaliout)                                                          0.6276


                    Significant   at I percent.       Signilicant ii 5 percent.       Sigiiifacanc ii 10 percent.
                    F-Malistic (overidentitication) is diii Suggested by Basmautn 119601.
Labor cuts
  In 89 out of 221 companies. there were labor reduui's in ihe two years before privatization. The one-
stage OLS panel of Table XI shows a negative insignificant effect of higher percentages of personnel
reductions. The censored tobit used in the two-stage procedure (first stage not shown) reveals that larger
labor Cuts were made in the second phase of the privatization program (1988-1992). SOE workers with
temporary contracts were likely targets. Fewer cuts took place in SOEs without unions but interestingly,
even fewer workers were tired in SOEs with unions affiliated to "National Union 1.' which is thought
to be closely associated with the government. Finally. Companies whose workers obtained frequent pay
increases had :ower probability of labor cuts: the go rnment did not fire the most expensive workers.
Table Xl shows that reducing the labor force switches from having a negative impact on PQ to becoming
marginally valuable in terms of premiums when we account for endogeneity. An extra 5% reduction in
v.'orkers increases the net price of the SOE close to 6%, evaluated at the predicted mean PQ,


Union Contract Renegotiation
  Although the authorities undertook labor cuts prior to thy sale in 40% of the SOEs, only in 18 instances
did the government actually restructure the union contract. These cases include some of the worst
performing companies. The first column of Table XI u.msiders this policy as exogenous and includes
a dummy equal to one for those cases where union contract renegotiations took place. The coefficient
shows a negative though not significant effect of labor contract restructuring on PQ.

  Using a probit as the first step in the two-stage procedure shows that the government restructured union
contracts with a higher probability in cases where the frequency of demands for wage increases was
greater. Most renegotiations involved firm-level unions that were considered active and enjoying very
favorable collective contracts. In the second-stage regression in Table Xl the coefficient of labor contract
renegotiations changes sign showing in a positive but not statistically significant effect on PQ. This
specification contradicts the apparent association of mis policy with lower PQs found in the simple means
test and in the exogenous regression in the first column o1 Table Xl.


 VI.D. Debt Absorption

  The results of the OLS regression in Table Xl show a statistically significant negative impact of debt
 absorption on PQ. making debt write-offs the worst prior-restructuring policy to adopt in terms of premia
 generated. The first-stage tobit for debt absorption shows that SOEs with lower market penetration and
 in "depressed" industries were likely targets for debt restructuring (not shown). When the estimated
 value of the amount of debt absorption over total equity is used as a generated instrument in the PQ
 equation in Table Xl. the results show that debt absorption by the government does not have a significant
 impact on PQ. challenging the benefit of this policy for generating larger premiums.




                                                      27
VI.E. Efficiency measures

  In 39 cases, the government undertook specific directives or programs aimed at improving performance
and operations efficiency, or at increasing management's flexibility to make financial and production
decisions.15 SOEs' management learns argued thai efficiency measures would solve the main problems
of the firm, improve performance, and generate a higher privacization net price. The results do not
support these claims. When comparing groups with and without efficiency programs, the opposite
behavior is observed. In the two years prior to privatization: (i) the operating-income-to-sales ratio
improved for those SOEs without efficiency measures and dropped for those with a program; and (ii)
capacity utilization fell 4.5% for those firms without a program, and fell 7.73% for those with one.

  The exogenous PQ regression in Table Xl produces a negative though insignificant coefficient for the
dummy which measures the use of such programs. The first stage of a probit shows that most of these
programs took place in industries with large to'al debt to assets ratios and in sectors where the
government represented a large share of the domestic supply. Companies with obsolete equipment and
outdated technology were not targets of these measures A higher percentage of old bureaucratic
managers is positively associated with the probabili1 of undertaking these measures. The second-stage
PQ regression in Table Xl confirms the exogenous OLS result with a larger negative effect on PQ. but
still without statistical significance. These results allow us to conclude that performance enhancement
measures by the existing CEO and management team before privatization do not generate higher premia.

VI.F. Investment and De-In vestment

 The government undertook an investment program in 45 to-be-privatized SOEs.1' Using a dummy
equal to one in the case of such a program in the exogenous PQ regression in Table XI to test for the
impact of this measure results in a non-significant positive coefficient. The sign is reversed when I
account for endogeneity. The first-stage probit finds that SOEs that had U,en experiencing hiier
production growth rates or had high capital utilization ratios were less likely candidates for investment
measures. SOEs with investment programs typically had small market shares and high debt to asset
ratios. Most of these programs were used during the first years of privatization when the restructuring
of SOEs still played a large role in the overall government strategy. In the second stage regression in
Table XI, using the generated instrument produces a large negative effect on PQ. As in the case of
efficiency programs, SOEs with investment programs show no better performance than those without.
It can thus be concluded that improvements in efficiency are dubious at best, and that the amount invested



       It is interesting to observe that in the 23 Cases where the government gave more flexibility to the existing management,
the CEO was not fired. The CEO was fired in only 3 of the 39 cases with a performance improvement program. This seems
to suggest a degree or substitutability of these iwo actions.

    29 Unfortunately, reliable data on capital expenditure rrom the financial statements was not available for a large pan of the
sample.

                                                              28
by the government is not reflected in higher PQs. especially when we remember that the resources used
would have remained in the government's pocket.

  Finally, given the lack of success of investment programs and performance improvement measures, it
seems logical to question the effect on prices of the opposite action, de-investment. In 41 SOEs, the
govermnent either froze nonessential capital expenditure. stopped major investment programs, or declared
that only emergency investments would take place. The test of means in Table X and the exogenous
regressions (not shown) indicate the positive results of these measures. This group of SOEs had high
market pen..tration and included several cases where he government had minority holdings. The two-
stage procedure in Table Xl shows a coefficient close to zero but the standard error is large. De-
investing is a better strategy than investing before privatization in order to achieve higher premia. even
without taking into account national savings.



                                          VII. CONCLUSION

  This paper examines the determinants of privatization .ices using company level analysis of a cross-
section of all privatized SOEs in Mexico. The importance of company and industry characteristics and
of stakeholders is assessed: expensive and active unions and non-control privatization packages reduce
net prices (PQs). SOEs' financial and operating performance measures deteriorate as the day of
privatization approaches, explaining the negative relation between the time to put the company on the
block and net prices. The speed of privatization consistently increases the premiums paid. The positive
impact of increased competition in the auction, and the .egative effects of specific auction requirements,
emphasize the importance of widespread participation and the need to eliminate restrictions that hinder
 bidder involvement.

 These findings open up an area of research on government policies prior to and associated with the sale
 of state-owned enterprises. This paper shows that direct costs of prior restructuring policies are quite
 substantial, amounting to an average of 30% of the sale price. Additionally, restructuring measures such
 as efficiency and investment programs slow privatization. Delays in privatization come at a substandal
 cost, particularly when subsidies poured on SOEs can quickly add up to outweigh privatization revenues.
 Finally, the analysis of the impact on net prices of restructuring measures gives us some guidelines on
 the dos and don'ts in restructuring prior to privatization. Tirole (1991) and Kikeri et al. [1992) suggest
 extensive government action in restructuring and careful selection of firms and their time of sale. My
 results do not support this view. Some of the most commonly advocated intervention measures --
 including absorbing debt, implemenhing efficiency programs, and increasing the decision power of the
 existing management team -- do not lead to higher premia. In contrast, policies that could be regarded
  as eliminating barriers to the sale, such as firing the CEO and down-sizing the labor force, do increase
  PQs. The empirical estimates in this paper point to a premium for speed and restructuring measures that
  expedite privatization and halt the drain of resources. The key lesson is: do not do too much, simply sell.


                                                      29
                                            FIgure 1
       TOTAL NUMBER OF STATE OWNED ENTERPRISES
                           (DECEMBER 1982 - JUNE 1992)
             (NUMBER OF COMPANIES)
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
  0
        19   1983   1984   1985      1985   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991   1992
                                            EAR)
                                               Appendix A

                              The Mechanism of Privatization in Mexico

                                                      in each case may be divided into two time frames:
  The general mechanism of the process followed
In,ernol time, from the date of the first memo within the government
                                                                        mentioning privatization of an SOE
until the first public announcement of the sale; and Public time, extending from the date of the first public
announcement until the date of the announcement of the buyer.


I-Internal time
   I) Recommendation and proposal of privatizatiOn by the ministry or coordinating agency in charge of
      the company.
  2) Approval by the "Interministerial Commission of Expenditure and Funding" (CIGF). This
      commission determines the method: liquidation, merger, transfer, or privatization.
  3) In the cases of privatization. the Secretariat of Programming and Budget (SPP) sends an official
      communication to mark the beginning of the process.
  4) Appointmel&t of one of the 18 Mexican commercial ..anks or of Nacional Financiera as sales agent.
      The agent bankand the Office of Privatization work together to determine the terms of the aqclion
      as well as other required details in order to produce information documents in each case.
 Il-Public time
    S) A public announcement calls for an auction, provides the calendar and the general guidelines.
    6) Potential bidders request information. A descriptive summary of the company is provided.
    7) A company prospectus with detailed information is given to bidders who make a deposit. ranging
        between I and close to 10% of the final sale price as calculated here. A letter of confidentiality is
       also required.
   8) Bidders can ask additional questions and are invited to visit the company.
                                                                   consultants) prepare a valuation which
   9) The agent bank (and possibly other domestic or foreign
       incorporates a financial and technical assessment of the company under different methodologies. The
                                                                                     the bidders. This serves
       result provides a minimum reference price (MR.P) which is not disclosed to
       as an internal reference value by which to evaluate the offers.
   10) Bids are submitted to the agent bank which proceeds to analyze them in terms of price, labor, and
        investment program proposals. A recommendation to the Finance Secretariat is made.
                                                               Privalization. In a case where all bids are
   It) Approval of privatization is provided by the Office of
        below the MRP or there is only I bid, the case is forwarded to theCIGF for a decision.
   12) In a case of rejection, the company will be auctioned again and the necessary steps under Public time
        will be followed. On average, after several unsuccessful auction rounds, direct negotiations with
        bidders are undertaken.
   13) The Finance Secretariat issues a final resolution and a Privatization Contract or sale contract is
       signed. Payment is typically directed to the Federal Treasury, or in a few cases to Nacional
        Financicra when this institution was the holder of the shares.


                                                        3'
                                                          Appendix B

                                              Summary Statistics or Variables

Summary statistics for the sample or 22! Privatization Contracts nlcontpanks prirslizcd in Mexico between 1983 and June 1992.


                 Variable                  Obs.           Mean            Median         Sid. Dcv.       Minimum      I Maaimwn

Privatizahon Q                              202          0.3378           06172           0.7915          -3.4600          4.0563

Net Incomel Sales (percent)                 191          -0.1292          -0.0099         03909           -2.9306          0.7332

Operating Incotne I Sale- percent)          191          -00596            0.047          0.3628           .1.7850         0.7534

Contingent Labor Liabilities                199          16.3365          15.0347         14.4260             0           130.4428
per Wotker (milliont ol pesot per
worker)
Numiter of Strikes                          185           0.9838             0             1.4835             0                  II
                                            22!           0.4626             0.5          0.3545            0.01                 I
Government in    Industry   (percent)
C.,wth in Production (percent)              195          -0.0163           -0.0153         0.3183             -l            1.1029

                                            205           0.5243            0.51           0.2735             0                 1.125
Capacity Utilization (perctflt)
Cot' sany Market Share (percent)            220           01520             0.05           0.2336             0

Number 01 Bidders                           220           2.9318              3            1.9397             I
Number of Bidders Final Round               220           2.5773              2            1.7849             I                  II
                                            203           0.4587           0.3420          0.3651             0             22740
Total Debt over Total AssetS
                                                         1721.919            472          5253.337            0             49203
Number of Employees                         210

Internal Time (days)                        184          4221717             268          385.7993            II
                                                         302.8245            211          253.6222            Ii
Public Time   (days)                         lii

                                            215          719.5767            606          441.7985            49
Total Time (days)
                                                                              I            1.0981                 I               7
Numbci of Auction      Rounds               221            1.6290




                                                                    32
                                                                 Appendix C
                                                          Definition or Variables
                                                                       financial institutions in charge iii tire privatizatton process of a company.
Agent bank dununlea: A set of 9 dummy variables one for each of the
Each dummy is equal to
                         if that pariicular agent was responsible far that company, and 0 irilurwive.
Announced nslnlmum bid floor: Dummy variable equal to I if tire government announced a minimum hid floor as part of the auction rules, and
0 otherwise.
Backward technology: Dummy variable equal rim I if the valuator or arty document described time techitimlogy ol mIte cnmpany as outdated or
backward, and 0 otherwise.
                                                                    I if the government required as part ill rite auction rules that the buyers meet
Buyers must meet all company contracts: Dumnmy variable equal to
all company contracts nade prior to privatization. and 0 ntherwite.                                 a bureaucrat with lest than three years on site
Bureaucrat manager: Dummy variable equal to I if the manager (or CEO) before privamization was
job, and 0 otherwise.                                                                                             of the auction rules a determined
Caah/lnstalbnenta achedule provided: Dummy variable equal to I if the government announced as pan
cath!it%stallnlent payment schedule.
Capacity utilization: The last two-year average of capacity utilization before privalizasion.
CEO change: Dummy variable equal to I if the CEO wat fired in the two years prior to privatizatton. and 0 otherwise.
Distribution of products contract: Dummy variable equal to I if the company had a commercialization contract with a third party, and 0 otherwise.
Company market abate: The average market share of the SOE during the three-year period before privatizalon.
                                                                                     after privatixation. according to the collective union contract.
Contingent labor lIabIlIties per worker: The average cost of firing a worker the day
DebllEqulty swap: Dummy variable equal to I if the government announced before the auction that it would allow the use of a debt (or equity awap
 mechanism, and 0 otherwise.                                                                           total tharehoideru' equity at the time of
 Debt Abaorbed I EquIty: Debt absorption undertaken by the government before privatization. divided by
 privatization.                                                                                          outlined in the test) withims the two
 De-Inveatanent meaaurea: Dummy variable equal to I if the company underwent a de.investment measure (as
 years prior to peivatization. and 0 otherwise.
 Depressed market: Dummy variable equal to I if the valuator or any document described at depressed the markem of the company, and 0 otherwise.
 Efficiency meaaurea: Dummy variable equal to I if the company underwent an efficiency improvement program in the two years prior to
 privatiaation. and 0 otherwise.                                                                                  labor relative to industry
 Excess workers: Dummy variable equal to I if the valuator or any document described the company as having esceta
 standards, and 0 otherwise.
 Eitperienced bureaucrat manager: Dummy variable equal to I if the manager (or CEO) before privamization was an experienced bureaucrat with
 over three years on the job, and 0 otherwise.
 Finn-level union: Dummy variable eqil to I if the union compris i workers only from that SOE. and 0 otherwise.
  Foreign Inveataasent not allowed: Dummy variable equal to I if the Law of Foreign Direct investment did not allow EDI in that industry, and 0
 otherwise.
 Foreign manager: Dummy variable equal to I if the manager (or CEO) L...,re privatization was a foreigner. and 0 otherwise.
 GNPP: Government's Net Privalization Price. The net present value of the nominal price of sale as registered in the sale contract aubmracting all
 restructuring coats, the cost of government commitments at the time of sale, and all other adjustments made to the sate contract.
                                                                                                                        after privatization. and 0
 Government as a partner: Dummy variable equal to I if the government remained as a shareholder in the company
  otherwise.
  Government In Induatry: The government's percentage participation in domestic production.
  Growth In production: The four-year geometric average of production growth before privatitatton.
   Growth In sales rate: The four-year geometric average of sales growth before privatixatton.
   Individual contract: Dummy variable equal to I if the company did not have a collective union contract so that each employees signed an individual
   employment contract, and 0 otherwise.
                                                                                                                         prior to privatization. and (I
    Investment measures: Dummy variable equal to I if the copspany had an investment program within the two years
  otherwise.                                                                                               auction that bidders submit an investment
  Investment plan at the time of bid: Dummy variable equal to I if the government required as pao of the
  plan at the time of the bid, and 0 otherwise.
  Industry order: The number of companies privatized before the company in she same 3 digit sic. industry code.
  Induatry-level union: Dummy variable equal to I if the workers of the company belonged to a union for the whole induttrSt. and 0 otherwise.
   Internal length: The number of days between tIre first recommendation for privarixation and the first public announcement of privatization.
                                                                if the labor contract was renegotiated in the two years prior to privatiration. and 0
   Labor contract renegotiatIon: Dummy variable equal to I
   otherwise.

                                                                             33
Large fringe benefits: Dummy variable equal to I It the collective union contract gave large fringe benefits so workers relative to indusary
standards, and 0 otherwise.
Manager frani labor union: Dummy variable equal to I lithe ttunager (or CEOi before privatiaation was connected or belonged to the union of
the company, end 0 otherwise.
Minlatry In charge: A set of 6 dummy variables. one llsr each of the nsinolraes under which the company was classified before privatisation. Each
dummy is equal io I if that ministry was responsible for that c.anipan. and U otherwise.
National unions "a": Dummy variable equal to I if the w,irkeis iii he company belonged to national union a not specific to an industry, and 0
otherwise.
Net Income / Salea: The four-year average of Net Income over Total Saks betare privatization.
No union amliatlon: Dummy variable equal so I ii the workers of the company had no union affiliation, and 0 otherwise.
Non'coota'ol package: Dummy variable equal to I if rIse percentage sold does not give contrtil so the buyer, and 0 otherwise.
Non4radeabhe good: Dummy variable equal to I if the main product or the company is a non-tradeable good, and 0 otherwise.
Number of auction rounda: The number of privasization sale rounds.
Number or final round bidders: The number of different bidders in she final auction round.
Number of bidden: The number of different bidders in all auction rounds.
Number of naUsea: The nsarnber of strikes esperienced by the SOE in the five years before privatizasion.
ObaolJle equIpment: Daanmy variable equal to I if the valuator or any document described the machinery of the company as obsolete, and 0
otherwise.
Operating Income I Saks: The four-year average of Operating Income saver Total Saks before privatization.
Order of ask: The number of companies privatized hefore the company in the whole process.
Ownerahlplbldder Restrictions: Dummy variable equal to I if ihere were auction requirements which restricted ownership for a minimum number
of years or did not allow certain type of biddera to parsicapate.
Percentage of labor cuta: Percentage of the labor force lircd isa the Iwsa yea nrio' to peivatization.
Percentage of management team fired: Percentage of the niasiafeitaesit team lired (besides the CEO) in she two years prior to privatizasion.
Percentage sold: The percentage of shares sold in privatitasisan.
Private manager: Dummy variable equal to I if the nsanager (or CEO) before prisasizauion was a private sector manager, and 0 otherwise.
Prlvatlaatlon Q: Government's Net Privasiz.ssion Price adjusted by the percentage of company shares sold ptus total liabilities at die time of
privatiastion. divided by the total assets of the company at the time of privalieation.
Price controLs: Dummy variable equal to I it the main product of the company was subject of price controls, and 0 otherwise.
Preference to ksaldera: Dummy variable equal to I if insiders were given special preferences in the auction process as pars of the company's
bylaws.
Product requIring concession: Dummy variable equal so I if the product m. the company required government concession, and 0 otherwise.
Publk length: The number of days between the first public announcement of privasizasion and the privatization date.
Requlre4 Deposit / Assets: The required deposit to be allowed so enter the auction as a percentage of coral assets of the company as the tUne of
privasization.
Restricted ownership period: Dummy variable equal to I if the goveenmea.. required as pars of the auction rules that the buyers should have
eaclusive ownership for a minimum number of years (usually 3 to 5) without allowing resale, and 0 otherwise.
Sale contract models gIven to bidden: Dummy variable equal so I if the g'wernmenr gave the bidders sale contract models before the bid date.
and 0 otherwise.
Sale Costa I Inventorlea: Saks Costs over total inventories at the time of privatizshlon.
Shareholder manager: Dummy variable equal so I if the manager (or CEO) before privarizarion was a shareholder, and 0 otherwise.
Shutdown: Dummy variable equal to I if the government shut down the company before privasizatlon, and 0 otherwise.
Supplkr SOE: Dummy variable equal so I if before privasizasion. she company acted mainly as a supplier for other SOEa, and 0 otherwise.
Technology contract wish third party: Dummy variable equal to I if the company had a technology contract with a third party, and 0 otherwise.
Temporary labor contracts: Dummy variable equal so I if the company had only temporary contracts signed with ins workers, and 0 otherwIse.
Total length: The total number of days between the tirst recommendation so privatize and the privasizahion date.
 Union I Non-union workers: Number of unionized waarkers over number of nonunionized workers in the company at the time of privatization.
 Wage Increases requests: Number of wage increases requested by workers of the SOE during the four years prior to privatisation.




                                                                         34
                                                                               ENDOGEJ'iOUSLENGTH
                      of  the cross-section of SOEs            us Mesucu  between  1983 and 1992. In the Firs: Stage OLS is used in get the predictor of the length depcndcnt variable
      OLS regressions                               privasised          recommendation (or privauzationand the (teas public announcementofpr.vtsstion of an SOE. The exact
      'Internal lenth' which is the number ofdays betweeninthe                                            dependent yariable is Priatizauon Q the value of the Government's Net
                                                can be found Appendix C. In the Second Stage. the                                                                                  of
      descripoon ol the independent variablcs
      PrivatizationPrice   (G PP) adjusted by  thepercentage  of ShareS sold, plus Total Liabilitiesat the time of- prmalisation. dividedby Total Assets ut the company at the timeAU
                                                      viriaDlet are implemented, the internal lengthpredictor, obtained from       die   first stage,is used as a generated ,nst,umee,.
      privatization. In the second stage. ms4rumeieal                     are given in parentheses.
      other variables arc as defined us previoustables. Standard errors

                                                                          Seco,,d S/nrc                                            Fi,il SM,
                                                               Privallaatiois Q                                                                              DL.s.
                                                                                                                 vj:iat,s            Internal Length             J      internalLcnth
                                                                                                   lndqsende,u
                                                    Front     (I)               From (2)                                                   (1)                   I
        Independeru vriablcs
                                                                                             Agent Bank I                           196.23       (311.65)            34994       (321.03/
        Net Income/Sales                            0.7553 •                    0.7539
                                                                                (0.2089)                                           -197.98       (314.59)            .25.111     (316.48)
                                                    (0.2076)                                 Agent Bank2
                                                    -O  1950 •              •0.0194'         Agent Bank3                            56.719       (354.45)            390.96 (373.48)
        Contingent Labor                                                        (0.0056)
        Liabtlit,ea per worker                       (0.0053)                                Agent Bank4                            135,46       (68.249)            278.05 (140.91)
                                                    -0.1344 •               -0.1351                                                -361.34       (396.61)            -193.59     (395.68)
        Number     of Strikes                 .                                              Agent BankS
                                                    (0.0443)                 (0.0445)
                                                                                             Agent Bank 6                           330.65       (301.76)            906.24      (410.41)
                                                    0.4286                   0.4293                                                -521.81       (252.71)            -363.07     (352.75)
        Govcrnmcn, in Industry                                                               Agent Bank 9
                                                    (0.2236)                (0.2263)
                                                                                             Agent Bank 10                          469.83       (321,59)            283,20      (112.99)'
                                                    -0.3654                     -0.3671
        Non-control Package dummy                                                                                                   363.70       (330.40)            562.67      (334.50)'
                                                     (0.2291)                    (0.2098)    Agent Bank II
                                                                                                                                   -330.58       (318.51)            -167.46      (321.84)
                                                        0,2025                   0.1999      Agent Bank 12
         198K-(992   dummy                                                                                                                                           -312.15      (530.57)
                                                    (0.1936)                    (0.1845)     Agent Bank (4                         -961.1)       (523.14)'

                                                                                -0.0006                 I                          .735.66       (357.70)
                                                                                                                                                             '       .769.34     (362.27)    a
Id,     I,,rrn,a! Length                            .0.6                                     Ministry
                                                    (0.0003)                    (0.3002)                                           .60.031       (103.36)            -87.920     (106.87/
                                                                                             Ministry 2
                                                           •                    0,0495'                                                                               355.48
                                                        0.0899                                                                       125.95      (220.56)                        (254.79)
         Number 01 Bidders                                                                   Ministry 3
        in FinalRound                               (0.0323)                    (0,0322)                                                                             -137.24
                                                                                                                                    57.379       (422.46)                         (429.73)
                                                                                             Minisuy 4
                                                                                                                                    -232.50      (262.45)            -232,12     (161.03)
                                                    -0.1400                     .0.1370      Minisuy 5
        FDI not allowed dummy                                                   (0.4107)
                                                    (0.4064)                                                                        617.23       (249.73)            608.12 (248.53)'
                                                                                             MInistry 6
                                                     0.3631                      0.3693                                             -245.10      (184.05)            -244.70      (185.25)
        Investment pian    in 6 months                                                       Miniwy 8
                                                    (0.2001)                    (0,3429)
        dummy                                                                                                                 r)                                      37.091      (94.751)
                                                                                             Liabilities/Assess (Avg.:,, to
                                                    -0.1451                     '0.1450
         Cash.only sale dummy                                                   (0.1283)     psseu.s/Mcan Assets of sample          '0.1690      (6.4389)            .1.0079      (6.4280)
                                                    (0.1273)
                                                                                                                                                                      138.79     (173.1$)
                                                                                             Cacr.piny MarketShare
                                                                                                                                                                      146.96     (36.958)'
                                                                                             Government Regulation dummy
                                                                                 1.1768                                             -125.88      (70.145)            -155.25      (79.845)
                                                        0.9439                               Technologycontract wflhiird dummy
                                                        (0.3811)                (0.6130)                                             167.46                           189.75      (179.58)
         Intercept                                                                           SubsIdiary SOE dummy                                 (181.69)
                                                                                                                                    -133.13       (116.37)           -133.47      (127.88)
                                                                                             Supplier SOEdummy
                                                                                                                                                                      77.074 (108.23)
                                                          yes                      yeS       1918-1092dummy
         Industry Dummies                                                                                                                                            -92,504 (115.26)
                                                          146                      146       Non-controlpackage dummy
         Number of Observations                                                                                                     704.83       (316.07)            -450.39 (332.19)
                                                                                             Interespt
                                                         .4126                    .4053                                                                                        .2991
                                                                                                                                              .2716
         Adjusted R5                                .
                                                                                             F-stausuc Oct Excluded instruments               .76                              323
                                                                                                                                            (0.0000)                       (0.0000)
                                                                                             (Prob> 8)
                                                                                                                                               171                            170
                                                                                             Number_of Observations
                                                          •                     percent.    ignificintat
                                                                                                      10 percent.
                                       I percent.             Significantat 5
                       Significantat
                                                                                   MANAGEMENT
      I'robit and 01       gretiont of the cross-section o(SOEs           in Mexico between 1983 and 1992. In the First Stor. a Prubit is mcd In get Ihc policy
      discrete dependent variable CEO Chaflge. a dummy wIne equals I i(the CEO wis (teed in the two                prior to                                         predictorof the
      indci,endCrn vitibItt  can be found in ii.ppcndieC. In the Seco.'4 Sntge.the dependenç variable ix years                          and 0 odmcrwtte. The exact description of the
                                                                                                             Privaimeanon rivaIlzaIlon
                                                                                                                            . thev*tuc of the Governments Nat                  Price
      (GNPP)adjusted by the percentage of shares told plus Total Liabilities at the time of prn-atization. divide. by Total Assets of the company at the time of Pnvatiw,Jn In
                                                                                                                                                                pnvatlzatiofl.    the
      stcofld stage instrumental variables are implemented, the CEO predictor' obtained(roen the flrst stage. is used as a
      in previous tables. Standard errors are siven in oarenthescs.                                                          geserwed uutrwnent. All othervariables are as defined

                                                                 Seeemd Sear                                                   FirstSins.
                                                                 Privatization     Q                                                                     p,
                                                                                                       Independent variables                   CEO.-     in      dummy
                        Independent variahks                        Fsen (l'i                                                            (
                        N* locume/Sates                              0.7266'                         Agelit Bank I                            -1.3593         (0.5939)
                                                                    (0.1901)                         AgentBank 2                               -13441          (1.3199)
                       Contingent Labor                             .0.Ol$2                          AgentBank 3
                        Liabilities per worker                      (0.0060)                                                                   1.6413         (0.6225)

                       Nutotser    iii Suiikt                       .0.0830                          Agent BankS                              .0.4639         (1.4093)
                                                                    (0.0407)                         Agent Batik 6                            -3.3997         11.8408)
                       Government in Industry                       0.4325                           Agent Bank 9                              0.4792         Cl .4093)
                                                                    (0.2009)
                                                                                                     AgetuBank (0                             .2.1585         U.4%37)'
                       Non-contrial Package dummy                   .0.3123'
                                                                    (0.1868)                         Agent8*nk II                              1.6*94         (1.4635)
                       Total Length                                 .0.0004    •                    Agent Bank                                .0.8211         II .3556k
                                                                    (0.0001)
                                                                                                    Ministry I
4-.                    Number of Bidders                            0.1106'
0'                     in Final Round                               (0.0290)                        Ministry 2                                 0.5136         (0.8865)
                                                                                                               3                                                                        a.
                       FDI nut allowed dummy                        .0.3932                                                                   .0,7(02         (1.1350)
                                                                    (0.4989)                        Ministry 4                                0.8689       (1144661'
                       Investment p1an in 6 months                  0.4251                          MiOiStty                                  0.1564
                       dummy                                        (0.1913)                                                                               (0.7894i
                                                                                                    Ministry                                  0 *it8       (I .0345Cm
                       Cash-only sale dummy                         .0.1750                         AssesS/ Mean Assets mit sample
                                                                    (0.1160)                                                                  0.0597       (0.0335)
                                                                                                    Company Market Share                                   (0.7235)
                       CEO chanyr dummy                            0.2468                           1988-1992 dummy
                                                                   (0.1328)                                                                   0.5424       (0.5344)
                                                                                                    Technology contract s/third dummy        -0.6229
                                                ,                                                                                                         (O.3781)
                                                                                                    SubSidiary SOB dummy                      0.053!
                                                                    0.6125'                                                                               (0.6593)
                       kitercepS                                   (0.3395)                        Supplier SOB dummy                        .0.6190      ((.3071)
                                                                                                   CEO experienced bureaucrat                -1.3215      (0.4955)'
                                                                                                   CEO private manager                       -2.9)76
                       Industry Dummies
                                                                                                                                                          0.88l4
                                                                                                                                              I.41U       (11149)
                       Numbet of Obscrvation$                         132
                                                                                                   Adjusted    R                                       .2971
                       Adjusted Ri                                   .4693                         F-atatistic on Excluded Inszrumcnts                 2.0*
                                                                                                   (Prob>P)                                       (0.0020)
                                                                                                   Number   of Orvaiioo.s
                   'Stgnt(scant at     I percent.    Sigmitcant at 5 percent.          Significantat 10 percent.
                                           REFERENCES

Aghion, Philippe. Oliver Hart, and John Moore. "The Economics of Bankruptcy Reform' Journal of
 Law and Economics. 1992, v.8 n.3, 523(46).

Aguilar. Jose A. "La Economla de Ia Empresa PiThlica y Ia Reforma del Sector Paraestatal en Mexico."
  B.A. thesis. ITAM, July 1991.

Altman, E. "A Further Empirical Investigation of the Bankruptcy Cost Question." Journal of Finance
  39, 1067(89).

Aspe, Pedro. Econo,nic Transformation The Mexican Way. Cambridge. Mass: MIT Press, 1993,

Banco de Mexico, Informe Annual. (several issues). Mexico City, Mexico.

___________ Indi,,.,idores EconO,nicos. (several issues). Mexico City, Mexico.

Barberis. Nicholas, Maxim Boycko, Andrei Shleifer and Natalia Tukanova, "Privatizationof Shops in
 Russia." Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming 1996.

Basmann, R. L. "On Finite Sample Distributions of Generalized Classical Linear IdentifiabilityTest
 Statistics." Journal of the American Statistical Associaüon, 55, pp. 650(59).

 Blanchard, 0. J.. R. Dornbusch. P. R. Krugman. R. Layard. and L. H. Summers. Reform in Eastern
   Europe. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 1991.

 __________
               Florencio López-de-Silanes. and Andrei Shleifer. "What Do Firms Do with Cash
  Windfalls?" Journal of Financial Economics. 36 pp. 337(60), 1994.

 Boardman, Anthony E. and Aidan R. Vining, "Ownership and Performance in Competitive
   Environments: A Comparison of the Performance of Private. Mixed, and State-Owned Enterprises."
   Journal of Law and Economics. April 1989. 32, 1(34).

 Bound, John and David a, Jaeger, and Regina Baker. "The Cure can be Worse than theDisease: A
  Cautionary Tale Regarding Instrumental Variables," NEER Technical Working Paper No, 137, June
   1993.

  Bolsa Mexicana de Valores. dndicadores Financieros e Indicador es Bursdtiles. Mexico City: BMV
 publications, issues from 1982 through 1992.

  Bolton, Patrick and Gerard Rolland. 'Economics of Mass Privatization." In the 15thPanel Meeting of
   Economic Policy, Lisbon, April 1992.

  Boycko, Maxim, Andrel Shleifer. and Robert W. Vishny. "A Theory of Privatization," Economic
   Journal, forthcoming 1996,



                                                     37
_____________ Privaa'ization in Russia. MIT Press, 1995.

Brannman,   Lance, J. Douglas Klein. and Leonard Weiss.         "Concentration and Winning Bids in
  Auctions." Antitrust Bulletin. Spring 1984. 27(5).

Fernández, Arturo. "El Futuro de Ia Privatizacjón en Mexico.     in CIDE Seminar on PrivatizacjOn en
 Mexico, Mexico City, 1990.

Freeman, Richard. "Unionism comes to the Public Sector." Journal of Economic Literature 24. March
  1986, 4 1(86).

__________ and Casey Ichniowski. "When Public Sector Workers Unionize." University of Chicago
  Press. Chicago, 1988.

Frydman, Roman and Andrzej Rapaczynski. "Markets and Institutions in Large-Scale Privatization." In
 Reforming Central and Eastern European Economies, edited by V. Corbo, F. Coricetli, and I. Bossak.
 Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, 1991a.

__________ "Privatization and Corporate Governance in Eastern Europe: Can a Market Economy be
  Designed?" In Central and Eastern Europe: Rc'uds to Growth, edited by G. Winkler. Washington.
  D.C.: IMF, 1991b.

Galal, Ahmed, Leroy Jones. Pankaj Tandon, and lngo Vogelsang. Welfare Consequences of Selling Public
  Enterprises: An Empirical Analysis. Oxford University Press, Inc., New York 199..

Gayer, Kenneth M. and Jerold 1. Zimmermann. "An Analysis of Competitive Bidding in BAR'!"
Contracts." Journal of Business, July 1977, 279(17).

Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart. "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: a Theory of Vertical
 and Lateral Integratio..." Journal of Political Economy, 1986.

Hansmann, Henry. "When Does Workers' Ownershir Work? ESOPs, Law Firms, Codetermination and
 Economic Democracy." Yale Law Journal. 1990.

Hausman, Jerry. "Specification and Estimation of Simultaneous Equation Models." In Handbook of
 Econometrics, edited by Zvi Grilliches and M. Intrilligator. Amsterdam: North Holland. 1983.

Hart, Oliver and John Moore. "Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm." Journal of Political
  Economy, 98, December 1990, 1119(40).

Kikeri, Sunita, John Nellis. and Mary Shirley. Privazization: the Lessons of Experience. Washington.
  D.C.: The World Bank, 1994.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques. Regulation, Privatizarion and Incentives in Developing Countries, Paper prepared
 for the ADB Conference on Development Economics in Manila, November 1994.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques arid Jean Tirole. A Theory of Incentives in Procurement and Regulation.


                                                    38
 Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1993.

LOpez-de-Silanes. Florencio. 'A Macro Perspective on Privatization: The Mexican Program." World
 Bank, 1993.

___________ "Pre- vs. Post-privatization Performance and Industry Structure" Mimeograph in preparation.
Harvard University, 1995a.

            "Bidders in Privatization Auctions" Mimeograph in preparation. Harvard University. 1995b.

___________ Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. "Privatization in the United States" NBER working
paper #5113. May 1995.

___________ and Guillermo Zamarripa. "De-regulation and Privatizacion of Commercial Banking: Pre-
versus Post-Performance". Mimeographed. University of Chicago, June 1994. Forthcoming in Revista
de Andlisis EconOmico, 1996.

Luders, Roll J. "Chile's massive SOE Divesture Program, 1975-90." Paper presented at the Conference
  on Privatizalion and Ownership Changes in East and Central Europe, World Bank, 1990.

Maskin, Eric S. "Auctions and Privatization." Presented at a Conference on Privatization, Kid Institute
 of World Economies. Kiel. Germany. September 1992.

Megginson, William L., Robert C. Nash. and Matthias van Randenborgh. "The Financial and Operating
  Performance of Newly Privatized Firms: an International Empirical Analysis." Journal of Finance.
  June 1994.

Milgrom, Paul. "Auction Theory.' In Advances in Economic Theory, edited by 1. Bewley. Cambridge:
 Cambridge University Press, 1987.

Nelson, Charles R. and Richard Starz. "Some Further Results on the Exact SmIl Sample Propertie of
 the Instrumental Variables Estimator. - Econome:rica 58, 1990, 967(76).

___________ "The Distribution of the Instrumental Variables Estimator and its t-Ratio when the Instrument
  is a Poor One. - Journal of Business 20, 1990.

Newey, Whitney K. "A Method of Moments Interpretation of Sequential Estimators." Economic Letters
 14, 1984, 201(06).

Newbery, D. "Reform in Hungary: Sequencing and Privatization." European Economic Review. 1991:

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert H. lope). "Estimation and Inference in Two-Step Econometric Models."
 Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, October 1985. 370(10).

 Presidency of Mexico. Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 1983-1988. SecretarIa de Programacion y
   Presupuesto, Mexico. May 1983.

 _________ Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 1989-1994. Secretaria de Programación y Presupuesto, Mexico.

                                                    39
 May 1989.

Salinas de Gortari, Carlos. Cuarro luformede Gobierno /992. Mexico City: Presidencia de Ia Repul.ilica
Mexicana, DirecciOn General de Comunicación Social. 1992.

Sappington, David EM.. Joseph E. Stigtitz. Dennis A. Yao, and Almarin Phillips. Privatization.
 Information and Incentives (includes other authors' comments on relations between public and private
 industry)." Journal of Policy Analysis & Manageme,u 6. Summer 1987, 567(19).

SecrecarIa de Ia Contraloria General de Ia Reptblica. Programa Nacional de Moderni:aciOi, de Ia
 Empresa Publica 1990-1994. Mexico City: SCGP. March 1990.

          Reglamento de Ia Ley Federal de las Entidades Paraestatales. Mexico City: SCGP, Iinidad
 de Comunicación Social, January 1990.

Secretarla de Hacienda y Crdito Püblico. The Divestiture Process in Mexico. Mexico City: SHCP. July
  1992.

c'hlecer. Andrei and Robert W. Vishny "Politicians and Firms.' Quarterly Jou'nalofEco;'omi's, 1994.

Staiger, Douglas .1. and James H. Stock. 'Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak Instruments."
  Mimeographed. Kennedy School of Government. Harvard University and NBER. Revision of
  September 1993.

Tirole. Jean. Privatizatuon in Eastern Europe: Incentives and Economics of Transition." In NBER
  Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Olivier Jean Blanchard and Stanley Fisher. Cambridge. Mass.:
  MIT Press, 1991.

Vickers, John and George Yarrow. Fri vati zation: an Economic Analysis. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
  1988.

Vining, Aidan R. and Anthony E. Boardman. "Ownership vs. Corn1 tition: Efficiency in Public
  Enterprise." Public Choice. 1992.

Vuylsteke. Charles, "Techniques of Privatization of State-Owned Enterprises," World Bank Technichal
 Papers, paper # 88. The World Bank, Washington D.C. 1988.

Wruck, K. "Financial Distress. Renegotiation, and Organizational Efficiency." Journal of Financial
  Economics 27, 1990. 4 19(44).

Yarrow, George, "Privatization in Theory and Practice,' Economic Policy 2. April 1986, 324(77).




                                                  40
