                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EXPLAINING DOMESTIC CONTENT:
                           EVIDENCE FROM JAPANESE AND U.S.
                             AUTO PRODUCTION IN THE U.S.




                                      Deborah L. Swenson




                                      Working Paper 5495




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    March 1996




Prepared for the NBER conference, "Effects of Trade Protection and Promotion Policies,
October 6-7, 1995. This paper is part of NBER's research program in International Trade and
Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 1996 by Deborah L. Swenson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                   NBER Working Paper 5495
                                                                               March 1996

                            EXPLAINING DOMESTIC CONTENT:
                           EVIDENCE FROM JAPANESE AND U.S.
                             AUTO PRODUCTION IN THE U.S.


                                         ABSTRACT


        This paper studies the domestic content decisions of auto makers in the U.S. between

 1984 and 1993 using foreign trade zone activity as a tool by which one can observe individuaj

sourcing and production. The results show that although the domesticcontent of Japanese firms

is rising, differences are not being eliminated completely. Also, the apparent elasticity of

substitution is lower for Japanese than for U.S. finns. These results suggest that although

transplant production may reduce the U.S. automotive deficit with Japan, transplant production

will not cause its elimination.




Deborah L. Swenson
Department of Economics
University of California
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
 Explaining Domestic Content: Evidence from Japanese and U.S. Auto Productionin the U.S.




 Introduction


         The ongoing U.S. trade deficit in automobiles and auto parts remains a central focus of trade

disputes between the U.S. and Japan. There are many margins on which this deficit could change.

These include export volumes, production location and domestic productcontent. However, this deficit

has continued, despite large changes in the assembly pattern of U.S. purchased autos. For example, in

1994 the U.S. purchased 2.69 million Japanese name plate automobiles. This was roughly the same

number as the 2.78 million purchased in 1990. However 1.45 million, or 54 percent of those vehicles

sold in 1994 were assembled in U.S. transplant operations as compared with only 38 percent 4 years

earlier. In light of the shift in production, the apparent immobility of the automotive deficitraises the

question as to whether multinational production arrangements, such as automobile transplant production

in the U.S., ultimately have any effect on the trade balance between nations. In particular, these facts

raise the question whether the national identity of the firms, as opposed to production location alone,

determines international sourcing decisions.      This paper begins to address this question by studying
the production of U.S. and foreign auto firms in U.S. foreign trade zones.

        Although roughly 30 percent of imports arrive through the intra-firm trade of multinationals,

and the percentage is much higher in the auto industry, there has been little examination of the factors

shaping these flows and firm decisions. Among theoretical treatments of this issue, considerations of

factor costs, increasing returns to scale in production, contracting difficulties, and the circumvention of


                                                    3
protection have figured prominently in the description of motivations for multinational activity.' Indeed,

these rationales are not necessarily exclusive of each other. Unfortunately a dearth of firm level data

on multinational firms activity in trade has impeded widespread empirical observation and

characterization of these effects.

        This paper considers one aspect of multinational activity, the domestic content decision of U.S.

and foreign auto firms in the U.S.2 Observation of this activity is facilitated by the U.S. operation of

the foreign trade zones program. The evidence shows that although the domestic content of U.S.

automakers is higher overall than that of Japanese auto firms, the difference is shrinking as the

operations age. It should also be noted that, although Japanese manufacturers may initially have located

in the U.S. for political reasons, Japanese auto assembly operations appear to be affected by relative

prices, just as U.S. production facilities are.     These conclusions are supported by observation of

domestic input content.

        The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 discusses factors that may influence the foreign and

domestic content of automobile production in the U.S. , including the institutional details of the U.S.

Foreign Trade Zones program. Section 3 provides a simple model of the demand for inputs, which links

the relative demand for domestic and foreign inputs to movements in factor costs. The model is then

tested in section 4. Concluding comments and discussion are presented in section 5.




        See Helpman (1984), Markusen (1984), Ethier (1986), and Bhagwati (1987) for examples of
these arguments.

    2
        In addition to trade talks regarding Japanese sales and purchases in the automotive sector, policy
concern regarding domestic content is exhibited by The American Automobile Labeling Act. This act
requires that, as of the 1995 model year, vehicle stickers include information on the location of
automobile assembly as well as the percentage of U.S./Canadian content. These stickers must also
include the production location of the engine and transmission as well as the country of origin for all
major sources of content.

                                                     4
2. Foreign Trade Zones: Design and Usage

2a. Trade Flows and Multinational Activity



        The predicted effect of multinational activity on trade depends largely on the international

conditions that are used to construct the model for prdiction. For example, Helpman and Krugman

(1985) describe the effects of multinational production in the context of a conventional factor model.

They demonstrate that the presence of multinational production can enhance or diminish the volume of

trade. The degree of intra-industry trade that occurs in this setting depends largely on the distribution

of factors. Since headquarter services are assumed to be capital intense in production, the flows of

intra-firm headquarter services, however, flow in a single direction and originate from the capital

abundant country. In contrast, Markusen and Venables (1995) consider an alternative framework in

which multinational activities can originate from multiple locations. Firms have many potential modes

of operation, including existence as a national firm which exports, or as a multinational firm that

produces in many locations. When firms decide how to serve foreign markets, they must weigh the

opposing forces of transport and tariff costs, which impede export sales, against the importance of scale

economies in production, which raise the cost of multinational activity relative to production in a single

location. In their model, multinationals initially enhance the volume of trade, but may ultimately

diminish the volume of trade if the multinational form of operation becomes increasingly prevalent over

time.

        Since we observe elements of both models in the international environment, it is not possible

to form a single prediction regarding the effect of multinationals on trade. It is likely that the ultimate

effect of multinationals on trade volumes will depend on the characteristics of the industry, as well as

the underlying sources of comparative advantage across countries. In this case, the overall effects have

to be observed industry by industry.


                                                    5
        To date few studies have examined the importance of multinational firms in trade. One

exception is Zeile (1995) who considers a number of measures that demonstrate the relative importance

of U.S. value added, or parts in multinational production. Zeile's results are based on a panel of

multinational firms operating in the U.S. This work documents that there are significant differences

across industries and countries in the measures of U.S. economic activity associated with multinational

firms. Zeile observes that Japanese multinationals incorporate a smaller percentage U.S. content in their

U.S. production, relative to other multinationals operating in the U.S. Zeile suggest that this observed

difference may reflect Japanese methods of subcontracting, as well as the relatively high portion of

Japanese firm investment that was greenfield as opposed to acquisition.

        An ongoing question in this literature is whether multinational activity enhances or substitutes

for market service by export. In one recent analysis, Blomstrom, Lipsey and Kulchycky (1988) study

the case of U.S. and Swedish headquartered multinationals and conclude that the activities are

complementary. In another study, Brainard (1993) performs a cross industry analysis, in a study which

describes the relative sales of multinationals generated by affiliate activity as compared with export.

This work discovers that affiliate activities rise in importance with transportation costs, tariffs and other

trade barriers, but that the relative importance of affiliate activities falls when it is confronted by higher

barriers to foreign investment. In addition, Brainard finds that plant scale and proprietary firm assets

also affect the modes of serving foreign markets, providing evidence that the relative importance of

multinational activity conducted by affiliates responds to industry characteristics. In light of this

characterization, this paper seeks to describe and measure the responsiveness of domestic content in the

auto industry.



2b. The Foreign Trade Zone Program

        Data from the U.S. foreign trade zones program forms the basis of this study. The foreign trade


                                                     6
zones program was created in 1934 in an effort to encourage international trade and the reexport of

products in particular. However, the program was of little use to producers until modificationswere

rendered in later years. In its initial form, the foreign trade zones program could not be used for

production or assembly purposes. The Boggs amendment in 1950 expanded the activities that could

be performed within foreign trade zones to include manufacture. A second major changewas a 1980

Treasury department ruling that limited the dutiable value of products leaving foreign trade zones to the

cost of the components contained in those products.

        The foreign trade zones program operates along two tiers. General purpose zones are available

for use by most industries. Both foreign and domestic firms are allowed to operate within these zones.

However, sensitive industries, such as automobiles and steel, must operate within the more regulated

foreign trade subzone program. By the end of the 1980's the auto industry accounted for more than

80 percent of all foreign trade subzone shipments.

        It is no coincidence that all U.S. auto assembly plantscurrently in the U.S. have sought and

obtained foreign trade subzone status. Auto assemblers benefit from three tariff reductions that are

provided by operation within a foreign trade zone. The most important provision is one that enables

producers to reduce the tariffs they owe in the case of "inverted tariffs". "Inverted tariffs" refer to

situations in which the tariff levied on intermediate inputs is higher than the tariff applied to the import

of the final product. Normally, firms utilizing imported components pay the tariffs associated with each

individual component. However, if a firm produces within the boundaries of a foreign trade zone, the

firm may select to pay either the tariff rate assessed on the final good, or the tariff rate that applies to

the imported components. The obvious benefit is the firm's ability to select the lowest of the two. rates.

        Currently, the ability to reduce tariffs when an inversion exists, is lauded as a provision which

helps U.S. assemblers to remain competitive with foreign assemblers. A rationale for the program is

elimination of the cost disadvantages that might face U.S. assemblers who use imported components.


                                                     7
Suppose, for example, that the foreign firm produces a product with foreign parts, and completes the

assembly abroad. When the product is shipped to the U.S., it pays the tariff rate that applies to the

assembled good. In cases of tariff inversion, a U.S. firm, performing assembly in the U.S., could pay

a higher tariff on the same foreign components. This ability to circumvent "inverted tariffs" is

particularly important for producers in the auto industry where the tariff rate on finished cars is 2.5%

and the rate on many auto parts ranges from 4 to 11 percent.3 A further tariff benefit accruing to zone

users is the ability to delay tariff payments. In general, firms must pay customs duties within 10 days

of a product's entry to the U.S. However, firms located in foreign trade zones are entitled to delay

payment of customs duties until 10 days after their products have left the foreign trade zone for their

destination markets. The magnitude of this second benefit is proportional to inventory held within the

subzone. Further, for finished products that are exported out of the U.S., no tariff is due on the imported

components that were used in production. Finally, the presence of foreign trade zones provides one

last benefit for automobile producers who practice just-in-time production techniques. The time

required for customs is reduced by as much as 5 days, enabling firms to produce more efficiently.4

        Foreign trade subzone benefits are not automatic. Automakers who wish to gain foreign trade

zone status for their assembly operations are required to apply for firm level subzone status, and they

are further required to renew these subzone privileges periodically. Foreign trade subzones are granted

to firms, and are attached to general purpose foreign trade zones.       Hence, a firm can not apply for

subzone status unless there is a general purpose zone to which it can attach itself. As long as this

qualification is met however, there are essentially no moving costs entailed in the creation of a foreign

trade subzone. Automakers typically request that their current manufacturing facilities be given subzone



        Inverted tariffs in the auto industry originated from U.S. tariff act of 1930.
    ' Products that are sourced through foreign trade zones may move more quickly since they avoid
some customs clearance formalities.

                                                     8
status, and the boundaries of the subzone are defined accordingly.

        In the larger context, it should be mentioned that the foreign trade zoneprogram can not be used

to circumvent other trade policies. To begin, although producers have the choice of paying the lower

of the intermediate inputs tariff and the final product tariff on imported components, operations within

a foreign trade zone or subzone can not be used to avoid the payment of anti-dumping duties. Further,

although products that are reexported from trade zones pay no U.S. tariffs on their use of imported

components, the NAFTA agreement is explicit that foreign trade zones can not be used to avoid the

payment of any North American tariffs on products that are subsequently exported to Mexico or Canada.



2c. Trends in Foreign Trade Zone Usage by Auto Producers



        A growing portion of trade in automobiles and auto parts enters the United States through the

foreign trade zones program. By 1993, the volume of automobile trade entering foreign trade zones was

over 12 billion dollars. Over half of this amount entered special purpose foreign trade subzones where

domestic assembly or activity was conducted before the products were shipped for final sale.5 Table

I displays some of the trends in automakers' usage of foreign trade zones. First, it is notable, that more

than 90 percent of the zone shipments are destined for the domestic market whether the assembly is

completed by a U.S. or foreign firm. However, the usage of domestic inputs by U.S. and foreign

automakers differs markedly. In 1993, foreign auto firms sourced two-thirds of their inputs from the

U.S., while U.S. firms sourced more than 95 percent of their inputs from the U.S. Nonetheless, the U.S.

sourcing by foreign firms had grown dramatically. In 1984, foreign firms purchased only 35 percent
of their inputs in the U.S.



      Auto activity represented 5 1.4% of all subzone foreign receipts in 1993. In turn, auto parts
comprised 92.8% of these auto subzone foreign receipts.

                                                    9
        Tables 2A and 2B track individual firm usage     of automobile foreign trade subzones. Foreign
and U.S. firms exhibit a few distinct trends in their foreign trade zone operations. To begin, most

domestic manufacturers had their trade zones in place by 1988, while foreign firms were continuing to

open new zones. The one exception was Volkswagen. Volkswagen opened its U.S. facility before the

other foreign producers, and closed its U.S. production facility in 1988. It should also be noted that

three subzones contain international joint venture activity; NUMMI, Autoalliance and Diamond-Star.'

While there is some heterogeneity in the sourcing and shipping activity between firms that are

headquartered in the U.S. or abroad, the U.S. plants have uniformly higher domestic input content and

shipping. Although the entry of new zone operators obscures the overall aging process of zone activity,

it also appears that foreign firms use an increasing percentage of inputs sourced from the U.S.

        Table 3 compares auto industry activity represented by the foreign trade zones data set of this

paper with aggregate trade statistics and with other industries. It is not possible to provide an exact

match, since the Department of Commerce classification system places foreign automakers under one

of two different categories, rather than a single category which encompasses these firms automotive

production activity. In particular, the Department of Commerce classifies each foreign firm according

to its primary line of business. In this taxonomy, some automotive firms are placed under the

manufacturing heading, while others are designated wholesale trade. As with manufacturing in

general, the bulk of imports brought to affiliates in the transportation equipment sector are used for

further manufacture. However, in contrast with the manufacturing aggregate, the transportation sector

imports cap ital equipment in twice the proportion. Nonetheless, the transportation equipment sector

imports capital equipment at the low amount of 3.5 percent of affiliate imports. The transportation

sector sources a much higher percentage of its imports shipped to affiliates directly from the foreign


    6
       For the purposes of this paper, zones are c!assified as an international joint venture if the output
from the zone results in automobiles sold under both U.S. and foreign nameplates.

                                                    10
parent, relative to the manufacturing Sector as a whole.

        To date, no work has been done on the foreign trade zones program. However, work has

examined the Oversees Assembly Provision (OAP). This program is similar in that it is meant to

mitigate tariff-induced disadvantages faced by U.S. component makers. When the U.S. imports

products, which are assembled abroad, the OAP exempts from duty that portion bf the U.S. imported

final products that is attributable to U.S. components. The general finding in thisarea, as demonstrated

by Finger (1976) and Mendez (1993), is that the OAP has increased the activity of U.S. parts industries

at the same time that it has reduced the activities of U.S. assemblers.7




       Grossman (1982) shows that the OAP may actually cause intra-industry trade in homogenous
products, as domestic and foreign producers may perceive differential input costs.

                                                  11
3. A model of Zone Usage



        To motivate the empirical work that follows, we construct a stylized model to describe the

demand for auto components of domestic and foreign origin. For expositional ease, the notation and

explanations that follow consider representative U.S. and Japanese firms that are both producing in and

selling to the U.S. market. In fact, it is assumed that multinational firms exist in equilibrium at all times,

although the volume of their activities may change.

        Multinational firms are assumed to use both domestic and foreign inputs in their production

processes according to a constant elasticity of substitution production function. The output of a typical

U.S. firm Y, is a function of U.S. inputs X and Japanese inputs X. Each of the N varieties of U.S.

inputs and N, varieties of Japanese inputs enter the production function symmetrically, and the elasticity

of substitution between any two inputs is a.


                                           [N, X' . ]Y X°"°]''•
        Japanese firms producing in the U.S. are also expected to have a constant elasticity of

substitution production function which reflects the output generated by the U.S. and Japanese inputs

entered into the production process. However, since Japanese firms are headquartered in Japan, we

introduce the possibility that Japanese firms use U.S. inputs less efficiently than they do Japanese

inputs.8 The differential efficiency related to the use of non-Japanese inputs is captured by the term &..
It is assumed that 0< &, < 1 . Hence, the overall Japanese production function is as follows,


    8
        Bergsten and Noland (1993) describe how the method of supplier contracting in Japan may
increase the proclivity of Japanese assemblers for Japanese parts produced by suppliers with whom they
have ongoing arrangements.

        It is possible that U.S. firms also have a differential efficiency in their use of U.S. and foreign
inputs. Incorporation of this idea would only strengthen the conclusions that follow. Further
                                                     12
                                       -
                                                          N,   X']
         Firms maximize profits, taking input prices into consideration. Theprice of a typical U.S. part
 is P,,, while the price of a representative Japanese part is P. In light of the production technology, the

 respective demands for U.S. inputs by Japanese and U.S. producers in the U.S.are:

                                 -   6.,[Pj/Pjj;           X - EPAJI',]
        At the same time, the demand for Japanese inputs by Japanese and U.S.
                                                                                         producers in the U.S.
are determined by:


                               X - [PJJP)I;               X - [P4JP,]°Y

        It is important to note that the composite price of inputs PA, differs for Japanese and U.S. firms

in a fashion that reflects any differential efficiency in the utilization ofparts sourced from different

locations. In particular, the aggregate price that applies to Japanese parts demand places a weight on

U.S. parts prices that is less than or equal to the weight placed on U.S. parts prices by U.S. producers.


                         nJ   r (l-.> +       J
                                                  . •,         r-,O-°>   . n('-)iJ I-.



        The value of U.S. content in Japanese production depends on the price and variety of U.S.

inputs used as well as the quantities of each variety demanded by Japaneseproducers. We can now

compare the value of U.S. input content to the total value of inputs used by Japanese firms through the

following calculation:




Explanation of the o,, term will be provided in the following Section.

                                                     13
                                         P)NJ. 6. (NJN.,XPJPJy


 As one would expect, the relative value of U.S. content is rising in the Japanese price of inputs and

declining with increases in the U.S. price of inputs. It is important to note as well, that the Japanese

price expressed in dollars is generated by the price in Yen multiplied by the exchange rate, P =e*P.

        Since a high portion of components purchases are intra-firm in nature, whether the parts are

produced in the U.S. or abroad, it is assumed that the parts are priced at marginal cost. It is possible

that there are scale economies that are present in the production of intermediate inputs. However, this

possibility is excluded here in order to prevent cost feedback that affects total demand. More discussion

of product demand is included in the following section.

        The U.S. content embodied in U.S. production takes a similar form and prices exert influence

in a comparable fashion, and is shown in the final equation.




                               PNç. F7IJXJ         I   .   (NJN.)(PJF7'



        In light of this set of equations, the following conclusions emerge. First, for a given set of

Japanese and U.S. prices, the U.S. content of U.S. firm production will be higher than that of Japanese

firms. In fact, this conclusion will be exacerbated if U.S. firms use Japanese inputs less efficiently than

Japanese firms do, since the preference for own-country inputs will be strengthened. Second, if the

dollar depreciates, the domestic content embodied in either U.S. or Japanese production should rise,

since dollar depreciations causes the relative price of U.S. inputs to fall.

        However, it is possible that Japanese production might not respond to exchange rate movements.


                                                   14
 Japanese motivation for producing in the U.S. could arise from the desire to gain North American

 content, or desire to circumvent protectionist moves in the U.S.'° Additionally, the need to fulfill

 content requirements for other tariff privileges might also modify the sourcing plans of firms:- If so,

 these motives related to the degree of protection and form of regulation could cause the domestic

 content of Japanese production to be much higher than the preceding set ofequations indicates." If

 Japan was maintaining a certain level of domestic content in the U.S. to achieve these alternative

 objectives, then one would expect that the level of U.S. content would not change with exchange rate

 movements, since content would be held to the minimum threshold needed to satis' the
                                                                                     requirement.




   '° This
           is the situation described by Bhagwati (1987).
   "    See Lopez-de-Silanes, Markusen and Rutherford (1993) or Krishna and Krueger (1995) for
discussions of content regulations.

                                                 15
4. Data and Estimation



        In this section we test the model of parts purchases that was developed in the previous section.

It is important to emphasize that the test is one that examines the location from which components are

sourced as opposed to the nationality of the party from whom the components are purchased.'2 In

particular, we are seeking to discover the responsiveness of finns in their decision to buy U.S. or foreign

parts. In all cases, we are seeking to explain the percentage of total inputs, i', that are of domestic

origin. The first set of tests follow the functional form that is proposed by the model, and are estimated

by non-linear least squares. However, the results are subsequently estimated by tobit, in order to
examine the sensitivity of the results to functional form, and to augment the regressors.

        The preceding section suggests that domestic input content is determined by relative prices of

inputs, the variety of inputs, and firm preferences. Hence, the estimating equation that is used in this

section assumes the form:




The relative efficiency of using U.S. parts is measured by &. In the case of U.S. headquartered firms,

ô,,, is set equal to one. In the case of foreign firms the value of 6,, is estimated. The relative number

of Japanese parts and U.S. parts, (N/Ni,,) is also set equal to one rather than estimated.'3 Hence, the



   12 However Zeile (1995) shows that 94.6% of automobile firm imports are intra-firm.

    13 Attempts were made to estimate the ratio of Japanese to US parts, but the results were too
large to be sensible. Also, since there are fully integrated automobile assemblers in both the U.S.
and Japan, it seems unlikely that the relative number of part types should differ drastically.

                                                   16
 estimation that proceeds from this point is the determination of the elasticity of substitution and the

 degree of discount, if any, that foreign producers associate with the use of U.S. parts. The purchase

 of domestic and foreign inputs is collected from the annual reports of the Foreign Trade Zones Board

 and is used to construct the measure of domestic content. The
                                                                   price of U.S. parts relative to Japanese

 parts is proxied alternatively by the relative automotive wage rates in the two countries andby the

 exchange rate.

Joint Venture Production

         Before continuing, there is one last data issue to be resolved. In particular, there were three

international joint ventures by the conclusion of the estimation period. For the purposes of this paper,

joint ventures are deemed to be facilities that produce models that are sold undera U.S. and foreign

nameplates.'4 Table 4 experiments with the classification of these U.S./foreign joint venturesto see

whether they can be classified as a unique hybrid, or whether these operations are more similar to either

U.S. or foreign auto production. Columns (1) and (2) analyze two subsets of thedata, and assume that

the estimated elasticity of substitution is the same for all types of automaker. In column (I) joint

ventures are compared with pure foreign automakers operating in the U.S. The results indicate a slight

difference; the pure foreign Ventures exhibit an apparent discount on their use of domestic parts relative

to the joint venture manufacturers. In column (2) the joint venture producersare compared with U.S.

producers. The results suggest that joint venture producers discount the use of U.S. parts relative to the

U.S. makers.

        Columns (3) and (4) repeat the subset groupings that were tested in the first two columns of table

4. However, the estimation now relaxes the assumption that all automakers have the same elasticity of

substitution. Instead, each type of automaker is allowed to have a unique elasticity of substitution.



        This restrictive definition of joint venture excludes Subaru-Isuzu which involves two
Japanese firms. However, none of its output is sold under a U.S. nameplate.

                                                   17
Column (4) shows that the joint venture producers appear to be less flexible than the U.S. makers, as is

shown by their estimated elasticity of substitution of 2.25. It is shown as well, that the joint venture

makers appear to place a discount on U.S. sourced parts relative to the U.S. firms.

        Finally, the entire sample is tested in columns (5) and (6) of table 4. Here each type of firm

is allowed to have its own elasticity of substitution in its purchasing of parts. In column (5) it is

assumed that no discount applies to the foreign purchase of U.S. parts. This column shows that U.S.

firms have an estimated elasticity of substitution that is more than 50% larger than the estimated

elasticity of foreign or joint venture firms. In column (6), it is assumed that foreign finns, and joint

ventures have a common elasticity of substitution, but that they may have different discount rates in their

use of U.S. parts. Again, the estimated elasticity for U.S. firms is much higher that than that for the

foreign orjoint venture firms in the sample. On the other hand, the estimated discount factors of foreign

and joint venture operators are very close in magnitude. Since the joint venture finns have elasticities

that are similar in magnitude to the pure foreign firm elasticities, the following estimation assumes that

the foreign firm and joint venture observations can be classified together as foreign. The specification

further assumes that foreign and joint venture producers have the same discount factor in their use of

U.S. parts.

        Table 4A investigates a number of subsets in the data, in order to gauge whether any of the

factors provide meaningful insight into the estimated elasticities of substitution or the input discount

factor, 8. Columns (I) and (2) separate the assembly zones from zones that specialize in the production

of parts. Although the elasticity of substitution for U.S. firms is virtually identical to the previous

estimates, the results show that foreign or joint venture assemblers have a higher elasticity of

substitution than was estimated in the previous table. However, a differential still remains.

        Columns (3) and (4) distinguish the auto assemblers by production volume. Auto zones

producing 207,000 or more vehicles per calendar year were deemed high volume, and zones producing


                                                   18
 fewer vehicles were classified as low volume. Auto firms are broken
                                                                             out according to production
 volume, since the auto industiy is known for its high fixed costs of production. We might assume that

 a firm with high production volume would be more sensitive to cost changes than a low volume firm,

 since the low volume firm could not justify producing parts inmultiple locations, even if relative prices

 changed. This reluctance would be most pronounced in the case of engine or transmission production,

 where fixed costs are especially high causing a reliance on scale production.

         Data on automobile zone volume was collected by matching eachforeign trade zone with the

auto plant data published in the Automotive News, Market Data Book. During the sample period,

the median U.S. assembly site plant (both foreign tradezone, and non-foreign trade zone) produced

207,000 vehicles. Of those plants producing within a zone, the median number of vehicles produced

was 227,0OO.' These results suggest that foreign and domestic assemblers have similar elasticities of

substitution, but that the notable differences emerge from the low volume sample. In the low volume

sample U.S. firms are much more responsive to price changes than are foreign producers in the U.S.

        Finally the data are separated according to the number of nameplate vehicle types produced in

each zone. This rationale for this separation is to see whether the difference inforeign and domestic

elasticities relates to the fact that foreign zones typically produce fewer car models in each zone than

do U.S. producers. Column (5) includes all assemblers who produce 3 or more vehicle typeS in a zone,

where column (6) includes all those with 2 or less vehicle nameplates. Vehicle diversity can not be

excluded as a determinant of U.S. foreign differences. However, the imprecision of the estimated

foreign elasticity makes it difficult to draw conclusions as to whether production diversity plays a role.




       The numbers are different, because some firms were slower to open zones than others.

                                                  19
Tobit Estimates

        Although the previous estimates have the advantage of following directly from the model of

parts demand, and result in direct estimates of the elasticity of substitution, they suffer from a few

drawbacks. The main reasons for using tobit analysis here is to see how estimated domestic content

responds to price changes when a larger set of firm characteristics is considered. It is true that the

elasticity of demand could be estimated as a function of plant age or other characteristics. However,

results were not stable or precisely estimated when this was performed with this paper's data set. The

estimating equation now takes the form:

           =a+        - D*e+ yX +

As before, content varies over time as relative prices change. These price change are captured

alternatively by exchange rate movements, measured bye, and later by the direct measurement of factor

input prices. Now, however, the level of U.S. content in production also depends on a U.S. shift term,

a,,,, and firm characteristics X. The error term is measured by .

        Table 5 provides a baseline estimate in column (1). As expected, the results show that the

average U.S. firm utilizes 31.5 % more domestic value added than does the average foreign firm. This

baseline estimate assumes further that all firms react similarly to exchange rate movements, and the

estimated effect again confirms that dollar depreciation causes the share of U.S. inputs to rise. Column

(2) adds another indicator variable to capture differences between parts makers and assemblers. While

the results are qualitatively similar to the baseline estimates, the estimation finds that parts makers have

domestic content that is roughly 16% lower than that of assemblers.

        Column (3) introduces the possibility that foreign and domestic firms may have different

responses to the movement of the exchange rate, and actually suggests that the response is higher for

the foreign firms in the sample. The specification also includes measures of the zone'sage, where age

is the number of years of zone operation. The age variable used applies only to the case of foreign


                                                    20
 firms. When age was included more generally, the estimated
                                                                    effects varied substantially and were
 not precisely estimated. It is likely that the age of the subzone activity is more meaningful in the

 case of foreign operations since they are more recently opened. Here we find that foreign firms source

 an increasing portion of their parts from the U.S. as their zones age, but that the level of growth
 diminishes over time.

         Column (4) adds another control for the total shipment size of the zones. It is learned that zones

 with higher shipments use a greater percentage U.S. parts. The inclusion of this regressor brings the

 value of the foreign response to the exchange rate back down to a magnitude that is slightly smaller than

 that of U.S. firms. Finally column (5) estimates firm fixed effects. The results are qualitatively similar

 to the previous specification. Overall, the results suggest that many of the observed differences between

 foreign and U.S. firms are caused by age and production volume differences.

        Rather than relying solely on the exchange rate toproxy for relative price effects, we now work

with specifications that include a number of prices that should directly affect the costs of production

in the auto industry. Table 5A sequentially adds measures of ore costs and energy costs to the estimating

equations. Each of the results implies that a rise in the relative cost of labor in the U.S. will reduce the

domestic content of U.S. produced automobiles, Incontrast, relative energy and iron prices enter with

a perverse positive coefficient. This suggests that the use of domestic inputs relative to total inputs

increases when the U.S. prices of these inputs rise. However, none of these estimates are significant.

And importantly, the continued U.S. indicator variable shows that U.S. firms utilize 30% greater levels

of domestic inputs, even after controls have been added forinput prices. It is the relative price of labor

that plays the most decisive role in parts sourcing decisions.

Specification Checks

       Table 6 examines the tobit estimating assumption that the
                                                                 regression errors are homoskedastic.
Since the errors could be related to firm size, the first two columns divide the dependent variable,

                                                   21
percentage domestic content, first by the square root of shipment size and next by the square root of zone

production volume. While the first normalization provides results that are qualitatively similar to earlier

tobit analysis, the second, based on production volume, does not. A further difference between columns

(1) and (2) is that production volume only applies to auto assemblers who produce completed vehicles.

Since total shipments represents the dollar value of shipments, it includes parts makers and assemblers.

        Under the assumption that there will be less heteroskedasticity of errors if data are analyzed

according to production volume subsets, the tobit analysis is redone on subsamples of the data that are

classified as high or low volume. As was learned previously, in the nonlinear least squares estimates,

the biggest apparent differences appear when low volume producers are compared. However, this result

is sensitive to the volume classification selected; median of all auto production, or median of all foreign

trade subzone production. Nonetheless, in three of the four estimates of price responsiveness in columns

(3) - (6), U.S. firms exhibit greater sensitivity in all but column (5). And this result is robust to the

inclusion of firm age effects, which were found to affect the price responsiveness.




                                                   22
 Conclusions



         This paper studies the domestic content decisions of domestic and foreign auto makers in the

 U.S. between 1984 and 1993. The results show that although the domestic content of Japanese firms

 has risen over time, differences are not being eliminated completely. Also, the apparent elasticity of

 substitution is lower for Japanese than for U.S. firms. If one assumes that the demand for Japanese

 nameplate automobiles will remain roughly constant, regardless of assembly location , these results

 suggest that although transplant production may reduce the U.S. automotive deficit with Japan, that
transplant production will not cause its elimination.

        The fact that the relative domestic input content of automakersresponds to relative production

costs provides two implications for multinational activity. To begin, this sensitivity to relative costs

suggests that foreign automakers are not purely motivated by the goal of circumventing U.S. trade

restrictions. If this were the single reason for transplant activity in the U.S., we would expect the degree

of U.S. content to be kept to a minimum that would not change with externalconditions. Next, some

studies such as Klein and Rosengren (1994) claim that foreign investmentoutlays are not measurably

altered by movements in relative wages. It may be true that foreign investment outlays do not respond

to relative wage movements, but it would be incorrect to infer that no other real activities were affected.

These results suggest that real wage movements may nonetheless have important consequences, since

multinationals can adjust their activities along other margins such as domestic versus foreign content

Further work is needed to provide an integrated understanding of the various margins along which

multinational activity is conducted.




                                                   23
Bibliography


Bergsten, C. Fred, and Marcus Noland (1993). Reconcilable Differences? United States-Japan
Economic Conflict, Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1987) "Quid Pro Quo DFI and VIEs: A Political-Economy-Theoretic Analysis,"
International Economic Journal, V 1(1), 1-14.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey and Ksenia Kulchycky. (1988) "U.S. and Swedish Direct
Investment and Exports," in Trade Policy Issues and Empirical Analysis, Robert E. Baldwin, ed.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 259-297.

Brainard, Lael S. (1993). "An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff Between
Multinational Sales and Trade." NBER Working Paper, #4580, December.

Ethier, Wilfred J. (1986). "The Multinational Finn," Quarterly Journal of Econom ic's, 101:805-833.

Finger, J.M., (1976). "Trade and Domestic Effects of the Offshore Assembly Provision in the U.S.
Tariff," American Economic Review, 66:598-611.

Foreign Trade Zones Board. 'Annual Report to the Congress of the United States," 1984-1992.

Giovannini, Alberto, (1988). "Exchange Rates and Traded Goods Prices," Journal of International
Economics, 24:45-68.

Grossman, Gene M. (1981). "A Theory of Domestic Content Protection and Preference," Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 96(4):583-603.

Grossman, Gene M. (1982). "Offshore Assembly Provisions and the Structure of Protection," Journal
of International Economics, 12:301-312.

Helpman, Elhanan, (1984). "A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational Corporations,"
Journal of Political Economy, 92:451-471.

l-Iorstmann, I.J. and J.R. Markusen, (1992). "Endogenous Market Structure in International Trade
(natura facit saltum)," Journal of International Economics, 32:109-129.

Klein, Michael W. and Eric Rosengren, (1994). "The Real Exchange Rate and Foreign Direct
Investment in the United States: Relative Wealth vs. Relative Wage Effects," Journal of International
Economics, 36:373-389.

Krishna, Kala and Anne Krueger, (1995). "Implementing Free Trade Areas: Rules of Origin and
Hidden Protection," NBER Working Paper, #4983, January.


                                                24
Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, James R. Markusen and Thomas F.
                                                              Rutherford, (1993). "Anti-Competitive
and Rent-Shifting Aspects of Domestic-content Provisions in
                                                            Regional Trade Blocks," NBER Working
Paper, #4512.

Mendez, Jose A. (1993). "The Welfare Effects of Repealing the Offshore
                                                                       Assembly Provision," Journal
of International Economics, 34:1-22.

United States House of Representatives, 1989. "Foreign Trade Zones," Hearing before the Commerce,
Consumer, and Monetary Affairs Subcommittee of the Committeeon Government Operations, March
7, Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wells, Louis 1., Jr. (1992), "Conflict or Indifference: US Multinationals ina Wortd of Regional Trading
Blocs," Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Research Program on Globalization
and Regionalisation, Technical Paper, No. 57, Paris: OECD.




                                               25
             Table I: U.S. Content and U.S. Shipments of FTZ Subzone Auto Assemblers.


        U.S. Firms                                           Foreign Firms

Year #         % Domestic % Domestic                         % Domestic % Domestic
        Sites Shipments   Inputs                      Sites Shipments    Inputs


1984     9      90.3          90.6                    3      96.0            35.1

1985 15         90.8          91.5                    5      96.9            32.0

1986 20         92.1          90.5                    5      97.3            29.2

1987 22         92.1          91.3                    4      98.5            41.3

1988 25         91.8           88.6                   5      95.2            49.3

1989 29         90.1           87.6                   6      94.4            52.8

1990 29         91.6          91.0                    6      93.8            59.6

1991    28      93.4          95.0                    6      92.6            64.1

1992 28         93.2          95.9                    6      89.8            68.8

1993 28         91.8          95.4                    6      88.5            66.7

Notes: % Domestic Shipment is the percentage of shipments from the foreign trade subzone that is
shipped to U.S. destinations. % Domestic Inputs is the percentage of inputs entering the foreign trade
subzone from U.S. locations. The percentages have been weighted by zone shipments.
Source: Foreign Trade Zones Board, Annual Reports, and author's calculations.
                            Table 2A: Volume ofAutomobile
                                                          Foreign Trade Subzone          Activity; 1984, 1988, 1992.
                                      1984                                           1988                                         1992
                 Zones      Inputs           Shipments        Zones        Inputs           Shipments         Zones
                 (#)        (Smill)          ($mill)                                                                    Inputs           Shn1s
                                                              (#)          ($mill)          ($mill)           (#)       ($mill)          ($mill)

 GM               0
                                                               10          13,118           14,324                16   16,560            17,232
 Ford             7         5,222            6,916             10          15,993           24,462             10      11,020            8,928
 Chrysler        3          4,470            7,344             6            4,866           4,830                 6     4,320            4,344
 Toyota          0                                             1               38              17                 1     1,958            1,957
Nissan           1           356             367               1             924              932                 1    1,368             1,352
Honda            I           816             755               1
                                                                           2,635            2,715             2        4,844             4,908
VW               1          327              332               1             277             307              0
S-I              0                                            0
                                                                                                              1         869              887
JV**            0                                             2              876             894              3        3,156         3,102
Total          13        11,191         15,7l4               32          38,727     48,481                40       44,095
         *
                                                                                                                                  42,710
Notes: = Subaru-Isuzu, ** denotes
                                   joint ventures between US and Japanesepartners. Zones
All input and shipmentvalues are deflated to                                             represented include assemblers and parts makers.
                                             1982 dollars.
Source: ForeignTrade Zones Board, Annual
                                             Reports, and autho?s   calculations.
                 Table 2B: Sourcing and Shipping Activitiesof Automobile Foreign Trade Subzones; 1984, 1988, 1992.

                                    1984                                         1988                                           1992

               Zones     % Dom             %Dom              Zones      % Dom           %Dom                Zones      % Dom           %Dom
               (#)        Inputs           Shipmnts          ()         Inputs          Shipmnts            ()         Inputs          iknrIs

GM              0                                             10        94.4             92.1                16         97.3           93.3

Ford            7                           92.8              10         84.7            91.6                10         90.9           93.1
                            85.9,
                3          92.1             86.3               6         87.3            87.4                6          95.1            91.8
Chrysler

                0                                              1        48.5             86.1                1          66.1            88.8
Toyota

Nissan          1           20.0            99.8               1         32.8            99.9                1          52.0            94.8

Honda           1           29.6            97.7               1        60.7             96.9                2          83.7            89.1

VW              1           63.8            87.7               1         35.4            91.0                0

S-Is            0                                              0                                             1          59.9            98.7

JV5             0                                              2         31.7            93.6                3          57.9            87.9

Total          13           84.1            90.1             32          82.9            91.3               40          87.5            92.0

Notes: * = Subaru-Isuzu, 5* denotes joint ventures between US and Japanese partners. Zones represented include assemblers and parts malçers.
Firm averages weight plant observations by plant shipments.
Source: Foreign Trade Zones Board, Annual Reports,and author's calculations.-
                                               Table 3: U.S. Imports Shipped to
                                                                                Affiliates, 1992
                       Shipped By Foreigners
                                                                                      Shipped by Foreign Parent Group
                       Total $        % Capital        %Goods          %Goods         Total $       % Capital     %Goods
                       Millions       Equipment        for Resale      for Further    Millions      Equipment     for Resale    &FLI11U
                                                       wlo Further     Manufacture                                w/o Further   Mfg
                                                       Manufacture
                                                                                                                  Manufacture

All Industries         182152          0.945           69.995         29.059          134292         0.685        74.258        25.057
Manufacturing          50919           1.601           28.592         69.805           34401         1.576        30.563        67.861
Transportation          5665          3.513            16.452         80.035           4882         4.035
Equipment                                                                                                         16.459        79.496

Wholesale             109833          0.144           93.320          6.536           88761         0.169
Trade                                                                                                            92.414         7.417

Motor Vchjcles         34524          0.113           90.974          8.913           28644
& Equipment                                                                                         0.136        89.806         10.054

Source: Foreign Direct Investment in the United States: 1992
                                                             BenchmarkSurvey, Preliminary Results. Table G-35.
                                       Table 4: Domestic Input Contentand Firm Type, 1984-1993.

                                               (1)            (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)

a-Group                                        1.838          2.670
                                               (.487)         (.422)


a-US                                                                                         2.700           2.701           2.700
                                                                                             (.435)          (.417)          (.414)

a-Foreign                                                                    2.191                           1.872
                                                                             (.547)                          (.781)

a-Joint Venture                                                              1.665           2.251           1.665
                                                                             (.863)         (1.758)         (1.408)

a-Foreign/JV                                                                                                                2.203
                                                                                                                            (.784)

8-Foreign                                     0.925                          0.823                                          0.826
                                              (.063)                         (.054)                                         (.009)

6-Joint Venture                                               0.865                          0.861                          0.860
                                                              (.113)                         (.136)                         (.129)


Adj. R2                                       0.763           0.797          0.768           0.796          0.789           0.792
N                                               79             284             79             284             341            341

Notes: Estimates are by non-linear least squares. Standard Errors are in parenthesis. Joint Ventures represent 22 year-firm observations.
o-Foreign/JV represents the elasticityof the foreign and joint venture observations estimatedjointly.
                                    Tabk 4A: Domestic Input Contentand Firm Characteristics,1984-1993.


                                                 (1)             (2)                (3)         (4)            (5)         (6)

                                                 ProductionType                     ProductionVolume           Numberof Models

                                                 Assembler       Parts              High        Low            >2          2 or less
a-US                                             2.692           2.749              2.058       4.615          2.670       2.719
                                                 (.451)         (1.021)             (.544)      (.917)         (.632)      (.639)
o-ForeignlJV                                     2.388          -1.951           2.353          2.306          4.763       2.335
                                                 (.867)         (4.469)         (1.042)        (1.644)        (4.307)      (.965)
6-ForeignliV                                     0.853           0.813          0.834           0.884         0.762        0.966
                                                 (.081)          (.128)         (.110)          (.128)        (.081)       (.103)
Adj.-R2                                          0.792           0.784          0.781           0.812         0.787       0.799
N                                                 295              46                189         106            146        149



Notes:   Notes: Estimates are by non-linear least squares. Standard Errors are in
                                                                           parenthesis.       Production Volume is
                                                                                                               deemed high if the number
                                                                                         below that
of cars produced in the calendar year was 207,000or higher. Low volume
                                                                       represents output            threshold.  Number of models counts
the number of auto nameplatevehiclesproduced within the individual zones.
                  Table 5: Auto Production in U.S. Foreign Trade Zones, 1984-1993
                           Dependent Variabk: [Domestic Inputs / Total Inputs]


                  (1)              (2)            (3)           (4)               (5)

US                0.315            0.294        0.204          0.588
                 (0.028)          (0.027)       (0.850)        (0.83 1)

Parts                             -0.161        -0.146         -0.099            -0.200
                                  (0.035)       (0.033)        (0.034)           (0.030)

Log(exch rate) -0.162             -0.218
               (0.094)            (0.092)

Log(exch rate)                                   -0.233        -0.254            -0.135
'US                                              (0.090)       (0.088)           (0.068)

Log(exch rate)                                   -0.3 18       -0.245            -0.135
'Foreign                                         (0.171)       (0.167)           (0.070)

Age                                              0.088          0.081             0.012
'foreign                                         (0.010)       (0.010)           (0.010)

AgeZ                                             -0.005        -0.005            0.000 1
'Foreign                                         (0.007)       (0.001)           (0.0007)

Total                                                           0.005             0.002
Shipments                                                      (0.00 1)          (0.00 1)

Constant           1.257           1.544          1.724         1.365             1.204
                 (0.428)          (0.421)        (0.791)       (0.773)           (0.313)

Firm Effects       NO               NO             NO            NO               YES

N                  341             341            341            341              341


Log               16.55            26.47          60.28         69.80             156.51
Likelihood


Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
                Table 5A: Auto Production in U.S. Foreign Trade Zones, 1984-1993
                       Dependent Variable: [Domestic Inputs / Total Inputs]


                        (1)              (2)        (3)            (4)
US                      0.316            0.316     0.323          0.304
                       (0.028)          (0.028)    (0.028)       (0.027)
Relative               -0.079           -0.088     -0.061        -0.083
Wage                   (0.051)          (0.056)    (0.059)       (0.058)

Relative                                 0.003      0.0002       -0.073
Energy Cost                             (0.171)    (0.170)       (0.165)

Relative Iron                            0.049      0.050         0.053
Cost                                    (0.079)    (0.079)       (0.076)

Relative Wage                                      -0.14 1       -0.2 13
Foreign                                            (0.111)       (0.108)

Parts                                                            -0.176
                                                                 (0.036)
constant                0.514            0.500     0.494          0.530
                       (0.026)          (0.034)   (0.035)        (0.034)
N                      341               341        34!           341

Log-L                  16.24            16.46      17.27         28.66
Likelihood

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.
                                   Table 6: Specification tests
                         Dependent variable: [Domestic InputslTotal Inputs]


                                                 High Volume                     Low Volume
                (1)             (2)            (3)          (4)                (5)          (6)

US              0.09           -0.01           0.63            0.60            0.61           0.32
               (0.22)          (0.02)         (0.22)          (0.23)          (0.24)         (0.18)

Real*          -0.23            0.01          -0.29           -0.31           -0.20          -0.47
US             (0.12)          (0.01)         (0.16)          (0.18)          (0.20)         (0.14)

Real           -0.16           -0.01          -0.13           -0.12           -0.18          -0.20
Foreign        (0.17)          (0.02)         (0.12)          (0.13)          (0.09)         (0.08)

               -0.01            0.001         -0.02           -0.02           -0.004         -0.005
Age
               (0.01)          (0.0004)       (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.005)        (0.005)

Foreign        -0.05           -0.003          0.06            0.07            0.07           0.04
Age            (0.03)          (0.002)        (0.03)          (0.03)          (0.03)         (0.02)

Foreign#        0.003          0.0001          0.001          0.0001          -0.005         -0.002
Age2           (0.002)         (0.0002)       (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)        (0.002)

Constant        0.50            0.03           0.44            0.45           0.51           0.81
               (0.18)          (0.02)         (0.17)          (0.18)          (0.22)         (0.16)

               10.88           1262.25        56.41           47.99           110.94         123.41
Log
Likelihood

N               340            242             232             219             109            122

Notes: Tobit Estimation. Standard Errors are in parenthesis. The dependent variable is divided by tht
square root of total shipments in column (1). It is divided by the square root of production volumeand
multiplied by 10 in Column (2). Columns (3) and (5) are relative to all production median of 207,000
units. Columns (4) and (6) are relative to all FTZ production median of 227,529 units.
