                             NBER WORKING        PAPER SERIES




                         EVIDENCE ON THE CHARACTERISTICS
                           OF CROSS SECTIONAL VARIATION
                                 IN STOCK RETURNS




                                         Kent Daniel
                                       Sheridan Titman




                                     Working Paper 5604




                    NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 1996




We thank participants of seminars at Dartmouth, Harvard Business School, HKUST, MIT,
Northwestern,    UCLA, University of Chicago, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign,
University of Michigan, USC, University of Texas, University of Tokyo, Wharton, and the
February 1995 NBER Behavioral Finance Workshop, the PACAP, APFA and AFA conferences
and Jonathan Berk, Mark Carhart, Randy Cohen, Douglas Diamond, Vijay Fafat, Wayne Ferson,
Kenneth French, Steven Kaplan, Mark Kritzman, Josef Lakonishok, Craig MacKinlay, Alan
Marcus, Chris Polk, Richard Roll, Ren6 Stulz, Robert Vishny and especially Eugene Fama for
helpful discussions, comments and suggestions.     Daniel thanks the Center for Research in
Security Prices (CRSP) at the University of Chicago for research support. Titman grateful] y
acknowledges research support from the John L. Collins, S .J. Chair in International Finance. We
are, of course, responsible for any errors. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in
Corporate Finance.     Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Kent Daniel and Sheridan Titman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                            NBER Working Paper 5604
                                                                                          June 1996



                              EV~ENCE   ON THE CHARACTERISTICS
                                OF CROSS SECTIONAL VARIATION
                                      IN STOCK RETURNS


                                                 ABSTRACT



          Firm size and book-to-market       ratios are both highly correlated with the returns of common

stocks.     Fama      and French    (1993)    have argued    that the association    between   these firm

characteristics     and their stock returns arises because size and book-to-market      ratios are proxies

for non-diversifiable     factor risk. In contrast, the evidence in this paper indicates that the return

premia on small capitalization      and high book-to-market      stocks does not arise because of the co-

movements         of these stocks with pervasive factors.     It is the firm characteristics   and not the

covariance structure of returns that explain the cross-sectional        variation in stock returns.




Kent Daniel                                                        Sheridan Titman
Graduate School of Business                                        Finance Department
University of Chicago                                              School of Management
1101 East 58th Street                                              Boston College
Chicago, IL 60637                                                  Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
                                                                   and NBER
1     Introduction

There is now considerable evidence that the cross-sectional pattern                of stock returns can be

explained by characteristics such as size, leverage, pmt returns, dividend-yield, earnings-tcprice
ratios and book- t~market ratios.l Fama and French (1992, 1996) examine all of these variables

simultaneously and conclude that, with the exception of the momentum strategy described by

Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the cross-sectional variation in expected returns can be explained                  -

by only two of these characteristics, size and book-tomtiket.                Beta, the traditional CAPM

measure of risk, explains almost none of the cross-sectional dispersion in expected returns once

size is   taken into account.2

    There is considerable disagreement about the reason for the high discount rate assigned

to small and high book-tomarket           firms. The traditional explanation for these observations,

exposited by Fama and French (1993, 1996), is that the higher returns are compensation for

higher systematic risk. Fama and French (1993) suggest that book-to-market and size are proxies

for distress and that distressed firms may be more sensitive to certain business cycle factors,

like changes in credit conditions, than firms that are financially less vulnerable.              In addition,

the duration of high growth firms’ earnings should be’ somewhat longer than the duration of

the earnings of low growth firms, therefore term structure shifts should affect the two groups of

firms differently.
                                                             ,,
    In contrast, Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) (LSV) suggest that the high returns

associated with high book-to-market (or value) stocks are generated by investors who incorrectly

extrapolate the past earnings growth rates of firms.              They suggest that investors are overly

optimistic about firms which have done well in the past and are overly pessimistic about those

which have done poorly. LSV also suggest that low book-to-market               (or growth) stocks are more

glamorous than value stocks and may thus attract naive investors who push up prices and lower

the expected returns of these securities.3

    1The size anomaly was documented         by Banz (1981) and Keim (1983), leverage by Bhandari (1988),
the past returns effect by DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and Jegadeesh and Titman (1993), the earnings-
to-price ratio by Ba.su (1983), the book-to-market      effect by Stattman  (1980) and Rosenberg, Reid, and
Lanstein (1985).
    2See also Jegadeesh (1992),
    3There is also a third potential explanation:  Kothari, Shanken, and’ Sloan (1995) suggest that selection-



                                                      1
    Fama    and French     (1993) provide several tests that suggest that a firm’s book-to-market ratio

and size are in fact proxies for the firm’s loading on priced risk factors. First, they show that the

prices of high book-t~market         and small size stocks tend to move up and down together in a way

that is suggestive of a common risk factor. Secondly, they find that the loadings on zero cost

factor portfolios formed based on size (a small capitalization portfolio minus large capitalization

portfolio they call SMB) and book-to-market ratios (a high book-to-market portfolio minus a low

book-to-market      portfolio they call HML) along with a value-weighted market portfolio (Mkt)

explain the excess returns of a full set of book-to-market             and size-sorted portfolios.4

    While LSV do not dispute the possibility that there may be priced factors associated with

value (or growth) stocks, they argue that the return premia associated with these factor portfolios

are simply too large and their covariances with macro factors are just too low (and in some cases

negative) to be considered compensation for systematic risks LSV present compelling evidence

to support their claim, however their results are not inconsistent with multi-factor models, such

as Merton (1973) and Ross (1976), which allow for priced” factors that are orthogonal to the

overall market return. An explanation for these return anomalies, based for example on Merton

(1973), would require that we find a priced factor that is orthogonal to the market, yet affects
                                                     ,,   .,.
future investment opportunities.

    While we would expect that it would be very difficult to verify that the returns associated

with size and book-to-market          portfolios do indeed satisfy the above condition, it is likely to

bias problems in the construction    of book-t~market    portfolios could be another cause of the premium.
However, recent work by Chan, Jegadeesh,        and Lakonishok     (1995) shows that the selection biases are
not large. Further,    Cohen and Polk (1995a) construct      portfolios in a way that completely eliminates
the COMPUSTAT        selection bias and find similar evidence. Finally, Davis (1994) forms book-to-market
sorted portfolios free of selection bias in the 1940-1963 period (out-of-sample        relative to the Fama and
French 1963-1992 sample period) and finds a book-te-market           effect similar in magnitude    to that found
by Fama and French (1992).
    4As further evidence, Fama and French (1993) show that Mkt, HML and SMB portfolios formed from
one-half of the CRSP sample of stocks can explain the returns of portfolios formed with stocks from the
other half. In addition, Fama ad Rench (1995) show that the same return factors are present in a firm’s
earnings, and Cohen and Polk (1995a) show that portfolios formed b~ed on individual firm’s covariances
with the SMB and HML factor exhibit the same premia as do the original size and book-to-market sorted
portfolios.
   5MacKinlay (1995) makes a similar argument:         He calculates the statistical   distribution    of the ez-ante
Sharpe-ratio  of the mean-vaiance    efficient portfolio from the returns of the Farna and French (1993)
portfolios, and concludes that the likely value of the the Sharpe-ratio          obtainable     is “too-high” to be
explained within the context of efficient-market    theory.




                                                         2
be equally difficult to verify that the returns do not satisfy this condition. To show that these
returns are not a factor in the Merton sense requires that we show that the factor cannot explain

the component of consumption growth which is orthogonal to the market return.           Given the

difficulties associated with linking observed risk premia on the overall market to macro variables

like aggregate consumption, this could be difficult to demonstrate.

   In summary, the existing literature does not directly dispute the supposition that the re-

turn premia of high book-t~market     and small size stocks can be explained by a factor model;      ~

rather, the debate centers on whether the factors can possibly represent economically relevant

aggregate risk. In contrast, this paper addresses the more fundamental question of whether the

return patterns of characteristic-sorted portfolio   are really consistent with a factor model at

all. Specifically, we ask (1) whether there really are pervasive factors that are directly associ-

ated with size and book-t~market;    and (2) whether there are risk premia associated with these

factors. In other words, we directly test whether the high returns of high book-to-market     and

small size stocks can be attributed to their factor loadings.

   Our results indicate that (1) there is no discernible separate risk factor associated with high

or low book-to-market (characteristic) firms, and (2) there is no return premium associated with

any of the three factors identified by Fama and French (1993), suggesting that the high returns

related to these portfolios cannot be viewed as compensation for factor risk. To elaborate,

we find that although high book-to-market      stocks do covary strongly with other high book-

to-market stocks, the covariances do not result from there being particular risks associated

with distress, but rather reflect the fact that high book-to-market   firms tend to have similar

properties; e.g., they might be in related lines of business, might be in the same industries or

from the same regions. Specifically, we find that while high book-to-market     stocks do indeed

covary with one another, their covariances were equally strong bejore the firms became distressed.

To determine whether characteristics or covariances determine expected returns we investigate

whether portfolios with similar characteristics, but different loadings on the Fama and French

(1993) factors, have different returns. We find that the answer is no. Once we control for firm

characteristics, expected returns do not appear to be positively related to the loadings on the

market, HML or SMB factors.




                                                3
    Our results are disturbing in that, like Fama and French (1992), they suggest that traditional

measures of risk do not determine expected returns. In equilibrium asset pricing models the

covariance structure of returns determine expected returns.       Yet we find that variables that

reliably predict the future covmiance structure do not predict future returns. Our results indicate

that high book-to-market   stocks and stocks with low capitalizations have high average returns

whether or not they have the return patterns (i. e., covariances) of other small and high book-to-

market stocks. Similarly, after controlling for size and book-to-market ratios, a common share

that “acts like” a bond (i. e.,, has a low market beta) has the same expected return as other

common shares with high market betas.

    The paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we re-examine the return characteristics

of portfolios of stocks sorted on size and book-t~market,     paying particular attention to sea-

sonalities in these returns, something that is important in our later analysis. In Section 3 we

present a simple, purely descriptive, return generating model which provides some structure to

our discussion of the empirical evidence presented in Sections 4 and 5. The model also provides

some insights about why the Fama and ~ench (1993) tests might fail to reject the factor pricing

model when the model is incorrect and why a factor analysis test, like the tests presented in

Roll (1994), might falsely reject a factor pricing model.   In Section 4 we present evidence on

one feature of this model, that there is no additional factor risk associated with high book-to-

market firms. Then in Section 5 we perform a set of empirical tests on another implication of

our descriptive model, showing that, after controlling for firm characteristics, estimated factor

loadings do not explain returns. Section 6 concludes the paper.



2    A Summary of the Return Patterns of Size and Book-to-
     Market Sorted Portfolios.

In this section we re-examine the return patterns of size and book-to-market sorted portfolios.

What we show is that there are important interactions between the size and book-to-market

effects and that the return patterns me different in January and non-January months. As we

later discuss, both of these observations play important roles in our research design.

    Panel A of Table 1 presents the mean excess returns for the 25 size/book-to-market      sorted



                                                4
portfolios from Fama and French (1993), over the period 63:07 to 93:12.6 These portfolios are

breed on unconditional sorts using NYSE breakpoints.                       Therefore, for example, the small/low

book-t~market       portfolio is that set of firms included on NYSE/AMEX                    or NASDAQ which have

book-to-market      ratios in the range of the lowest quintile of NYSE firms and market equity in

the lowest quintile of NYSE firms. All returns presented here are of value-weighted portfolios

which are rebalanced annually, and consequently the results should not be driven by bid-ask

bounce.’

    Panel A illustrates the magnitude of the return differential across the portfolios.                          First, we

see that the difference in returns between the high book-to-mmket                       quintiles and the low book-

to-market quintile of the same size was more than 50 bp/month                          over this period (except for

the very largest firms, where the difference is only 19 bp/month).8                        Across size quintiles, the

premia for the smallest quintile of firms over the largest is 30-50 bp/month,                       except for the low

book-to-market quintile where the difference is only 1 bp/month.

    An analysis of these returns suggests that after controlling for book-to-market there is more

of a large firm rather than a small firm anomaly. Although the returns are almost monotonic in

size, there are no significant differences in the returns of the small and medium size firms within

any of the book-to-market groupings. However, the largest quintile of firms do have significantly

lower returns than the rest, with this being especially true for the high book-to-market stocks.g

One implication of this is that a simple linear or log-linem regression of returns on capitalization

and book-to-market       ratios will not adequately characterize observed stock returns. There are

important interaction effects that would be ignored in such a specification.                          For this reason,

we will continue     our strategy    of examining     the       return   patterns   of various   characteristic-sorted

portfolios.

    It is also possible that a factor structure could be artificially induced because of a common

    6We wish to thank Eugene Fama and Kenneth French for supplying the portfolio returns.                 The con-
struction of these portfolios is described in dettil in Fama and French (1993),
    ‘It is important to note that these premia may seem small, particularly       across size quintiles, relative to
results presented in other studies. This is because of the value-weighting     and the use of NYSE breakpoints.
    ‘Interestingly,    we also find that the market-betm   for both small and large high BM stocks are lower
than for the corresponding       low BM stocks.
    ‘The contrast between this and what has typically been found in other studies is due to our use of
value-weighted      portfolios. The very smallest firms do have larger returns, but these firms are not heavily
weighted in these portfolios.



                                                            5
January seasonal. For this reason, we separately analyze the returns of the size and book-to-

mmket sorted portfolios in January and non-January months. Panels B and C of Table 1 give

the mean returns of the same 25 Fama and Bench portfolios, only now separated into January

and non-January months. This table shows that the size effect is almost exclusively a January

phenomena and that the book-t~market            phenomena occurs mainly in January for the larger

firms, while the medium size and smaller high book-to-market firms exhibit about a 3% return

premium    in January   and another   370 premium over the other 11 months. For the largest quintile

of firms, high book-to-market stocks exhibit the same 370 January premium over the returns of

low book-to-market      stocks, however, for these stocks, the difference between the high and low

book-to-market portfolio returns has been negative in the other 11 months.l”



3     A Model of the Return Generating Process

In this section we present three models which clarify the motivation for our empirical tests,

These should be viewed as purely descriptive models that provide a concrete framework for

describing some of the opposing views described in the introduction.             The first model, which

we consider our null hypothesis, is consistent with the views described by Fama and French

(1993, 1994, 1996) where there exists a “distress” factor with a positive risk premium.               The

second model represents an alternative hypothesis in which the factor structure is stable over

time, and expected returns are determined by a firm’s loading on factors with time varying return

premia, In the third model firm characteristics rather than factor loadings determine expected

returns. Extant empirical evidence is consistent with all three models, but in Sections 4 and

5 we will present empirical evidence that is inconsistent with all but the characteristic-based

model.

    In addition to motivating our own research design, the models presented in this section

illustrate some possible pitfalls associated with past studies that examine whether loadings on

factor portfolios explain the returns on characteristic-based portfolios.          First, we argue that

empirical studies that form benchmmks based on principal components or any other form of

factor analysis may falsely reject a linear factor pricing model which in fact properly prices

  10Davis (1994) finds similar results. We note also that this is consistent    with DeBondt   and Thaler
(1985), though they look at p~t returns rather than Book-t~Market     ratios.



                                                    6
all assets. These arguments apply to the recent study by Roll (1994), which shows that factor

loadings from a principal components analysis fail to explain the book-t~market                            effect, as well m

to earlier tests of the arbitrage pricing theory that used factor analysis. 11 In addition, we argue

that research designs which uses the returns of characteristic-based portfolios as independent

variables may fail to reject a fator            pricing model when the model is in fact incorrect.                     Such

designs include Fama and French (1993), as well as Chan, Chen, and Hsieh (1985), Jagannathan

and Wang (1996) and Chan and Chen (1991).


3.1         Model    1: The null hypothesis


Our null hypothesis is that returns are generated by the following factor structure:




where 8i,t_l is firm i’s loading on the distress factor, ~D,*at time t. In this factor pricing model,

expected returns are a linear function of all factor loadings:




Here, the book-t~market            ratio of the firm proxies for O,,t-l, the loading on the distress factor.

The premium associated with this distress factor, AD, is positive, meaning that firms which load

on this distress factor (i. e., high book-to-market firms) earn a positive risk premium.

      It is also important to note that @i,t-l varyies over time as firms move in and out of distress.

This means that an experiment in which one estimates the factors using a purely statistical

factor analysis, and then determines whether the premia of the high book-to-market                                portfolio

can be explained by the loadings on these factors, would give invalid results: since there is no

group of firms that continually loads on the distress factor, the factor cannot be extracted with

a purely statistical factor analysis.12

   11These would include papers by Lehmann and Modest (1988) and Connor and Korajczyk (1988) which
use size-sorted portfolios as independent variables, but form factors based on individual firm returns.
   lZHowever, if there were ch~ging weight portfolios of distressed firms included M returns in the
principal    components   stage,   it would be possible   to properly   extract   the distress   factor,




                                                            7
3.2      Model    2: A Model      with Time Varying                 Factor Risk Premia


Our first alternative hypothesis is a model in which there is no separate distress factor and in
which the covariance matrix of returns is stable over time. This means that factor loadings do
not change as firms become distressed.        However, since distressed firms on average have high
loadings on factors which have had negative realizations in the past, it appems as if a distress
factor exists. For example, following a string of negative realizations on the oil factor, a portfolio
of high book-t~market      firms will contain a large number of oil stocks. As econometricians, we
would identify movements in the oil factor at this point as movements in the distress factor,
when in fact they are movements in the “distressed” oil factor.

      In Model 2, a factor’s risk premium increases following a string of negative factor realizations.

Since many of the firms in the high book-to-market portfolio load on the distressed factor, the

high book-to-market portfolio will have higher expected returns. In the example from the last

paragraph, a portfolio of high book-to-market firms would earn a high return because it contains

many oil firms, which load on the “distressed” oil factor, which now has a high return premium.

      More formally, we assume that a time-invariant, J-factor model describes the variance-

covariance matrix of returns.




The difference between this equation and equation (1) is that there is no separate distress factor

~~. Furthermore, we assume that the remaining ~’s in this model are constant over time, so

that the covariance structure does not change w firms move in and out of distress. Again, the

factor structure describes expected returns:

                                                            J
                                      E[?;,t]= Tf,t   + ~       Pi,jAj,t-l                          (3)
                                                          j=l


Now, however, unlike in equation (2), the risk premia on the J factors vary through time. Also,

the changes in the premia are negatively correlated with the pa,st performance of the firms

loading on this factor.    This means that when a factor experiences negative realizations, the

firms that load on the factor become distressed (their book-to-market ratios increase) and their

expected returns increase because the A associated with this factor increases.


                                                      8
      Finally, we again assume that there is an observable variable di,i (i. e., the book-to-market

ratio). 0 obeys a slowly mean-reverting process and the innovations in 6’are negatively correlated

with past returns (so that distressed firms have high 0’s). This means that, across firms, 8 should

be correlated with the factor loading on the currently distressed factor. Therefore, if a portfolio

of the stocks of high 6 firms is assembled, the stocks are likely to be those which have high

loadings on factors with (currently) high A’s. In other words, the high 8 portfolio is successfully

timing the factors. This characterization is similar to that proposed by Jagannathan and Wang                   .

(1996), who suggest that small firms have high average returns because they have high betas on

the market when the expected return on the market is high.13


3.3     Model      3: A Characteristic-Based               Pricing       Model


In contrast to the factor pricing models presented in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, the characteristic-

based model presented in this section assumes that high book-to-market stocks realize a return

premium that is unrelated to the underlying covariance structure. This model is thus inconsistent

with Merton (1973) or Ross (1976) in that it permits asymptotic arbitrage.

      As in Model 2, covariances are stationary over time and can be described by a factor

structure 14 Specifically, we again assume that a time-invariant, approximate J-factor struc-

ture describes the variance-covariance matrix of returns.




However, in contr=t       to the previous models, factor loadings do not describe expected returns.

Instead, we assume expected returns are a function of the observable, slowly varying firm at-

tribute ~i,t:

                                                                                                          (5)

As in Model     2, the innovations   in 6 are negatively    correlated     with the returns on the stock, but

0 is not directly related to the loadings on the distressed factors. What is unique about Model 3

   13However the setting here is slightly different: In the Jagannathan     and Wang (1996) setting, the
loadings of tie individual   (small) firms on the market factor change through time, while in the model
presented here, factor loadings are constant but the composition of the high book-to-market  firms changes
over time.
   14Although we focus on the relation between book-to-market      ratios and returns in this section, the
analysis also applies to the relation between size and returns.


                                                       9
is that firms exist which load on the distressed factors but which me not themselves distressed,

and therefore have a low 0 and commensurately low return (and vice-versa). If Model 3 is true

then following a string of negative shocks to the oil factor there may be some stocks which,

despite their high loadings on the oil factor, are still not distressed. Model 2 suggests these

firms should still e=n the distress premium, because they behave like other distressed firms. In

contrmt, Model 3 suggests their returns behavior does not’ matter: if they are not distressed

they will not earn the premium. Note also that Model 3 implies that a clever investor can earn

the book-tmmmket       return premium without loading on any common factors.


3.4      Empirical    Implications     of the Models


The empirical evidence that Fama and French (1993) present can be summarized with two

empirical facts: (1) the stocks in the high book-t~market        portfolio strongly covary with one

another; and (2) high book-to-market      stocks have high returns. The conclusion conventionally

drawn from this evidence is that the firms in the high book-to-market portfolio are all loading

on a factor which has a high premium; this is indeed the intuition suggested by the first two

models.

      Models 2 and 3 illustrate why this conclusion need notfollow from the evidence. It is true that

since the distressed firms covary with one another, on average these firms must load on the same

factor, which we can call the distressed factor. Of course, a firm will become distressed when a

factor on which it loads has a strong negative realization. Using Bayesian reasoning, it therefore

follows that firms which are distressed will, on average, load on the same factor. In both Model 2

and 3 “(the characteristic-based model), this is why distressed firms covary with one another, not

because of the presence of a separate distress factor. One way to discriminate between Model

1 and Models 2 and 3 is to see whether the return standard deviation of a portfolio of stocks

increase if they all simultaneously become distressed. If the factor structure is stable and there

is no separate distress factor (i. e., if Model 1 is false), then the return standard deviation should

stay approximately constant.

      Model 3 also indicates these existing empirical observations do not necessarily imply that

returns are determined by factor loadings. In the characterist it-based model, the high returns

are earned by all distressed firms, whether they load on the distressed factor or not. Some firms


                                                  10
may have become distressed by virtue of bad realizations on an idiosyncratic        term rather   than

on a common factor.     Models 1 and 2 predict that such firms should not exhibit a premium;
however, if the characteristic-based   model is correct they should.

    In tests where the test portfolio returns are constructed   from characteristic sorted portfolios
(as in Fama and French (1993)), the factor will appmr to. be associated with a high premium:
since the average firm in the distressed portfolio does load on this factor, a strong correlation

will be found between distressed factor loadings and return premia.           Hence, to discriminate

between the models, a test method must be used which separates out the firms which are high

book-to-market, but which do not behave like high book-to-market firms. This is what our test

in Section 5 does.

    The stability of the covariance matrix turns out to be quite important for testing the pricing

aspect of the characteristics-breed model. If the factor structure is reasonably stable, we can

use past factor loadings to predict future loadings and determine whether it is characteristics

or factor loadings which determine returns. However, if the covariance matrix is unstable, it

will be difficult to determine how firms will behave in the future, and consequently to find, for

example, value firms which behave more like growth firms.



A    The Covariation of Stocks with Similar Characteristics

The characteristics-pricing model described in Section 3.3 differs from our null hypothesis as

presented in Section 3.1 in two important ways. First, the characteristics model has no “distress”

factor; the common variation in high book-t-market         stocks arises because stocks with similar

factor loadings are likely to become distressed at the same time. Second, the model specifies

that average returns are determined by characteristics like book-to-market and size rather than

factor loadings.

    The first aspect of the model is important because the common variation among value and

growth stocks has been interpreted as evidence of a distress factor. This is b=ed on the following

reasoning: if you randomly select 1000 stocks and go long a dollar in each of these, and randomly

select 1000 stocks and go short a dollar in each of these, the resulting portfolio will effectively net

out the various sources of factor risk and you should end up with a portfolio with an extremely


                                                  11
small return variance. Assuming that the residual standard deviation of the individual stocks

is roughly 1070/month, then the standard deviation of this random portfolio’s returns would be

about 0.25Ye/month. Instead, the HML portfolio has a standard deviation of about 2.5Y0/month

indicating that the portfolio is subject to considerable factor risk. Farna and French (1993)

interpret this evidence in the following way:

                      constructed. to mimic risk factors related to size and BE/ME
        . . . portfolios                                                               capture
        strong common variation in returns, no matter what else is in the time series regres-
        sion. This is evidence that size and book-to-market equity indeed proxy for sensitivity
        to common risk factors in stock returns.

      In contrast, the characteristics model assumes that this common variation arises because the

HML portfolio consists of “similar” firms that have similar factor loadings whether                or not they

are distressed.     In other words, the return generating model is assumed to be reasonably stable,

but firms with similar factor loadings are expected to be distressed at the same time.


4.1      The    Portfolio     Returns


In this section we examine how the risk chmacteristics of stocks change in the years leading

up to their inclusion in the various characteristic portfolios.          If Model 1 provides a good char-

acterization of the data, then on average, the covmiances between the stocks should be higher

when they are in the high book-t~market            portfolio than when they are not. However, under

the specifications in Models 2 and 3, covariances are constant over time.

      Following Fama and French (1993), we form six portfolios based on the intersection of the

three book-to-market        categories (High, Medium and LOW) and two size categories (Small and

Big).    These portfolios are designated LS, MS, HS, LB, MB, and HB. In addition we form the

two zero-investment portfolios HML           (High- Minus-hw)        and SMB      (Small-Minus-Big),     which

Fama and French use to capture the book-to-market               and size effect.ls We then calculate the

pre-formation       and post-formation   return standard deviations, in each of the five years before

and five years after the formation date, of hypothetical portfolios that have constant portfolio

weights equal to the formation date weights of the eight portfolios described above. 16

   15Det ails about the construction   of the set of portfolios is described in the Appendix.
   16Note that this gives us slightly different returns over the period July:t through June:(t + 1) than for the
standard HML portfolio; we are holding the weights constant here so we are not generating buy-and-hold
returns. Elsewhere in the paper we calculate true buy-and-hold         returns.


                                                       12
   Before looking at pre- and post- formation date standard deviations we will examine the

average returns of stocks included in the HML portfolios prior to the formation date.            We

calculate these average pre-formation returns for the entire set of formation dates from June

1963 through June 1990 (28 years), and plot these in Figure 1. We stop in 1990 because this

is the last formation date for which six years of future return data is available. This figure          .

shows that the pre-formation returns of the HML portfolio are strongly negative, supporting

the contention of Fama and French that high book-t~market        firms are distressed and that low

book-to-market firms have performed well in the past. Another important       feature of this plot is
the large returns experienced in every January in the pre-formation period. Every pre-formation

(average) return outside of January is negative and every average January return is positive.
Note also that there is a large “step” in the returns in January of the formation year. This is
because the portfolios are formed based on the book-t~market     ratios at the end of the preceding
year, as described earlier.

   To determine how covariances change in the pre- and post- formation period we examine the

pre- and post-formation return standard deviations of the eight portfolios.     One difficulty with

this analysis is that a considerable fraction of the firms in the HML portfolio are not traded

five years before or five years after the portfolio formation date.   For example, about half of

the small growth stocks (L/S portfolio) do not have CRSP or COMPUSTAT               data five years

prior to their inclusion in the portfolio.   Similarly, about 25% of the H/S firms do not have

data five years subsequent to their inclusion. Therefore, to generate this table, we have also

imposed the additional requirement that, for a firm to be included in the analysis, it must have

returns reported on CRSP in June: (t-5) for the Backward Looking Analysis (where June:t is the

formation date), and at June: (t+5) for the forward looking analysis. Without this restriction,

the formation-year 5 and -5 portfolios would contain a substantially smaller number of firms

than the lag O portfolios.17

   These standard deviations are presented in Table 2. First, consider the leftmost column

in Panel A, labeled with formation-year 5. The numbers in this column are the excess return

standard deviations for the portfolio formed based on the characteristics five years in the future.

For example, the portfolio’s composition between July of 1963 and June of 1964 is based on

  17We also generatedthe Table without imposingthis requirement. The resultsdo not changematerially.


                                                13
firm sizes at the end of June 1968 and book-t~m~ket            ratios at the end of December of 1967.

This column provides the standard deviation of the portfolios five years prior to their actual

formation dates.

    Because of data restrictions we investigate only the 63:07-89:06 period for the “Backward

Looking” portfolios: reforming the formation-year 5 portfolio in 89:07 would require stock prices

for June of 1994, which we do not currently have access to, For the “Forward Looking” Analysis

in the right side of the Table we use the sample period from through 68:07-93:12 because book-

to-market ratios are not available before December 1962. We calculate the standard deviations

of each of these 54 series (six lagged years times nine portfolios) for each lag and tabulate these

in Panel A of Table 2. We see that the difference in the lags + 5 and lag Ostandard deviations is

close to zero for all series except the HML, for which the standard deviations increase from 2.2

to 2.5. However, part of the increase in standard deviation for the HML portfolio arises because

it exhibits a large January seasonal, as we saw in Figure 1. In Panel B of Table 2 we perform

the same standard deviation calculation, only we now exclude all Januarys from the sample.

There is still a slight increme in standard deviation in moving from formation-year 5 to O, (and

a decrease in moving from formation-year -5 to O) but this increase is only about 10Yo.18

    In summary, the reason that high book-t~market          stocks exhibit strong common variation is

not because they load on a separate distress factor. If this were the case, this common variation

would disappear when we look prior to and after the time when these firms are most distressed.

We instead find that the common variation is present both five years before and after these firms

are in the distress/growth portfolio. This suggests that the common variation is always present

for the set of H and L firms, and is not a result of loading on a separate factor that is present

only when they are in a distress/growth phase. 19

   lsWe note that the HML portfolio returns exhibit high standard deviations at -1 and -2 years, Recall
that these portfolios are formed based on ex-post information that they will (on-average) experience
large positive (for the H portfolios) or negative returns (for the L portfolios) in formation-years 1 and
2. Perhaps this contributes to the high standard deviations. Notice that there is no such effect for the
formation-year – 1 and –2 portfolios, which are formed based on ex-ante information.
   lgWe considered the possibility that the returns standard      deviations change very little because the
book-t~market    ratios of the six portfolios change very little. However, we calculate the average book-
to-market ratio for the six portfolios in the table, and show that they do change significantly (these data
are available upon request). In addition, we regressed the time series of returns in Panel A of Table 2 on
the three Fama/French     factor-mimicking   portfolios. For the HML portfolio, the ~HML coefficient falls
substantially in moving from O lags to either +5 or -5. The coefficient is 0.46 for formation year 5, and



                                                    14
5       Cross-Sectional          Tests of the Factor Model

If a factor pricing model is correct, then a high book-t~market        stock with a low book-t~market

factor loading should have a low average return, In contrast, if prices are based on characteristics

rather than on factor loadings, then a high book-to-market stock should have a high expected

return regardless of its loading.     This Section presents tests of the two factor pricing models

(Models 1 and 2) against the characteristic-breed alternative (Model 3).

      As discussed in Section 3.4, discriminating between these models requires portfolios that

exhibit low correlation between their factor loadings and their characteristics (e.g., high book-

to-market ratios but low loadings on the HML factor). In order to construct such portfolios we

first form portfolios based on characteristics (size and book-to-market),          and then sort each of

these into sub-portfolios based on the firms’ pre-formation factor loadings. In this respect, our

analysis is very similar to the analysis in Fama and ~ench           (1992) and Jegadeesh (1992) who

construct portfolios that exhibit independent variation in size and beta. As in these papers, we

then analyze whether the returns for the sub-portfolios vary with the factor loading, as Models

1 and 2 predict they should.


5.1      Construction     of the    Test   Portfolios


We first rank all NYSE firms by their book-to-market           ratio at the end of year t – 1 and their

market capitalization (ME) at the end of June of year t, as described in the Appendix. We form

33.3% and 66.6% breakpoints for book-to-market and ME based on these rankings. Starting in

July of year t, we then place all NYSE/AMEX              and NASDAQ stocks into the three book-to-

market groups and the three size groups based on these breakpoints. The firms remain in these

portfolios from July of year t to June of year t + 1.

      The stocks in each of these nine portfolios are then placed into smaller portfolios, b~ed on

the stocks’ expected future HML factor loading, using information that is ez-ante observable.

The resulting sets of portfolios consist of stocks with approximately the same size and book-to-

market ratios but with different loadings on the book-t~market            factor HML. These portfolios

0.36 for formation year –5, versus a coefficient of approximately  1 at lag O. This demonstrates   that the
high standard deviation of the lead or lagged HML portfolio returns cannot be attributed    to comovement
with the current set of value/growth  firms.


                                                    15
allow usexamine the extent to which average retmnsme generated bythefactor                   loadings rather

than the chmacteristics.

    We use the stocks’ pre-fomation         factor loadings as instruments for their future expected

loadings. To estimate these, we regress each stock’s returns on three pre-fomation               factor port-

folios (described in the next paragraph) for the period -42 to -7 relative to the portfolio formation

date. We did not use the month -6 to O observations to estimate these loadings because the fac-

tor portfolios are formed based on stock prices existing 6 months previously. This is illustrated

in Figure 1. From this plot, it can be seen that returns are very negative up to t = –6, when the

book-to-market ratios are calculated. However, the portfolio returns are large between t = –6

and t = – 1. This “step function” in the return pattern would add noise to our factor loading

estimates, so we exclude it from our estimation period.

    The factor portfolios used to calculate the pre-formation        factor loadings differ from the Fama

and French factor portfolios in an important respect.            The Fama and French factor portfolio

weights change every year as firm size and book-t~market               change.    What we do is take the

portfolio weights of the Fama and French factor portfolios at the end of June of year t and

apply these constant weights to returns from date -42 to -7 to calculate the returns of constant

weight factor portfolios, as described in Section 4.1. Based on our hypothesis that the covariance

matrix is stationary over time, factor loadings calculated from factor portfolios constructed in

this way should provide much better predictions of the future covariance of firms with the HML

factor.   As our evidence in the last section indicates, covariances between stocks entering the

high book-to-market portfolio seem relatively stable.20

    Breed on these ez-ante estimates of the factor loadings we then equally divide each of the

nine book-to-market and size sorted portfolios into five value-weighted portfolios. Unfortunately,

several of the 45 portfolios formed in this way have as few as 1 stock in them for the years between

1963 and 1973. As a result we must restrict our time-series tests to the 1973-1993 period; the

number of stocks in each portfolio is almost always above 10, and is generally much higher than

this after 1973.
   20As further evidence on this point, we also constructed     portfolios by sorting stocks based on their
covariances with past HML returns.     The dispersion in post-jomation      factor loadings across portfolios
formed in this way was substantially   smaller than the dispersion in ex-post factor loadings of portfolios
constructed   in the manner described above,



                                                     16
5.2      Empirical    Results


Table 3 presents the mean excess returns for the 45 portfolios described in the previous section.
As we move from column 1 to 5 in this table we me moving from portfolios with low ez-ante
loadings on the HML factor to portfolios with high loadings. The table reveals no discernible
relation between factor loadings and returns for the portfolios of smaller stocks but a relatively

weak positive relation between the factor loadings and returns for the portfolios comprised of

larger stocks; however, the difference between the average returns of first and fifth factor loading

portfolios is only 0.0770/month.     Moreover, it is possible that this weak positive relation occurs

because, in sorting on the HML factor loading, we are picking up variation in the book-to-market

ratio within the relatively broad categories.

      We examine this possibility in Table 4 which provides the average book to market ratios and

sizes of each of the 45 portfolios. The average book to market ratios and sizes reported for each

portfolio are calculated relative to the median NYSE firm at each formation date. What we

find is that across factor-loading portfolios, within any book-to-market/size            grouping, there is

some covariation between the average book-to-market ratio and the HML factor loading. And

indeed, this pattern is strongest for the large firm (Sz = 3) portfolios, which is also where we see

the strongest positive relation between factor loadings and returns. 21 This factor/characteristic

covariation will decre~e the power of our test to reject the factor model (Model 1) in favor of

the characteristics model (Model 3), however we will see later that the test is still adequately

powerful to reject the null hypothesis.       The lack of a relation between the loadings and the

returns could potentially reflect the fact that pre-~ormation betas are weak predictors of future

(or post-jormation) loadings. However, the results reported in Table 5 indicate that our method

does in fact achieve considerable dispersion in the post-formation factor loadings. In Table 5,

we report the results of regressing the posi-jormation excess returns for each of the 45 portfolios

on an intercept and on the returns of the zero-investment Mkt, HML and SMB portfolios.

      We see in Table 5 that the HML coefficients are clearly different for the different book-to-

 21Mean size is roughly constant acrossthe factor loading portfolios. The only regularpattern is that the
more extreme factor loading portfolios (portfolios 1 and 5) tend to be slightly smaller, This is probably
because smaller stocks have higher return standard deviations,   and therefore   the ~’s calculated   for these
firms are likely to be more extreme than for the larger firms.




                                                    17
market groups, as they should be: we know that, unconditionally, book-to-market                          ratios and

HML loadings should be highly correlated.               But the important thing for us is that within a

book-to-markei/size      grouping,    the sort on the pre-formation         HML factor loadings produces a
monotonic ordering of the post-jorrnation             factor loadings.      Moreover, there appears to be a
highly significant difference between the loadings of the low and high factor-loading portfohos,

something we shall verify shortly.22

    We are especially interested in the estimated intercepts. Models 1 and 2 predict that the

regression intercepts (a’s) should be zero, while model 3 suggests that the mean returns of

the portfolios should depend only on characteristics (size and book-to-market),                     and should be

independent of variation in the factor loadings. Hence, Model 3 also predicts that the a’s of

the low factor-loading portfolios should be positive and that those of the high-factor loading

portfolios should be negative. The a’s reported in this table indicate that this is generally the

case. Only one of the nine high loading portfolios (see column 5) has a positive a and only

two of the low loading portfolios (see column 1) has a negative a. Furthermore, the average

a for factor loading portfolio 1 is 0.02% per month, and for factor loading portfolio 5 it is

–0.24%/month.         The difference is -0.26%/month.         Recall that Table 3 showed that the difference

in average returns for these portfolios was only 0.07%/month.

    In Table 6 we formally test whether the a’s associated with the high and low factor loadings

are significantly different from each other.           To do this we calculate the returns to portfolios

which, for each of the nine book-to-market              and size groupings, invests one dollar in each of

the factor loading portfolios 1 and 2 and sells one dollar in each of factor loading portfolios

4 and 5.     We call these “characteristic-balanced”            portfolios, since both the long and short

positions in the portfolios are constructed to have approximately equal book-to-market                        ratios

and capitalizations. Each of these nine zero cost portfolios are then combined to form one zero

cost characteristic-balanced portfolio.23

    The characteristic-based model predicts that the average return from these zero cost characteristic-

   22We note that the dispersion in pre-fomation factor-loadings          is considerably   greater. This is because
the pre-formation factor loading dispersion          is due to both measurement        error effects and the actual
variation in factor-loadings.      The post-fomation    dispersion results almost exclusively from true variation
in the loadings.
   23We also constructed      portfolios by investing one dollar in portfolio 1 and selling one dollar of portfolio
5 and obtained very similar results.


                                                         18
balanced portfolios should be indistinguishable from zero. In addition, the characteristic-based

model predicts that the estimated intercept from a regression of the returns of these zero cost

portfolio on the Fama and French factor portfolios should be positive. In contrast, the factor

pricing models described in models 1 and 2 predict that the average returns should differ from

zero, but that the intercept from the factor model should be indistinguishable from zero.

      The results reported in Table 6 reveals       that all but one of the a’s from the time-series

regressions of the nine individual characteristic-balanced portfolio returns on the factor returns

are positive, and three of the nine have T-statistics above 2. Furthermore, the intercept for

the regression of the returns of the combined characteristic-balanced             portfolio on the factor

portfolios is large, 0.354%/month       or over 470 / yea,    and is statistically different from zero.24

In contrast, the mean return of this portfolio is only –0.116% per month (T-Statistic of -0.60),

which is only one-third of the size of the factor model intercept, and is insignificantly different

from zero.     These results are consistent with the characteristic-bwed          pricing model and are

inconsistent with the factor pricing models (Models 1 and 2).


5.3      Sorting    by Other     Factor Loadings


This section presents similar tests that allow us to determine whether the SMB and MKT jactors

are priced, after controlling for size and book-t~market          characteristics. Table 7 presents the

mean returns, coefficients on the SMB factor, the intercepts and associated T-statistics for a set

of portfolios constructed in the manner described in the last section, except that now the nine

portfolios are each sorted into quintiles based on the pre-formation SMB factor loadings, rather

than on the HML factor loadings. It can be seen in the SMB betas that our sorting method is

picking up dispersion in the SMB factor loadings within the size sorted portfolios.

      The lower right panel of Table 7 provides the T-statistics for the regression of the characteristic-

balanced portfolio returns on the three factors. Again, the characteristic-balanced portfolio re-

turns are the differences in returns between the two lowest factor loading portfolios (in columns

1 and 2 of the upper panels) and the two highest factor loading portfolios (in columns 4 and 5),

   24The intercept,  a, is the return of a portfolio which has ~’s of zero on all three factors, and which
is constructed   by buying $1 of the single portfolio and selling quantities of the zero-investment  factor-
mimicking portfolios (Mkt, SMB and HML) which me equal to the regression coefficients shown at the
bottom of Table 6.



                                                     19
i.e., the return on a zero cost portfolio where the long and short components have similar charac-

teristics. First, the column giving the T-statistic on the intercept on the SMB factor shows that

there is substantial negative loading on the SMB portfolios,                                    Second, the characteristic-based

model suggests that the intercepts should be positive, and indeed all but one of them are, though

the T-statistics me not large. The l~t row of the last panel, headed “single portfolio,” gives the
coefficients and T-statistics for the regression of the sum of the characteristic-balanced portfolio

returns on the three factors.                    Although the coefficient is large in magnitude, -representing an

excess return of more than 370 per year, it is only marginally significant.

      The    analysis    presented       in Table     8 is the same,      only now we sort on the Mkt loadings.                          Again,

the   T-statistics       for the     characteristic-balanced           portfolios      indicate         that   the    factor   model      is re-

jected      in favor    of the     characteristic-based          model.      Also,      since     the     mean       return    of the     single

characteristic-balanced              portfolio     is 0.095    70/month      ( Z’-statistic       of 0.3),     the data does not pro-

vide evidence against Model 3, and in support of the factor model. Strikingly, the mean return

of this portfolio is positive even though the portfolios market beta is -0.54. Here we again find

that the characteristic matters and not the factor loading.                                   In other words a stock earns the

“stock” premium even if its return pattern is similar to that of a bond (i. e., it has a low ~~~t ).

      These results are similar to the results reported by Fama and French (1992) and Jegadeesh

(1992) who show that, after controlling for size, there is a slightly negative relationship with

beta.25 We also see from the last row of the Table that the three-factor model is rejected for

this portfolio with a T-statistic of 2.2.


5.4         Factor      Loadings,         Characteristics,             Turnover           and Past             Returns


The fact that there are stocks with similar capitalizations and book to market ratios but very

different factor loadings deserves further analysis. We do not find this surprising, given that

firms in very different industries can be very similar along these two dimensions. However, we

would like to know if these differences in factor loadings are significantly related to either volume

or returns in the recent past since there is evidence suggesting that momentum (Jegadeesh and

Titman 1993) and liquidity (Amihud and Mendelson 1986) can be important predictors of stock

   25Bear in mind, though, that we are looking at the market                        coefficient    in a multiple        regression,     whereas
the two cited papers use a univariate regression.



                                                                    20
returns.

      One possibility is that the low factor loading stocks are the less liquid stocks, (Perhaps, the

factor loadings of the less liquid stocks me underestimated because their returns lag the returns

of the more liquid stocks in the factor portfolios. ) If this were the case, and if in addition there

was a liquidity premium, then one might expect the lower expected returns associated with

having a lower factor loading would be offset by the return premia ~sociated       with illiquidity.

      Similarly, we might expect that the low factor loading stocks are those that did very poorly

over the previous year and just recently entered the high book to market portfolio.        However,

this would bias our tests towards supporting the factor model since the momentum effect would

lower the returns of these low loading stocks. In order to bias our results against the factor

model the past years returns of the stocks must be negatively related to the factor loading.

      To explore these possibilities we calculated the average turnover and the average return over

the 12 pre-formation months for each of the 45 portfolios. These are tabulated in Tables 9 and

10. The findings reported in this table suggests that our lack of support for a factor model is not

due to either momentum or liquidity. Indeed, the portfolios with the lowest factor loadings seem

to have the highest turnover, suggesting that if liquidity does have an effect on returns, it would

bias our results towards finding a relation between factor loadings and returns. In addition,

there does not seem to be any noticeable relation between p~t returns and factor loadings.



6      Conclusions

The    analysis in this paper demonstrates two things: First, we show that there is no evidence of

a separate distress factor. Most of the comovement of high book-t~market        stocks is not due to

distressed stocks being exposed to a unique “distress” factor, but rather, because stocks with

similar factor sensitivities tend to become distressed at the same time. Second, our evidence

suggests that it is characteristics rather than factor loadings that determine expected returns.

We show that factor loadings do not explain the high returns ~sociated         with small and high

book-to-market stocks beyond the extent to which they act as proxies for these characteristics.

Further, our results show that, with equities, the market beta has no explanatory power for

returns even after controlling for size and book-t~market    ratios. Although our analysis focused


                                                 21
on the factor portfolios suggested by Fama and French (1993), we conjecture that factor loadings

memured with respect to the various macro factors used by Chan, Chen, and Hsieh (1985), Chen,

Roll, and Ross (1986) and Jagannathan and Wang (1996) will also fail to explain stock returns

once characteristics are tden              into account.          These papers explain the returns of size and/or

book-tc-market-sorted          portfolios and are thus subject to our criticism of the Fama and French

(1993) analysis.

    Some of our colleagues have argued that although we have shown that the Fama and French

factors are inefficient, we have not refuted the more general claim that the size and book-to-

market effects can be explained by a factor model. 26 This argument is based on the idea that the

HML portfolio contains noise as well as factor risk. If this is true and if the book-to-market ratio

is a very good proxy for the priced factor loading, then ~HML may provide almost no additional

information    on the   true      factor   loading,      after    controlling     for the   book-to-market      ratio.   Under

these assumptions, in sorting on factor loading as we do in Table 5, we are picking out variation

in the measured ~~~~’s which is not associated with variation in the priced factor loading, and

hence we cannot expect returns to vary with ~~~~.

    While we certainly cannot rule out the possibility that factor model can explain this data,

we still find this argument unconvincing for several reasons. First, the argument suggests that

if the models are estimated with less noisy factors, we are less likely to reject the factor model.

However, more recent evidence suggest that this is not the cme. Cohen and Polk (1995b) and

~ankel and Lee (1995) show that refined measures of the book-to-mmket                                    characteristic have

considerably   more     ability     to predict        future     returns   than    the   standard    book-to-market      ratio.

More importantly, Cohen and Polk show that when they replicate our cross-sectional test (in

Table 5) with their more efficient industry-adjusted                        HML factor,27 they find that the factor

model is still rejected in favor of our characteristics model .26
  26WTe
      think Kenneth ~ench for bringing this possibility
                                                     y tOour attention.
  “More efficient here means that it has a higher Sharpe ratio.
  28Specifically,Cohen and Polk (1995b) calculate adjustedbook-to-market ratios based on the ratio of
individual firm’s ratio to the long-run average book-to-market ratio for the the industry the firm is in.
They construct an HML portfolio based on this measureand find that it has a considerablyhigherSharpe-
ratio than the Farnaand French (1993) HML portfolio (and is therefore more efficient). They redo the
tests presented here with the more efficient portfolios and find that the factor model is still rejected in
favor of the characteristic-basedmodel.




                                                                  22
   In addition, if the excess returns of distressed stocks do arise because of their sensitivity to

an unobserved factor, it must be the case that the unobserved factor portfolios have significantly

higher Sharpe ratios than not only the FF portfolios but also the more efficient portfolios of

Cohen and Polk and Frankel and Lee. In other words, the payoff associated with bearing the

risks associated with these distressed factors must be significantly greater than the payoff from

holding the size and book-to-market factor portfolios. MacKinlay (1995) has suggested that the

Sharpe ratio achievable using the three Fama and French (1993) factor portfolios is already “too

large” to be explained by efficient market theories; would explain the returns of the portfolios

in Table 5 would have still higher Sharpe ratios.

   If expected returns are indeed based on characteristics rather risk, the implications for port-

folio analysis, performance evaluation and corporate finance are striking. As we have already

discussed, our results suggest that portfolios can be constructed which earn the book-to-market

premium without loading heavily on common factors.        This means that higher Sharpe ratios

are achievable than was indicated by previous studies. In terms of performance evaluation,. our

results suggest that comparing the evaluated returns to matched samples formed on the basis of

capitalization, book-to-market and probably also past returns (to account for the Jegadeesh and

Titman (1993) momentum effect) would be preferred to using the intercepts from regressions on

factor portfolios. A recent example of the matched sample approach is Ikenberry, Lakonishok,

and Vermaelen (1995). We are substantially more tentative about the implications of our results

for corporate finance. It should be noted, however, that the characteristics model is inconsistent

with the Modigliani and Miller (1958) theorem, so if we do want to take the characteristic-based

pricing model seriously, we will have to rethink most of what we know about corporate finance.

   However, before beginning to consider the implications of these results, it is worthwhile to

consider why it might be that characteristics are the determinants of returns rather than risk.

Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1994) suggest a behavioral explanation: that investors may

incorrectly extrapolate past growth rates. Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992) suggest an

agency explanation: that investment fund managers are aware of the expected returns associated

with value stocks, but nonetheless purchase growth stocks because these are easier to justify to

sponsors. Liquidity-based explanations may also be plausible, since volume tends to be related

to size and past returns, but the evidence in Table 9 suggests that the relationship between


                                               23
book-to-market and turnover is relatively weak.

   Another possibility is that investors consistently held priors that size and book-t~market

ratios were proxies for systematic risk and, as a result, attached higher discount rates to stocks

with these characteristics. For example, they may have believed that stocks with these charac-

teristics would be more sensitive to aggregate economic or credit conditions, beliefs that many

financial economists shared. With the benefit of hindsight we can now say that book-to-market

ratios do not seem to be particularly good proxies for systematic risk of this sort. However, we

think it is quite plausible that investors in the 1960s and 1970s, with limited ability to access

and manipulate the returns/accounting     data that would have told them otherwise, would not

have updated their priors as our statistical analysis suggests they should have. If this is the case

than the patterns we have observed in the data should not be repeated in the future.




                                                24
References


Amihud,       Yakov,    and   Haim     Mendelson,        1986,   Asset       pricing     and     the bid-ask    spread,     Journal      of
    Financial     Economics        17, 223–249.

Banz,     Rolf W.,     1981, The     relationship    between        return      and    the mmket        value   of common       stocks,
    Journal     of Financial and Quantitative             Analysis 14, 421-441.

Ba.su, S., 1983, The relationship between earnings yield, market value, and return for NYSE
  common stocks, Journal of Financial Economics 12, 126–156.

Bhandari, Loxmi C., 1988, Debt/equity ratios and expected common stock returns: Empirical
  evidence, Journal of Finance 43, 507–528.

Chan, K. C., and Nai-Fu Chen, 1991, Structural and return characteristics of small and large
  firms, Journai of Finance 46, 1467-1484.

Chan, K. C., Nai-fu Chen, and David A. Hsieh, 1985, An exploratory investigation of the firm
  size effect, Journal of Financial Economics 14, 451–71.

Chan, Louis K. C., Narasimhan Jegadeesh, and Josef Ldonishok, 1995, Issues in evaluating
  the performance of value versus glamour stocks: Selection bias, risk adjustment and data
  snooping, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 269–296.

Chen, Nai-Fu, Richard Roll, and Stephen A. Ross, 1986, Economic forces and the stock market,
  Journal of Business 59, 383-403.

Cohen, Randolph B., and Christopher K. Polk, 1995a, COMPUSTAT selection bias in tests of
  the Sharpe-Litner-Black CAPM, University of Chicago working paper, October 1995.

              1995b,   An investigation       of the impact         of industry        factors    in =set-pricing     tests,   Univer-
    sity o’f Chicago     working     paper,    October      1995.

Connor, Gregory, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1988, Risk and return in an equilibrium apt: Ap-
  plication of a new test methodology, Journal of Financial Economics 21, 255-289.

Davis, James L., 1994, The cross-section of realized stock returns:                                      The pre-COMPUSTAT
  evidence, Journal of Finance 50, 1579–1593.

DeBondt, Werner F. M., and Richard Thaler, 1985, Does the stock market overreact?, Journal
  of Finance 40, 793–808.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1992, The cross-section of expected stock returns,
  Journal of Finance 47, 427-465.

—          1993, Common risk factors in the returns on stocks and bonds, Journal                                          of Financial
    Econ;mics  33, 3-56.


                                                                 25
                 ? 1994, Industry costs of equity, University of Chicago working paper.

           1995, Size and book-to-market factors in earnings and returns, Journal oj Finance                                           50,
    131-1’56.

—                 1996,   Multifactor      explanations          of reset    pricing     anomalies,      Journal    of Finance,    forth-
    coming 51.

Frankel, Richard, and Charles Lee, 1995, Accounting valuation, market expectation, and the
  book-to-mmket effect, University of Michigan working paper.

Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok, and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, Market underreaction to open
  market share repurchases, Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181–208.

Jagannathan, Ravi, and Zhenyu Wang, 1996, The CAPM is alive and well, Journal                                               of Finance,
  forthcoming 51.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, 1992, Does market risk really explain the size effect?, Journal                                            of Fi-
  nancial and Quantitative Analysis 27, 337–351.

           and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Returns to buying winners and selling losers: Implications
    for st~ck market efficiency, Journal of Finance 48, 65-91.

Keim, Donald B., 1983, Size related anomalies and stock return seasonality: Purther evidence,
  Journal of Financial Economics 12, 13–32.

Kothari, S.P., Jay Shanken, and Richard Sloan, 1995, Another look at the cross-section of
  expected returns, Journal of Finance 50, 185–224.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, The structure and performance
  of the money management industry, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Macroeconomics
    pp. 339-391.

—            7
                 1994, Contrarian        investment,         extrapolation     and risk,      Journal of Finance 49, 1541-1578.

Lehmann, Bruce, and David Modest, 1988, Empirical foundations of the arbitrage pricing theory,
  Journal of Financial Economics 21, 213-254.

MacKinlay, A. Craig, 1995, Multifactor models do not explain deviations from the CAPM,
  Journal of Financial Economics 38, 3-28.

Merton, Robert C., 1973, An intertemporal capital ssset pricing model, Econometrics                                             41, 867-
  887.

Modigliani,          Prance,   and      Merton     Miller,      1958, The     cost     of capital,    corporation    finance,   and   the
    theory        of investment,        American       Economic       Review     53, 261–297.

Roll, Richard W., 1994, Style return differentials: Illusions, risk premia, or investment opportu-
  nities?, UCLA AGSM Working Paper, August 1994.

Rosenberg, Barr, Kenneth Reid, and Ronald Lanstein, 1985, Persuasive evidence of market
  inefficiency, Journal of Portfolio Management 11, 9–17.


                                                                        26
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The abitrage    theory of capital ssset pricing, Joumai   of Economic
  Theory 13, 341-360.

Stattman, Dennis, 1980, Book values and stock returns, The Chicago MBA: A Journal of Selected
  Papers 4, 25-45.




                                             27
A     Appendix:         Construction of the Portfolios

The construction of the book-t~market and size portfolios follows Fama and French (1993).
Using the merged CRSP/COMPUSTAT            files maintained by CRSP we form portfolios of common
shares based on the ratio of the book-equity to market equity (book-to-market) and on market
equity (ME). B is defined to be stockholder’s equity plus any deferred taxes and any investment
tax credit, minus the value of any preferred stock, all from COMPUSTAT. To determine the
value of preferred stock we use redemption value if this is available, otherwise we use liquidating
value if it is available, and if not we use carrying value. In calculating book-to-market, we use
the book-equity from any point in year t, and the market on the last trading day in year t,
where the market equity, from CRSP, is defined as the number of shares outstanding times the
share price. We only include firms in our analysis which have been listed on COMPUSTAT for
at least two years and which have prices available on CRSP in both December of t and June of
year t + 1. The book-to-market ratios, and sizes of the firms thus determined are then used to
form the portfolios from July oft + 1 to June of t + 2. As discussed in Fama and ~ench (1993),
the end of June is used as the portfolio formation date because the annual report containing the
book-equity value for the preceding year is virtually certain to be public information by that
time.
    To form the portfolio, we first exclude from the sample all firms with book-to-market values
of less than zero. We take all NYSE stocks in the sample and rank them on their book-
to-market and size as described above. Based on these rankings, we calculate 30% and 70%
breakpoints for book-to-market and a 50% breakpoint for size. We then place all NYSE/AMEX
and NASDAQ stocks into the three book-to-market groups and the two size groups based on
these breakpoints. The stocks above the 70% book-to-market breakpoint are designated H, the
middle 40% of firms are designated M, and the firms below the 3070 book-to-market breakpoint
are designated L. Also firms above the 5070 size breakpoint are designated B (for big), and the
remaining 50% S (for small). Note that since these breakpoints are based only on NYSE firms,
we have considerable variation in the number of firms in each of the nine portfolios formed in
this way. For example, since there are many more small firms on NASDAQ and AMEX the
number of firms in the small firm portfolios is much larger than the number of firms in the large
firm portfolios.
    These two sets of rankings allow us to form the six value-weighted portfolios HB, MB, LB,
HS, MS, and LS. From these portfolio returns we calculate the SMB(Small-Minus-Big) portfolio
returns, which are defined to be rSMB = (rHs + rMS + rL,S– rHB – rMB – rLB)/3, and the HML
(Mgh-Minus-Low) pOrtfOliOretUrnS, which are defined as rH~L = (rHE + r~s - rL~ - ~L.5)/2.
Also, a value-weighted portfolio Mkt is formed which contains all of the firms in these portfolios,
plus the otherwise excluded firms with book-t~market values of less than zero.




                                                28
                                 Figure 1: HML portfolio pre-formation returns
0.04




0.02




~




           .......
           . .. . . . .,.:....       .                                                 \,,...,.,




           w
20
:




-0.02




-0.04
     -42                -36          -30        -24            -18          -12   -6               0
                                           monthsbefore~rtfolio formation




                                                        29
Table 1: Monthly mean excess returns                              (in percent)       of size and book-to-market                sorted
portfolios (63:07-93:12).
We first rank all NYSE firms by their book-t~market  at the end of year t – 1 and their market capital-
ization (ME) at the end of June of year t,as described in the Appendix. We form quintile breakpoints
for book-to-market and ME b~ed on these rankings. Starting in July of year t, we then place all
NYSE/AMEX and NASDAQ stocks into the five book-tc-maket groups and the five size groups based
on these breakpoints~ The firms remain in these portfolios from the beginning of July of year t the end
of June of year t+ 1.
Panel     A presents     the average     of the monthly       value weighted         returns   for each of these portfolios,    net of
the one month          T-Bill return    from the CRSP         RISKFREE          file. Panel    B presents   the average   returns   for
January     only, and Pmel       C presents         the average    return,    excluding   the returns   in January.


                                                        Panel A: All Months
                                                    low        book-to-market                    high
                                       small         0.371   0.748 0.848 0.961                  1.131
                                                     0.445   0.743   0.917  0.904               1.113
                                       size          0.468   0.743   0.734  0.867               1.051
                                                     0.502   0.416   0.627  0.804               1.080
                                        big    [1
                                                     0.371   0.412 0.358 0.608                  0.718
                                                     Panel B: Januavs  only
                                               II low       book-to-market                       high
                                       small        6.344     6.091          6.254   6.827      8.087
                                                    3.141     4.456          4.522   4.914      6.474
                                       size         2.397     3.374          3.495   3.993      5.183
                                                    1.416     1.955          2.460   3.515      5.111
                                        big         0.481     1.224          1.205   2.663      4.043
                                             Panel C:         Non-Januarya     only
                                              I low             book-to-market                   high
                                       small -0.162           0.271 0.365 0.438                 0.5~0
                                                 0.204        0.412 0.595 0.545                 0.635
                                        size    0.296         0.509 0.488 0.588                 0.682
                                                0.420         0.278 0.463 0.562                 0.720
                                         big    0.361         0.340 0.283 0.424                 0.421




                                                                      30
       Table 2: Pre-formation        monthly return standard deviations of portfolios
This table presentspre-formation characteristicsof the set of size and book-to-market portfolios.
Six portfolios were formed b~ed on unconditional sorts on book-t~market (H, M, and L) and size (S
and B). Mkt, SMB, HML portfolios were also formed as described in the Appendix. For this table, we
also imposed the additional requirementthat CRSP report a valid return for the firm five years (prior
to/after) to the formation for the (forward/backward) looking malysis.
The formation year Oreturns consistsof returnsfrom July of year t through June of year t + 1 for value-
weighted portfolios reformed each year at the end of June of year t,based on the BM at the end of year
t – 1 and the market value in June oft. These returns are approximatelyequivalentto those presentedin
Fama and French (1993). For formation years (FY) other than zero, the portfolio time seriesof returns
consists again of the returns from July of year t through June of year t + 1, but now formed based on
the BM at the end of year t – 1 + FY and the market value in June of t + FY. The portfolio weights in
these calculations are based on the market value in June oft+ FY.
Panel A presents the simple time-series standard deviations of each of these portfolios. For the backward
looking portfolios, for each of the six lags, the return time series is from 63:07 to 89:06. For the forward-
looking-. portfolios, the time period is 68:07-93:12. Panel B also presents the time-series standard deviations
the portfolios, but here the January returns are excluded from each of the time series.

        Sizel                                                Formation    Year
         BM’                 Backward       Looking                                   Forward Looking
       Portfol.     5]41312111011                                         0     [-11-21-31-41-5
                                          Panel A: Standati           Deviations
         L/S       7.01     6.94   6.95      6.97     6.74     6.61      6.56    6.60   6.70    6.62    6.57   6.41
        M/S        5.73     5.77   5.74      5.67     5.61     5.55      5.25    5.36   5.46    5.45    5.43   5.42
        H/S        5.74     5.73   5.69      5.70     5.97     5.67      5.25    5.18   5.38    5.48    5.47   5.40
        L/B        4.89     4.92   4.84      4.88     4.91     4.82      4.61    4.66   4,79    4.83    4.81   4.79
        M/B        4.42     4.40   4.47      4.49     4.47     4.37      4.16    4.27   4.37    4.46    4.48   4.42
        H/B        4.61     4.68   4.59      4.58     4.77     4.55      4.23    4.23   4.27    4.34    4.37   4.46
        Mkt        5.13     5.13   5.09      5.07     5.05     4.96      4.74    4.80   4.92    4.94    4.93   4.88
        SMB        3.04     3.02   2.96      2.88     2.78     2.80      2.63    2.68   2.76    2.79    2.78   2.75
        HML        2.20     2.29   2.53      2.88     3.30     2.55      2.51    2.28   2.12    2.13    2.20   2.21
                          k’anel   k: Standam       Deviations        - Januaties       ~zcluded
        L/S        6.63     6.54   6.60     6.66      6.59     6.31      6.22    6.15   6.20   6.17     6.06   5.90




                                                              I
        M/S        5.32     5.37   5.33     5.28      5.27     5.16      4.84    4.92   5.03   5.00     5.01   5.01
        H/S        5.30     5.26   5.13     5.09      5.21     5.11      4.63    4.67   4.91   5.03     5.07   4.99
        L/B        4.83     4.85   4.76     4.77      4.82     4.73      4.46    4.48   4.58   4.62     4.62   4.61
        M/B        4,33     4.30   4.34     4.37      4.27     4.21      3.90    4.08   4.17   4.27     4.25   4.21
        H/B        4.42     4.45   4.33     4.27      4,32     4.27      3.88    3.87   4.05   4,14     4.23   4.27
        Mkt        4.89     4.87   4.82     4.79      4.76     4.68      4.40    4.45   4.59   4.62     4.62   4.57
        SMB        2.74     2,71   2.66     2.60      2.62     2.56      2.39    2.41   2.47   2.54     2.54   2.52
        HML        2.20     2.31   2.46     2.76      2.92     2.45      2.38    2.24   2.09   2,09     2.15   2.18




                                                              31
Table 3: Mean             excess returns of the 45 portfolios                                    formed      on the       basis    of size,
book-to-market             and HML factor loadings

We first rank all NYSE firms by their book-to-market         at the end of year i! – 1 and their market capi-
talization  (ME) at the end of June of year t, as described in the Appendix.         We form 33.3% and 66.7%
breakpoints   for book-to-market     and ME based on these rankings.        Starting in July of year t, we then
place all NYSE/AMEX        and NASDAQ stocks into the three book-to-market            groups and the three size
groups based on these breakpoints.       The firms remain in these portfolios from the beginning of July of
year t the end of June of year t+ 1. Each of the individual firms in these nine portfolios is then further
sorted into one of five sub-portfolios   based on their ~HML    coefficients in the regression:




The regression is run between 42 months ad 6 months prior to the formation date (June of year t),as is
described in Section 5.1, The value-weighted  returns for each of these portfolios are then calculated for
each month between July 1973 and December 1993. The formation process results in portfolios which
are buy-and-hold,   and which are rebalanced at the end of June of each year

This table     presents   the mea        excess returns       of the 45 portfolios          formed     on the basis of size (Sz), book-
to-market      (book-to-market)         and the estimated       factor loadings         on the HML portfolio,           for the period   from
July 1973 through         December       of 1993. Each of the five columns                  provides      the monthly     excess returns     of
portfolios    of stocks that      are ranked      in a particular      quintile     with respect      to the HML factor loading          (with
column       1 being the lowest and column            5 being the highest).            The firm size and book-to-market            rankings
of the stocks in each of the portfolios              are specified      in the 9 rows.           For example,   the top left entry in the
table   (0.202) is the mean excess return             of a value-weighted            portfolio     of the stocks that     have the smallest
size, the lowest book-t~market             and the lowest expected                loading   on the HML factor.


                                  Char Port                    factor loading portfolio
                                  BM        Sz           12345
                                    1         1       0.202         0.833     0.902         0.731       0.504
                                    1         2       0.711         0.607     0.776         0.872       0.710            @
                                    1         3       0.148         0.287     0.396         0.400       0.830
                                    2         1       1.036         0.964     1.014         1.162       0.862
                                    2         2       0.847         0.957     0.997         0.873       0.724
                                    2         3       0.645         0.497     0.615         0.572       0.718
                                    3         1       1.211         1.112     1.174         1.265       0.994
                                    3         2       1.122         1.166     1.168         1.080       0.955
                                    3         3       0.736         0.933     0.571         0.843       0.961
                                    avera~e           0.740         0.817     0.846         0.866       0.806




                                                                       32
               Table 4: Average              Book-to-Market               and Size of Test Portfolios

Portfolios wereformed based on size, book-to-market and preformation HML factor loadings aadescribed
in Table 3. At each yearly formation date, the average size and book-to-market for each portfolio wzs
then calculated, using value weighting:




Then,   at each point,    =t        and ~t     were divided by the median             ME and median      book-to-market     for
NYSE firms at that       point   in time.    The two time series were then averaged             to get the numbers   that   are
presented   in the table below.


                                                         factor        loading potifolio
                          m                     1            2

                                                    Book-to-Market
                                                                           3          4

                                                                           relative to median
                                                                                                5



                               11             0.415       0.466          0.492      0.501    0.440




                         B
                               12             0.404       0.453          0.487      0.501    0.505
                               13             0.360       0.399          0.457      0.507    0.542
                               21             0.980       0.991          1.013      1.017    1.011
                               22             0.963       0.996          1.003      1.013    1.021
                               23             0,949       0.975          0.998      1.027    1.025
                               31             1.908       1.841           1.876     1.941    2.242
                               32             1.624       1.725           1.708     1.732    1.890
                               33             1.568       1.563           1.554     1.638    1.747

                          m                   1.019       1.045           1.065     1.097    1.158
                                                    Market   Eauitu
                                                               .-   relative to median
                               11             0.239       0.262          0.255      0.251    0.212




                         B
                               12             1.178       1.235           1.280     1.239    1.240
                               13            34.716      42.269         55.325     30.111   24.842
                               21             0.226       0.248          0.265      0.264    0.239
                               22             1.194       1.171          1.197      1.205    1.204
                               23            23.951      41.405         27.428     25.675   21.163
                               31             0.173       0.207          0.227      0.237    0.205
                               32             1.146       1.187           1.215     1.217    1.191
                               33            10.615      27.661         21.152     11.626   15.288
                                              8.160      12.849         12.038      7.981    7.287




                                                                  33
Table 5: Portfolios           Sorted     by Characteristics              and Predicted         HML      Factor    Loadings

Portfolios wereformed based on size, book-t~market and pre-formationHML factor loadings as described
in Table 3. This table presentseach of the coefficientsestimatesand T-Statistics from the following time-
series regressionof these portfolio returns on the excess-Market,SMB and HML portfolio returns:

                 R.z,bm,fl –    R$ = a i-    ~HML       hHML     + fiSMB    “fiSMB    + ~Mkt     (fiMkt – Rf)




      E
          Chr Pti               factor   loading    pofifolio                      factor loading -. ~ortfolio
          BM      Sz     1           2         3         4           5       1          2       3          4       5
                                              &                                                T(&)
           11          -0.58      0.14      0.06      -0.17     -0.67      -3,97     ,1.04      0.48
                                                                                                  ‘ ‘   -1.34    -4.00
           12           0.16      0.05      0.13       0.16     -0.08       0.94      0.47      1.12     1.33    -0.63
           13           0.02      0.05      0.06      -0.06      0.28       0.15      0.42      0.50    -0.55     2.26
           21           0.13      0.08      0.06       0.21     -0.31       1.05      0.87      0.73     2.13    -2.31
           22           0.03      0.20      0.22       0.01     -0.31       0.24      1.71      2.05     0.14    -2.66
           23           0.19     -0.08      0.05      -0.10     -0.07       1.13     -0.50      0.35    -0.67    -0.46
           31           0.08      0.05      0.10       0.01     -0.47       0.70      0.55      1.06     0.10    -3.27
           32           0.17      0.22      0.25       0,05     -0.31       1.25      1.67      1.94     0.36    -1.63
           33          -0.01      0.16     -0.23      -0.12     -0.18      -0.04      1.13     -1.45    -0.74    -0.90
      E
                        0.02      0.10      0.08       0,00     -0.24       0.16      0.82      0.75     0.08    -1.51
      -
                                           ~HML                                              T(fiHML)
          11           -0.40     -0.38     -0.11      -0.04      0.25      -7.09     -7.09     -2.32    -0.84     3.91




      E
          12           -0.60     -0.32     -0.18      -0.05      0.05      -9.13     -7.15     -3.98    -1.02     1.01
          13           -0,70     -0.44     -0.22      -0.11     -0.02     -12.85     -9.85     -4.72    -2.48    -0.44
          21            0.02      0.19      0.32       0.35      0.48       0.39      5.51      9.69     9.06     9.13
          22            0.17      0.23      0.28       0.36      0.49       3.23      5.14      6.59     8.67    10.98
          23            0.03      0.24      0.22       0.31      0,49       0.50      3.90     4.03      5.53     8.40
          31            0.42      0.50      0.57       0.75      0.91       9,74     13.00     16.26    19.74    16.11
          32            0.40      0.58      0.56       0.72      0.82       7.32     11.40     11.07    13.91    11.26
          33            0.45      0.56      0.67       0.81      1.00       6.69     10.03     10.91    12.81    12.90
                 ;e    -0.02      0.13      0.23       0.34      0.50      -0.13      2.77      5.28     7.26     8.14
      &          =
      E          =
                                          PSMB                                               T(~sMB)
           1       1    1.23      1.07      1.07       1.18      1,39      23.27     21.29     24.34    26.33    22.97
           1       2    0.81      0.55      0.62       0.55      0.61      13.06     13.04     14.93    12.78    14.18
           1      3    -0.14     -0.17     -0.16      -0.08      0.04      -2.84     -4.16     -3.59    -1.88     0.83
           2     i-     1.19      0.95      0.94.      0.89      1.15      27.05     29.40     30.56    24.74    23.63
           2      2     0.54      0.45      0.44       0.47      0.72      10.99     10.87     11.09    12.10    17.12
           2      3    -0.22     -0.25     -0.15      -0.10     -0.07      -3.63     -4.39     -3.02    -1.96    -1.21
           3     T      1.24      1.01      0.95       1.04      1.25      30.74     27.73     28.97    29.27    23.67
           3      2     0.61      0.43      0.37       0.43      0.69      12.08      9.09      7.86     8.80    10.17
           3      3    -0.06     -0.15     -0.17       0.05      0.10      -1.02     -2.90     -3.04     0.82     1.35
      i   aver   g;
                 =
                        0.58      0.43      0.43       0.49      0.65      12.19     11.11     12.01    12.33    12.52

      E                                    pMkt                                              T(~Mk,)
                 =
          1        1   1.12      1.03      1.07       1.04      1.15      33.32      32.30     38.04    36.38    29.66
          1        2   1.14      1.03      1.03       1.07      1.08      28.90      38.38     38.90    39.26    39,07
          1        3   0.99      0.98      0.95       1.04      1.04      30.72      36.77     33.61    38.47    36.39
          2      i-    0.99      0.93      0.95       0.95      1.08      35.45      45.11     48.49    41.54    34.84
          2        2   1.06      0.96      0.94       1.01      1.06      33.42      35.91     37.40    41.19    39.56
          2       3    0.97      1.02      0.96       1.04      1.07      25.56      28.22     29.97    31.22    30.42
          3      T     1.01      0.92      0.94       1.05      1.17      39.10      39.96     45.23    46.16    34.94
          3        2   1.05      0.99      0.98       1.02      1.20      32.59      32.78     32.32    32.82    27.74
          3      —3    1.02      1.03      0.99       1.03      1.15      25.81      31.25     26.97    27.20    24.96
     E
                       1.04      0.99      0.98       1.03      1.11      31.65      35.63    ‘36.77    37.14    33,06

                                                                34
           Table 6: Regression             Results       for the Characteristic-Balanced                          Portfolios

This table presents       each of the coefficients and T-Statistics from the following time-series regression of
the zer~investment         portfolio returns, described below, on the excess-Market,   SMB and HML portfolio
returns:
                         %,j,k – Rj        = Q + pMkt     “RMkt + pHML              ~RHML      + pSMB     “RSMB

The regressions are over the period July 1973 to December 1993.
The left hand side portfolios were formed based on size, book-to-market        and pre-formation    HML factor
loadings, and their returns were calculated        in the manner described in Table 3. From the resulting
forty-five returns series, a zer~investment     returns series was generated from each of the nine size and
book-to-market     categories. These portfolios are formed, in each category, by subtracting     the sum of the
returns on the 4th and 5th quintile factor-loading      portfolios from the sum of the returns on 1st and 2nd
factor-loading   portfolios.
The first 9 rows of the table         present     the t-statistics        for the characteristic-balanced              portfolio   that   has a
long position     in the low expected       factor loading portfolios          and a short position        in the high expected           factor
loading    portfolios   that   have the same size and book-t~market                      rankings.      The bottom         row of the table
provides    the coefficient    estimates     as well as the t-statistics            for this regression     for a single portfolio          that
consists   of a   equally-weighted         combination     of the above 9 zero-investment                portfolios.


                               Chr Prt            Char-Balanced Portfolio: T-Statistics
                               BM     Sz          &         ~Mkt            PSMB            PHML          R’

                                1      1         1.43       -0.43           -2.69           -9.21       31.48
                                1      2         0.50        0.18            1.98           -8.99       31.48
                                1      3        -0.48       -1.62           -2.52           -8.57       27.11




                                3      2        2.01        -2.30           -0.63           -4.52       8.58
                                3      3        1.08        -1.30           -2.36           -4.98       12.39
                                single          0.354      -0.110          -0.134           -0.724      41.61
                               portfolio        (2.30)     (-3.10)         (-2.40)       (-12.31)




                                                                     35
          Table 7: Time-series                Regressions            - SMB Factor                   loading-sorted              portfolios

The upper two panels present the intercepts and                            ~SMB     coefficient estimates and T-Statistics from the
following multivariatetime-seriesregression:

                    R.z,bm,fl –    Rf = a +      ~HML       “RHML          + DSMB         “fisMB         + pMkt    “ (RMkt     – Rf)

The coefficient estimates for fiHML and bMki are not presented here.
The left hand side portfolios were formed based on size, book-to-market      and pre-formation   SMB factor
loadings as described in Table 3, with the exception that the factor loadings used to form the portfolios
were the SMB factor loadings (rather than the HML factor loadings).
The lower panel gives the mean returns for each of the portfolios and the T-statistics    for the regressions
of the characteristic-balanced portfolios on the three factors, as described in Table 6.


                                                     &                                                            Y “(a)

          r   BM
               1
                            1
                          -0.28      -0.01
                                          2          3
                                                 -0.06
                                                                4
                                                            -0.10
                                                                             5
                                                                           -0.65
                                                                                           1
                                                                                         -1.94      -0.06
                                                                                                         2          3
                                                                                                                  -0.44
                                                                                                                                4
                                                                                                                             -0.75
                                                                                                                                             5
                                                                                                                                           -3.58
               1           0.07       0.20        0.13       0.01           0.01          0.57       1.79          1.10       0.08          0.03
               1           0.25       0.06        0.01      -0.08           0.05          2.40       0.55          0.06      -0.67          0.38
               2           0.16       0.07        0.06      -0.05           0,06          1.38       0.73          0.69      -0.48          0.37
               2           0.11      -0.10        0.06       0.12          -0.05          0.84      -0.87          0.54       1.05         -0.38
               2           0.08       0.01       -0.16       0.10          -0.03          0.50       0.08         -1.04       0.88         -0.27
               3           0.02       0.11       -0.06      -0.13          -0.11          0.21       1.14         -0.63      -1.14         -0.75
               3           0.19       0.23       -0.12      -0.01           0.15          1.20       1.79         -0.91      -0.07          0.75
               3           0.23      -0.10       -0.16      -0.38           0.08          1.29      -0.67         -1.09      -2.58          0.45
          [
                           1.04       0.99        0.98       1.03           1.11         31.65      35.63         36.77      37.14         33.06
          ~


          E   Chr Prt                           05MB                                                         T(~sMB)
              BM    Sz      1             2          3          4            5             1             2          3           4            5
               11          1.01      1.06        1.18        1.20          1.45          19.14      24.93         26.04      25.18         21.96
               12          0.49      0.54        0.59        0,71          0.84          11.33      13.21         13.38      15.00         15.40
               13         -0.29     -0.11       -0.11       -0.03          0.15          -7.81      -2.58         -2.50      -0.69          2.89
               21          0.84      0.85        0.91        1.17          1.57          20.58      26.15         26.53      29.86         28.18
               22          0.25      0.45        0.47        0.67          0.86           5.29      10.74         12.01      16.38         18.15
               23         -0.38     -0.26       -0.14        0.06          0.25          -6.38      -5.46         -2.54       1.44          5.44
               31          0.89      0.93        1.06        1.23          1.49          21.34      26.51         30.70      28.70         27.07
               32          0.12      0.34        0.57        0.65          0.91           2.05       7.43         11.53      12.56         12.96
               33         -0.33     -0.11        0.05        0.00          0.20          -5.27      -2.04          0.87      0.01           3.21
              average      0.29      0.41        0.51        0.63          0.86           6.70      10.99         12.89      14.27         15.03
              Chr Prt                Mean returns:                                     nar-Balanced          Portfolio:      T-Statistics

      i BM         Sz      12345                                                   &             ~Mkt        DSMB            DtfML           R2
         11               ).52     0.80       0.79       0.75       0.38          1.76           -3.85        -6.15           0.75         25.84
         12               ).64     0.84       0.81       0.65       0,75          0.96           -3.37        -5.47           2.10         24.16
         13               ).49     0.38       0.30       0.35       0.46          1.21           -3.82        -5.12           0.13         20.98
         21               ..09     0.93       1.03       0.94       1.22          0.86           -5.51       -11.72           2.82         52.98
         22               1.85     0.69       0.87       1.00       1,01         -0.22           -5.74        -8.56           0.53         40.82
         23               ).57     0.54       0.42       0.80       0.86          0.08           -4.23        -8.19          -1.56         33.03
         31               ..13     1.23       1.14       1.15       1.27          1.43           -6.15        -9.29           0.78         44.85
                    2     ..01     1.23       0.96       1.09       1.29          0.76           -4.81        -8.25           2.11         39.09
      k 33                ).84     0.72       0.77       0.69       1.08          1.15           -6.02        -4.80          -2.13         26.41
                          1.79     0.82       0.79       0.82       0.92       0.258           -0.331         -0.790         0.057
      k                                                                     II (1.68)          (-9.25)       (-14.10)        (0.96)    I


                                                                           36
         Table 8: Time-series                 regressions              - Mkt Factor                 loading-sorted             portfolios

The upper two panels presentthe intercepts,r~~~ coefficientestimatesand T-Statistics from the following
multivariatetime-seriesregression:

                    R3z,bm,f[ –    Rf = a +      fiHML      “fiHML          + PSMB          “RSMB         + pMkt    “ (RMkt    – Rj)


The coefficient estimates for ~HML  and ~SMB  are not presentedhere.
The left~hand-sideportfolios were formed baaed on size, book-to-market and pre-formation MKT factor
loadings as described in Table 3, with the exception that the factor loading used to sort the portfolios
was the MKT factor loading (rather than the HML factor loading).
The lower panel gives the mean returns for each of the portfolios and the T-statistics for the regressions
of the characteristic-balmced             portfolios     on the three factors,                as described         in Table 6.


              Chr Prt                                &                                                                ,,
          BM                1             2          3           4            5              1              2         3         4            5
               1          -0.22      -0.11      -0.07       -0.16           -0.39          -1.30       -0.89       -0.54      -1.22     -2.46
               1           0.31       0.26       0.08       -0.10           -0.17           2.76        2.42        0.64      -0.72     -1.17
               1           0.31       0.07       0.05        0.00           -0.30           2.40        0.66        0.42       0.03     -2.16
               2          -0.02       0.16       0.25       -0.06           -0.08          -0.19        1.64        2.30      -0.69     -0.60
               2           0.16       0.09      -0.02       -0.01           -0.01           1.22        0.82       -0.14      -0.10     -0.10
               2           0.04      -0.03      -0.01        0.01           -0.21           0.24       -0.18       -0.07       0.04     -1.23
               3          0.25        0.07       0.09       -0.05           -0.36           1.77        0.69        1.05      -0.50     -3.63
               3          0.21        0.39      -0.06        0.19           -0.31           1.18        2.65       -0.43       1.36     -1.57
               3          0.08       -0.11       0.05       -0.06           -0.25           0.38       -0.66        0.32      -0.39     -1.45
              average     0.12        0.09       0.04       -0.03           -0.23           0.94        0.79        0.39      -0.24     -1.60

              Chr Pti                           bMkt
         ~                  1             2          3           4            5              1              2        3          4            5
            11            1.00       0.96        1.07           1.11        1.20           25.90      32.58        38.44      36.26     32.20
            12            0.95       0.98        1.07           1.16        1.20           36.16      39.08        35.77      34.41     35.14
            13            0.90       0.95        1.00           1.07        1.16           30.51      38.71        36.38      40.47     35.94
            21            0.79       0.87        0.94           1.04        1.19           27.77      37,87        37.78      47.48     39.26
            22            0.81       0.91        0.99           1.07        1.23           26.48      34,61        40.70      42.46     34.61
            2.     3      0.82       0.91        1.05           1,15        1.21           21.27      25.42        27.76      35.02     30.03
            31            0.84       0.85        0.97           1.08        1.26           25.44      34.55        46.30      45.87     54.38
            32            0.84       0.94        1.04           1.13        1.30           20.44      27.72        32.63      35.62     28.09
            33            0.84       0.94        1.09           1.19        1.20           18.06      25.15        28.39      33.62     30.59
         +
           average        0.87       0.92        1.02           1.11        1.22           25.78      32.85        36.02      39.02     35.58
         ~                           Mean returns:                                       bar-Balanced           Portfolio:    T-Statistics
         -[                12345                                                     &             ~Mkt          D.5MB        PHML           R2
           11             ).69     0.73       0.81       0.63        0.49           0.73            -4.86         -0.14        4.19      24.61
           12             ).91     0.86       0.70       0.67        0.52           2.98            -6.56         -3.74        1.43      30.54
           13             ).54     0.31       0.39       0.35        0.22           2.20            -5.36         -5.46       -0.16      27.78
           21             ).80     1.04       1.16       0.98        1.07           1,11            -9.76         -7.41        0.87      51.41
           22             ).88     0.86       0.84       0.87        0.98           0.91            -8.22         -5.24        1.63      41.88
           23             ).59     0.46       0.59       0.71        0.58           0.56            -7.16         -3.60        0.47      30.88
           31             ..33     1.13       1.23       1.20        1.03           2.87           -10.89         -5.53       -0.03      49.85
           32             ..06     1.36       0.95       1.31        0.84           1.66            -6.40         -4.95        1.53      33.44
         ; 33             ).77     0.73       0.89       1,00        0.74           0.60            -5.72         -4.63        0.59      27.70
         average          ).84     0.83       0.84       0.86        0.72         0.474           -0.540         -0.540       0.150
         (T-stat)
         3                                                                        (2.19)         (-10.78)        (-6.87)      (1.78)


                                                                            37
 Table 9: Average       Turnover           for Portfolios             sorted      by Size, BM,             and HML    Loading

Portfolios wereformed based on size, book-to-market   ad pre-formation  HML factor loadings as described
in Table 3, The numbers presented are the average turnover for each of the portfolios, for the period
1973:07-1993:12, where turnover is defined w the trading volume for the month (as reported by CRSP)
divided by the number of shares outstanding    at the beginning of the month, times 1000. The averages
are value-weighted, so turnover in month t is defined as




                            Chr Prt                      factor loading portfolio
                            BM Sz                      1       2 .3            4                       5
                              1    1             75.6          66.1        60.3        60.1        58.7
                              1    2             96.6          61.8        50.6        47.4        56.3
                              1    3             52.7          39.3        37.9        41.1        45.8
                              2    1            61.9           43.7        40.2        40.2        46.2
                              2    2            62.3           42.5        38.4        39.9        42.8
                              2    3            44.6           39.3        37.6        38.7        39.9
                              3    1            49.1           38.6        38.2        42.0        45.4
                              3    2            56.2           43.1        44.7        44.2        51.6
                              3    3            49.0           41.5        38.8        45.9        44.5
                             average           60.89       46.21          42.97       44.39       47.91


                  Table 10: Mean Past 12-Month                            Return       of Test Portfolios

Portfolios wereformed based on size, book-to-market and pre-formation HML factor loadings as described
in Table 3. At each yearly formation date, the average past 12-month return for each portfolio was
calculated using value weighting:


                                  “-7’’’-72= Z,            ;’,,,        z , ‘E’”      ~‘*’’-11”

The last column   is the difference       between     the 5 and 1 factor-loading           portfolio       returns.

                           Chr Prt                   factor loading portfolio
                           BM Sz                     1     2      3      4                    5     5-1
                             1        1       1,74      1.83       1.79        1.77     1.50       -0.24
                             1        2       2.59      2.15       1.79        1.88     1.93       -0.66
                             1        3       1.88      1.62       1.41        1.40     1.52       -0.36
                            2         1       1.25      1.31       1.17        1.15     1.24       -0.02
                            2         2       1.30      1.17       1.12        1.26     1.37        0.06
                            2         3       1.09      1.26       1,03        1.08     1,25        0.17
                            3         1       0.87      0.96       0.90      0.84       0.61       -0.26
                            3         2       0.97      1.01       0.96        1.04     0.89       -0.08
                            3         3       0.85      1.02       1.23        1.14     1.09        0.24
                           average            1.39      1.37       1.27        1.28     1.27       -0.13




                                                                   38
