NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCK MARKET YIELDS AND THE
PRICING OF MUNICIPAL BONDS

N. Gregory Mankiw
James M. Poterba

Working Paper 5607

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

We are grateful to Whitney Newey, Michael Rashes, and Mark Wolfson for helpful comments
and discussions, and to the National Science Foundation for research support. This paper is part
of NBER’s research programs in Asset Pricing, Economic Fluctuations and Growth, Monetary
Economics and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by N. Gregory Mankiw and James M. Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5607
June 1996

STOCK MARKET YIELDS AND THE
PRICING OF MUNICIPAL BONDS
ABSTRACT

This paper proposes

an alternative

between taxable and tax-exempt

to the traditional

bond yields.

model for explaining

This alternative

the spread

model is a special case of a

general class of clientele models of portfolio choice and asset market equilibrium.

In particular,

we consider a setting with two types of investors, a taxable investor and a tax-exempt
who hold specialized bond portfolios.

The tax-exempt

the taxable investor holds only tax-exempt bonds.
and tax-exempt

investor,

investor holds only taxable bonds, and

Both investors hold equity, and the taxable

bond markets are linked through the equilibrium

holding and bond holding for each type of investor.

conditions

governing

In contrast to the traditional

equity

model, this

alternative model has the potential to explain the small observed spread between taxable and taxexempt yields.

In addition, this model predicts that the yield spread between taxable and tax-

exempt bonds should be an increasing
Although

the substantial

function

of the dividend

yield on corporate

changes in the tax code during the last four decades complicate

testing of this model, we find some support for the predicted relationship

the

between the equity

dividend yield and the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt bonds.

N. Gregory Mankiw
Department of Economics
Littauer 223
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

stocks.

James M. Poterba
Department of Economics
E52-350
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
and NBER

What determines

the yield on tax-exempt

municipal bonds relative to the yield on

similar taxable bonds? This paper suggests that factors outside the taxable and tax-exempt
bond markets,

in particular the yield on common

stocks,

may affect

According to the traditional model, the yields on taxable and tax-exempt
so that, in equilibrium, a taxable investor is indifferent
bonds.

between

this yield spread.
bonds must adjust

holding the two kinds of

This model is the basis for most of the previous studies of yields in the tax-exempt

bond market.

Poterba (1 989) offers one survey of this literature; Litzenberger and Nir (1 995)

is a recent example.

In this setting, the marginal tax rate on interest income determines the

ratio of the tax-exempt
statutory

tax rates.

to taxable

yield.

Fortune (1 988),

As a result, relative yields should move with

Poterba (1 986),

Skelton (1 983),

and various other

studies have presented evidence that confirms this prediction.
In this paper we develop an alternative framework
tax-exempt

for analyzing the relative yields of

and taxable bonds. We move beyond the traditional model, in which there is only

one type of investor with a given tax rate, to consider a model in which there are two types
of investors who face different tax rates and specialize in different kinds of bonds. The first
type of investor is a tax-exempt

institution which holds taxable bonds but no tax-exempt

bonds. The second type of investor is a wealthy taxpayer who holds tax-exempt

bonds but

no taxable bonds. What links the two bond markets is that both investors hold equities.
this model, the relative pricing of taxable and tax-exempt

bonds is determined

In

by equating

each bond’s after-tax risk-adjusted return, for the investors who hold that type of bond, to
the analogous return on corporate stock.
taxable and tax-exempt

Neither type of investor considers holding both

bonds, so there are no investors who are indifferent

between

the

yields on these two types of bonds.
Our model is a simple special case of a more general class of clientele models in

financial economics.

In this sense, it is similar in spirit to Green’s (1 993) model of the term

structure in the taxable and tax-exempt
comparison between
emphasizes
advantaged”

bond markets.

Green suggests that the standard

par taxable bonds and par tax-exempt

that yields on tax-exempt
portfolios

of taxable

bonds is inappropriate,

bonds should be compared
His empirical

bonds.

with

findings

and he

yields on “tax-

suggest

that

such

comparisons help to explain the smaller implicit tax rate on longer-term than short-term taxexempt bonds. Our analysis also suggests that factors beside the yield on taxable par bonds
affect yields on tax-exempt

bonds.

Despite some important differences from the traditional model with a single type of
investor, our model nevertheless

shares many of the features of this model.

predict that the yield spread moves with statutory tax rates.

Both models

Hence, much of the evidence

for the traditional model is also consistent with our alternative model. This alternative model
can, in addition, potentially explain why the yield ratio seems “too small” on average to be
explained by the traditional model.
tax-exempt

In 1993, for instance, the yield on high-quality long-term

bonds was 87 percent of the yield on similar Treasury bonds.

This ratio, together

with the traditional model, implies a marginal tax rate of only 13 percent.

By contrast, the

marginal federal into-me tax rate for high-income households was about 40 percent at this
time. Hence, the tax-exempt

and taxable yields were too close together to be easily explained

by the traditional view, without introducing other factors such as differences in risk between
municipal and Treasury bonds.
predicts a narrower

Our alternative

yield differential

between

model can resolve this puzzle because it
taxable

and tax-exempt

yields than the

traditional model.
Our alternative model also predicts that the spread between taxable and tax-exempt
yields will fluctuate

with the dividend yield on the stock market.

2

Because dividends and

capital appreciation are taxed differently, the dividend yield affects the relative tax burden that
taxable investors face on common stocks and, therefore, their required return on tax-exempt
bonds.

We test this prediction using time-series data from 1955 to 1994.

Although the

results are not completely consistent with the model, we do find evidence that the dividend
yield is related to the spread between

taxable and tax-exempt

bond yields.

This finding

supports our general suggestion that available returns on assets other than taxable bonds may
affect the pricing of tax-exempt

bonds.

This paper is divided into four sections.

The first develops the framework

for our

analysis of yield spreads. The second section documents the substantial differences between
top statutory marginal tax rates and implicit tax rates in the tax-exempt

bond market.

It also

shows how our alternative model can resolve this puzzle. The third section presents empirical
evidence that the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt
dividend yield.

bonds is related to the equity

The fourth section is a brief conclusion.

1. The Multiple-Investor

Framework

This section describes the standard model of municipal market equilibrium, and then
presents our alternative model.

First, we consider a taxable investor with a marginal tax rate

of r. If this investor is to be indifferent between holding a par taxable bond with yield r~ and
a par tax-exempt

municipal bond with yield rM, it must be the case that (1 -T)r~ = rM. This

implies

rr - rM - zrT

(1)

If taxable investors hold both taxable and tax-exempt
set according to this equation.

bonds, then the yield spread should be

Much of the literature on the municipal bond market has

shown that the tax rate impIied by this equation in fact moves with statutory marginal tax
rates.

This evidence provides some support for this model, but as we will see, it may be

consistent with other models as well.
We now develop an alternative model by introducing a second class of investors: taxexempt institutions.
tax-exempt

Because tax-exempt

investor holds them.

on taxable and tax-exempt

bonds earn a lower return than taxable bonds, no

At the same time, because the spread between the yields

bonds is so small, no taxable investor holds taxable bonds.

model is thus related to the “preferred habitat” models of asset-market

This

equilibrium that have

been proposed in various contexts.
Consider the equilibrium conditions for each type of investor.

A tax-exempt

compares the return on stock with the return on bonds Plus an equity risk premium.

investor
If d is

the dividend yield, g the expected capital gain, and 0 the risk premium, then the tax-exempt
investor earns the same risk-adjusted return on taxable bonds and stocks when

(2)

rT+O-d+g.
A taxable investor compares the tax-exempt

bond yield with the after-tax

return on stocks.

If ~q is the tax rate on capital gains, then the taxable investor’s equilibrium condition is

r~ + (1 - Tq)# - (1 - t)d
where (I-

rq)e’ is the taxable investor’s

assume that taxable and tax-exempt
gains.

after-tax

(3)

+ (1 - Tcg)g

risk premium on equity.

investors have the same expectations

Note that we

regarding capital

In addition, we assume that the equity risk premium falls as the tax rate on capital

gains rises, because the government takes on some of the risk through capital-gains taxation.

4

We can solve for r~ - r~ using the equilibrium conditions for the taxable and tax-exempt
investors.

By subtracting equation (3) from equation (2), we obtain

rr - rM - [(l-tq)w

(4)

- e] + f d + Cc, g.

This expression depends on g, the expected capital gain on equities, which is not observable.
We can, however, rearrange equation (2) to solve for g and substitute into equation (4). We
obtain

(5)
This expression shows that the spread between taxable and tax-exempt

yields should depend

on both the taxable bond yield and the equity dividend yield. The coefficient on the bond yield
is the capital-gains

tax rate, not the interest-income

tax rate.

The difference

between

the

interest and capital-gains tax rates multiplies the dividend yield.
In the alternative model summarized in equation (5), the yield spread is an increasing
function of the tax rate on interest income, so the previously cited evidence that tax policy
affects the yield spread is consistent with the current model.
interest tax rate affects the yield spread, however,
model.

In the two-investor

taxable and tax-exempt

The mechanism by which the

is quite different than in the traditional

case, the tax rate on interest affects the yield spread between

bonds because it determines the tax burden on dividends, which is

part of the return on one of the taxable alternatives to tax-exempt

bonds.

Data on portfolio holdings provide some support for the notion of a clientele equilibrium
in the tax-exempt

bond market.

At the end of 1992, the most recent period for which it is

possible to disaggregate households and nonprofit institutions in the Federal Reserve Board
Flow of Funds accounts, households held $581.1

billion in municipal securities directly. They

also heId additional tax-exempt debt through mutual funds. Nonprofits, which are tax-exempt,

held only $0.1 billion of such securities.
securities, and another $157.3
of taxable Treasuries.

Households held $182.8

billion of taxable Treasury

billion in savings bonds, while nonprofits held $110.9

billion

Both nonprofits and households report substantial holdings of corporate

equities.
The notion that tax-exempt

institutions compare taxable bonds and equities is fully

consistent with these portfolio data.
difficult to interpret.

The portfolio pattern exhibited by households is more

Although households hold more tax-exempt

bonds than taxable bonds,

they nonetheless hold substantial amounts of taxable bonds, which appears inconsistent with
our stylized model.
tax-deferred

It is possible, however, that holdings of taxable debt are concentrated

investment

in

vehicles such as Individual Retirement Accounts and Keogh plans.

In this case, household ownership of taxable bonds is consistent with the model.
We should note that the ownership pattern of tax-exempt
than it was twenty

years ago.

debt is very different today

When Fama (1 977) suggested that commercial banks were

the marginal investors in all short-term

municipal obligations,

and that the pricing of these

bonds depended on the tax rates of these banks, commercial banks were major investors in
this market.

Since the Tax Reform Act of 1986 limited banks’ ability to invest in tax-exempt

securities and borrow the principal in a tax-deductible
this market has declined.

way, the role of commercial banks in

Households have become the largest holders of tax-exempt

debt

in the ten years since the 1986 act.
The changing pattern of municipal-bond ownership poses a challenge to testing models
of yield determination.

If details of the tax code and financial regulations determine the set

of investors for whom holding tax-exempt

bonds is a viable option, and if these rules change

over time, then it may be problematic to find a sufficiently long time series to permit careful
testing of these models.

Alternatively,

if shifts in marginal tax rates coincide with shifts in

6

the identity of investors in the municipal bond market, there may be changes in risk premia
and other factors that confound econometric testing. We consider these issues further below.

2. The Implicit Tax Puzzle
Motivated

by the traditional model, economists often summarize the yield differential

between taxable and tax-exempt
from a taxable and tax-exempt

bonds by the imr)licit tax rat Qthat equates the after-tax yield
security.

This implicit tax rate ~ is (r~ - r~)/r~, where the two

yields are for securities with similar characteristics.
A standard source of information

on the yield curve for taxable

and tax-exempt

securities is Salomon Brothers’ Analytical Record of Yields and Yield S~read~, which presents
estimates of yield curves for par bonds on the first of each month.
determinants of the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt

Like many studies of the

bonds, including Buser and

Hess (1 986), Poterba (1 986), and Kochin and Parks (1 988), we focus on the spread between
newly issued Treasury

securities

and prime-grade

general obligation

tax-exempt

bonds.

“Prime” is the least risky category of municipal bonds presented in the Salomon Brothers data,
so both the taxable and tax-exempt
data on pre-defeased-municipal

rates are close to riskless.

Chalmers (1 995) examines

bonds and presents striking evidence that default risks do not

explain the pricing of high-quality municipal and taxable bonds.
Table 1 shows annual averages of the twelve monthly implicit tax rates for 20-year
bonds. We focus on yield spreads for long-term bonds, which have almost always exhibited
a smaller implicit tax rate than short-term bonds. At some points in the late 1960s and early
1980s, the difference between the implicit tax rates on one- and twenty-year
twenty-five

percentage

points.

The upward slope of the tax-exempt

bonds exceeded

term structure has

sometimes been steep enough to imply future short-term municipal rates greater than those

7

suggested by the taxable term structure; see Kochin and Parks (1988).
The data in Table 1 show that the implicit tax rate on these bonds has historically been
low, and that it declined substantially
32.4 percent.

during the 1980s.

In 1980, the implicit tax rate was

Since individual investors could face marginal tax rates as high as 70 percent

on taxable interest income, the implicit tax rate was well below the top tax rate. The implicit
tax rate on twenty-year

bonds declined to 20.0 percent in 1990, and subsequently

average value of 13.0

percent in 1993.

investors in 1993 was 39.6

fell to an

The top federal marginal tax rate on individual

percent, again much higher than the implicit tax rate.

Our alternative model also allows the computation of an implicit tax rate, although such
a computation requires more assumptions.

In patiicular, suppose that the two investors place

the same risk premium on equity (0 = d’) and that capital gains are not taxed (rthe implicit tax rate r is (r~ - r~)/d.
yield spread, the alternative

= O). Then

We call this the @alternativeimc)licit tax ratQ. For a given

model implies a much larger implicit tax rate, because the

dividend yield is normally much below the taxable bond yield. Conversely, for any given tax
rate, the alternative model predicts a much smaller spread rT - r~.
Table
alternative

1 also presents the time series of the alternative

implicit t=

rate is consistently

therefore, closer to statutory tax rates.

implicit tax rate.

This

higher than the traditional implicit tax rate and,

In the years since the Tax Reform Act of 1986, the

alternative implicit tax rate has ranged between 29.4 percent (1 993) and almost 60 percent
(1987).

In some cases, both in this period and before, the alternative

greater than the highest statutory

implicit tax rate is

marginal tax rate on interest and dividend income.

finding may reflect our extreme assumption that the effective
More generally, our computed value for the alternative

This

capital-gains tax rate is zero.

implicit tax rate, (r~ - r~)/d, should

equal ~ + (r~/d -1 )Tq, which is greater than the tax rate on dividends r. Like the implicit tax

8

rate computed under the standard model, the alternative implicit tax rate declines during the
1980s,

but the level of the alternative

implicit tax rate does not fall substantially

below

statutory marginal tax rates.
Our discussion of the alternative implicit tax rate is not designed to supplant the use
of the traditional implicit tax rate.

The traditional implicit tax rate measures the tax rate at

which an individual investor would be indifferent between holding a taxable and tax-exempt
bond, and this is often a useful construct.
investors who hold tax-exempt

However,

under our assumption

that taxable

bonds are not investing at the margin in taxable bonds, this

calculation does not convey information on the marginal tax rates of the investors who are
setting prices in the tax-exempt

bond market.

3. Regression Evidence
To compare the traditional model and our alternative model of municipal bond yields,
it seems natural to regress the yield spread r~ - r~ on the taxable bond yield r~ and the equity
dividend yield d.

That is, we consider regression models of the form:

(6)

rr - rM-6+a*rr+fl*d+e

Note that this regression nests the traditional model (equation 1) and our alternative model
(equation 5) if tax rates and risk premia are held constant.

For any given set of tax rates, the

two models give precise predictions about the magnitude of the coefficients in this regression.
According to the traditional model, a = T and # = O, where ~is a marginal tax rate on interest
income.

According to the alternative model, a = T= and B = ~ - ~=, where r= is the effective

marginal tax rate on capital gains. The theory developed above suggests that d = (1 -T~)(O’ 8), the difference in the after-tax risk premia that taxable and tax-exempt
for holding equities.

investors demand

As we

noted

above,

estimation

information if it were conducted
profitably own tax-exempt
varied substantially.

of such a regression

would

convey

during a period when the regulations affecting

the most
who could

bonds were stable, but when interest rates and dividend yields

Such a data sample’ is not available.

Nonetheless, to get a rough gauge

of the validity of the two models, we try estimating this regression for the sample periods that
are available, even though they span tax reforms and other changes in the tax-exempt

bond

market.
An important issue concerns the interpretation

of the error term c in the regression.

Within the model we are examining, this error term arises if there are differential changes in
the risk premia on equity
identification

is whether

or if there are changes

this error is correlated

in tax rates.

The key question

for

with either the taxable bond yield or the

dividend yield.
There are at least three ways in which such correlation might emerge.

First, if changes

in the dividend yield are correlated with changes in the required risk premia on corporate
equity, then the coefficient on d will reflect more than simply the difference between the tax
rates on dividend income and capital gains.

The net effect of this bias is not clear, for it

depends on correlation of the dividend yield with the difference in risk premia between the
two investor types.
A second source of potential

bias arises from the effect

marginal tax rates of investing households.

of changes in d on the

If fluctuations in the dividend yield are attributable

to changes in dividend payments, and an increase in aggregate dividends raises the taxable
income of some investing households enough to increase their marginal tax rates, then
increases in d will raise the yield spread by more than the asset-market
imply.

This will lead the coefficient

equilibrium conditions

on d to overstate the actual differential

10

in margi:, al tax

rates.

This effect is unlikely to be large, however.

both corporate equities and tax-exempt
effect does not operate.

Moreover,

If the taxable investors who are holding

bonds face the top marginal tax bracket, then this

because most of the variation in d is attributable

to

fluctuations in share prices, not changes in dividends, a relatively small share of the variation
in d is likely to be associated with changes in investor marginal tax rates.
A third effect that warrants consideration is a relationship between marginal tax rates
and dividend payout.

Poterba (1 987) presents some evidence from the U.S. time series, and

cites other studies, suggesting that when the differential

between the tax rate on dividends

and that on capital gains rises, firms reduce their payout ratios. This would suggest that an
increase in ~which raises the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt

bonds would also

reduce d, thereby leading to a negative bias in the estimate of ~.
Although these concerns suggest some caution in interpreting the regression evidence,
we nonetheless

proceed in estimating

alternative model.

the equation

(6) as a first step in evaluating

We use monthly data for the period 1955:1-1994:12.

the

The results are

shown in Table 2. The first three rows present estimates for the full sample period, while the
last three rows correspond to the period 1982:1-1994:12,

the period after the top marginal

tax rate on unearned income was reduced from 70 to 50 percent in the Economic Recovery
Tax Act of 1981.
In bivariate regressions that include either the taxable bond yield or the dividend-price
ratio, each of these variables has a positive and statistically significant correlation with the
yield spread. The explanatory power of the equation that includes the dividend yield is smaller
than that of the equation with the taxable yield.
period, the explanatory

If we exclude the 1950s from our sample

power of the two equations is roughly equal, and for some sample

periods, the yield spread is more strongly correlated with the dividend yield than with the

11

taxable bond yield.
When both the taxable bond yield (r~) and the dividend yield (d) are included in the
estimation equation, as in equation (6), each variable has a statistically

significant effect on

the yield spread (r~ - r~). Recall that the traditional model of municipal bond pricing predicts
a coefficient

of zero on the equity dividend yield. The data decisively reject that restriction.

The resulting estimates can be used to compute the implied values of the dividend tax
rate, r, and the effective capital-gains tax rate, ~~, under the assumption our alternative model
The implied value of T is 48.6

is correct.
percent.

percent, while the implied value of ~= is 17.0

Keep in mind that these are not estimates of the tax rate under any particular tax

code, but rather estimates

based on forty years of data that span several tax regimes.

Viewed in this light, the estimates seem reasonable.

The effect iv~ capital-gains tax rate has

long been recognized to fall well below the statutory tax rate; Feldstein and Summers (1 979)
divided the statutory rate by four to allow for the effects of deferral of realization, and basis
step-up at death.

The estimated dividend tax rate of nearly fifty percent is somewhat

higher

than the top statutory marginal tax rate in the post-1 986 period, but is well within the range
of marginal tax rates in earlier years.
The last three~ows of Table 2 present estimates of the same equation for the 1982:11994:12

time period.

Because marginal tax rates vary less in this period than between this

period and earlier years, we thought that the regression might work better for these years
alone. This conjecture, however, was not confirmed.
coefficients

are not stable over time.

The regression results suggest that the

When we relate the yield spread to either the taxable

bond yield or the dividend yield in a bivariate regression, the coefficient
to be positive and statistically
however,

the coefficient

significant.

estimate

When

on the taxable

12

estimates continue

both variables are included together,
bond yield is positive and that on the

dividend yield is negative (and statistically significant).
The subsample instability in Table 2 calls attention to our aggregation
many different

tax regimes.

Therefore,

variation in tax rates over time.

we next consider specifications

of data from
that allow

for

In particular, we estimate

(7)
If our alternative model is correct and if we use the correct marginal tax rates for the investors
who are determining
coefficient

prices in these asset markets,

then the alternative

model predicts

estimates of u’ = B’ = 1.

To estimate this equation,
facing highest-income

individuals.

we construct variables based on the marginal tax rates
We use two measures of the effective

capital-gains

tax

rate: the statutory rate and one quarter of the statutory rate. As we noted earlier, the latter
approach is used by Feldstein and Summers (1 979) to allow for the effects of deferral of
realization and basis step-up at death.

We then construct synthetic variables by multiplying

these tax parameters by the return on taxable bonds and the dividend yields.

We use these

synthetic variables in the above regression.
The results are in Table 3. In some ways, the results are supportive of the model.
all cases, the coefficients

In

are statistically significant and of the correct sign. For the entire

sample, the fit is better than for the comparable

regression in Table 2, which implicitly

assumes constant tax rates. Moreover, the results are more robust over subsamples.
other hand, the coefficients

are not always

of the right magnitude.

On the

In particular,

the

coefficient on the dividend-yield variable, although always positive and significant, is less than
the value of unity predicted by the alternative theory.

13

4. Conclusion
Traditional

analyses of how taxes affect the yield spread between taxable and tax-

exempt bonds have assumed that a single class of taxable investors is indifferent
holding these two securities.
the pricing of municipal

between

This paper has proposed and examined an alternative model of

bonds,

in which

there

is heterogeneity

in investor

type

and

segmentation in the bond market. Taxable investors hold tax-exempt bonds, while tax-exempt
investors hold taxable bonds.

What links the investors, and the two bond markets, is that

both investors hold equities.

The model generates

between taxable and tax-exempt

the novel prediction that the spread

bond yields depends on the dividend yield paid by equities,

as well as on the taxable interest rate and on the marginal tax rates for dividends and capital
gains. The time-series data gives some support to this prediction, although the results are not
completely consistent with the simple model presented here.
One natural extension of the model developed here would allow for investors who can
hold assets in both taxable

and tax-exempt

form.

Individual

investors

with

access to

Individual Retirement Accounts, Keogh plans, 401 (k) accounts, or similar investment vehicles
can reduce their tax burden by allocating assets among accounts
characteristics.

according to their tax

Such-a model can potentially explain some of the anomalous results reported

here. In Table 3, for example, we reported that the equity dividend yield, adjusted by the tax
rate, has a significant impact on the spread between taxable and tax-exempt
that the size of the effect is smaller than the model predicts.

bond yields, but

Perhaps the explanation is that

individuals hold low-dividend stocks in their taxable account and high-dividend stocks in their
tax-exempt

account.

Such behavior would lower the effective tax rate on dividends and, as

a result, reduce the impact of the dividend yield on the spread between bond yields.
The generaI lesson from our analysis is the importance of considering assets other than

14

taxable bonds when modelling the yield on municipal bonds.
the analysis of Green (1 993),

who considers a model with various kinds of taxable bonds,

some selling at par and others selling below par.
arbitraged to yield returns comparable
bonds.

In this sense, we have built on

In his model, tax-exempt

to those on favorably-taxed

bonds are

taxable bonds, not par

Our analysis shares the insight that explaining the pricing of tax-favored

may be easier if one expands the set of assets that investors are able to hold.
suggests that for analyzing the yield spread between taxable and tax-exempt
be important to consider developments

in equity as well as fixed-income

15

securities
Yet it also

bonds, it may

markets.

REFERENCES
Buser, Stephen A. and Patrick J. Hess, 1986, Empirical determinants
taxable and tax-exempt

of the relative yields on

securities, Jo urnal of Financial Economicq 17, 335-355.

Chalmers, John M. R., 1995, The relative yields of tax-exempt

and taxable bonds: Evidence

from municipal bonds that are secured by U.S. Treasury obligations, mimeo, Virginia
Tech.
Fama,

Eugene F., 1977,
manuscript,

A pricing model for the municipal

bond market,

unpublished

University of Chicago Graduate School of Business.

Feldstein, Martin S., and Lawrence H. Summers,

1979,

Inflation and the taxation of capital

income in the corporate sector, National Tax Journal 32, 445-470.
Fortune, Peter, 1988,

Municipal bond yields: Whose tax rates matter?, National Tax Jo urnal

41, 219-233.
Green, Richard C., 1993, A simple model of the taxable and tax-exempt

yield curves, Review

of Financial Studie s 6, 233-264.
Kochin, Levis A. and Richard W. Parks, 1988,

Was the tax-exempt

bond market inefficient

or were future expected tax rates negative?, Jo urnal of Financ ? 53, 913-931.
Litzenberg, Robert and Nir Rabinowitz,

1995, Tax exempt money-market

yields: An empirical

study on the impact of taxes, transaction costs, information lags, and liquidity trading,
Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
Newey,

Whitney

K., and Kenneth D. West,

matrix estimation,

1994,

Automatic

lag selection in covariance

Review of Economic Stu dies 61 (October),

631-654.

Poterba, James M., 1986, Explaining the yield spread between taxable and tax exempt bonds,
in H. Rosen, cd., Stud ies in State and Loca I Public Financ Q (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press), 5-48.

16

Poterba, James M., 1987,
-1987:2,

Tax policy and corporate saving, Brookinas Par)ers on Economic

455-503

-

Poterba, James M., 1989, Tax reform and the market for tax-exempt

debt, Re~ional Scienc~

gnd Urban Economic s 19, 537-562.
Skelton, James L., 1983, The relative pricing of tax exempt and tax exempt debt, Jou rnal of
Financial Economic s 12, 343-356.
Trczinka, Charles, 1982, The pricing of tax-exempt
of Financ e 37, 907-923.

17

bonds and the Miller hypothesis, Journal

TABLE 1:
IMPLICIT TAX RATES FROM TAXABLE AND TAX-EXEMPT BOND MARKETS
--. . .. .... . ... ...... ................ ... ............. ... .... ...... .... .
Year

(r~ - r~)/r~

(r~ - r~)/d

1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965
1966
1967
1968
1969
1970
1971
1972
1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994

25.8%
23.0
15.9
19.9
23.3
23.8

18.0%
17.3
12.6
17.6
29.8
28.6
26.2
32.6
35.0
38.9
39.2
33.5
38.6
41.7
27.3
20.1
27.6
35.9
74.6
59.7
46.4
60.2
56.1
58.2
62.9
69.0
64.2
36.0
55.7
63.2
53.3
36.5
59.3
40.8
46.2
48.2
45.9
38.7
29.4
42.5

20.0
26.9
27.5
27.8
27.7
23.9
25.1
23.7
13.9
10.6
13,7
16.1
29,6
29,6
22.8
29.0
33.8
36.4
37.3
32.4
24.1
16.1
21.6
23.3
20.6
15.6
19.9
16.3
18.6
20.0
18.4
14.7
13.0
16.8
------------------------

----------------------

-------------------------

Source: Authors’ calculations based on data from SalomonBrothers’Analytical
Reco rd of
Yields and Yield S~readS, and dividend yield information from Standard and Poor’s. The
entries in the first column correspond to the marginal interest income tax rate of the investor
who is indifferent between taxable and tax-exempt bonds under the assumptions of the
traditional model; the entries in the second are the marginal tax rates on interest and dividend
income of the marginal taxable investor who is indifferent between equity and tax-exempt
bonds, assuming a zero capital-gains tax rate. See text for further discussion.

TABLE 2:
DETERMINANTS

OF THE YIELD SPREAD BETWEEN TAXABLE AND TAX-EXEMPT

BONDS

Dependent Variable: (r~ - r~)
---------------------------------------

---------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------

r~
Sample
Constant
d
---------------------------- ------------------- ---------------------------------------0.058
(0.147)

55-94

-0.868
(0.401)

55-94

-0.863
(0.448)

0.170
(0.026)

82-94

-0.679
(0.364)

0.251
(0.044)

82-94

-0.143
(0.509)

82-94

-0.567

(0.205)
----------------------------

.598

.527

0.639
(0.118)

.432

.626

0.316
(0.137)

.669

.478

.727

.324

0.479
(o. 150)

.447

.461

-0.490
(0.1 17)

.801

.276

0.223
(0.026)

55-94

0.435
(0.049)

Adj. R2 SER
-------------- --------------------

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. .. .. . . . . . . . . . . .

Notes: Estimation results using monthly data from the beginning of the first calendar year
indicated, through December 1994.
Standard errors shown in parentheses are estimated
using the Newey-West (1994) algorithm to preserve consistency under autocorrelation and
heteroscedasticity.
The dependent variable is the yield spread between the 20-year taxable
bond yield (r~) and the 20-year tax-exempt bond yield (r~) as reported in Salomon Brothers’
Analytical Record of Yields and Yield SoreadS. d is the dividend yield on the S&P 500 for the
Wednesday closest to the first of each month.

19

TABLE 3:
D~ERMINANTS

OF THE YIELD SPREAD BETWEEN TAXABLE AND TAX-EXEMPT

BONDS

Dependent Variable: (r~ - r~)
. . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..- . . . . . . . . . . -----------------------------------------------------------------------

T- ● r~
Constant
Sample
----------------------------- ------------------------------------Using Top Capital

55-94

82-94

(~-~w)”d
Adj. R2 SER
--------------- ---------------------------------------

Gains Rate

-1.016
(0.243)

1.021

0.402
(0.074)

.724

.436

(0.092)

-1.033
(0.485)

1.011
(0.200)

0.604
(0.162)

.671

.355

Using 1/4 Top Capital Gains Rate
55-94

82-94

-1.000

3.748
(0.337)

0.329
(0.067)

.714

.444

(0.252)

-1.116
(0.530)

3.578
(0.707)

0.557
(0.170)

.637

.373

-. ----- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ----------------------

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .-. .-.. - —----------------------------------

Notes: Estimation results using monthly data from the beginning of the first calendar year
indicated, through December 1994.
Standard errors shown in parentheses are estimated
using the Newey-West (1 994) algorithm to preserve consistency under autocorrelation and
heteroscedasticity.
The dependent variable is the yield spread between the 20-year taxable
bond yield (r~) and the 20-year tax-exempt bond yield (r~) as reported in Salomon Brothers’
Analytical Record of Yields and Yield Soread~. d is the dividend yield on the S&P 500 for the
Wednesday closest to the first of each month.

20

