                             NBER WOR~G          PAPER SERIES




                              SPOUSAL LABOR SUPPLY AS
                          ~SURANCE:   DOES UNEMPLOYMENT
                         INSURANCE CROWD OUT THE ADDED
                                   WORKER EFFECT?




                                       Jonathan Gruber
                                      Julie Berry Cullen




                                     Working Paper 5608




                    NATIONAL     BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996


We are grateful to Josh Angrist, David Cutler, Jerry Hausman, Larry Katz, Jim Poterba, and
seminar participants at MIT, Ohio State, the University of Chicago, and the NBER for helpful
comments, to Beethika Khan for research assistance, and to the National Institute on Aging for
financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Labor Studies and Public
Economics.    Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by Jonathan Gruber and Julie Berry Cullen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper 5608
                                                                                         June 1996

                                  SPOUSAL LABOR SUPPLY AS
                              INSURANCE: DOES UNEMPLOYMENT
                             INSUHCE     CROWD OUT THE ADDED
                                       WORKER EFFECT?

                                              ABSTRACT

        We consider the role of spousal labor supply as insurance against spells of unemployment,
Standard theory suggests that women should work more when their husbands are out of work (the
“Added Worker Effect” or AWE), but there has been little empirical support for this contention.

We too find little evidence of an AWE over the 1984-1993 period.           We suggest that one reason

for the absence of the AWE may be that unemployment               insurance (UI) is providing    a state-
contingent    income    stream that counteracts    the negative   income   shock from the husband’s

unemployment.      We in fact find that increases in the generosity of UI lower labor supply among

wives of unemployed      husbands.     Our results suggest that UI is crowding out a sizeable fraction

of offsetting spousal earnings in response to unemployment        spells, although even in the absence
of a UI system the spousal response          would only make up a small share of the associated
reduction    in family income.       We also find evidence that families     are making labor supply
decisions in a life cycle context, since there are effects of UI on the labor supply of wives of
employed     husbands   who face high unemployment        risk.   Yet, couples do not appear able to
smooth the labor supply response to UI income flows equally over periods of employment               and

unemployment,     suggesting the presence of liquidity constraints.    Finally, wives in families with
small children    are more responsive      to UI benefits in their labor supply decisions,      which is
consistent with the notion that they have a higher opportunity cost of market work.


Jonathan Gruber                                          Julie Berry Cullen
Department of Economics, E52-274c                        Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                    Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139                                      Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
        Government intervention in private insurance markets in the U.S. has grown rapidly over the

past 30 years.   This rapid growth, along with increased budgetary pressure at both the state and

federal level, has raised the question of whether such interventions are necessary.    Answering this

question requires assessing whether, in the absence of government intervention, private arrangements

would emerge to provide insurance against adverse events.         One natural private arrangement is

insurance through the labor supply of family members.         In the face of a negative shock to the

earnings of one family member, other family members can increase their labor supply to compensate

for the resulting income loss. 1

        There have been a number of studies which have focused specifically on spousal labor supply

as insurance against the unemployment of the household head.        These studies test for the “added

worker effect” (AWE), which is the entry of wives into the labor force when their husbands lose

their jobs. Somewhat surprisingly, however, empirical studies of the AWE have generally not found

evidence consistent with this contention,

        One potential explanation for these findings is that previous studies have ignored the presence

of public insurance for unemployed workers through the unemployment insurance (UI) program.

UI provides a state contingent income stream which counteracts the income effect from the husband’s

job loss.   As such, it may mitigate the wife’s labor supply response,         so that these estimates




     lThere area number of other private arrangements that maybe crowded out by public insurance,
but they are not the focus of our study. The source of private insurance that has received the most
attention in previous studies is own savings. Both theoretical and empirical research suggests that
savings is reduced by the generosity of the social insurance system in the U. S., although the extent
of the estimated “crowdout” varies. Hubbard et al. (1995) use a stochastic life-cycle model to
demonstrate that government social insurance programs substantially reduce personal savings. For
empirical evidence that social insurance programs crowd out personal savings, see Feldstein (1974)
for the case of Social Security; Fishback and Kantor (1994) for the case of workers’ compensation;
and Engen and Gruber (1995) for the case of unemployment insurance. We return in the conclusion
to consider the interaction of spousal insurance and wealth accumulation.
                                                  2

understate   the potential   for wives to insure their family income while their husbands          are

unemployed.2 If this is true, it suggests that in the absence of public insurance spouses would insure

to a larger extent the income risk from unemployment facing the family.

        The purpose of this paper is to re-assess the insurance role played by spousal labor supply,

focusing particularly on role of unemployment insurance.     For the sake of comparability to previous

literature we retain the focus on the response of wives to their husbands’ unemployment.    While this

focus is somewhat anachronistic in light of the increased labor force participation of married women,

in 87 percent of married couples the husband earns more, and in 73 percent the husband works more

hours (over a two year period) than the wife.3        Thus, this remains a natural starting point for

examining the response of secondary earners.

        We do so using the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), a large nationally

representative survey which follows families over a period of 2-3 years.    The longitudinal aspect of

this data allows us to control for underlying heterogeneity in tastes for work in measuring the AWE,

and to follow wives during their husbands’ unemployment spells.       And we can match to the SIPP

information about the UI regime in the state in which a family resides to consider the role that UI

plays in determining the magnitude of the measured AWE.

        Our analysis proceeds in three steps.   First, we briefly revisit the AWE question: do wives

work more when their husbands lose their jobs?     We consider a fairly rich empirical model which

addresses a number of problems with previous empirical work, but we are also unable to document

a significant AWE.    We tien assess whether there is a crowdout role being played by UI. In fact,



    2A similar point is made by Topel (1984), and by Viscusi and Moore (1987) and Fishback and
Kantor (1995), who show that the availability of unemployment insurance/workers’ compensation
lowers the compensating wage differentials provided for unemployment risk/injury risk respectively.

    3Figures tabulated from SIPP data for 1983-1993 described below.
                                                      3

we find that there is quite a large crowdout; our estimates imply that in the absence of UI, wives’

total hours of work wou Id rise by 30% during their husbands’ spells of unemployment.        At the same

time, however, we find that this spousal response would make up only a small share (about 14%)

of the associated reduction in family income.

            Finally, we note that the exogenous variation in income across couples induced by underlying

differences in the UI system provides a window onto a number of additional questions about how

spousal labor supply decisions are made. For example, is there a response to the contingent income

stream from UI during periods of employment as well, as the life cycle model of labor supply would

imply? To the extent that there is such a life cycle response to UI, does it indicate that couples are

able to perfectly smooth the wife’s labor supply through time, or do they appear to face liquidity

constraints which induce intertemporal distortions in labor supply allocation?        And how does the

responsiveness to UI vary with family structure, and in particular the presence of small children?

        The paper is divided into six sections.     In Part I, we discuss the theoretical motivation for

the AWE, and previous work on this question.              In Part II, we describe our data and empirical

strategy.     In Part III, we present our basic AWE estimates.    In Part IV, we examine the effect of UI

on spousal labor supply.      Part V presents the extensions.    Part VI concludes.




                                           Part I: Background

~eoretical Considerations

        The theory underlying the notion of spousal labor supply as insurance against unemployment

is developed in Ashenfelter (1980), Heckman and MaCurdy (1980), and Lundberg (1985).                 In a

simple static model, there is presumed to be an Added Worker Effect because the reduced transitory

income of the family will raise the labor supply of the wife (if her leisure is a normal good).     This
                                                      4

effect may be enhanced if increased non-market time for the husband lowers the opportunity cost of

market work for the wife, through substitution in home production; but the extent of complementarily

or substitutability of spousal labor supply remains an unresolved question.4

        As Heckrnan and MaCurdy highlight, however, the AWE should be small in the context of

a life cycle model, so long as the income loss from unemployment is small relative to the husband’s

lifetime earnings.       In this case, wives of husbands who face higher unemployment          risk should

increase their earnings at all times, and not just while the husband is unemployed.         That is, to the

extent that unemployment is a transitory shock, it should not distort the intertemporal allocation of

the wife’s labor; there will be more market labor supplied by wives whose husbands face greater

unemployment risk, and not necessarily wives whose husbands are unemployed at a point in time.

        There are at least three reasons, however, why the event of unemployment per se might be

expected to cause wives to work more. First, as noted above, the leisure of wives and husbands may

be substitutable through household production,        Second, as noted by Mincer (1962) and Lundberg

(1985), if families are liquidity constrained or face fixed consumption commitments, they may not

have the resources to smooth consumption over the husband’s unemployment spell, so that wives will

have to work more during the spell. Finally, as Dynarski and Shefrin (1987) show in their analysis

of unemployment and consumption, even in a life cycle model with perfect capital markets there will

be a response of consumption to both job loss and reemployment if these events convey information

about lifetime prospects.     This same intuition applies to spousal labor supply as well.

        Thus, the previous literature suggests that there may be both a life cycle response to

unemployment     risk,    as well as a differential       increase in labor supply during    the spell of




    4Knieser (1976) suggests that the labor supply of spouses is complementary for older couples,
but there is no more recent evidence of which we are aware.
                                                   5

unemployment. 5 But none of these studies have considered the role of UI, By providing a state-

contingent income stream, UI mitigates the income loss from unemployment.       This will have effects

on both decisions over the 1ife cycle and decisions during the unemployment spell as well. We focus

initially below on the effect of UI during the spell of unemployment; in the extensions, we consider

life cycle effects outside of the spell.




Previous Evidence

        Most empirical work on the Added Worker Effect focuses on the implications of this response

for aggregate unemployment dynamics. b A smaller literature has attempted to estimate the specific

labor supply response of wives to their husband’s unemployment.7        This literature has faced two

methodological problems, and has dealt with them with mixed success.       The first is that there may

be underlying differences in the taste for work between wives of men who become unemployed and

wives of men who do not.       The bias imparted by this heterogeneity is not obvious, but if there is

“assortative mating” in tastes for work, then it will bias against finding an AWE in a cross-section

of data. The second is the “discouraged worker effect” (DWE): if the husband’s unemployment is



     50ne interesting question is why wives go to work at all, as opposed to the husband simply
taking a new job immediately. The answer implicit in the previous literature, and in our paper, is
that there is some required period of search by the husband for a new job match, and that there may
be a transitory shortfall in family income during that search process, requiring market work by the
wife. We do not model the husband’s search behavior in this paper; we simply condition on a
separation, and not on the behavior during the resulting spel I of unemployment (ie. duration of the
spell). We do this because search behavior among the unemployed has been shown repeatedly to
be a function of UI generosity (for example, see Meyer, 1990), so that it would be an endogenous
regressor in our models of spousal labor supply.

    bSee, for example, Cain (1966), Mincer (1966), and Wachter (1974).

     7N0 study of which we are aware considers the response of husbands to wives labor supply,
although a number of papers do model joint family labor supply more generally; see Killingsworth
and Heckman (1986) for a review.
                                                   6

due to a general economic downturn, then thewife’s      shadow wage may be falling as well, making

her less likely to work.a

        Previous work has generally been unable to document a significant AWE.           Heckman and

MaCurdy (1980,1982) use a life cycle model of labor supply with couple fixed effects that control

for heterogeneity.   They initially find no response of wives to their husbands’ unemployment; this

conclusion is reversed by their 1982 revision, which finds a negative (but insignificant) effect of

income and a significant positive effect of the husband’s hours of unemployment, both of which are

consistent with an AWE.       Layard et al. (1980) perform a cross-sectional analysis for the UK, and

find that wives’ labor supply actually falls when the husband becomes unemployed.      They conjecture

that this may be due to the means-tested welfare entitlement program in the U. K., which resulted in

a high tax rate on spousal labor supply during spells of unemployment by the husband,         Maloney

(1987) pursues a similar cross-sectional approach with U.S. data, and also finds no evidence for an

AWE.    Lundberg (1985) uses a quasi-difference framework, modelling the wife’s transition to and

from states of non-participation,   employment, and unemployment as a function of the employment

status of their husbands.     She does find evidence of a small AWE for whites, but she finds the

opposite effect for blacks.   Most recently, Maloney (199 1) uses a selection model to try to capture

heterogeneity in tastes for work, and he concludes that there remains no evidence of an AWE.

        The mixed conclusions from these studies may reflect their differential success in dealing with

the problems noted above. Moreover, none of these studies has been carried out on data from more

recently than 1982 (and only one since 1976); the dramatic shift in female labor force participation




    ‘The aggregate literature on the AWE has generally concluded that the discouraged worker effect
dominates the added worker effect in economic downturns. For an attempt to distinguish between
the added and discouraged— worker effects using aggregated micro-data across areas, see Mitchell
(1979).
                                                  7

since then may substantially change any earlier conclusion.   Finally, as noted, none of this studies

has considered the role of UI. We address these issues in our empirical work.




                 Part II: Data and Empirical Strategy for Estimating the AWE

Data

         We use the 1984-1988 and 1990-1992 panels of the Survey of Income and Program

Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is a nationally representative survey which collects information from

a large sample of households every four months (waves) over a period of two to two-and-one-half

years,   The interviews that we use therefore span the period from the middle of 1983 to the end of

1993. At each interview, households are asked questions about the entire previous four month period

as well as each, month in that period.     Data are collected on the demographic      and economic

characteristics of each household member and of the household as a whole.

         A concern with our analysis is the potential endogeneity of the husband’s labor supply to

decisions made by the wife, such as through joint retirement behavior.   We attempt to mitigate this

problem in three ways.   First, we restrict our analysis to couples where both the husband and wife

are between the ages of 25 and 54.9 Second, we also restrict our sample to months after we observe

at least three months of employment by the husband.    Husbands in this age range who have worked

for at least three consecutive months are likely to be very strongly attached to the labor force, and

therefore it is unlikely that they are leaving their jobs because of work decisions by their wives. 10



    we choose only couples that are married for the duration of the SIPP panel, thereby ignoring
the endogeneity of marital status to either the unemployment of the husband or the generosity of UI.
These are worthy topics for future analysis.

     1°This left-censoring restriction only excludes 9 % of the observations in this age range. Note
that these excluded months include all months for persons who never work in three consecutive
months, as well as the initial months for persons whose first three months of work come at some
                                                    8

Furthermore, this information on past earnings histories is necessary to assign potential UI benefits

to the husband.   Lastly, we restrict our analysis of unemployment to spells where the husband is

looking for work in at least some months, so that we are not capturing early retirement or other

endogenous labor force leaving.

        We also exclude couples where the husband is always self-employed, since he cannot avail

himself of the UI system.   And we exclude outlying observations with hourly wages below $lAour

and above $100/hour, and monthly hours of more than 400. Finally, we consider couples who are

in the SIPP for at least two years, in order to have sufficient information to identify the fixed effects

models that we estimate, and to consider longer run effects of UI.




Regression Framework

       Our basic regression framework for analyzing the AWE is:

(1)    LSiL= ~ + ~lXit + @2UNEMi~ + ~36j + ~47p + tit

       Our unit of observation is a spell of employment or unemployment (t) for a person (i). That

is, all consecutive months of employment or unemployment are collapsed into a single observation,

and our dependent variable is average spousal labor supply during the spell; so for each person there

is t observations corresponding to their t spells of employment or unemployment.

       This spell-based approach is important for two reasons. First, there is likely to be significant




point during the SIPP panel. We also attempted to deal with endogeneity through an instrumental
variables strategy, using as instruments the unemployment rate for the husband’s occupation and
indust~ in the local area, in a model which controlled for female-specific local labor market
conditions.    This approach was not successful, however; it yielded implausibly large negative
coefficients on the husband’s unemployment, indicating that, even conditioning on measures of the
female-specific labor market conditions (as we do below), the labor market conditions facing the
husband are correlated with the wife’s job opportunities.
                                                   9

correlation in the behavior of couples during a given spell, so that it would be inappropriate to treat

monthly observations on labor supply during that spell as independent.     Moreover, for the analysis

of UI, our independent variable of interest, UI benefits, is constant throughout the spell, so that we

really only have variation across spells and not within them. Second, by using one observation per

spell, we do not “overweight” long spells in our analysis of UI. There is a large literature which

strongly suggests that the duration of unemployment spells is a function of UI generosity (ie. Meyer,

1990), so that using data on each month of unemployment could lead to selection bias since we

would have more months of observations from cases where UI is disproportionately          generous.   By

the same logic, we do not want to overweight short spells in our regressions,         by having more

observations   for individuals who flow in and out of employment;          we therefore    weight each

observation by the reciprocal of the number of spells for that person, so that each person’s weights

sum to one. 11

        We use two measures of the labor supply of wives (LS) from couple i as dependent variables:

employment and the number of hours worked per month. These correspond to the measures of labor

force attachment used in many previous studies of the AWE.       Since we are aggregating over spells

of employment and unemployment,      our dependent variables are the share of months employed and

average hours/month   during the spell.

        Our key independent variable is a dummy for whether the husband is currently unemployed.




     I’This is done within the sample being used. That is, when we use both spells of employment
and unemployment for the AWE analysis, the weight is one over the total number of spells. When
we use only spells of unemployment for the UI analysis, the weight is one over the number of
unemployment spells. An alternative, which deals with the intra-spell correlation but not with the
potential bias from endogenous duration, is to simply pursue the analysis using monthly observations
on labor supply, and to correct the standard errors for the correlation within spells, Doing so yields
results which are similar to those reported below, albeit with somewhat smaller (although sti II
significant) estimated effects of UI.
                                                     10

We define spells of unemployment as beginning with the first full month that a husband is without

a job, and ending with the first full month that the husband is working and with a job, and as

containing at least one month where the husband is looking for work. 12 In doing so, we deviate

from the usual definition of unemployment by excluding any spells which include months where the

husband is with a job but is on layoff (temporary layoffs).         We do so both because wives may

respond differently to temporary and permanent layoffs, and because this type of unemplo yment has

been shown to be particularly responsive to UI generosity (Feldstein, 1978; Topel, 1983), so that

including temporary layoffs might make the interpretation of our UI results more problematic.        Our

basic results are similar when we include those spells that are temporary layoffs.

        We also focus on all job leavers, and not just job losers. This is because there is no reliable

measure of reason for separation in the SIPP.        This is unfortunate, because the AWE discussion

refers to job loss, not quits.   This issue is addressed to some extent by our exclusion of spells that

do not result in job search.     It is also addressed in our UI analysis by our use of actual UI benefits

received in some models, since only job losers can receive UI; thus, in these models, we identify

the impact on the population of interest, job losers.

        X is a set of demographic covariates: the age and education of the husband and the wife; the

race of the wife; and the number of children of ages O-1, 2-5, and 6-18.          We also control for a

number of (lagged) characteristics of the husband’s job: a 14 piece spline in his quarterly earnings,




     12Weexclude months where the husband is unemployed for part of the month from the analysis,
since it would be difficult to appropriately scale the spousal labor supply response for the share of
the month unemployed, and since many of the spells lasting less than one month may be false
transitions in the SIPP data.
                                                   11

industry, and occupation. 13 The lagged wage will be an important control for the determinants of

UI benefits, and all three factors help to control for heterogeneity across husbands who do and do

not leave their jobs.   The control variables take on their lagged value from the three months before

a given (employment or unemployment) spell begins, and are held constant for the duration of the

spell. 14 Finally, we include a full set of controls for state of residence (bj) and calendar time (we

have dummies for each year period, denoted by 7P).

        Our hours of work models include both zero and positive hours, since our goal is to measure

the total hours response.   We therefore estimate the models as Tobits, to account for the bunching

of observations at zero. For measuring the spousal response, however, we are only concerned with

the response of observed hours, and not the “latent” hours decision that is modelled by the Tobit;

we therefore report both Tobit coefficients, and the implied effect on observed hours of work. 15

It is also of interest to separate the effect of unemployment on the wife’s decision to work and the




    13The spline points are at the lst, 5th, 10th, 20th, . . . . 90th, 95th, and 99th percentiles of the
earnings distribution for the relevant sample under analysis. We deviate somewhat from previous
labor literature by not including a predicted wage for the wife. We do so because we include in our
reduced form equation all of the variables that we would use to form such a prediction, so that the
predicted wage itself would be identified solely from functional form assumptions on the prediction
equation. When we include a predicted wage as well, there is no effect on our basic results.

     14Theone exception to this approach is the wage over spells of employment. In some models,
we will regress the wife’s average work effort during spells of employment on average UI benefits
avai Iable during spells of employment. As such, it is important to control for average wages during
these spells, since (as we discuss in more detail below) wages are an important determinant of both
UI benefits and spousal labor supply. Thus, in these cases, we control for a spline in average lagged
wage during the spell, as opposed to lagged wage at the start of the spell.

     IsThe Tobit coefficient corresponds to the latent index model, and therefore measures the
marginal impact on desired hours. The implied effect on observed hours involves a transformation
of this coefficient, as described by McDonald and Moffitt (1980). The implied effect is the sum of
the effect on the participation and hours of work decisions: the change in the likelihood of working
positive hours, times average hours among those who work; and the change in hours among those
working, times the likelihood of working.
                                                   12

amount of hours conditional on work.         We therefore estimate both models of employment,        by

O~,]b     and of conditional hours of work, using a “Heckit” -type sample selection model (Heckman,

1979) to account for selection into positive hours. We have no excluded instruments that separately

identi& selection, however, so that this model is identified solely from functiona[ form assumptions.

          In Part I, we noted two problems with inferring the added worker effect from equations such

as (l).     The first is differential   tastes for work among the wives whose husbands          become

unemployed, relative to those wives whose husbands stay employed.           We have tried to correct for

observable heterogeneity by including a number of characteristics of the couple, and of the husband’s

job. An alternative, which deals with heterogeneity in tastes that is fixed over the length of the SIPP

panel, is to include couple-specific fixed effects in our models.       This fixed effects model can be

readily estimated using the Iongitud inal data available in the SIPP.

          The second is the discouraged worker effect. Previous attempts to control for the DWE have

generally relied on average area-specific unemployment       rates.     These types of controls may be

particularly problematic if women face different job opportunities than men, since variations in the

overall unemployment rate will be dominated by changes in male job opportunities. 17 We therefore

include two indicators of labor market conditions that are specific to wives: the unemployment rate

and the average wage of women with the wife’s education level in that state at that point in time.

These measures are computed from the Current Population Survey’s Merged Outgoing Rotation

Group data, the largest monthly employment micro-data set available, which allows us to precisely




    lbWe have also repeated the employment analysis using a dummy for any work during the spell,
and estimating a probit model; the AWE results are very similar and the UI effects are identical.

     17This is not a problem with the studies of Layard et al. (1980) and Lundberg (1985), who use
area-specific fixed effects. We have estimated models which include SMSA fixed effects, as well
as our state fixed effects, with little effect on the results.
                                                    13

measure these indicators at a four month frequency,




                                         Part III: AWE Results

Means

        The means of our dataset are presented in Table 1. In the first column, we present the means

for all of the spells in our sample.    In the second and third we divide these into employment spells

and unemployment spells. Finally, in the fourth and fifth columns we present information from the

first three months of the sample separately for couples where the husband will and will not become

unemployed at some point during the SIPP panel.          On average, wives work in 63% of the months

in the SIPP data. Including those who work zero hours, the average wife works slightly under 100

hours per month.    Among those that work, the average amount of work per month is 131 hours;

average earnings~our     is $7.24.     The next two columns offer only mixed support for an AWE.

Wives are actually less likely to work when their husbands are unemployed,           but conditional on

working they work more hours; overall, there is only a small change in hours.

        However, the remainder of the table also suggests the potential importance of heterogeneity.

Wives of husbands who are unemployed are less educated; husbands who are unemployed also have

much lower earnings prior to becoming unemployed,            This is further illustrated in the final hvo

columns of the table. Even in their first three months in the SIPP, when all husbands are employed,

there is a lower likelihood of employment and higher hours conditional on working for wives whose

husbands are going to become unemployed (but are not yet unemployed).           Moreover, there is also

a potentially important role for the DWE here as well.         The average female wage is lower, and

female unemployment is higher, in the places where wives of unemployed husbands live.             This is

true both at the point in time when the husbands are unemployed (comparing columns (2) and (3)),
                                                   14

and before the unemployment has occurred (comparing columns (4) and (5)).




Regression Estimates

          Our results from estimating model (1) are presented in Table 2. In the first three columns,

we do not control for heterogeneity with fixed effects. The first column reports the Tobit coefficient,

with the implied effect on observed hours in square brackets. The estimates are quite similar to what

emerged from the table of means: there is actually a negative effect of unemployment on average

hours of work and on the likelihood of work, but neither estimate is significant.    There is a positive

effect on hours of work conditional on working, but the estimated effect is small; the rise of 8.22

hours is only 5.5% of the baseline hours of work among women who are working while their

husbands are unemployed.

          The control variables generally have the expected signs. Wives of higher earning husbands

are less likely to work; the implied income effect at the mean husband earnings is -0.14 for the total

hours equation (and -0.11 for the Heckit), which is somewhat larger than the estimates in Mroz

(1987).    Labor supply rises with the education of the wife, but is non-linear with respect to the

education of the husband; wives of husbands with low or high education work fewer hours relative

to wives of husbands with average years of schooling.      Employment and hours of work also much

lower for those women with children, particularly young children.      The controls for average wages

is positive and significant; the unemployment control is negative, but it is only marginally significant

in the employment equation and insignificant elsewhere.

          In the next two columns, we move to control for time invariant heterogeneity across couples

in our sample by including fixed effects. In this case, we estimate our total hours equation by ON;

we do not estimate Heckit models here because of the inconsistency of the first step probit with fixed
                                                           15

effects. 1* The fixed effects have little effect on the estimates, suggesting that our wrong-signed

findings were not due to heterogeneity in tastes for work.

        Our results for the AWE are therefore in line with the mixed findings of the previous

literature: there is little evidence of a response in wife’s labor supply to the unemployment of the

husband.   This may be due to insufficient controls for labor market conditions, small income effects,

or even complementary leisure across spouses.              Alternatively, it may be that UI is crowding out a

potential spousal response.    We turn next to investigating this hypothesis.




                         Part IV: The Role of Unemployment Insurance

Empirical Strategy

       In order to investigate the crowdout role of UI, we restrict our analysis to spells of

unemployment.        We consider     separately       below            the potential   effects   of UI on spells   of

employ ment.19 We run regressions of the form:

(2)    Nit = ~ + ~~Xi~+ ~~UIi~+          ~~tj   +   ~~7p    +     Ci




where UIil is the amount of unemployment insurance benefits for which the husband of couple i is

eligible during unemployment spell t. If UI is crowding out any spousal response, then we would

expect the coefficient ~2<0.

       Our key regressor       is the unemployment              insurance benefits for which the individual is



    lBON estimation of the total hours model without fixed effects yielded results very similar to
the effect on observed hours from the tobit.

     19Analternative here would be to include both spells of unemployment and employment, as in
(l), and to interact the effect of UI with the unemployment indicator. But this approach would
impose a common set of coefficients on the control variables (including, most importantly, the wage
spline), which may be inappropriate for these quite different samples. Given that we are able to
obtain reasonably precise estimates separately for the unemployed and employed spells, we pursue
the more robust approach of estimating equations for these spells separately.
                                                    16

potentially eligible.   To create this variable, we have built a simulation program which models each

state’s UI system for the period 1983-1993. The basis for this program is Employment and Training

Administration (various years), which reports semi-annual information on state benefit schedules; in

addition, it was augmented by information from a number of states and from hvine             (1990).   UI

benefits are calculated as a function of the highest earnings quarter (called the “high quarter wage”,

or HQW) in the “base period”          (generally the first four of the five quarters preceding         the

unemployment spell),      Calculating benefits appropriate] y, therefore, requires at least five quarters

of wage history, which wasn’t available for most of our sample. Since we have at least one quarter

of wage information, we use husband’s earnings in the quarter before his unemployment spell began

as the HQW, and four times that amount as the base period value. For the individuals in our sample

for more than five quarters, for whom we can compute a true high-quarter wage, the correlation

between the UI benefits using the true HQW wage and the UI benefits calculated under our

simplifying assumption is 0.90.20

        There are two potential concerns with estimating equations such as (2). First, the UI benefit

for a given individual is a function of characteristics that might otherwise be correlated with the

wife’s labor supply.     For example, UI replacement rates fall with the husband’s wage (due to the

progressive nature of state benefit schedules), and the wife’s labor supply may fall as the husband’s

wages rise as well.     In order to control for this, we include the aforementioned 14-piece spline in



     201naddition, individuals must have some minimum earnings during the base period, and in some
states a certain distribution of earnings (ie. a certain amount earned outside the high quarter), to
qualify for benefits. We apply the state specific rules for minimum earnings amounts to our
estimated base period earnings, but we ignore the distribution rules. This results in 10% of the
sample being coded as ineligible. Once again, for those who are in the survey for more than 5
quarters, we can calculate eligibility exactly; the correlation between the two eligibility measures is
0.88. UI benefits were also tax subsidized before 1987 for low income couples (those with family
income below $18 ,000); we do not model this subsidy since family income is obviously endogenous
to the labor supply decision of the spouse.
                                                      17

the husband’s quarterly wage to pick up omitted effects of income on spousal labor supply .2]

           Second, the unemployment of the husband may not be exogenous to the generosity of the UI

regime in which the family resides, either through job leaving or unemployment duration.         Feldstein

(1978) and Topel (1983) find that the probability that an individual is laid off is a function of the

replacement rate, although Anderson and Meyer (1994) find an inconsistent relationship between

layoffs and benefits.     This is potentially problematic for our approach, if the wives of the men who

are laid off when replacement rates rise have different tastes for work on the margin. 22 To

minimize this problem, we do not include temporary layoffs in our sample of unemployed,              since

these are found to be the type of unemployment that is sensitive to UI benefit levels in the previous

studies.    Given our sample restrictions, we do not find a significant correlation between UI benefits

and the likelihood that a husband has a spell of unemployment during the SIPP panel, which rules

out this source of sample selection as an explanation for our findings. 23

           Finally, there is an important issue of interpretation of these results.   Since our measure of

UI is potential benefits, the estimated parameter 62 measures the effect of making a husband eligible

for one more dollar of UI benefits on the labor supply of his wife.           This is not the same as the

husband receiving one more dollar of unemployment insurance.            While our sample of husbands are



     21Since we also include dummies for state of residence and calendar year, our model is identified
only from higher order interactions of wage, state, and time, which are presumably legitimately
excluded from the female labor supply equation. We present a specification check which supports
this assumption below.

    22That is suppose that as UI rises the men who leave their jobs have especially motivated wives.
Then the av~rage labor supply response to the husband’s unemployment will appear to be larger
where UI is more generous, even if there is no legitimate AWE.

     23More precisely, we ran a probit regression on all couples where the dependent variable was
a dummy for the husband having a spell of unemployment during the SIPP, and the independent
variables are as in (2). The estimated coefficient on unemployment benefits was wrong-signed
(negative) and insignificant,
                                                     18

all monetarily eligible for UI (they have sufficiently high past earnings), they may not meet the non-

monetary eligibility requirements (they may have quit their previous jobs).      Moreover, even among

the population of men which is eligible for UI, takeup of these benefits is much less than full, as has

been documented by Blank and Card (1991), Anderson and Meyer (1994), McCall (1995), and

others.    Estimated takeup rates for UI in the literature vary.   For our SIPP sample of (UI eligible)

unemployed husbands, 56% of the spells of unemployment are associated with UI receipt.

          On the other hand, this receipt question cannot be answered by a direct regression of spousal

labor supply on UI benefits received.     The studies cited above all consistently find that takeup of UI

is endogenous to the level of UI generosity,        leading to a potential sample selection bias to the

estimates.     Furthermore,   there is likely to be considerable measurement error in the SIPP data on

UI benefits received.

          There is a natural instrumental variable for benefits received, however: potential benefits.

Potential benefits are clearly correlated with benefits received, and the working hypothesis of this

paper is that potential benefits are uncorrelated with spousal labor supply other than through the

effects of the UI system.     In addition, while potential benefits are noisily measured as well, so long

as the measurement error in our imputation is independent of the measurement error in UI benefits

received, instrumenting will correct the measurement error problem.

          Thus, we can estimate a system of equations of the form:

(3)       BENi = ~ + ~lXi + ~2UIi + ~36j + ~drp + ~i

          ~i   = ~ + ulXi + uzBENi + Uabj+ ~d7p+ ~i

where BEN is the amount of unemployment insurance received by the husband in couple i and the

other variables we defined above. Estimating this system by Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) yields

the parameter coefficient of interest, 02, which is the effect of receiving another dollar of UI on
                                                   19

spousal labor supply.

        Both the reduced form parameter from equation (2) (~z) and the 2SLS parameter from

equation (3) (uz) are of interest.   The former is most directly policy relevant, as argued by Gruber

(1994). Government policy-makers cannot directly control UI receipt, but they can control the level

of potential benefits.   So BZmeasures the relationship of direct policy interest, which is the effect

of raising UI generosity on the spousal labor supply of the potentially eligible population,    On the

other hand, U2is a measure of the structural parameter of interest for measuring how spousal labor

supply responds directly to income received.     In addition, Uzmeasures the effect on job losers only

(since only they can receive UI), mitigating the problem from having some quitters in our sample.

        An important limitation of the 2SLS estimate Uz,however, is that it might overstate the effect

of UI receipt on spousal labor supply.      This is because there may be some “option value” of the

program even for those couples where the husband does not take up benefits.      Suppose that there is

some fixed cost to taking up UI benefits; an example here would be stigma associated with receipt

(see Moffitt, 1983, for a discussion in the context of cash welfare).    This is consistent with there

being less than full takeup among those eligible for the program.   Consider now a couple where the

husband is newly unemployed and would prefer not to take up stigmatizing UI, but where there is

uncertainty about the prospects for the husband’s reemployment.     This couple may delay takeup until

it appears that the husband will be jobless for a reasonably long period of time. But in the meantime

they will account for the presence of insurance through UI in their choices, including the choice of

labor supply by the wife; that is, the wife will work less initially than she would if this contingent

option were not available, since she knows that the family can avail themselves of UI if necessary.

In this case, al will overstate the effect of UI on those actually taking up benefits, since the

instrument is correlated with the labor supply decisions of those not taking up, and thus negatively
                                                    20

correlated with the error term in the 2SN      equation.x

          In theory, this problem could be surmounted with a second instrument which could be used

to model selection into takeup of UI. We were unable to find such an instrument, however.            It is

worth noting that this is a general problem with the literature on UI and other social insurance

programs; analysts either estimate the reduced form or 2SN coefficients, but are unable to measure

precisely the option value of these programs on those who do not take them up.




Results

          The basic results of our UI reduced form regressions are presented in Table 3. We present

the coefficient of interest from regressions that include all of the covariates shown in Table 2 (and

discussed in the footnote to that table). Our sample consists of one observation for each of the 2560

spells of unemployment      for which the husband is eligible for UI.      29% of our sample is repeat

spells; correcting the standard errors for multiple observations       on the same individual had little

effect.   In interpreting these results, it is important to keep in mind that we are measuring average

hours of work per month, while potential (and actual) UI benefits are measured per week.            Thus,

the coefficients must be divided by 4.3, the average weeks per month in our SIPP sample, for

interpretation.

          As the first panel shows, there is a sizeable and significant negative effect of increases in UI




     24More specifically, our goal here is to measure the effect of the treatment (UI) on the treated
(recipients). However, we cannot do so, because there is an effect on the non-treated (potential
recipients who do not take up) as well. Our IV approach is essentially comparing the labor supply
of wives in more and less generous UI systems, relative to the amount of benefits actually received.
Both the true labor supply response to UI receipt and the option value among non-recipients will
cause labor supply to be lower for those groups with higher UI benefits. The IV estimate, however,
attributes the difference between the groups solelv to recei~t, thereby overestimating the direct impact
of receipt.
                                                    21

generosity on spousal labor supply.     For each $100 in benefits per week ($430 per month), wives

work 23.7 fewer hours per month (using the implied effect on observed hours from the Tobit

equation).   The results also suggest that UI crowds out spousal labor supply both along the

employment and the hours of work margins.         The employment coefficient implies that $100 in UI

benefits per week would lower the likelihood that wives work by 12.7%.        And the Heckit coefficient

indicates that conditional on work wives work 15 fewer hours per month for each $100 in benefits

per week, although this estimate is not significant.

        One means of assessing the total crowdout effect of the UI program is to measure our

predictions for spousal labor supply in the absence of UI. Among the unemployed, the average wife

works 97 hours per month; this figure differs slightly from Table 1 since our sample here excludes

those ineligible for UI. Our Tobit model of total hours of work predicts that in the absence of UI

she would work 127 hours per month. That is, hours of work would be roughly 30% higher during

the husband’s spell of unemployment if there were no UI benefits.        Similarly, the non-employment

rate of wives with unemployed husbands would drop by almost 45% if UI benefits were set to zero.

Thus, it appears that the presence of UI is a major reason for the lack of an added worker response

that was measured in Part III.

        An alternative means of interpreting this finding is to ask how much of the loss in the

husband’s earnings would be made up by increased spousal labor supply if there were no UI. We

can do so by assuming that wives who go to work or increase their hours earn the average hourly

wage rate for current working wives of unemployed husbands.            Under this assumption, our total

hours estimate implies that wives would make up 14% of the husband’s lost earnings.          While much

larger than the zero effect that is implied by our AWE regressions, this figure is still relatively small.

That is, while UI is crowding out a substantial AWE, given that UI replaces only a share of the
                                                 22

workers income and that wives earn much less than their husbands, the associated increase in spousal

labor supply from zeroing out UI benefits only replaces a small part of the lost family income.

       As noted above, from a behavioral perspective it is of more interest to examine the response

of wives as a function of the UI benefits received by their husbands.        An upper bound on this

response can be estimated by the 2S~    system (3). These results are presented in the next panel of

Table 3. They indicate that for each dollw of UI received per week, wives are work 0.45 fewer

hours per month, and they are 0.24% less likely to work.

       A natural means of interpreting these findings is in terms of the direct financial crowdout of

UI. That is, for each dollar received by the family, how much less does the wife earn? Once again

making our average earnings assumption, our total hours estimates show that wives earn 68 cents

less for each dollar of UI received. 25 Recall that this is an upper bound on the extent of crowdout,

due to the option value argument described above; the true amount of crowdout lies between 36 cents

(from our reduced form estimate) and 68 cents.        In either case, the results once again suggest a

critical crowd out role for UI.

       This estimate also implies quite a large income effect for spouses of unemployed husbands.

We find that for each dollar of income per week provided by the UI system, wives work 0.24 fewer

hours per month; for each dollar of income received, they work 0.45 fewer hours.       At the average

non-wife monthly income during unemployment spells ($938.60), the implied income elasticity of

labor supply for wives is between -0.53 (lower bound from reduced form) and -1 (upper bound from

2SM estimate). Both of these estimates are much larger than the income effects estimated in Mroz’s

(1987) careful study of female labor supply, and the income effects implied by the coefficients on



    250ne means of assessing the validity of our average earnings assumption is to use earnings per
month in place of hours per month as our dependent variable. Doing so yields a implied crowdout
of 65%, quite close to our implied crowdout using the average earnings assumption.
                                                    23

husband’s income in our AWE regressions; they are at the upper end of the range of elasticities

surveyed by K illingswofi     and Heckman (1986). This may reflect the fact that couples are liquidity

constrained during periods of unemployment, a point to which we return below.




Specl~cation Check: EJects on Wives of Employed Hubands

       Our results thus far have assumed that, conditional on our controls and sample selection

criteria, we are measuring a causal effect of UI on spousal labor supply through changes in the

income of the husband.      This may not be true for at least two reasons.   First, UI benefit differences

may not be exogenous to the labor supply of wives, even after conditioning on our rich set of

controls for individual characteristics and labor market conditions.     For example, it is possible that

UI benefits setting responds to changes in the taste for work within states over time in a manner that

is not captured by our control set. Second, own potential UI benefits may have a direct effect on

the labor supply of wives, beyond the indirect effect through their husbands’ benefits. For example,

if own UI generosity increases do induce job separations for wives, then there would be a spurious

(from our perspective) negative correlation between UI benefits and spousal labor supply.              An

alternative view, promoted by Mofiensen (1977), is that there is a UI “entitlement” effect, whereby

increases in UI generosity increase the labor supply of workers who want to quali~ for this generous

benefit; this would bias against our findings.zc

        Both of these arguments suggest that our estimated effect maybe biased by omitted variables.

But one way to test for their importance is to examine the effect of UI on a control group for whom

these spurious effects will operate, but our true effects will not: wives of employed husbands.      Since




    *cThis view, of course, presumes that compensating wage differentials do not offset any increases
in potential UI benefits from increased work effort.
                                                   24

these husbands are not receiving UI, there should be no income effect on their wives.z’ But, if UI

is correlated with spousal labor supply through these other (spurious) channels, then there will be

an important effect on these wives’ work decisions.

        Table 4 reestimates our equations for spells of employment of the husband.       As in Table 3

(and for Table 5 as well), we only report the coefficients of interest from regressions that include

all of the other regressors in Table 2. The results indicate that there is only a small effect of UI on

the wives of husbands who remain employed: each $100 in UI benefits per week raises hours of

work by 4.6 per month (the implied effect on observed hours from the Tobit estimate, which is in

square brackets).   The effect on propensity to work is insignificant.   These effects are much smaller

than the comparable effects on the unemployed, implying that our results for the unemployed do not

arise simply through some source of spurious identification.2a




     27Except, of course, through life cycle effects of UI outside of the unemployment       spell.   We
return to this point below.

   *gTheestimates for total hours and employment are statistically significantly different across the
employed and unemployed spells samples.
                                                   25

                                Part V: Extensions and Implications

        The results thus far have demonstrated that UI is crowding out spousal labor supply responses

to the unemployment     of their husbands,   and that this crowdout is substantial.     But the natural

variation in income during unemployment         spells that is provided by the UI system offers an

opportunity for learning much more about family labor supply decision-making.         In this section, we

explore a number of additional questions about how spousal labor supply decisions are made.




Life Cycle E#ects of UI

        Even though the effect of UI on wives of employed husbands is much smaller than the effect

on wives of unemployed husbands, the fact that there is even a small effect may reflect an additional

phenomena: life cycle effects of UI.     In a life cycle model, the possibility of receiving UI during

unemployment spells should influence the wife’s labor supply over all periods, not just periods of

unemployment.    This is because, as highlighted by the model of Heckman and MaCurdy (1980), UI

is only transitory income, and thereby should not effect the intertemporal allocation of labor supply.

This would suggest a small effect on average during spells of employment, which is exactly what

is found in the first panel of Table 4. But this finding cannot distinguish life cycle effects of UI from

some effect through the alternative (spurious) channels described above.

        The presence of a life cycle response to UI can be assessed, however, by using information

on the likelihood that husbands become unemployed.          If individuals have a higher likelihood of

collecting UI, then there will be a larger income effect for that couple from increases in UI

generosi~.   As such, in a life cycle model, more generous UI will induce less work at all times for

wives of husbands with the greatest risk of unemployment.       On the other hand, for couples where

the husband has only a low risk of unemployment, more generous UI will have little effect on their
life cycle labor supply decisionrnaking.

        In the next panel of Table 4, we therefore split the sample of employed months based on the

predicted likelihood that the husband has a spell of unemployment.       We first estimate a regression

model of the likelihood that a husband has a spell of unemployment over the duration of the SIPP

panel as a function of his initial job characteristics. 29 We then apply these coefficients to our

sample of employed spells to form a predicted risk measure.        We then split this employed sample

into those who are above the average predicted risk and below the average predicted risk, and run

separate regressions of the form of equation (2) within each subsample.

        The results are reported in the next panel of Table 4.         In all three columns, the point

estimates are consistent with there being a life cycle response to UI, The effect of UI on those below

the average predicted risk level is small and insignificant, while the effect on those above this level

is larger; the high risk coefficient is significant for total hours and the hours Heckit, although in no

case is the difference between the high and low risk coefficients significant.   Thus, there is evidence

that couples are responding to UI generosity not only during the unemployment of husbands, but

over spells of employment as well.




How Well Do tiuples Smoth Spowal Labor Supply?

        The results thus far suggest that there are effects of the UI system both during and outside

of spells of unemployment.     But the relative magnitudes of the coefficients suggest that at least some

couples are unable to perfectly smooth spousal labor supply over the life cycle, perhaps due to

liquidity constraints.   That is, in a life cycle model with perfect capital markets, there would be an



    29The regression model includes the usual set of covariates from our AWE regressions, along
with interactions of our industry and occupation dummies to increase the precision of our prediction.
Our second stage regression then includes these interactions as well.
                                                  27

equal effect of UI during spells of employment and unemployment.       There may still be an AWE due

to substitutability of leisure, but the transitory income provided by UI should have no impact on the

intertemporal allocation of labor supply .30 If families are otherwise unable to smooth consumption,

however, UI benefits will have a differentially large impact during unemployment spells.         This is

what we appear to find, comparing the results for unemployed spells (Table 3) to our results for

employed spells (Table 4).

        A firther prediction of the life cycle model of labor supply with liquidity constraints is that

the differential between the effect of UI during employed and unemployed spells will fall as the

underlying risk of unemployment rises. Consider two couples, one of which (couple A) has a 100%

chance of having an unemployment spell over a two year period, and one of which (couple B) has

a 10% chance.    Under this scenario, there will be a much larger spousal labor supply response to

UI for couple A than for couple B, since UI increases represent a larger expected income flow.

Moreover,   if there are perfect capital markets, then for both couples the response will be equal

during months of employment and unemployment,          since UI is just a source of transitory income so

that there are no intertemporal effects.   That is, if couple B should happen to become unemployed

in a low UI regime, they will just borrow to smooth consumption during their spell, rather than

having the spouse suddenly work more.

        Now suppose that there are imperfect capital markets, so that couples cannot borrow during

spells of unemployment.      Even in this world, couple A will smooth the impact of UI over the life

cycle through savings, since UI represents a certain income stream.       But, for couple B, savings is

an imperfect smoothing device, and if they are unable to borrow or otherwise purchase insurance,



     30There could be some small differential effect of UI during unemployment spells, to the extent
that the unemployment spells convey information about future unemployment prospects; but, since
UI is time limited and therefore small relative to lifetime income, this effect should be second order.
                                                        28

there will be a differential spousal labor supply response to UI during the spell of unemployment

itself.   That is, UI will have a larger impact during unemployment spells than during employment

spells for this low risk group.   Therefore, there is an additional testable implication of the imperfect

capital markets view: the differential response of spouses to UI during spells of unemployment

should be larger for low risk than for high risk couples.

          We test this supposition in the final panel of Table 4, by presenting additional results for our

sample of unemployed spells, split by predicted risk in parallel fashion to the second panel (using

the same cutoffs for high and low risk).     Indeed, comparing the coefficients in the second and third

panels of Table 4, for those in the high risk group there is a relatively small additional effect of UI

during unemployment spells: one hundred dollars of UI per week lowers hours per month by 7.3

while the husband is employed, and by 16 while he is unemployed.            But for the low risk group, there

is a striking difference between employment and unemployment: each $100 increment to UI results

in only a 0.1 hours/month      reduction in work during employment spells, but a 34.2 hours/month

reduction during unemployment spells. Thus, families in this group do not appear to be smoothing

the wife’s labor supply over the life cycle; instead, there is a large differential response to UI

benefits during the unemployment        spell itself.        This suggests that these families are liquidity

constrained during unemployment spells.




Presence of Young ChiUren

          A critical element in labor supply decision-making           for couples is family structure.    In

particular, the presence of young children may have an important effect on the responses of wives

to the income flows from UI. As discussed in Killingsworth and Heckman (1986), it is likely that

wives will respond more to the state-contingent stream of UI income if there are small children
                                                   29

present.     In the context of a simple static model of the allocation of time, the elastici~ of labor

supply of wives rises with their value in home production and falls with their net wage. 31 So long

as women are in charge of child care, their value in home production will be highest when there are

small children in the household.    And the presence of children means that the wife’s work will imply

associated child care costs, lowering her net wage.       Thus, a prediction of this model is that the

elasticity of response to income flows during unemployment will be highest when there are small

children present.    Moreover, having children in the household may increase the responsiveness of

labor supply to family income because family consumption is less flexible with respect to variations

in income (due to the fixed consumption needs that are tied to children), so that leisure must be more

flexible (Mincer, 1962).

           In Table 5, we assess how the effect of UI varies with the presence of children, by freeing

up our UI coefficient by whether there is a child less than 6 in the household.       In fact, there is a

much stronger crowdout effect of UI in households with a small child. According to the total hours

equations, households without a child, each $100 in UI income per week results in 18.8 fewer hours

of work per month; but in those with a small child, each $100 of UI per week results in 31.5 fewer

hours, an effect that is over 50% larger.    In fact, the main effect of having a young child present is

zero for this sample, in contrast to the large negative effect for the full sample in the AWE



     31Consider a family consisting of two persons, m and f, with utility U = Z, where Z is a
consumption good produced according to the production function Z= L~~bC1-”, Li is the hours of
leisure of family member i, and C is a consumer good. The family maximizes their utility subject
to C = R + w~H~ + wfHf, where R is exogenous income, wi is the net hourly wage for person i,
and Hi = T - Li is hours of work (T is total time available). Differentiating the first order condition
for family member f with respect to non-wage income R, one obtains: 6Lf/6R = a/w~. So the
response of the wife’s leisure (and thus her labor supply) to income changes will rise with a, her
relative value in home production, and fall with w~, her net hourly wage. It is important to
emphasize that the level of labor supply falls with a, which is consistent with the large and significant
negative coefficients on the presence of small children in Table 2. But, conditional on a given level
of labor supply, the elasticity of labor supply rises with a.
                                                     30

regressions; that is, on average, families with small children where the head is unemployed appear

no longer able to substitute the home production of the wife for lower consumption by the fami Iy.

Thus, our findings are consistent with the notion that income variations are a more important

determinant of women’s labor supply when there are small children present.32




                                          Part VI: Conclusions

         In the absence of private financial markets for insuring unemployment, a natural presumption

is that other forms of insurance will arise to smooth the family’s consumption over this adverse

shock.    One source of such insurance         is spousal labor supply.      But the strong theoretical

presumptions    in favor of an Added Worker Effect have been surprisingly refuted by much of the

previous literature on this topic, as well as by our own estimates using more recent data.        In this

paper, we suggest that a major reason for the inability of previous research to measure an AWE has

been the presence of public insurance for unemployment spells through the UI program,        We provide

evidence to support this contention; our estimates suggest that UI is significantly crowding out the

labor supply of the wives of unemployed husbands.

         While we find a sizeable crowdout, our estimates also suggest that even in the absence of UI

there would still be a large reduction in family income from the unemployment of the husband.

Thus, spousal labor supply only provides at best partial insurance against the income risk from

unemployment.     This partial insurance may be due to the other forces counteracting the AWE, such

as the DWE.     Alternatively,   it may simply reflect the fact that given the relatively low earnings of




    32These findings are not simply the result of an omitted interaction with having small children;
when we estimate separate equations for those with and without small children (paral Ieling the second
and third panels of Table 4), the results are somewhat stronger, although the standard errors rise as
well.
                                                   31

wives compared to their husbands, it is difficult to use this mechanism to substantially replace the

reduction in family income from the husband’s unemployment.

       Our estimated response to UI is quite large; the income effects implied by our results are

much larger than those estimated in much of the previous literature on female labor supply.         This

large estimated income sensitivity may arise from the fact that households are liquidity constrained

and have fixed consumption needs during unemployment spells. This would be consistent with our

finding that the effect of UI is larger when young children are present.   It is also consistent with our

result that families appear unable to smooth the spousal labor supply response to UI over the life

cycle; this is a natural outcome in a model where liquidity constraints prevent couples from

intertemporall y optimizing their labor supply patterns.    And it is consistent with the evidence in

Gruber (1994), who finds a significant consumption         smoothing effect of UI.33 An interesting

direction in which to extend this research would therefore be to consider the interaction of spousal

labor supply witi    indicators of the ability of couples to smooth their consumption,          such as

accumulated assets .34

        It is also interesting to consider our findings in the context of recent studies of the impact of

female labor supply on income inequality.     Juhn, Murphy and Topel (1991) and Juhn and Murphy

(1996) find that, despite a secular fall in the employment and earnings of those men at the bottom

of the income distribution since the early 1970s, the labor supply of their wives has increased much

less Wan the labor supply of wives of husbands higher up the income distribution.        In this context,




    33The results of that analysis are not inconsistent with the crowdout of spousal labor supply that
we find here, in that the measured effect in Gruber (1994) is relatively small (with each $1 in
increased UI benefits leading approximately to a 27 cent consumption increase).

    34This type of analysis will be difficult, of course, since the choice of asset levels and labor
supply should be model led simultaneously.
                                                    32

our findings suggest that spousal labor supply may be playing quite different roles as short run

insurance against unemployment versus long run insurance against changes in permanent earnings

prospects.      On the other hand, the findings of these other papers may reflect the fact that the

opportunities    for the wives of low skilled men (who are often themselves       low skilled) have

deteriorated as well; also, changes in income taxation over this period have given the largest labor

supply incentives to wives of high earners (Eissa, 1995).    Considering further the use of spousal

labor supply as insurance against different types of long run and short run income risk is an

important priority for future work on this topic.

        Finally, we have not considered the welfare implications of our findings. Our results suggest

that public insurance through UI is substantially crowding out a private insurance mechanism.     But

this mechanism is not a costless one. In particular, we have not measured the loss n family utility

from increases in spousal labor supply to compensate for reductions in UI benefits     That is, when

UI generosi~ is reduced the family is “buying” more insurance by reducing the leisure of the spouse,

and this is not reflected in our estimates.   A welfare computation of the effects of UI generosity

changes must account for the family utility reduction from this increase in spousal labor supply.
                                               33

                                           References

Anderson, Patricia M., and Bruce D. Meyer (1994). “The Effects of Unemployment Insurance
       Taxes and Benefits on Layoffs Using Firm and Individual Data. ” NBER Working Paper
       #4960.

Ashenfelter, Orley (1980). “Unemployment as Disequilibrium     in a Model of Aggregate Labor
       Supply, ” Econometrics, 48, 547-564,

Blank, Rebecca and David Card (1991). “Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment:
       Is There an Explanation?, ” Quarter~ Journal of Economics, 106, 1157-1190.

Cain, G.G. (1966). Married Women in the Labor Force: An Economic Analysis.              Chicago:
       University of Chicago Press.

Dynarski, Mark and Steven M. Sheffrin. (1987).      “Consumption and Unemployment”      Quarterly
       Jourrnal of Economics, 104, 411-428.

Eissa, Nada (1995). “Taxation and the Labor Supply of Married Women: The Tax Reform Act of
        1986 as a Natural Experiment”. NBER Working Paper #5023.

Employment and Training Administration (various years).  “Significant Provisions of State
      Unemployment Insurance Laws”. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Department of Labor.

Engen, Eric, and Jonathan Gruber (1995).   “Unemployment Insurance and Precautionary Savings, ”
       NBER Working Paper #5252.

Feldstein, Martin (1974).       “Social Security, Induced Retirement,   and Aggregate     Capital
         Accumulation, ” Journal of Political Economy, 82, 905-926.

Feldstein, Martin (1978).   “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance        on Temporary     Layoff
         Unemployment”, American Economic Review, 68, 191-222.

Fishback, Price V., and Shawn E. Kantor (1995). “Did Workers Pay for the Passage of Workers’
        Compensation Laws?, ” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 110, 713-742.

Gruber, Jonathan (1994). “The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment Insurance. ”
       NBER Working Paper #4750.

Heckman, James J. (1979).   “Sample Selection Bias as a Specification Error, ” Econometrics, 47,
       153-162.

Heckman, James J. and Thomas E MaCurdy (1980). “A Life Cycle Model of Female Labor
      Supply, ” Review of Economic Studies, 47, 47-74.
                                               34

Heckman, James J. and Thomas E MaCurdy (1982). “Corrigendum on a A Life Cycle Model of
      Female Labor Supply, ” Review of Economic Studies, 49, 659-660.

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes (1994). “Precautionary Saving and
       Social Insurance, ” Journal of Polilical Economy, 103, 360-399.

Juhn, Chinhui, and Kevin M. Murphy (1996). “Wage Inequality and Family Labor Supply”. NBER
       Working Paper #5459.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel (1991). “Why Has the Natural Rate of
       Unemployment Increased Over Time?, ” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 75-142.

Killingsworth,  Mark R. and James J. Heckman (1986). “Female Labor Supply: A Survey, ” in
        Handbook of Labor Economics, Volume I, O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds. Amsterdam:
        Elsevier Science Publishers BV.

Kniesner, Thomas J. (1976). “An Indirect Test of Complementarity      in a Family Labor Supply
       Model, ” Econometrics, 44, 651-669.

Layard, R., M. Bmon,      and A. Zabalza (1980). “Married Women’s Participation     and Hours, ”
        Economics, 47, 51-72.

Levine, Phillip B. (1990). “Unemployment Insurance Benefit and Tax Schedules,       1978-1987”.
       Mimeo, Princeton University.

Lundberg, Shelly (1985). “The Added Worker Effect, ” Journal of Labor Economics, 3, 11-37.

Maloney, Tim (1991). “Unobserved Variables and the Elusive Added Worker Effect, ” Economics,
       58, 173-87.

Maloney, Tim (1987). “Employment Constraints and the Labor Supply of Married Women: A
       Reexamination of the Added Worker Effect, ” me Journal of Human Resources, 22, 51-61.

McCall, Brian (1995).   “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels on Recipiency, ”
       Journal of Business and Economics Statistics, 13, 189-198.

McDonald, J. and Robert Moffitt (1980).   “The Uses of Tobit Analysis, ” Review of Economics and
       Statistics, 62, 318-321.

Meyer, Bruce D. (1990). “Unemployment Insurance and Unemployment Spells. ” Econometrics, 58,
       757-782.

Mincer, Jacob (1962). “Labor Force Participation of Married Women: A Study of Labor Supply, ”
       in Aspects o~Labor Economics. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press, 63-97.
                                                        35

Mincer,    Jacob (1966).        “Labor Force Participation    and Unemployment, ” in Prosperi~ and
          Unemployment, R.A. Gordon and M.S. Gordon, eds. New York: Wiley.

Mitchell, Olivia S. (1979). “The Cyclical Responsiveness of Married Female’s Labor Supply:
        Added and Discouraged Worker Effects, ” XRRAAnnual Proceedings, 32, 251-257.

Moffitt, Robert (1983). “An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma, ” American Economic Review, 73,
         1023-1035.

Mortensen,      Dale (1977).     “Unemployment Insurance and Job Search Decisions, ” Zndu.strialand
          Labor Relatiom Review, 30, 505-517.

Mroz, Thomas A. (1987). “The Sensitivity of an Empirical Model of Married Women’s Hours of
      Work to Economic and Statistical Assumptions, ” Econometrics, 55, 765-799.

Topel, Robert (1983).      “On Layoffs and Unemployment Insurance”, American Economic Review,
          73, 541-559.

Topel, Robert (1984).          “Equilibrium Earnings,    Turnover and Unemployment:   New Evidence, ”
          Journal of Labor Economics, 2, 500-522.

Viscusi, W. Kip, and Michael J. Moore (1987). “Workers’ Compensation: Wage Effects, Benefit
        Inadequacies, and the Value of Health bsses, “ Review of Economics and Statistics, 69,249-
          61.

Wachter, Michael L. (1974).        “A New Approach to the Equilbirium Labour Force, ” Economics, 35-
       51.

White, Halbert (1984). Asymptotic ~eoryfor         Econometricians. Orlando, Florida: Academic Press.
                                                                    36

                                                         Table 1: M-s

                                                        All Months                                          First 3 Months

                                          (1)               (2)                   (3)                  (4)                  (5)
                                       Everyone           Husband              Husband              Husband              Husband
                                                         Employed              Unempl.              No Spell             Has Spell

        Wife Employed                     .634               .634                    .624              .633                  .619
                                         (.437)            (.436)                   (.467)           (.475)                (.479)

     Wife’s Monthly Houm                  98.0              98.0                     98.9             98.1                  97.6
         (including o’s)                 (77.3)            (77. 1)                  (82.7)           (84.8)                (84.8)

     Wife’s Monthly     Hours             131.4             130.8                    149.5            151.5                 154.2
            (if >0)                      (60.2)            (60.3)                   (52.6)           (52.4)                (51,3)

 Wife’s Hourly Earnings                   7.24              7.25                     6.78             7.49                  6.73
             (>0)                        (4.02)            (4.01)                   (4.21)           (4.61)                (4.26)

          Wife’s Age                     36,5               36.4                    36.8              36.3                  35.9
                                         (7.1)              (7.0)                   (7.0)             (7,0)                 (7.2)

        Husband’s     Age                38.5               38.5                    39.0              38.3                  38.1
                                         (7.3)              (7.3)                   (7.4)             (7.2)                 (7.5)

        Wife’s Years of                   13.1               13.1                    12.4              13.2                  12.3
           Education                     (2.6)              (2.6)                   (2,8)             (2.6)                 (2.8)

       Husband’s Years                    13.5               13.5                    12.3              13.7                  12.3
         of Education                    (2.9)              (2.9)                   (3,1)             (2.9)                 (3.1)

          Wife White                      .897              .898                     .850             .903                   .864

      Kids Under 2 Yrs                    .150              .151                     .129             .165                  .147
                                        (.378)             (.379)                   (.352)           (.396)                (.372)

         Kids 2-5 Yrs                     .326              .326                     .322             .329                  .333
                                        (.583)             (.583)                   (.580)           (.584)                (.590)

         Kid 6-18 Yrs                    .963               .960                     1.04             .947                  .999
                                        (1.06)             (1.06)                   (1.10)           (1.05)                (1.10)

     Husband’s Wkly Wage                  474               479                      336               497                   377
            hst Qtr                      (252)             (251)                    (242)             (278)                 (236)

      UI W&kly      Benefits               152               153                     120               154                    141
                                          (41)              (40)                     (49)             (41)                   (48)

       Avg Fernale Wg                    7.19               7.19                     7.10             7.26                  6.96
         by St/Ed/Yr                    (1.72)             (1.73)                   (1.61)           (1.71)                (1.64)

     Avg Female Unem by                  .049                .049                     .055             .049                 .055
           St/Ed/Yr                     (.030)             (.030)                   (.034)           (.030)                (.035)

         Observations                   33169              30294                    2875             21018                  4176
W:       Based on authors’      tabulations   of SIPP data described     in text.     Standard deviations     in parentheses.
                                           37

                           Table 2: Basic AWE Regressions

                  (1)            (2)             (3)         (4)       (5)
                 Hours         Employed         Hours       Hours    Employed
                 Tobit                          Heckit      OLS
  Husband         -3.02          -.012           8.22        -1.79    -.013
 Unemployed       (3.15)         (.014)         (2.43)      (1.15)    (.007)
                 [-2.42]
  Wife’s Age      5.57            .025          3.00         5.13      .061
                 (1.08)          (.005)         (.81)       (2.72)    (.016)
 Wife’s Agez     -.082            -.0003        -.037       -.073     -.001
                 (.014)          (.0001)        (.011)      (.036)    (.000)
Husband’s Age     .150            .001          1.31         3.68     -.017
                 (1.05)          (.005)         (.75)       (2.65)    (.016)
Husband’s Age2   -.006            -.0000        -.015       -.039      .0003
                 (.013)          (.0001)        (.009)      (.034)    (.0002)
 Wife White      -18.5           -.061          -8.95       -11.8     -.043
                 (1.8)           (.008)         (1.55)      (5.5)     (.032)
    Wife’s       32.3             .139          10.4        13.3       .091
  Education:     (2.0)           (.009)         (2.6)       (4.3)     (.025)
    12 Yrs
   13-15 Yrs     44.0             .196          13,3         5.76      ,069
                 (2,5)           (.011)         (3.4)       (5.20)    (.031)
   16+ Yrs       68.0             .277          28.7        12.1       .053
                 (2.7)           (.012)         (4.3)       (6.1)     (.036)
  Husband’s      -1.02            .002          -1.16       -3.12      .022
  Education:     (1,88)          (.008)         (1.35)      (4.32)    (.025)
    12 Yrs
   13-15 Yrs      .308            .007           .390       -4.80     -.015
                 (2.16)          (.009)         (1.54)      (5.23)    (.031)
   16+ Yrs       -8.74           -.026           -5.45       1.04      .031
                 (2.42)          (.011)         (1.77)      (5.84)    (.034)
  #of Kids:      -46.7           -.177          -18.1        -19.4    -.123
   O-1 Yrs       (1.5)           (.006)         (3.1)       (2.14)    (.013)
   2-5 Yrs       -35.3           -.128          -18.1        -18.1    -.107
                 (1.0)           (.004)         (2.0)       (1.88)    (.01 1)
   6-18 Yrs      -9.51           -.029          -7.61        -10.1    -.044
                 (.56)           (.002)         (.50)       (1,38)    (.008)
                                                   38

                            Table 2: Basic AWE Regressions, Continued

                          (1)           (2)              (3)               (4)            (5)
                      Hours Tobit     Employed          Hours             Hours         Employed
                                                        Heckit            OLS
  Female Unemp.          -32.4           -.176           4.88              -35.4          -.063
                         (23.5)          (. 102)         (17.3)           (21.8)          (.128)
   Avg. Female            1.20            .003           1.02             1.79             .009
      Wage               (.51)           (.002)          (.36)            (.70)           (.004)
  Fixed Effects?          No              No              No               Yes             Yes
  Number of Obs          33169          33169           24197             33169           33169

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also include spline in husband’s quarterly earnings,
dummies for husband’s industry/occupation, and state and year dummies.
                                                    39

                            Table 3: Does UI Crowd Out the AWE?

                                          (1)                 (2)                  (3)
                                         Hours              Employed              Hours
                                         Tobit                                    Heckit
                                        Reduced Form


      Potential UI Benefits               -0.325              -0.127              -0.149
                                         (0.131)             (0.051)              (0.095)
    Effect on Observed Hours             -0.237
              Mean                        97.3                 .618                148.6
        Implied Effect at                 126.9                .789                168.6
            UI=O
                                             2SLS


      UI Benefih Received                -.623               -0.238               -0.353
                                         (.251)              (0.096)              (0.225)


   Effect on Observed Hours               -.454
         Number of Obs                    2560                2560                 1667

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors on employment dummy are
multiplied by 100. Regressions include all of covariates listed in Table 2, as well as spline in husband’s
quarterly earnings, dummies for husband’s industry/occupation, and state and year dummies,
                                                    40



               Table 4: Extension - Employed Sample and Predicted Risk

                                           (1)              (2)                 (3)
                                          Hours           Employed             Hours
                                          Tobit                                Heckit

                                    Employed Sample


       Potential UI Benefits              -0.057            -0.011             -0.046
                                         (0.033)            (0.015)            (0.024)
                                         [-0.046]
          Number of Obs                   30056              30056             22153

                        Employed Sample - Cut by Predicted Risk


       Potential UI Benefits-              -.002              .009             -.009
             Low Risk                     (.057)             (.021)            (.034)
                                          [-.001]
        Potential Benefits-                -.091             -.037             -.093
            High Risk                     (.045)             (.023)            (.039)
                                          [-.073]
         Number of Obs                    17633,            17633,             13729,
      cow Risk, High Risk)                12423             12423              8846

                       Unemployed Sample- Cut by Predicted Risk


      Potential UI Benefits-               -,506            -.184              -.065
            Low Risk                      (.223)            (.094)             (.179)
                                          [-.342]
        Potential Benefits-                -.221            -.080              -.151
            High Risk                     (. 176)           (.070)             (.115)
                                          [-.160]
         Number of Obs                     899,              899,               547,
      (Low Risk, High Risk)                1661              1661               1036

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors on employment dummy are
multiplied by 100. Regressions include all of covariates listed in Table 2, as well as spline in husband’s
quarterly earnings, dummies for husband’s industry *occupation, and state and year dummies.
                                                   41

            Table 5: Extension - Effects of Having Young Child Present

                                    (1)                (2)                  (3)
                                   Hours             Employed              Hours
                                   Tobit                                   Heckit


        UI Benefits                -0.258               -0.105            -0.141
                                  (0.137)               (0.053)           (0.091)
                                  [-0.188]
        Child <2                    4.46                4.041               1.68
                                   (14.9)               (0.058)            (8.72)
                                   [-2.23]
       UI Benefits*                -0.255               -0.078            -0.129
        Child < 2                 (0.101)               (0.039)           (0.077)
                                  [-0.127]
      Number of Obs                2560                  2560               1667

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Coefficients and standard errors on employment dummy are
multiplied by 100. Regressions include all of covariates listed in Table 2, as well as spline in husband’s
quarterly earnings, dummies for husband’s industry/occupation, and state and year dummies.
