                             NBER WOR~G          PAPER SERIES




                       THE WEALTH OF COHORTS: RETIREMENT
                            SAVING AND THE CHANGING
                           ASSETS OF OLDER AMERICANS




                                       Steven F. Venti
                                       David A. Wise




                                     Working Paper 5609




                    NATIONAL     BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996




Funding was provided by the National Institute on Aging through grant number PO1-AG05842
and by the Hoover Institution. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Aging and
Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Steven F. Venti and David A. Wise. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                          NBER Working Paper 5609
                                                                                        June 1996


                            THE WEALTH OF COHORTS: RETIREMENT
                                 SAVING AND THE CHANGING
                                ASSETS OF OLDER AMERICANS


                                              ABSTRACT



          Personal retirement accounts are becoming an increasingly important form of retirement

saving.     Using data from the Survey of Income and Program Participation,        the paper considers

the effect of this change on the assets of recent retirees and persons who are approaching

retirement.     Much of the analysis is based on comparisons       of younger and older cohorts with

different lengths of exposure to personal retirement saving programs.        The findings suggest that

personal retirement saving has already added substantially to the personal financial assets of older

families.     Projections imply that the personal financial assets of the cohort that will attain age 76

in 28 years will be almost twice as large as the personal financial assets of the cohort that

attained age 76 in 1991. The results indicate also that to date there has been little replacement

of employer-provided       pension saving with personal retirement saving.     Together with evidence

that personal financial saving is unrelated to changes in home equity, the results suggest that

personal retirement saving will lead to an important increase in the overall wealth of the elderly.




Steven F. Venti                                          David A. Wise
Department of Economics                                  Kennedy School of Government
Dartmouth College                                        Harvard University
Hanover, NH 03755                                        Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                 and NBER
       Arnericw are changing the way they save for retirement. Contributions to personal saving

accounts are becoming an increasingly large proportion of retirement saving while contributions

to traditioml employer-provided pension plans are declining. The proportion of total contributions

awounted for by IRAs, 401(k), and Keogh plans increased from about 7 to over 50 percent during

the 1980s. We consider the effect that this change has had on the assets of recent retirees and on

persons on the eve of retirement. We fmd that contributions to personal plans have already added

appreciably to the persoml retirement assets of older Americans and, by implication, that the

effect is likely to be much larger in the future.

       The paper emphasizes the changing assets of older Americans. The change has been fieled

by the rising popularity of persoml retirement saving and thus to evaluate its implications for the

financial status of the elderly it is necessary to understand the saving effect of these programs.

In a series of earlier papers we considered the saving effects of ~s.1      Venti and Wise [1992]

introduced amlysis based on comparison of “like families, ” a version of the cohort analysis

structure used in this paper. Poterba, Venti, and Wise [1994, 1995a] considered the saving effect

of 401(k) and IRA contributions based in part on the comparison of like families and in part on

the “quasi experiment” presented by eligibility for 401(lc)plans. This paper contributes to that line

of analysis, but with a different focus, a different methodology, and a broader scope. We direct

attention to families just before and just after retirement.   We frame the analysis explicitly in

terms of cohorts.   The analysis rests primarily on comparison of older and younger cohorts of

respondents to the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) between 1984 and 1991.



                                                    -1-
The cohorts ~d different lengths of exposure to the personal retirement saving plans introduced

in the 1980s.     Persons who were already retired in the early 1980s had less “opportunity to

contribute than persons who were still working when these plans were introduced.

       We consider not only whether personal retirement saving contributions substitute for other

persoml fmcial      assets, as in our previous papers, but also whether they substitute for employer-

provided pension assets. To understand the effect of pensions on saving, we need to understand

not only how persoml retirement saving is related to other personal fucial      assets, but also how

each of these is related to employer-provided pension assets.

       Traditional economic assumptions imply that if employers increase saving for employees

through employer-provided pension entitlements then employees will save less. Or, if individuals

choose to save more through personal retirement saving plans then they will save less in other

persoml fucial      assets. Or, if individual housing equity is increased through unanticipated gains

in housing prices, then the individual will reduce saving in other forms. The net saving effect of

persoml retirement saving depends on whether individuals make economic fmncial decisions in

accordance with these assumptions.        We fmd that for the most part these assumptions are

inconsistent with observed individual behavior.

I.     BACKGROUND.

       A.        Data.

       The analysis is based primarily on 1984, 1987, and 1991 data from the Survey of Lncome

and Program Participation (SIPP). The data are drawn from the 1984, 1985, 1986, and 1990

_      of the survey, with data for the same year sometimes available horn more than one panel.

The 1984 interview was conducted between September and December 1984 and the 1987 interview



                                                 -2-
between January and April 1987, with approximately 28 months between the two interview

periods. Thus in the cohort analysis described below we treat this interval as a two-year period.

The 1987 and 1991 surveys were conducted almost exactly four years apart. The 1984 to 1991

period is assumed to span six years.

          Each panel contains eight interview waves administered every four months over a 32 month

period.       We use all the waves containing supplemental topical modules requesting detailed

information on assets and liabilities and pension plan coverage. These waves are wave 4 of the

1984 panel (administered between September and December 1984), wave 7 of the 1985 panel and

wave 4 of the 1986 panel (January to April 1987), and wave 4 of the 1990 panel (February to May

1991).        The SIPP household is defined by a physical address.     These were reformatted into

individual family units headed by either a husband-wife pair or a single individual. Thus a single

SIPP household may yield several “families” for the present analysis.

          We consider the following asset categories:

          ●     Personal Financial Assets
                “ Total
                ●   Personal (Targeted) Retirement Assets
                c Other Personal Financial Assets
          ●     Employer-Provided Pension Assets
          “     Social Security Assets
          ●     Home Equity
          ●     Other Non-Liquid Equity

The analysis deals primarily with personal fucial       assets and employer-provided pension assets.

The components of each of the categories are listed in Appendix Table 1. The table pertains to

families aged 65 to 69 in 1991.          It reports the proportion of families owning each of the

components, as well as the asset mean and median values. The category “personal retirement

assets” includes holdings in IRAs, 401(k)s, Keoghs, and life insurance amuities.       Respondents


                                                  -3-
were not asked for a 401(k) balance for 1984, and thus 1984 totals do not include 401(k) assets.

But the mean (and median) 401(k) family balance would have been quite small at that time. These

saving plans are grouped together because each narrowly targets saving for retirement, as opposed

to saving for other, presumably more short-term, goals. The category “other personal fmncial

assets” encompasses conventional (non-tax advantaged) saving vehicles, including saving accounts,

money market deposit accounts, CDs, NOW accounts, money market funds, U.S. government

securities, municipal and corporate bonds, stocks, mutual funds, U.S. Savings Bonds, and other

interest earning assets.   The category “total persoml fmncial    assets” is the sum of persoml

retirement assets and other persoml financial assets. Home equity is the current market value of

the home less the unpaid mortgage.

        As explained below, the data are used to create means and medians by cohort-all    persons

who are the same age in a particular calendar year. Thus the same cohort can be followed over

successive ages in 1984, 1987, and 1991. However, Social Securi~ and employer-provided

pension assets must be calculated from observed benefit payments. Thus wealth in these forms

is available only for persons who are retired and we typically consider them only for persons over

65. The present values are obtained by capitalizing the stream of monthly income from each

source using sex-specific survival probabilities calculated from mortality tables.2

       B.      Family Wealth at Retirement.

        Social Securi~ benefits provide the vast majority of the income of a large fraction of

retired Americans, and the present value of expecti   fiture benefits is the major component of the

wealth of most elderly families. In 1991, the median Social Security wealth of families with heads

65 to 69 was about $100,000.      (See Figure la.)    Median employer-provided pension wealth



                                               4-
(including government and military pensions) was ordy $16,017. Pension wealth is distributed

much more uneverdy than Social Securiv wealth-44 percent of families 65 to 69 @ve no pension

income at all. The median level of housing equity was $50,000, but housing equity is typically

not used to support consumption of the elderly, at least not until quite advanced ages.3 The

median level of other non-liquid assets, such as cars and business equity was only $5,992.

Personal saving through conventional channels represents a very small proportion of the assets of

most older families; the median level of (other) personal fmcial   assets was ordy $7,428.4 Thus

most families, if they spend the income provided by Social Securi~ and employer pension

annuities, have ahnost no liquid accessible assets to meet unexpected expenditures. More than half

of families had neither IRA nor 401(k) accounts so that the median wealth in persoml retirement

assets was zero.

       Although the median is the best single measure of the assets of the typical family, the

components of wealth other than Social Security are highly skewed so that the means are much

larger than the medians. The mean level of other persoml fmncial assets in 1991 was $42,018,

more than five times the median.      But even mean other personal fmncial     assets are a small

fraction of combined Social Security and employer-provided pension assets, as indicated in Figure

lb.

       The means, however, reveal the increasing importance of IRA and 401(k) assets as a

fraction of total persoml financial assets. For families aged 65 to 69, persoml retirement assets

were only 6.6 percent of total personal fwcial    assets in 1984, they represented 20.6 percent by

1991. Personal retirement assets increased over four fold between 1984 and 1991, much more

than any other component of wealth, as shown in Figure lc.



                                                 -5-
       c.     _Aggregate IRA and 401(k) Saving.

       Total contributions to IRA and 401(k) amounts over the 1980s are shown in Figure 2. IRA

contributions jumped enormously in 1982 as soon as they became available to all wage earners and

then increased to a peak of over $38 billion in 1985. Contributions dropped dramatically after the

Tax Reform Act of 1986, that limited the taxdeductibility    of the contributions of families with

incomes over $40,000 per year and single persons with incomes over $25,000. Even though only

27 percent of contributors were affmted by the legislation? contributions fell by over 60 percent,

with a dramatic decline even in the contributions of persons who were umffected by the

legislation. The implications of this decline are discussed in detail in Poterba, Venti, and Wise

[1994, 1995a]. By 1990, less than $10 billion was contributed to IRA accounts.

       Contributions to 401(k) plans increased consistently from thek introduction in 1982 to $49

billion in 1990, the most rwent date for which data are available. Extrapolation of past trends

would suggest that contributions are now between 60 and 70 billion.          Figure 2 reveals no

relationship between IRA and 401 (k) contributions,         with the annual increase in 401(k)

contributions about the same after as before the 1987 decline in IRA contributions.

       The relationship between these contributions and contributions to other retirement saving

plans (excluding Social Security) is shown in Figure 3a. Contributions to defid    benefit pension

plans declined almost 40 percent, from $48.4 billion in 1980 to $24.9 billion in 1989. This

decline was apparently due primarily to the large unexpected returns to pension find assets over

the 1980s, as described in Bernheim and Shoven [1988]. The decline may have been indu~         also

in part by the funding limits imposed by the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987, as

explained in Schieber and Shoven [1993]. Participants in defined benefit plans declined ordy 9.3



                                                -6-
percent and the number of plans by 10.5 percent between 1980 and 1989. Contributions to defined

contribution plans remained about the same over the entire period.6

       Persoml targeted retirement saving represented ordy 7.6 percent of the total in 1980 but

had increased to over 50 percent of the total by 1989. It seems apparent that if IRA contributions

had not been curtailed by the 1986 legislation, balances in these accounts would have represented

a much larger fraction of contributions to all retirement plans and total contributions would have

been substantially larger. The trend in total contributions displayed in Figure 3a closely follows

the trend in IRA contributions.

       Toti personal saving as measured by the Federal Reserve Board’s Flow of Funds (FOF)

accounts, is shown in Figure 3b. These data include contributions to targeted retirement saving

plans, as well as other components of saving. The FOF data are based on direct measurement of

the net acquisition of assets and are thus more comparable to the targeted retirement saving

components than the National Income and Product Account (NIPA) data, the most often cited

measure of aggregate persoml saving. The NIPA data estimate saving as the residual between

disposable income and personal consumption expenditures. The FOF data include several assets

not incorporated in the NIPA deftition of saving.7 Thus, in addition to the more inclusive FOF

series, the Federal Reserve Board also publishes a series that attempts to match the components

of saving that are in principle included in the NIPA measure-indicated   by “FOF NIPA Basis” in

Figure 3b. But even after the adjustment, the NIPA and FOF measures often differ by tens of

billions of dollars. They are discussed in some detail in Poterba, Venti, and Wise [1995b].

       Targeted retirement contributions represent a large fraction of FOF mtioml saving. In

1986, for example, retirement plan contributions accounted for 72.3 percent of FOF N@A Basis



                                               -7-
data and 30.9 percent of the umdjusted FOF series. Both measures tend to follow the pattern of

targeted retirement saving in Figure 3a, which in turn follows the pattern of lRA contributions.

In particular, both measures show a substantial increase in saving between 1980 and 1986, both

show a noticeable fall in saving after the 1986 legislation, and then a recovery by 1989.

       The goal of the subsequent analysis is to assess the impact of persoml retirement saving

on the fmcial   status of older Americans as they approach and enter retirement.    Two issues are

considered. First, using cohort data, the relationship between personal retirement saving and other

personal financial assets is considered in section 2.     Second, the relationship between total

persoml fmncial assets and employer-provided pension assets is considered in section 3. We

direct attention only briefly to the relationship between housing wealth and personal financial

assets, but that relationship has been analyzed recently by Hoynes and McFadden [1993]. who fmd

little relationship between changes in housing equity and persoml fmncial assets. We rely on

their results in making summary judgments      about the net effect of personal targeted retirement

saving on the financial assets of older Americans. In his review article on the relationship between

housing equity and wealth, Skinner [1991] also concludes that there is little or no relationship

between housing equity and other fmncial asset saving.

II.    PERSONAL        RETIREMENT          SAVING      AND    OTHER       ASSETS:       COHORT
       ANALYSIS.

       A.       Cohorts and Cohort Data.

       We begin with a discussion of the principle elements of cohort analysis.         A cohort is

typically a group of persons that are born in the same year. Thus persons who are a given age in

1984 are also a cohort. Cohort analysis usually means that the same cohort is followed over time.

That is, persons who are age 50 in 1984 can be observed in 1985, 1986, and so forth. Panel data


                                                -8-
is designed to —.
               follow specific individuals over time. For example, the mean wealth of persons

who are 50 in 1984 can be traced over time, considering the mean wealth of these same persons

in 1985, in 1986, and so forth.     From panel data, the cohort means are obtained directly by

following the same persons over time. But cohort means can also be obtained from random

samples of the population in successive years (a series of cross-sections).   We use the SIPP data

in this way, although these data also include a short panel component, following the same people

for 32 months. Using these data, the mean assets of a random sample of persons who are 50 in

1984 are compared to the mean assets of another random sample of persons who are51 in 1985,

52 in 1986, and so on.

       We have made calculations for 15 cohorts defined by age in 1984: C42, C44, . .. . C70.

For ease of exposition we usually show data graphically for only a subset of the cohorts. In fact,

each cohort is defined by all persons within a 5-year age interval in 1984. For example, C42

refers to the midpoint of the interval that includes people between 40 and 44 in 1984, 41 and 45

in 1985, etc.

       For illustration, mean personal retirement saving assets are graphed for five cohorts in

Figure 4a. For each cohort, assek are reported for 1984, 1987, and 1991. For example, the mean

of personal retirement assets of cohort C46 was about $1,800 in 1984, $4,500” in 1986, and

$11,700 by 1991. Increases for the C52 and C58 cohorts are also large. But the increases for the

older cohorts are much smaller. The C70 cohort, that was past typical retirement age in the early

1980s when the programs were introduced, accumulated very little in persoml retirement assets.

That is, the relationship between age and the accumulation of personal retirement assets depends

strongly on the cohort.



                                                -9-
        Notice -.that the relationship between age and asset accumulation judged by the cross-section

profile is grossly misleading in this case. For example, the difference between the assets of 46

and 52 year olds in 1984 is much less than the assets actually accumulated by cohort C46 between

age 46 (in 1984) and age 52 (in 1991). In Figure 4a the cross-section relationship between age

and assets can be obtained by ltig      the values reported for a given year. For example, 1991

values are reported for ages 52, 58, 64, 70, and 76, highlighted by the small circles. Similarly,

the 1984 values—for ages 46, 52, 58, 64, and 70—are highlighted by the triangles. In both cases

the cross-section relationship gives a distorted view of the actual accumulation of persoml

retirement assets with age. This is because the large “cohort effects” are unrecognized in the

cross-section relationship.

        The different levels of asset accumulation by different cohorts at spec~lc ages provide the

core dam to evaluate the net saving effect of personal retirement saving contributions.          The

differences are called “cohort effects” and can be judged directly by the difference in assets of

cohorts that attained a given age in different calendar years. At a given age, different cohorts had

different lengths of exposure to persoml retirement saving programs, that were widely available

beginning in 1982. For example, cohort C46 that attained age 52 in 1991 accumulated much

greater personal retirement assets by age 52 than cohort C52 that attained age 52 in 1984 and thus,

by that age, had had many fewer years to accumulate these assets. The same is true for cohorts

C52 and C58 at age 58, C58 and C64 at age 64, and C64 and C70 at age 70.

        To facilitate exposition, we often fit the three data points for each cohort and graph the

fiti   values, as shown in Figure 4b. In this way it is possible to visualize many more cohorts on

the same graph.



                                                -1o-
         Mean persoml retirement assets for all 15 cohorts are shown in Appendix Table 2. The

data for each cohort is in a separate column and the relationship between age and assets within a

cohort is shown by the asset values moving down the column. Cross-section relationships for

1984 are shown in the “top” diagonal, for 1987 by tie middle diagonal, and for 1991 by the lower

diagonal. As indicated in Figure 4, the differences are extremely large.

         In the subsequent amlysis we will consider whether cohort effects like those shown for

personal retirement assets in Figure 4 are offset by countervailing cohort effects with respect to

other persoml fmncial assets. For example, Figure 4a shows that persons who attained age 52

in 1991 had much larger personal retirement assets that persons who reached age 52 in 1984. The

key question is whether the larger personal retirements were offset by a reduction in other personal

ticial    assets. If the personal retirement asset cohort effects are offset by countervailing cohort

eff=ts in other persoml fmcial      assets, there will be no cohort effects in total personal fucial

assets; it they are not offset, the persoml retirement asset cohort effects will be mirrored by

similar cohort effects in total personal fucial     assets. Equivalently, if there are no cohort effects

with respect to other personal fucial     assets, this implies that the personal retirement asset cohort

eff~ts are not canwled by offsetting cohort effects in other personal f~cial       assets. To highlight

the cohort effects, most of the evidence is presented graphically.          We also use more formal

estirnaks of cohort effwts to project the future retirement assets of younger cohorts.

         B.     Personal Retirement Assets and Other Personal fiancial             Assets

         We begin by considering the assets of M respondents to the SWP, including both

contributors and non-contributors.      The basic assumption is that younger cohorts-that       reached

a given age in later calendar years-had           a longer period in which to contribute to persoml



                                                    -11-
retirement accounts.      But that in other respects the cohorts are similar (after correcting for

earnings differences between cohorts that attained a given age in different years). Thus differenms

in asset accumulation can be attributed to the differential availability of these programs.     The

implicit assumption is that the differences are not due to a systematic trend in the “taste” for

saving.    The data for contributors and non-contributors together provide the most compelling

evidence on substitution because these data are not confounded by the potential changing

composition of contributors and non-contributors, which may change the saving propensities of

the two groups over time.

          Contributors to personal targeted retirement saving programs and non-contributors are then

considered separately. In this case, it is proposed that the cohort differences among contributors

result horn the differences in exposure to the special retirement saving programs. For example,

contributors who attained age 52 in 1991 have larger persoml retirement assets than contributors

who reached age 52 in 1991 because the former group had had seven more years to contribute to

these programs. These data can be used to judge the effect of the retirement saving programs on

the future asset accumulation of those who participate in such programs. In addition, the cohort

effects of contributors can be compared to the cohort effects among non-contributors.      The non-

contributory cohort effects might be considered an indication of cohort effects that would have

obtained in the absence of the special retirement saving programs. That is, it might be assumed

that any systematic trend in the “taste” for saving would be revealed in a cohort effect among non-

contributory.    The results will show that for the most part there are no cohort effwts among non-

contributory. Comparisons of contributors and non-contributors must be interpreted with caution,

however, have very different saving propensities, as the data discussed below will show. Thus



                                                 -12-
it is questiomble whether data for non-contributors can be used to infer the saving of contributors

had they not participated in the programs.      For contributors, cohort effects are observed with

respect to persoml retirement assets but not with respect to other personal fmncial           assets.

Indeed, for all respondents together, there are no cohort effects with respect to other persoml

fimncial assets. Cohort effects are@        observed with respect to the persoml retirement assets

of contributors. Thus we believe it urdikely that the results can be attributed to a general shift in

the taste for saving over time.

        To simplify the graphical exposition, we sometimes show the actual data for “non-

overlapping cohorts, ” as in Figure 4a. Or, we present fitted values like those in Figure 4b. We

would like to emphasize the assets of the typical family and thus would prefer to use median

values. In addition, the medians are less subject to random fluctuation due to extreme outliers.

As explained above, however, in some instances tie medians are not informative (when fewer than

50 percent of families own an asset) and we present only means.

       An issue that arises in the cohort analysis is the appropriate comparison of the assets of

persons who attained a given age in different calendar years. If our goal were to compare the

purchasing power of different cohorts, a price index would be the most appropriate measure by

which to put different calendar year data on a common basis. Here, however, the issue is not

purchasing power but rather the saving that would have owurred in the absence of the personal

retirement saving programs,       There are at least two possibilities:   One is to assume that the

increase (or decrease) in other persoml financial asset saving that would have occurred in the

absence of the persoml retirement saving programs is the perce~ increase in this asset category

among non-contributors. Averaged over ages 48 to 68 the increase was 3.8 percent between 1984



                                                 -13-
and 1991. Another conceptual approach is to base the correction on the nominal earnings of

successive cohorts, assuming that other personal fmcial    asset saving is based on earnings, and,

that there would have been no real cohort effects in personal fimncial asset saving in the absence

of the persoml retirement saving programs.         The closest empirical approximation to this

conceptualization may be an earnings index. For illustration, we present some results in nominal

dollars, but most of the results are based on values converted to 1984 dollars using the wage and

salary component of the Bureau of Labor Statistics Employment Cost Index.

       1.      All Respondents:    Means.

       a.      Nominal Values.

       The mean personal targeted retirement assets of cohorts C46, C52, C58, C64, and C70 are

shown in Figure 5a. As described with respect to the illustrative figure above, younger cohorts,

that attained any specific age in a later calendar year and thus at that age had had longer exposure

to the special retirement saving plans introduced in the early 1980s—accumulated much larger

personal retirement assets. For example, cohort C58 accumulated the highest level of personal

retirement assets. Members of this cohort were age 56 to 60 in 1984 and 54 to 58 in 1982 when

the IRA and 401(lc) programs were expanded, and were age 62 to 66 when last surveyed in 1991.

The C70 cohort accumulated the lowest level of persoml retirement assets. Members of this

cohort were already age 66 to 70 and past retirement in 1982 and thus were in large part umble

to take advantage of the IRA and 401(lc) programs.

       The corresponding means of other personal ticial       assets of the same cohorts are shown

in Figure 5b. The accumulation of personal retirement assets-described     above—differed greatly

by cohort. The corresponding accumulation of other personal financial assets also shows a cohort



                                               -14-
effect, but not_one that offsets the retirement asset cohort effwt; younger cohorts also have higher

levels of other financial assets. Because the rapid accumulation of retirement assets was not offset

by a reduction in the accumulation of other fmncial assets, the accumulation of total personal

fmcial        assets also shows strong cohort effect, with younger cohorts-who   attained any age in

a later year-typically    accumulating more persoml fucial      assets, as shown in Figure 5c. Both

total and retirement assets for three cohorts are shown in Figure 5d. At age 58, for example, the

difference in retirement assets of cohorts 52 and 58 can be compared directly to &e difference in

the total persoml assets of these cohorts. The same comparison can be made for cohorts 58 and

64 at age 64.

         b.        Indexed Values-Fitted.

         Fitted values of total and retirement assets for eight cohorts are shown in Figure 5e. The

vertical lines are to aid in comparing the cohort differences in total and retirement assets at given

ages.    If there were no reduction in the other fmcial        assets of successive cohorts as they

increased their persoml retirement assets, the difference in the total would be equal to the

difference in retirement assets.      The average of the ratios of the total to the retirement asset

difference is 1.16. There is of course some randomness in these ratios. But the data suggest that

the accumulation of persoml retirement assets resulted for the most part in a corresponding

increase in total persoml fmcial         assets. Fitted values for other persoml fmncial   assets are

graphed in Figure 5f. They reveal essentially no systematic cohort effect.

         c.        Indexed Vdues-Actti       And Projeeted.

         The results above show that each of the successively younger cohorts has greater persoml

financial assets than the preceding older cohort. What the persoml fwcial        asset levels will the



                                                  -15-
younger coho~ have accumulated by the time they reach the age of the oldest cohort? Although

it is improbable that future asset levels can be precisely predicted, we believe that the data allow

plausible projections of the future assets of the younger cohorts. We fit the indexed actual cohort

means with a specification of the form


          Aic=a +~c+yl(Age,)   +y2(AgeJ2   +y3(Agei)3    +&ic                                  (1)



where A represents an asset category-personal       retirement assets, other persoml fmncial assets,

total persoml fmcial      assets-c   indexes cohort and i the ith cohort mean. The PCare cohort

effects with ~~C = O. Thus the individual estimates represent deviations from the mean effect,

which is set to zero.    The specification is intended to fit the age-asset accumulation pattern,

allowing the differences in the levels of the assets between successive cohorts to be maintained as

the cohorts age, and to cumulate.      It is assumed, for example, that the estimated difference

between the assets of the two youngest cohorts, C42 and C46, will be maintained as the cohorts

age. Thus the projected difference at age 76 in the asset levels of cohorts C42 and C70, for

example, is given by the difference between C42 and C44, plus the difference between C44 and

C46, plus the differenm between C46 and C48, and so forth. Indeed, it is convenient to think of

the estimated cohort effects as representing the projected cohort dtierences at age 76. It is likely

that this assumption implies a conservative estimate of the projected cohort differenms.   Constant

percentage differences as the cohorts age, for example, imply much larger age 76 cohort

differences.

        The estimates are shown in Table la.       The projected personal retirement assets (column

1) of the youngest cohort are $14,076 ~bov~ the mean while the projected assets of the oldest



                                                  -16-
cohort are $13_,105 below the mean, a difference of $27,181. If there were no counterbalancing

cohort effects with respect to other persoml fmncial            assets, the total persoml fmncial    asset

cohort effects should approximately parallel the retirement asset cohort effects. The estimates

show that the projected total (column 2) for the youngest cohort is $16,003 ~bov~ the mean and

$14,083 below the mean for the oldest cohort, a difference of $30,086.               The other personal

fmcial        asset cohort effects are typically not statistically different from zero. An F-test does not

reject the hypothesis that there are no cohort effects, that is, that all the individual effects are zero.

         The projections of total personal financial assets based on equation (1) are graphed in

Figure 5g. The age 76 persoml fmncial assets of the oldest cohort are $37,299; the projected

age 76 assets of the youngest cohort are $67,385, an increase of over 80 percent.

         2.         Contributors   and Non-Contributors      Separately:   Indexed Means.

         a.         Indexed Values-Fitted.

         Because ody a minority of respondents contribute to a persoml retirement saving

aaunt-only         about 40 percent of cohorts who were younger than 65 in 1984 and a much smaller

per~nt of older cohorts-the        total saving effwt of the participants is diluted by the larger number

of respondents that did not participate and were apparently umffected by these saving programs.

Thus we also present data for contributors and non-contributors separately. The findings based

on means are shown in Figures 6a through 6c. Again, cohorts who reached a given age in a later

calendar year, had accumulated much more in personal retirement accounts than cohorts who

reached that age in an earlier year.          These differences are reflected, for the most part, in

corresponding differences in total personal f~cial          assets, as shown in Figure 6a. And, as with




                                                     -17-
both contributors and non-contributors together, the cohort data for other persoml f~cial    assets

of contributors show essentially no systematic cohort effects. (See Figure 6b.)

       For comparison, the accumulation of personal fucial     assets of non-contribute rs is shown

in Figure 6c. There appear to be no cohort effects among non-contributors at younger ages. At

older ages, older cohorts appear to have slightly higher persoml fmncial asset levels. This may

be because a smaller proportion of older cohorts ever contributed to a persoml retirement plan,

and thus the non-contributors among the older cohorts disproportiomtely include “savers” that if

they were younger would have contributed to a persoml retirement account. This composition

effect is discussed below with referenm to Table 2.

       b.      Indexed Vdues-Actud       and Projected.

       Projected means (indexed to 1984) of contributors are shown in Figure 6d together with

actual values for selected cohorts. The projected age 76 total personal financial assets of cohort

C70 (in 1991) is $93,151; the projected value of the C42 cohort at age 76—18 years hence—is

$160,175.   As with both contributors and non-contributors, the estimated cohort effects for total

personal fmncial   assets tend to mirror the estimated effects for personal retirement assets, as

shown in Table lb.     The estimated cohort effects for other persoml financial assets are not

typically statistically different from zero.     (The estimates, however, reveal an apparent

composition effect among older cohorts and this is discussed below.) Thus for participating

families the cumulative effect of persoml retirement account contributions is very large.

Assuming no cohort effect with respect to other personal fmncial assets, personal retirement

assets would increase over the next 18 years from 22 to 50 percent of the total persoml fwcial

assets of age 76 families.



                                               -18-
          3.       Contributors
                   —              and Non-Contributors     Separately:   Indexed Medians.

          a.       Indexed Values-Fitted.

          As mentioned above, the distribution of fwcial     assets is highly skewed so-that means are

much larger than medians. Thus the median is a much better indicator of the assets of the typical

family.        Medians for all respondents are not informative, however, because the median for

persoml targeted retirement assets is typically zero.        Median total and retirement assets for

contributors are shown in Figure 7a. Like the means, the medians also show that younger cohorts

accumulated much larger levels of personal retirement assets than older cohorts.            The larger

accumulation of retirement assets was not offset by a corresponding reduction in the accumulation

of other personal fucial      assets (Figure 7b), that show no substantial off-setting cohort effects.

Thus younger contributor cohorts are accumulating much larger levels of total fmcial            assets

(Figure 7a) than their older counhrparts.

          The medians for non-contributors are shown in Figure 7c. These data show extremely low

levels of financial assets and essentially no cohort effects at younger ages. As mentioned above,

the “apparent” cohort effect for the oldest cohort apparently reflects a composition effect; most

of the oldest respondents were non-contributors, and thus had greater assets than younger cohort

non-contributors.

          b.       Indexed Values-Actual    and Projected.

          Like the means, the projected median values of total personal fmncial assets show very

large cohort effects that tend to mirror the cohort effects for persoml retirement assets, as shown

in Table lC. Recall that urdike means the sum of the medians if not the median of the sum, and

thus the estimated cohort effects cannot be “added” across equations. Most of the estimated cohort



                                                  -19-
effects for other
               —. persoml fmncial assets are not statistically different from zero, although an

apparent composition effect is reflected in the estimated cohort effects among older cohorts.

Nonetheless, it is clear that younger cohorts of participating families are accumulating much more

in total persoml financial assets than older cohorts.     The projected median of current age 76

families (cohort C70 in 1991) is $62,388; the projected accumulation of the youngest cohort by

age 76 is $107,138.

       4.        Summary of Age-Specific    Cohort Effects by Contributor      Status:     Means and
                 Medians.

       The graphs of the cohort data show the accumulation of assets with age for successively

older cohorts.    The different levels of asset accumulation by different cohorts at specific ages

provide the core data to evaluate the net saving effect of persoml retirement saving contributions.

As discussed above, the single most informative comparison is for boti contributors and non-

contributory combined, considering the change in other financial assets (or in total fwcial     assets)

as the persoml retirement assets of respondents increased.      These da@ are not confounded by

possible changes in the composition of contributors, and of non-contributors, as the proportion of

contributors increased between 1984 and 1991.          But comparisons for contributors and non-

contributory separately are also informative: we consider the change in the other fmncial assets

(or in the total fmcial   assets) of contributors as their personal retirement assets increased. But

other financial assets may have increased or decreased for other reasons as well. One way to

judge the effect of other influences is to consider the change in the fmncial            assets of non-

contributory.    As mentioned above, however, because of apparent large differences in saving

propensity, non-contributors may be an inadequate “control” group with which to judge the

behavior of contributors in the absence of the retirement saving programs. And, the comparison


                                                -20-
of cohort data for contributors and non-contributors may be may be affected by “composition”

effects. For example, the proportion of contributors in the 65 to 69 age interval increased from

19 to 35 percent between 1984 and 1991.          Thus, for example, “saver” families      may have


disproportiomtely become contributors, leaving a larger concentration of “non-savers” in the non-

contributory group in 1991.     If this were the case, non-contributors would not serve as a

homogeneous control group with which to compare the contributors.          To help to address this

changing composition issue we have estimated the mean assets of all respondents -- both

contributors and non-contributors -- and the mean and median assets of contributors and non-

contributory separately, controlling for income, age, marital status, and gender of the family head.

The 1984 and 1991 means and medians for three age groups spanning typical retirement ages are

shown in Table 2. The means are evaluated at the 1987 means of the income and demographic

variables and the medians are evaluated at the medians of the income and demographic variables.

Thus the estimates reflect values that would have obtained if the income and demographic

characteristics of pools of contributors and non-contributors remained at 1987 levels in all years.

All values are in 1984 dollars.       (The conditional medians are somewhat larger than the

unconditional medians. Thus, for example, the conditional financial medians of non-contributors

may be 50 percent higher than the overall medians of the fmncial assets of non-contributors. )

Data for all three years and for additional age intervals are shown in Appendix Tables 3a and 3b.

       Consider the age 60-64 means, for example.         Considering both contributors and non-

contributory combined, the mean retirement saving assets of families who were in this age interval

in 1984 was $3,946, compared to a mean of $10,914 for those who did not attain this age until

1991. But this large increase in retirement saving assets was not accompanied by a substantial



                                                -21-
decline in other persoml financial assets, which remained virtually unchanged ($28,629 in 1984

and $27,959 in 1991). Consequently, there was a large increase in total persoml retirement

assets, from $32,575 to $38,874.      For contributors, mean targeted retirement saving increased

from $9,968 for the oldest cohort (those who were in this age interval in 1984) to $25,795 for the

youngest cohort (who attained this age interval in 1991). There was little corresponding change

in other persoml fmcial      assets, however, a decline of from $51,397 for the oldest cohort to

$50,160 for the youngest cohort. Total persoml fmcial            assets increased by 24 percent, from

$61,365 to $75,954.      In contrast, the assets of non-contributors declined by 6 percent, from

$13,468 to $12,684.      Because of the additive property of means, the $15,827 increase in the

targeted retirement saving assets of contributors can be compared to the $14,589 increase in total

persoml f~cial      assets. Similar trends are revealed for the other age groups.

        The medians in Table 2 show a similar pattern. There is typically a large increase in the

personal retirement assets and in the total f-cial      assets of contributors and ordy a small decline

in other financial assets. In contrast, the median personal fmncial assets of non-contributors

typically declined more than the median of other persoml fmncial assets of contributors and the

perwntage decline was typically much greater. Because fucial          asset are so skewd, the medians

provide a better measure than the means of the wealth of the typical family. But because medians

are not additive, direct comparison between the increase in retirement assets and the increase in

total fmcial     assets does not provide an unambiguous measure of the extent of substitution.

Appendix Tables 3a and 3b show much the same pattern but with some variation among the age

intervals and from year to year.




                                                 -22-
          In addition, the tables show the proportion of each age group that has a personal retirement

saving account. The proportion with retirement accounts does not vary much by age or cohort for

persons younger than 64. Nor does the proportion vary much for the oldest age group, of which

very few in any cohort had accounts. But older cohorts, in the 65 to 69 and 70 to 74 age intervals

in particular, were much less likely than the younger cohorts to have persoml retirement accounts.

Thus the decline in the total persoml f~cial         assets of non-contributors in the 65 to 69 age

interval (as the proportion in the non-contributor status declined from.81 to .65) may result in part

from a “composition” effect, with “savers” increasingly likely to be contributors. This effect may

be reflected in the older cohort data graphed in Figures 6C and 7Cand the data must be interpreted

accordingly. But the conditioml means and medians should help to control for this composition

effect. Judging by the proportion of contributors, the data for “pre-retirement” ages and for the

oldest ages are probably not importantly affected by this changing composition in either case.

III.      PERSONAL      RETIREMENT         SA~G      AND EMPLOYER-PROVIDED                PENSION
          ASSETS,

          Tradeoffs between personal retirement saving and other personal f=ia~      asset saving may

provide the most readiIy available opportunity for substitution from one form of saving to the

other. But personal retirement saving could also substitute for employer provided pension assets.

Persons who foresee larger employer-provided retirement benefits may be less likely to contribute

to a 401(k) plan, or to an IRA account, or to accumulate other persoml financial assek. Thus we

consider whetier families with more pension wealth have less wealth in total persoml fimncial

assets.

          There are two circumstances that condition the analysis: fust, the SIPP data do not allow

calculation of employer-provided pension wealth until a person is retired and receiving pension


                                                  -23-
benefits.    The_benefit, together with life tables, can beusedto    determine thepresent   value of

ex~ted      fiture pension benefits-pension   wealth. Thus cohort analysis as presented above is not

suitable in this case. Second, both pension wealth and persoml f~cial      asset saving will increase

with income, thus without controlling for income persons with greater persoml fmncial wealth

would almost certainly have greater pension wealth as well. Thus we consider the relationship

between persoml fucial        assets and pension wealth for persons 65 to 69, who have retired and

for whom we can determine pension wealth. And we use Social Securi~ wealth percentiles to

control for lifetime income. a The relationship between Social Security wealth and lifetime income

is very non-linear, with less than proportionate increases in Social Security wealth as lifetime

income increases. But we believe that the percentile level provides the best available means of

grouping people by lifetime income.

         Using an analysis of variance framework, we estimate the relationship between pension

wealth and three persoml fimncial asset categories: persoml retirement assets, other persoml

fmcial      assets, and total persoml financial assets. The specification is of the form

 Ai = ai+ bi(PensionWealth)      + ci(Education)   + ei ,                                       (2)


where i indicates the ith Social Security wealth decile and A denotes a personal fmcial         asset

category.     We control for education bmause saving is typically found to increase with years of

education, given income.

         The parameter estimates on pension wealth are reported in Table 3 for each of the persoml

asset categories and for each of the years 1984, 1987, and 1991. The estimates are typically small

but suggest that a dollar more in pension wealth is associated with from 4 cents less to 19 cents

more in total persoml fmncial        assets in 1991, although most estimates are not statistically

                                                   -24-
different from—.
              zero. Essentially the same results are obtained if education is excluded from the

specification. And, the same results are obtained if home equity is added to the specification, to

control for other wealth that could in principle be used to meet financial needs after retirement.

Thus we conclude that there is urdikely to be much if any substitution of personal fmcial    saving

for employer-provided pension entitlement.

       We obtain essentially the same results when equation (1) is estimated separately for persons

with and without a college degree. If anything, the results are stronger for persons with college

degrees. That is, the estimated coefficients are somewhat larger for the college educated group.

This result is apparently at variance with the recent results of Bernheim and Scholz [1993], who

fmd no substitution for persons without a college degree but a positive substitution effect for

persons with a college degree. Their estimates are based on the Survey of Consumer Finanus and

pertain to persons who are not yet retired. They use an indicator variable for pension coverage,

whereas we use pension wealth just after retirement.    Their measure of persoml assets includes

business equity and property other than primary home, whereas we include ordy persoml f~cial

assets. Our ANOVA specification also aims to capture lifetime earnings differences and allows

for complete interaction by Social Security wealth percentile.

        Several other previous studies have considered the impact of employer-provided pensions

on persoml saving.     The early work of Cagan [1965] and Katom [1965] found that persons

-       by an employer pension save more in other forms. Cagan attributed this to a “recognition

effect, ” whereby pension coverage induces awareness of the need to save for the future. More

recently, several studies have sought to update and add to this line of analysis by relating persoml

saving to ex~cted pension wealth, instead of pension coverage. These studies have focused on



                                                -25-
older persons who are not yet retired and for whom the pension-saving tradeoff may be greatest.

The results have been mixed, perhaps because it is difficult to calculate pension wealth accurately

for persons who are not yet retired. Munnell [1976] finds a substantial offset, as high as 62 cents

for each dollar of estimated pension wealth. Blinder, Gordon, and Wise [1981], Hubbard [1985],

and Avery, Elliehausen, and Gustafson [1986], however, fmd little or no evidence of a tradeoff,

Diamond and Hausman [1984] fmd a modest tradeoff. Thus these findings would suggest that the

tradeoff is far from dollar for dollar and the consensus view appears to be little or no effect.

       Possibly the principle reservation about the previous studies is the difficulty of constructing

m accurate measure of expected pension wealth for persons prior to receipt of pension benefits.

Such calculations require assumptions about job mobility, fiture earnings, time to retirement, and,

most important, pension plan provisions. The detail necessary to calculate pension wealth is are

not reported in any of the data used by previous investigators, with the exception of the Survey

of Consumer Finances used by Avery, Elliehausen, and Gustafson [1986]. Thus we have directed

attention to recently retired persons and have used Social Security wealth percentiles to control for

lifetime income.

Iv.    HOUSING      EQUITY.

       Rapid increases in housing prices led to large increases in home equi~ in many parts of

the country over the 1980s. Data for selected cohorts -- indexed to 1984 dollars -- are shown in

Figure 8. Substantial cohort effmts are apparent, but whether the younger or the older cohort has

more housing equity varies with age. In cohorts that reached ages 58, 64, and 70 in 1991 had

more wealth in housing equity than the older cohorts that reached these ages earlier, in 1984.

Thus the younger cohorts that attained these ages in a later year had not only accumulated more



                                                -26-
housing equity, tieyounger     coho~had    accmulated   more housing equi~wealti      as well. For

many, the increase in housing equity was probably an unanticipated windfall gain. Thus it might

be expected that there would be even more inducement to reduce other persoml fmncial asset

saving, contrary to the findings reported above. This is typically true for ages above 58. At 52,

however, the younger cohort has less housing equity than the older cohort and this is typically true

at ages less than 58.   More discussion of cohorts and housing equity with particular attention to

the effect of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which may have encouraged home equity loans, is

presented in Poterba, Venti, and Wise [1996],

         Notice that the figure shows an increase in housing equity between 1984 and 1991 for each

cohort, even for the cohort that ages from 70 to 76 between 1984 and 1991. Cross-section data,

however, would show a misleading decline in housing equity at older ages. The 1991 cross-

section data, represented by the 1991 values at 52, 58, 64, 70, and 76, show home equity

declining after age 64. Older coho~       have less housing equity than younger cohorts, but not

because they reduce housing equity as they age.

         We have not attempted in this paper to consider formally the relationship be~een personal

fmcial    asset saving and housing equity. Hoynes and McFadden [1993] have remntly completed

an analysis of this issue. They fmd essentially no relationship between increases in home equity

and total personal f~cial      asset saving,   based on data from the Panel Survey of Income

Dynamics (PSID). They are able to follow the same persons over an extended time period. The

SIPP data follow the same persons for only 30 months and the cohort method we use in section

two does not provide a sufficient number of cohorts to perform a meaningful comparison of




                                               -27-
changes in home equity versus changes in persoml fucial       assets by cohort. Skinner [1991] also

finds little relationship between housing equity and persoml fmncial assets.

v.     CONCLUSIONS.

       Personal targeted retirement accounts are an increasingly important form of saving for

retirement. By 1989, contributions to IRA, 401(k), and Keogh accounts exceeded contributions

to traditioml employer-provided defined benefit and defined contribution pension plans. We have

emphastied the effect of this form of saving on the fmcial         status of recent retirees and on

persons approaching retirement. Based on comparison of younger and older cohorts, we conclude

that, for the most part, the increasing contributions to personal retirement plans have not displad

other fimncial asset saving.    And consequently the real persoml fmncial         assets of younger

cohorts are substantially larger than the assets of their predecessors.   Although any projections

must be imprecise, the conservative estimates that we have made suggest that age-76 families 18

years in the future will have almost $25,000 more in a personal fmncial assets than current 76

year old families-about   $67,000 versus $43,000. The persoml funcial         assets of participating

families will be $67,000 higher at age 76–$93,000      versus $160,000.

       using Social Security wealth percentiles to control for lifetime income, we fmd that thus

far there has been little replacement of employer-provided pension entitlements with persoml

retirement saving. Nor do we fmd any reduction in other personal fmncial           asset saving with

increases in employer-provided pension wealth. Thus we conclude that, for the most part, the

personal retirement saving of recent retirees has not replaced fm          pension plan saving by

employers, nor have employer pensions displaced other persoml financial assets.          This should

not be interpreted to mean that employer pensions have no effect on individual behavior. It seems



                                                -28-
apparent that employer pensions together with Social Securi~ have led to dramatic declines in

typical retirement ages and the labor force participation of older Americans.           Thus even if

pensions have not reduced the amount that employees save in other forms, they surely have

reduced the amount that older persons earn. This issue is discussed in some detail in Lurnsdaine

and Wise [1990].

       Because we can fmd no apparent offset to the increase in persoml retirement saving, we

believe that this form of saving will not ordy be an increasingly important component of the wealth

of the elderly, but indeed holds the prospect of adding substantially to the fucial    status of older

Americans.     In particular, personal retirement saving is likely to increase substaritially the non-

annuittid    liquid fmcial   saving of older families.

       If these trends continue, the baby boom generation will accumulate substantially larger

levels of personal fwcial    assets than their older counterparts and thus after retirement will have

much larger pools of accessible assets upon which to draw to meet unexpected contingencies.




                                                 -29-
                                                Notes


1.       Results using different data sets and different methodologies are presented in Venti and Wise

[1986, 1987, 1990b, 1992].      The findings of other investigators   of this issue-Gale   and Scholz

[1990], Feenberg and Skinner [1989], and Joines and Manegold [1991 ]—are summ~d             in the last

paper.

2.       A discount rate of 6 percent is used. Social Security, Railroad Retirement, federal employee,

and military pensions are indexed by law. About 75 percent of state and local public employees

receive some post retirement benefit increase; about half receive automatic COLAS (Phillips (1992).

Post-retirement benefit increases in the private sector are less common. Gustman and Steinmeier

(1993) found that during the-17 year period ending in 1987, that included a period of high inflation,

about 45 percent of private sector defined benefit plans provided some post-retirement cost of living

increase, usually ad hoc. We have indexed Social Security, Military pension, Railroad retirement,

and all government employee pension annuities at an annual rate of 4 percent. Other annuities are

not indexed.

3.       See Venti and Wise [1989, 1990% 1991], Feinstein and McFadden [1989], Wd Sheiner and

Weil [1992].

4.       The value for 1991 may bean anomaly. Medians in earlier years were about $9,000 and

mean values increased from about $34,365 in 1984 to $42,018 in 1991.

5.       See EBRI [1986].

6.       The data show an anomalous increase from 25.5 in 1988 to 34.0 in 1989. Preliminary

tabulation by the Department of Labor show a decline to below 25.5 in 1990.

7.       There are three principle conceptual differences between the FOF and the NIPA definitions

of savings. These involve treatment of non-housing durable goods, state and local government


                                                  -30-
pension reserves, and net saving of corporate fins.    For details see Wilsonetal[1989].

8.     Only persons with reported Social Security benefits are included in the analysis.




                                                -31-
                .-                           Referencw



Avery, Robert B., Grego~ E. Elliehausen, and Thomas A. Gustafson.           1986. “Pensions and

       Social Security in Household Portfolios: Evidence from the 1983 Survey of Consumer

       Finances, ” in F. Adams and S. Wachter (eds.), Savings and &pital Fo~”on.       Lexington

       books.

Bernheim, B. Douglas.         1987. “The Economic Effects of Social Security. ” Journal of Public

       Economics, vol. 33, pp. 273-304.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Karl Scholz. 1993. “Private Saving and Public Policy. ” Tax

       Policy and the Economy, vol. 7, pp. 73-110.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, and John B. Shoven. 1988. “Pension Funding and Saving, ” in Z. Bodie,

       J. Shoven, and D. Wise (eds.), Pemiom in the U.S. Economy.          University of Chicago

       Press.

Blinder, Alan S., Roger Gordon, and David E. Wise. 1981. An Empirical Study of the Eflects

       of Pensions on the Saving and Wor          Supply Decisions of Older Men. Princeton, NJ:

       Mathtech Inc.

Cagan, Phillip.      1965.    me Effect of Pemion Plain on Aggregate Saving: Evidence From a

       Sample Suwey.         Occasional Papers No. 95. Natioml Bureau of Economic Research.

Diamond, Peter A. and Jerry A. Hausman. 1984, “Individual Retirement and Savings Behavior, ”

       Journul of Public Econom-cs, vol. 23, pp. 81-114.

Employee Benefit Research Institute. 1986. “Tax Reform and Employee Benefits. ” Issue Brief

       No. 59, October.




                                                 -32-
Feenberg, Da@el, and Jomthan Skinner. 1989. “Sources of IRA Saving. ” Tm Policy and the

       Economy 3; 25-46.

Feinstein, Jomthan and Daniel McFadden.     1989. “The Dynamics of Housing Demand by the

       Elderly: Wealth, Cash Flow, and Demographic Effects, ” in D. Wise (cd.), me Economics

       of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gale, William G. and John Karl Schok.       1990.    “IRAs and Household Saving. ” Mimeo,

       University of Wisconsin.

Gustman, Alan and Thomas Steinmeier. 1993. “Cost of Living Increases in Pensions, ” in Olivia

       Mitchell (cd.), As the Wor~orce Ages. Ithaca, NY: ILR Press.

Hoynes, Hilary and Daniel McFadden.     1993. “The Impact of Demographics on Housing and

       Non-Housing Wealth in the United States, ” unpublished, September.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. 1985. “Personal Taxation, Pension Wealth, and Portfolio Composition, ”

       Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 67, no 1, February pp. 53-60.

Joines, Douglas H., and James G. Manegold. 1991. “IRAs and Saving: Evidence from a Panel

       of Taxpayers. ” University of Southern California wor~g   paper no. 90-9.

Katom, George. 1965. Pn”vatePensiom and Individual Saving. University of Michigan Press.

Lumsdaine, Robin L. and David A. Wise.       1990.   “Aging and Labor Force Participation: A

       Review of Trends and Explamtions. ”           NBER Working Paper #3420,        August.

       (Forthcoming in JCER-NBER conference volume, Universi~ of Chicago Press.)

Munnell, Alicia H. 1976. “Private Pensions and Saving: New Evidence, ” Jouml       of Political

       Economy, vol. 84, October, pp. 1013-1032.




                                            -33-
Phillips, Kristen.   1992. “State and Local Pension Benefits, ” in John A. Turner and Daniel J.

       Beller (eds .), Trends in Pensions 1992. Washington D.C.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise. 1994. “401(k) Plans and Tax-Deferred

       Saving, ” in D. Wise (cd.), Studies in the Economics of Aging, University of Chicago

       Press: 105-138.

                       1995a. “Do 401 (k) Contributions Crowd Out Other Personal Saving?”

       Journul of Public Economics 58:1-32.

                       1995b. “The Effects of Special Saving Programs on Saving and Wealth. ”

       NBER Working Paper No. 5287, October.

                      1996. “Do Retirement Saving Programs Increase Saving: Reconciling the

       Evidence. ” Working Paper, April.

Schieber, Sylvester and John Shoven. 1993. “The Consequences of Population Aging on Private

       Pension Fund Saving and Asset Markets, ” unpublished, September.

Sheiner, buise   and David N. Weil. 1992. “The Housing Wealth of the Aged, ” NBER Working

       Paper No. 4115, July.

Skinner, Jomthan.    1991. “Housing and Saving in the United States, ” NBER Working Paper No.

       3874, October.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise. 1986. “Tax-Deferred Accounts, Constrained Choice and

       Estimation of Individual Saving. ” Review of Economic Studies 53: 579-601.

                      1987. “IRAs and Saving, ” in M. Feldstein (cd.), Z?zeEflects of Tmation on

        Capital Accumubtion.    Chicago: University of Chicago Press.




                                              -34-
                      1989.   “Aging, Moving, and Housing Wealth, ” in D, Wise (cd.), The

      Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                   , 1990a. “But They Don’t Want To Reduce Housing Equi~”,       in D. Wise

      (cd.), Issues in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

                    1990b. “Have IRAs Increased U.S. Saving?: Evidence from the Consumer

      Expenditure Surveys, ” Qurter~    Jouml      of Economics 105: 661-698.

                    1991. “Aging and the Income Value of Housing Wealth. ” Journal of Public

      Economics, U:371-395.

                     1992. “Government Policy and Persoml Retirement Saving. ” Tax Policy

      and the Economy 6:1-41.

Wilson, John F., James L. Freund, Frederick O. Yohn, and Walter Lederer. 1989. “Measuring

      Household Saving: Recent Experience from the Flow-of-Funds Perspective, ” in R. Lipsey

      and H. Tice (eds. ), i?ze Memurernent of Saving, Investment, and Wealth.     Chicago:

       University of Chicago Press.




                                            -35-
              —                      FIGURE LEGENDS

Figure la.   Median Assets by Year
             Families Aged 65-69


Figure lb.   Mean Assets by Year
             Families Aged 65-69


Figure lc.   Mean Wealth Increast 1984-1991
             Families Aged 65-69


Figure 2,    lRA and 401(k) Contributions


Figure 3a.   Retirement Plan Contributions


Figure 3b.   Natioml Flow of Funds Saving


Figure 4a.   Illustration of Cohort Data
             Personal Retirement Assets


Figure 4b.   Illustration of Cohort Data
             Persoml Retirement Assets-Fitted


Figure 5a.   Persoml Retirement Assets
             All Respondents-Five    Cohorts-Means


Figure 5b.   Other Personal Financial Assets
             All Respondents-Five    Cohorts-Means


Figure 5c.   Total Persoml Financial Assets
             All Respondents-Five    Cohorts-Mere


Figure 5d.   Total PFA   VS.   Pm
             All Resr)ondents. Seleeted Cohorts




                                               -36-
Figure 5e,   Personal Financial Assets, Total and Retirement
             Means-All    Respondents—Indexed


Figure 5f.   Persoml Financial Assets, Other
             Means-All    Respondents-Indexed


Figure 5g.   Total Personal Financial Assets
             Means-Both-Actual       and Projected


Figure 6a.   Personal Financial Assets, Total and Retirement
             Means-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 6b.   Persoml Financial Assets, Other
             Means-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 6c.   Persoml Financial Assets, Other
             Means-Non-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 6d.   Total Personal Financial Assets
             Means-Contributors-Actual         and Projected


Figure 7a.   Persoml Financial Assets, Total and Retirement
             Medians-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 7b.   Persoml Financial Assets, Other
             Medians-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 7c.   Persoml   Financial Assets, Other
             Medians-Non-Contributors-Indexed


Figure 7d.   Total Persoml Fimncial Assets
             Medians-Contributors-Actual         and Projected


Figure 8.    Home Equity
             All Respondents-Selected     Cohorts-Lndexed



                                                 -37-
Table 1. Projection Equation Estimated Cohort Effects, by Asset and Contributor Status
                 Persoml Retirement                Total Persoml Fimncial       I   Other Personal Financial
                          Assets                              Assets                         Assets
  Cohort
               Coefficient         t-Stat          Coefficient         t-Stat       Coefficient     t-stat
                      a. Both Contributors and Non-Contributors                 -- Means
C42        I     14076              19.0       I     16002               8.2    I      1927           1.0      II
C44              11085              17.9             12024               7.3             939          0.6
C46               9997              17.3              9568               6.3            -428         -0.3
C48        I      7821              14.8       I      6556               4.7    I     -1264          -0.9      II
C50               5759              11.9              4132               3.2          -1626          -1.3
C52               3814               8.6              1459               1.2          -2354          -2.1
C54                1944              4.7               452               0.4          -1492          -1.4
C56                 363              0.9               734               0.7             370          0.4
C58        I     -1604              -3.9       I     -1682              -1.6    I        -78         -0.1      II
C60              -3815              -8.7             -5165              -4.5          -1349          -1.2
C62              -5813             -12.1             -3796              -3.0           2017           1.7
C64              -8130             -15.4             -5234              -3.7           2895           2.2
C66             -10345             -18.0             -8766              -5.8           1578           1.1
C68        I    -12049             -19.2       I    -12203              -7.3    I       -154         -0.1      II
C70             -13103                         I    -14081                      I       -981
                                           b. Contributors -- Means
C42              30138              16.3             31120               4.4             982          0.1
C44              24305              15.8             25331               4.3            1025          0.1
C46        I     21990              15.3       I     20567               3.8    I     -1423           0.2      II
C48              17802              13.5             16136               3.2          -1666          -0.3
1C50             13235              11.0             11451               2.5          -1784          -0.4
C52               8697               7.9              5686               1,3          -3011          -0.7
C54               4355               4.2              2536               0.6          -1818          -0.5
C56                 381              0.4                379              0.1               -2         0.0
C58               -4140             -4.1             -5351              -1.4          -1210          -0.3
C60               -8972             -8.2            -15512              -3.7           -6539         -1.6
C62             -12970             -10.8            -10886              -2.4           2084           0.5
C64             -17496             -13.3            -10101              -2.0           7395           1.5
C66             -21873             -15.3            -11122              -2.0          10751           2.0
C68             -26299             -16.8            -24331              -4.1            1968          0.3
C70             -29153                              -35903                            -6752
Table 1. Projection Equation Estimated Cohort Effects, by Asset and Contributor Status,
                                        Cont.
                Personal Retirement       Total Personal Financial       Other Persoml Financial
 Cohort               Assets                       Assets                         Assets
              Coefficient    t-stat       Coefficient      t-stat        Coefficient    t.-stat
                                 c. Contributors -- Medians
C42             16066         11.8          21522            6.5           -6078          2.3
C44             12793         11.3          19358            7.0           -2771         -1.2
C46             12074         10.3          17811            6.9           -2955         -1.4
C48              9936         10.3          14804            6.2           -2441         -1.3
C50              7383          8.3          11362            5.2           -2005         -1.1
C52              5066          6.2           7053            3.5           -1964         -1.2
C54              3103          4.1           4498            2,4           -1753         -1.2
C56                910         1.2             163           0.0           -1370         -1.0
C58             -1953         -2.6          -3451           -1.9             -374        -0.3
C60             -5556         -6.3          -9896           -5.0           -1806         -1.1
C62       I     -7414         -8.4    I    -11095           -5.1     I        -74        -0.0      II
C64            -10617        -11.0         -12503           -5.3            3520          1.8
C66            -12448        -11.8         -15700           -6.1            5184          2.5
C68       I    -14046        -12.2    I    -20652           -7.3     I      7186
C70            -15297                 I -23274                       I      7701                   11
Table 2. Summary of Cohort Effeets at Selected Age Intervals: Percents and Conditional
                   Means and Medians (1984 $s), 1984 and 1991
                                                       Means               Medians
         Age Interval & Data Reported
                                               1984            1991    1984     I    1991
kge 55 to 59
411Respondents
 Personal Retirement Assets                    3456             9015      --            --

 Other Personal Financial Assets               19271           17052      --            --

 Total Persoml Financial Assets               22729            26066      --            --

Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                43              43      43           43
 Personal Retirement Assets                     8215           21225   5561         11997
 Other Personal Financial Assets              31864            31028   11997        10581
 Total Personal Financial Assets              40081            52254   19878        28952
Non-Contributors
 % Without Persoml Retirement Saving              57              57      57           57
 Total Personal Financial Assets                9744            6590    1006          921

Age 60-64
Ml Respondents
 Persoml Retirement Assets                      3946           10914       --           --

 Other Personal Fimncial Assets                28629           27959       --           --

 Total Personal Financial Assets               32575           38874       --           --

Contribut ors
 % With Persoml Retirement Saving                 38              42      38           42
 Personal Retirement Assets                     9968           25795    6300        17076
 Other Persoml Financial Assets                51397           50160   17720        16598
 Total Persoml Fimncial Assets                 61365           75954   26996        38691

Non-Contr ibutors
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving             62              58      62           58
 Total Personal Financial Assets               13468           12684    2073         1645
 Table 2. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Intervals: Percents and Conditional
                    Means and Medians (19?34$s), 1984 and 1991
                                                              Means                  Medians
         Age Interval & Data Reported
                                                      1984            1991     1984          1991
Age 65-69
All Respo ndent$
 Personal Retirement Assets                            2467           8022         --            --

 Other Personal Fimncial Assets                      33352        29483            --            --

 Total Personal Financial Assets                     35819        37505            --            --

Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                       19              35        19           35
 Persoml Retirement Assets                            11925       24672         7245        14047
 Other Personal Financial Assets                     62073        60753        31659        27762
 Total Persoml Financial Assets                      73998        85426        40948        53636
Non-Contributors
  % Without Personal Retirement Saving                   81              65       81            65
 Total Persoml Fimncial Assets                       22708            17152     9171          7446

Based on mean and median regressions controlling for age, education, marital status, and income. Tht
means for each age-saver group are evaluated at the 1987 means of the demographic variables for tha
group. The medians are evaluated at the 1987 medians of the demographic variables.      All values art
in 1984 dollars.
Table 3. ANOVA Estimates of the Effect of Employer Pension Wealth on Personal
        Financial Assets, by SS Wealth Percentile, and by Asset and Year
SS Wealti     Personal Retirement      Other Persoml         Total Persoml
Percentile          Assets            Financial Assets      Financial Assets
                                     1984
               -.021       (.010)    -.006       (.050)     -.027      (.053)
               -.000       (.013)     .052       (.061)      .052      (.065)
               -.005       (.015)     .125       (.073)      .120      (.078)
                .008       (.016)    -.003       (.077)      .005      (.082)
                .028       (.016)     .230       (.075)      .257      (.079)
               -.005       (.011)     .159       (.055)      .153      (.058)
               -.008       (.012)     .024       (.059)      .016      (.062)
               -.012       (.016)    -.112       (.078)     -.124      (.083)
               -.008       (.014)     .126       (.067)      .118      (.071)
                .006       (.010)     .045       (.048)      .052      (.051)
                                     1987
                .013       (.013)     .074        (.053)     .087      (.056)
               -.001       (.015)    -.040        (.060)    -.041    ~ (.064)
               -.011       (.023)     .054        (.090)     .043      (.096)
               -.008       (.020)    -.086        (.078)    -.093      (.083)
                .000       (.017)     .173        (.068)     .174      (.073)
                .020       (.013)     .208        (.053)     .228      (.056)
                .002       (.010)     .009        (.041)     .012      (.043)
                .020       (.014)      .027       (.057)     .047      (.060)
                .005       (.018)     -.278       (.071)    -.274      (.075)
               -.032       (.013)      .278       (.052)     .246      (.056)
                                     1991
1st             .006       (.020)      .066       (.055)     .072      (.062)
2nd            -.003       (.042)      .003       (.116)     .Ooo      (.131)
3rd             .105       (.039)      .087       (.107)     .192      (. 121)
4th             .064       (.030)      .084       (.083)     .147      (.093)
5th            -.016       (.023)     -.023       (.064)    -.039    . (.073)
6th            -.029        (.026)     .065       (.071)     .036      (.080)
7th            -.007        (.029)    -.007       (.080)    -.013      (.090)
8th             .054        (.028)     .111       (.078)     .165      (.088)
9th             .057        (.026)     .031       (.071)     .088      (.080)
lotb           -.027        (.022)     .039       (.061)     .012      (.069)
4ppendix Table 1. Components of Asset Categories, Proportion of Families Owning, and
A

                     Mean and Median hvels, Age 65-69, 1991
                                                          Percent
               Asset Category and Component               Owning    Mean    Median
I‘ersonal (Targetted) Retirement Assets                     34.5    10992       0
Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs)                       30.8     7239       0
401(k) Accounts                                              3.8      617       0
Keogh Plans                                                  1.9     1439       0
Life Insurance and annuities                                 3.0     1626       0


(lther Personal Financial Assets                            84.8    42018    7428
Saving Accounts & CDs                                       72.2    19894    3600
Money Markets Funds, Bonds, & Securities                    13.3     8007       0
    Stocks & Mutual Funds                                   21.9    13219       0
    U.S. Savings Bonds                                      14.1      548       0
    Non-Interest Bearing Checking Accounts                  38.4      351       0


I3mployer-Provided        Pension Assets                    56.2    62305   16017
    Pension                                                 34.6    23276       0
    Railroad Retirement                                      2.0     3483       0
    Federal                                                  5.1     9767       0
    State Government                                         2.6    11550       0
    Local Government                                         2.8     3569       0
    Military                                                 7.1     5251       0
    Veterans                                                 5.2     3891       0
    Other                                                    3.0     1517       0


(Social Security Assets
L                                                           88.0    99682   99167


1Rome Equity                                                75.3    64955   50000


1Equity in Other Property                                   81.8    33855    5992
    Net Equity in Other Property                            13.2     7450       0
    Motor Vehicle Equity                                    80.6     6902    3950
    Business Equity                                          5.9     7180       0
    Rental Property                                          7.7     7961       0
    Other Properties (vacation, commercial,... )             1.4      369       0
    Money Owed to Family                                     2.6      685       0
    Equity in Other Financial Investments                    3.5     2258       0
    Money Owed to Family-Business/Property         Sale      2.7     1049       0
             =      =       =      =        =       =       =       =                =          =       =       =               =        =       =        =
                                                                                                                                w        Q                d
                     —.                                                                                                         o        m                c
    0                                                                                                                           w        3                m
    P                                                                                                                                    N                F

    ......   ..... ....     ...    .....    ...... ....     ...     ,...., .....      .... .....        .....   .....           .....    ...     ,....,   ,..


    00
                                                                                                                                s
                                                                                                                                m
                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                                 m
    u                                                                                                                           m                m
    ......   ....   ....    ,...   .....            .....   ...     ,...., .....      ....      ....    .....   .....           .....    ...     ,....,    ..
                                                                                                                m                        m
                                                                                                                m                        Q
    u                                                                                                           m                        m
    u                                                                                                           m                        b

             ....   .....   ...    .....            .....   ...     ,...., .....     ..... .....        .....   .....           .....    ...     ,....,   ,..
                                                                                                        m       m               a
                                                                                                        b       m               m
                                                                                                        m       m               m
                                                                                                        m       *               o
             ....   ....    ...    .....    ...... .....    ,.... ,...., .....        .... .....        ..... ..... ...... ....          ...     ....     ,..
                                                                                            m           b           m
                                                                                            e           u
                                                                                            m           *           w
                                                                                            e           w           o
             ....   ....    ,...   .....    ...... .....    ...     ,...., .....     ..... .....        ..... .....     ...... .....     ...     ....      ..
                                                                                     m m                      0
                                                                                     b      o                 N
                                                                                     N                        m
                                                                                     e      00                o
             .... ,...., ....      .....            .....   ,.... ,....,              ....      .....   ..... .....             .....    ...     ....      ..
                                                                                     b                  m
                                                                                     @                  m
    m                                                                                s                  o
    m                                                                                &                  m
    ......   .... ,...., ,...      .....    ...... .....    ,.... ,....,              ....      .....   ..... ..... ...... ....          ...     ....     .. .
                                                                   m                            0
                                                                   e                            m
    *                                                              m
    m                                                              m                            m
    ...... .... ,...., ....        .....    ...... ....     ,.... ....               .....      .....   ..... ..... ...... .....         ,....   .....    .. .
                                                                  0                  e
                                                                  m                  b
    *                                                             o
    m                                                               P                d
                                                                                     l-l


             ,...., ....    ....   .....    .....   ....    ,....   .....            .. . . .   .....   ..... .....             ....     ,....   ....     .. .
                                                    m
                                                    m
                                                    m
                                                    N

             .... .....     ....   .....    ..... ,....,    ,...    .....   ......   .....      .....   ..... ..... ..... ,....,          ...    .....    . ..
                                            m 0                     0
                                            m *                     m
                                            ~      b                o
                                                   m                m
             ..... .....    ....   .....    ..... ,...., ....       .....   ......   .....      .....   ....    ..... .....     ....     ,...    .....    .. .
                                   u        m
                                   m        w
                                   o        m
                                   m        *
             .... .....     ....   .....            ....    ....    ..... ......     .....      .....   ....    ....    ,....., ,....,   ,...    .....    . ..
                            w      m                *
                            N      m                m
                            w      w                w
                                   *
                                                    d


             ..... .....    ....   ....             ....    ....    .....            .....      .....   ,... ....       .....   ....     ....    .....    . ..
                    w       N
                    m       w
                    w       w
                            *
             ..... .....    ....   ,...,,           ....    ....    ..... ......     .....      ....    ....    ,...., .....    ....     ....    .....    . ..

             m      m              m
                                   u
             o
             m      zv             m
                                   o
—   —        —      —       —      —                —       —       —                —          —       —       —       —       —        —       —

    .4“      N
             e
             =
                    e
                    *
                    =
                            c
                            *
                            =
                                   g
                                   =
                                                    m
                                                    m
                                                    =
                                                            *
                                                            w
                                                            =
                                                                    c
                                                                    m
                                                                    =
                                                                                     o
                                                                                     u
                                                                                     =
                                                                                                m
                                                                                                c
                                                                                                =
                                                                                                        s
                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                                w
                                                                                                                u
                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                        00
                                                                                                                        Q
                                                                                                                        =
                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                P
                                                                                                                                =
                                                                                                                                         N
                                                                                                                                         b
                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                                                 F
                                                                                                                                                 =
                                                                                                                                                          u
                                                                                                                                                          P
                                                                                                                                                          =
   Appendix Table 3a. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Intervals: Percents and
            —                Conditional Means (1984 $s)
            Age Interval & Data Reported        I    1984     I    1987          1991
Age 50 to 54
IAll Respondents
  Personal Retirement Assets                         2772          5748          9103
 Other Persoml Financial Assets                     14456         14483         13501
 Total Persoml Financial Assets                     17227         20231         22604
Contribute r s
  % With Personal Retirement Saving                    36            42            46
 Personal Retirement Assets                          7498         13767         20413
 Other Personal Financial Assets                    27744         27511         24024
 Total Personal Financial Assets                    35241         41277         44436
Non-co ntributors
  % Without Persoml Retirement Saving                  64            58     “      54
 Total Personal Financial Assets                     6165          5145          5390

Age 55-59
All Responti
 Persoml Retirement Assets                           3456          6581          9015
 Other Personal Financial Assets                    19271         18956         17052
 Total Personal Financial Assets                    22729         25537         26066
Contribute r s
  % With Personal Retirement Saving                    43            43            43
 Personal Retirement Assets                          8215         15325         21225
 Other Personal Financial Assets                    31864         34953         31028
 Total Personal Financial Assets                    40081         50279         52254
Non-co ntributors
  % Witiout Personal Retirement Saving                 57            57            57
 Total Personal Financial Assets                     9744          6916          6590

Age 60-64
       spondenm
 Persoml Retirement Assets                           3946          6923         10914
 Other Personal Financial Assets                    28629         25153         27959
 Total Personal Financial Assets                    32575         32076         38874
     Appendix Table 3a. Surnrnary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Internals: Percents and
              —
                                 Conditional Means (1984 $s)
              Age Interval & Data Reported         I     1984    I    1987     I     1991
P
     ntr ibutor~
    % With Personal Retirement Saving                      38           41             42
    Personal Retirement Assets                          9968         17042         25795
    Other Personal Financial Assets                    51397         41179         50160
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    61365         58220         75954
Non-Contributor&
    % Without Personal Retirement Saving                   62           59             58
    Total Personal Financial Assets                     13468        14189          12684

Age 65-69
All Respondent
    Personal Retirement Assets                          2467          4342          8022
    Other Personal Financial Assets                    33352         31238         29483
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    35819         35580         37505
          utor~
    % With Personal Retirement Saving                      19           27             35
    Personal Retirement Assets                          11925        16037         24672
    Other Personal Financial Assets                    62073         58129         60753
    Total Personal Fimncial Assets                     73998         74166         85426
Non-Contribute r s
    % Without Personal Retirement Saving                   81           73             65
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    22708         21253          17152

Age 70-74
All Respondents
    Personal Retirement Assets                           1626         1834          4433
    Other Personal Financial Assets                    34291         34469         35680
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    35917         36303         40112


    % With Personal Retirement Saving                       8           15             20
    Personal Retirement Assets                          14698        12594         22623
    Other Personal Financial Assets                    88181         66427         89799
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    102878        79020         112421
Non-Contr ibutors
    % Without Personal Retirement Saving                   92           85             80
    Total Personal Financial Assets                    26585         29020         25201
  Appenti      Table 3a. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Intervals: Percents and
                                Conditional Means (1984 $s)
            Age Interval & Data Reported                  1984            1987            1991
Age 75-79
All Respondents
 Personal Retirement Assets                                960           1082             1778
 Other Personal Financial Assets                         30271          29241           33360
 Total Personal Financial Assets                         31231          30323           35138
Contributors
 %With Personal Retirement Saving                            6               7              11
 Personal Retirement Assets                              16305          16218            19187
 Other Personal Financial Assets                         76484          75562           69867
 Total Personal Financial Assets                         92789          91780           89054
Non-Co ntributors
 %Without Personal Retirement Saving                        94              93              89
 Total Personal Financial Assets                         27025          25930           31141

Age 80+
   Rest)ondents
 Personal Retirement Assets                                431             575      .     1243
 Other Personal Fimncial Assets                          27493          27949           29880         .

 Total Personal Financial Assets                         27924          28524           31123
Contributers
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                           4               4               5
 Personal Retirement Assets                               8551          15288           25500
 Other Personal Financial Assets                         78271          54771           76091
 Total Personal Financial Assets                         86812          70059           101591
Non-Contr ibutors
 %Without Personal Retirement Saving                        96              96              95
 Total Personal Financial Assets                         25166          26900           27656

Based on mean regressions controlling for age, education, marital status, and income. The means fol
each age-saver group are evaluated at the 1987 means of the demographicvariables for that group.
All values are in 1984 dollars.
  Appendix Table 3b. Summary of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Intervals: Percents and
                           Conditional Medians (1984 $s)
            Age Interval & Data Reported       I    1984     I    1987     I    1991
Age 50 to 54
co ntributor~
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                    36            42            46
 Personal Retirement Assets                         5374          8828         11542
 Other Personal Financial Assets                    8851          8806          7701
 Total Personal Financial Assets                   16392         20792         22883
Non-Contributors
 %Without Personal Retirement Saving                  64            58            54
 Total Personal Financial Assets                     831           829           721

Age 55-59
Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                    43            43            43
 Personal Retirement Assets                         5561         10051         11997
 Other Personal Financial Assets                   11997         13274         10581
 Total Personal Financial Assets                   19878         26918         28952
Non-Contributors
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving                 57            57            57
 Total Personal Fimncial Assets                     1006           951           921

Age 60-64
Cent ributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                    38            41            42
 Personal Retirement Assets                         6300         10954         17076
 Other Personal Financial Assets                   17720         16800         16598
 Total Personal Financial Assets                   26996         30832         38691
Non-ContributoE
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving                 62            59            58
 Total Personal Financial Assets                    2073          1834          1645

Age 65-69
Contributor
  % With Personal Retirement Saving                   19            27            35
 Personal Retirement Assets                         7245         10420         14047
 Other Personal Financial Assets                   31659         32493         27762
 Total Personal Financial Assets                   40948         49222         53636
  Appendix     Table 3b.   S~ary      of Cohort Effects at Selected Age Intervals:   Percents    and
               —                    Conditional Medians (1984 $s)
             Age Interval & Data Reported              I    1984      I     1987      I     1991       II
~s
N n-
  % Without Personal Retirement Saving                        81              73                65
 Total Personal Financial Assets                            9171           8949            7446

Age 70-74
Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                              8             15                20
 Personal Retirement Assets                                 7965           7753           13018
 Other Personal Financial Assets                           43715          38972           32263
 Total Personal Financial Assets                           58169          50713           53319
No n-Contr ibutors
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving                         92              85                80
 Total Personal Financial Assets                           14216          13815           12257

Age 75-79
Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                             6               7                11
 Personal Retirement Assets                                 6184           7402           10961
 Other Personal Financial Assets                           42655          52361           36523
 Total Personal Financial Assets                           54756          60602           57442
Non-Contributors
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving                         94              93                89
 Total Personal Financial Assets                           13297          12188           12800

Age 80+
Contributors
 % With Personal Retirement Saving                             4               4                 5
 Personal Retirement Assets                                 5445           5162            9199
 Other Personal Financial Assets                           45564          30640           39777
 Total Personal Financial Assets                           61278          46280           63012
Non-Cent ri butors
 % Without Personal Retirement Saving                         96              96                95
 Total Personal Financial Assets                            9493           9637            8836

Based on median regressions controlling for age, education, marital status, and income. The median!
for each age-saver group are evaluated at the 1987 medians of the demographic variables for thz
group.    All values are in 1984 dollars.
         Fig la.    Median Assets by Year
               Fami es Aged 65 to 69
350000


300000


250000
                                        Other Personal Financial
                                    /
200000                                  n
                                    .   Other Non-Liquid
150000

                                        Home Equity
100000
                                        s
 50000


     0   —           -t ——              Social Security
             1984            1991
                     Year
             Fig 1b. Mean Assets by Year
                  Families Aged 65 tc 69
    350000
                                          Personal Retirement
    300000

                                      \   Other Personal Financ
    250000                                *I,*
                                          I&.,,.
                                               ,.,
E
                                      \
                                          ❑:{*.,.,
g 200000                                  Other Non-Liquid
c
‘: 150000
                            ‘--1          ❑
                                          Home Equity
5                                         s
    100000
                                          Em Ioyer Pension

     50000                                d
                                          Social Security
         0              I


               1984            1991
                      Year

                                                                  —
    Fig Ic.   Mean Wealth Increase 1984-91
                     Families 65-69



               .—.               -—
                                          Social Security


                                          Employer Pension
                                 -—


                                          Home

                                          ❑
                                          Other Non-Liquid


1                                         Oth Per Fin

                                      \   •1
                                          Personal Retirement
0
                   Fig 2. IRA and 401(k) Contributions
     50




                                         —
     40
                                                       7


                                        ---1
                                      —
                               —


c
.—




     10

                          I

      0        I      I

          1980’1981   ‘ 1982’1983’1984’1985’          1986’1987’   388 ‘ 1989.’ 199C
                                               Year

                                ❑ IRA ■ 401(k)
            Fig 3a. Retirement Plan Contributions
     140

     120



c
.—




     20

       0        +                 +              +
                                                         1986          1988
           1980     1981   1982       1983   1984 1985          1987          1989
                                                Year

                    ❞✌✛❞❉
                     ✛✌ ❑ Keogh ❑ 401(k) ❑
           DB       ❑,,;f@.Dc                                          IRA    I
         Fig 3b. National Flow of Funds Saving
500


400




100



  0
       1980   1981   1982   1983   1984 1985   1986   1987   1988   1989
                                      Year

❑     FOF Unadjusted U       FOF NIPA Basis    ■ Tot Retire Cent       I
            Fig 4a.        Illustration         of Cohort Data
                        Personal      Retirement       Assets

    16000

    14000
                                         ro
    12000

    10000



     6000

     4000
                                                                                          —
     2000

          0
              46 ‘ 48   50’52’54’    56’58’60’626466’68
                                                Age
                                                                         [,-
                                                                      ‘70’
                                                                                d
                                                                               72’74’76



■   C46       ❑   C52    ❑     C58   ~C64          ❑      C72   +84            CS+91CSI
             Fig 4b. Illustration                           of Cohort Data
                   Personal             Retirement          Assets--Fitted


     16000
                                                  I           ---   J---   -------------------
     14000                   ---1
                                                  i--                I
                                    I
     12000

     10000
VI
:     8000
a
      6000

      4000

      2000
                                    I
                                                   I                 I                   I

         0     1    1       1       1   1   1     1     1     1     1      1      1      1       1   1   1


              46   48       SO 5’2 ti       5’6 5’8 dO d2           d4     66   d8     7’0 ~2 7’4 7’6
                                                     Age

                        ~           C46 ~       C52 _       C58 _           C64 _            C72
            Fig 5a. Personal Retirement Assets
                          All     Respondents--Five                   Cohorts--Means

    16000 I                                                                                                     I
    14000
            !
    12000 +-----
                ‘-------------’                 ---------
                                                                            1-----
            i
    10000


            I
                ‘------
~


:    8000       -------
n
     6000       -------

    4000

    2000

        0   w   --

                --

                46          48
                                ---

                                ---

                                      50   52    54’56’58’60’62
                                                                  Age
                                                                           64   66     68   70   72   74   76




                                       ■        ’46❑ “2           ❑      ❑ ’64❑ C7”,
                                                                       C58
         Fig 5b. Other Personal Fin Assets
             All Respondents--Five    Cohorts--Means
    60000


    50000


    40000
p
:30000
n
    20000


    10000


         0    L                                    I




                                     Age



                  ■ “’ E     c“   ❑ C58 D    C64       ❑ ’70   I
        Fig 5cmTotal Personal                Fin Assets
         Al   Respondents--Five        Cohorts--Means

60000


50000                                                                          i




                                  m




20000


                                              I

                                                                      1



                                  58 60 62          68   7C 72   74       76
                                      Age
                      Fig 5d. Total PFA v PRA
                     All Respondents--Selected                     Cohorts

     60000                                                    ,-


     50000

     40000
VI



     20000

     10000

         0-,   L
               “--




                 ‘
               52’54’5
                       ‘“
                         ,;..



                                     58
                                           t
                                               60
                                                Age
                                                    I


                                                        62         64   66’68’70



                                                             —

■       C52-Tot ~          C58-Tot   ❑    C64-Tot       ❑    C52-Ret         C58-Ret   ❑   C64

                                                                                                 1
             Fig 5e. Personal Financial Assets
                              Total and Retirement
                              Means--All Respondents--Indexed
  50000



  40000

                     fax------
                     d----
               ----------74
                                              ---------




                   _r_.
                    __-l
                     ----
  30000                                                                _l______       l __________
                                                                        I             I
                                                                        I             I
                                                                         I            I




             /f+--
020000                                                                 -\--.   -.-+           ----------




             /p++&+_
                                                                         1                I
                                                                         I                I
                                                                        I                 I
  10000                                                                 1- —              ,—




         0    I   !   I   I   I   I   k   I       1       I   I    I     I     I      )             I      I   I


             ~2~~6~8~O#2#4~6#8dOd2                                &6’6d8/0i2#47’6
                                                  Age
    Fig 5f. Personal Financia                                   Assets

                 Means--All Respondents--Indexed
50000



40000
                                                                                --



30000                                                                        -- L------




                                                                               _r ----------




10000   -4,  ____&________i
                  I       I       I
                                      ___
                                                  l------
                                                  I
                                                                [-----
                                                                I
                  I       I       I               I             I

    0    I   I    I   I   I
        4’2 44464850525456:
                              I   I     I     I
                                            ld06’2d4d66’87
                                            ige
                                                            I   I        I
                                                                                     m
            Fig 5g. Total Pers Financial Assets
                 Means--Both--Actual                  and Projected
    70000



    60000                                                                        ._ --- .—.——



                                                                            .——
    50000                                                              —./ ———._—
                                                                                —_—
                                                                       //

~
:40000                                                                     /–.       ––. ––. .
a

    30000



    20000



    10000    m   I    I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I    I   I   I   I   I         I      I   I

             42 ~    46 48 5’0 5’2 #4 5’6 5’8 dO 6’2 d4 6’6 6’8 7’0 /2                 7’4 7’6
                                           Age
             Fig 6a. Personal Financial Assets
                                 Total and Retirement
                                Means--Contribuors--l ndexed
    120000


    100000
                                                                                                        -----/----


     80000                                                                       -_,---         -       -----         =-

~
:    60000                            :::---~~i               --+.       -       --       __. -. +_____               < __________
n

    40000              //’
                  ----L-
                  /1/-111
                                              -4       ----+--           ----l------t----           ‘                  ‘
                                                                                                                    -4-------




     20000


         0    I    I    I   I     I       I        d      I          I       I        I     I       I           1      I        I   I   I

             4’2 &     46 4’8 50 5’2 i4                 5’6 58 6’0 62 64 66 6’8 7’0 7’2 74 t6
                                                             Age
    Fig 6b. Personal Financial Assets
                                        Other
                      Means--Contributors--Indexed
120000


100000




                                                                        ‘------z
                                                                              --------
 80000




 40000
                                             “--:---ti
                                                    ~                   -1-----




                                                                          ,::
                                                                      --[------
                                                                                      -




                                                                                      I------
                                                                                                ‘ -------------




                                                                                                       L ---------


                                                                          I
 20000                                - t-----~------l------l--                             ----L          ----------
                  I          I          I               I                 I           I                I

                  I          I          I               I                 I           I                I

     0    I   I   I     I    II   I     I       I       i         I       I       I   I         1                 I     I   I


         42 44 464’8        5’0 5’2 ~4 5’6 5’8 6’0 6’2 d4 d6 6’8 /0                                           7’2 7’4 7’6
                                            Age
         Fig 6c. Personal Financial Assets
                                                      Other
                               Means--Non-Contributors--Indexed



                  ---------------------------
    ‘20000 ~

    100000
                 I
                 t
                                                                                                              ~--------
                                                                                                                                           I

     80000           --------------------------------------
                 +
                                                                                                 I            I


~
n
     60000
                 I   ------------------------------                           -   I   ‘---
                                                                                                 I

                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                             I
                                                                                                     --------------




                 1~Pi&
     40000 ------------------------                               -+--   ----I------I------L--                         --------




     20000           ---- ---l----- -~-----t               ------- -----1------                          --       ----------




             0        !    I     d    I     II   I     I      I     I     I       I          I   I   I        1        I          I   I

                     42 44 46 4’8 50 52 ~4 g6 58 d“ 6’2 d4 d6 68 7’0 7’2 /4                                                           76
                                               Age
             Fig 6d. Total Pers Financial Assets
                   Means--Contributors--Actual                                      and Proj
    180000


    160000


    140000


    120000
~
~
g
    100000


     80000


     60000                                            , -=       ----------------                ---------



     40000
              m
     20000     I    I   I   1   I   I   I   I     I          I      1      I        1   I    I     I         I   I

              4’2~464’8505’2            54#65’8     6062                 646668             /0/27’47’6
                                                  Age
               Fig 7a. Personal Financial Assets
                                  Total and Retirement
                            Medians--Contribuors--l       ndexed
   70000


   60000


   50000


 p 40000
=u
:30000

                                                {I                                 I
   20000                                        .l______l______       ;_____       4______




   10000


           0    I   I   I     I   I   1     I    I    I      I    I   I        I   I     I   I   I
                                                                                                     .
               4’2 44 4’6 4’8 5’0 5’2 d4 i6     5’8 dO 6’2 d4 66 6’8 7’0 7’2 7’4 7’6
                                                 Age
           Fig 7b. Personal Financial Assets
                                                Other
                           Medians--Contributors--I ndexed
  70000


  60000


  50000
                                                                                                          I
                                                                                          I               I
 ~ 40000                                            . .
                                                                                    -r        -----       -
=u
830000
                                                          I
                                                              ____;_____            ./c__
                                                                                       -.
   20000


   10000
                    ----------:-----~-:fl------:
                                       r—–—–-
                                                9
                                                                                  --l--
                                                                                          1
                                                                                                ____;         ______
                           —,———
                                                          I         I   ‘--

                             I                            I         I                     I               I

           0    I      I    I      I   I   I    i   I           I             I                       I          1     I    I


               4’2 ~       46 4’8 dO 5’2 d4 ~6 5’8 6’0 6’2 6’4 d6 6’8 7’0 7’2 /4                                           76
                                                Age
           —.—              —                              —-                       .-—
           Fig 7c. Personal Financial Assets
                                              Other
                       Medians--Non-Contributors--Indexed
  70000
               T
  60000        1   -


   50000                                                                                                     r
               t                                                                                             I




               1
                                                                                                    I        I
 p 40000           -
                                                                                                  ‘r ---     1-
=u                                                                             I                    I        1
830000”            -                                            -—             I___          _--l----        L..
                                                                I              I                    I        I




               I
                                                                I              I                    I        I
  20000            -                   ___~_____,                   ______, ____               ._l____
                                                                                                             }--
                        I          I          I                 I              I                    I        I
                        I          I          I                 I              I                    (        I
   10000                                                                                                     r——————        -——-
                       -1------1       ---r       -----l              -        l------              l-----   1
               {                                                                                             \
                        I          I          I                 I              I                    I
               t                                                                                    1

           0                                                              I
                                                                               I      1  )I       I                     I          I

               ~0                                                             6’2 64 d6 6’8 i’O /2                     74 7’6
                                                                Age
             Fig 7d. Total Pers Financial Assets
               Medians--Contributors--Actual   and Proj
    110000
                                                                     /
    100000                                         . .../   ––F-––




     90000

     80000

     70000



u    50000

     40000

     30000

     20000

     10000

                                    Age
                 Fig 8. Home Equity
            All Respondents--Selected       Cohorts
                            Indexed


50000                                                  --c
        i
45000


.!
40000




                                                66
                                                     1+
                                                     68      70
                                  Age

             ■    C46   ❑   C52   ❑   C58   ❑    C64      ❑       C72
