NBER WORKING

PAPER SERIES

CONSUMPTION AND THE STOCK
MARKET: INTERPRETING
INTERNATIONAL
EXPERIENCE

John Y. Campbell

Working Paper 5610

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

This paper was prepared for the Economic Council of Sweden’s conference on Financial Markets
and the Macroeconomy,
Stockholm, October 6, 1995. I am grateful to Lars-Erik Oiler, Lars
Svensson, and Anders Vredin for helpful comments, to Luis Viceira for exceptionally able
research assistance, and to Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities Limited, Morgan Stanley Capital
International, David Barr and Paul Soderlind for providing data. This paper is part of NBER’s
research programs in Asset Pricing, Economic Fluctuations and Growth, and Monetary
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
O 1996 by John Y. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5610
June 1996

CONSUMPTION AND THE STOCK
MARKET: INTERPRETING
INTERNATIONAL
EXPERIENCE

ABSTRACT

This paper reviews the behavior of stock prices in relation to consumption.
lists some

important stylized facts that characterize

The paper

US data, and relates them to recent

developments in equilibrium asset pricing theory. Data from other countries are examined to see
which features of the US experience apply more generally.

The paper argues that to make sense

of stock market behavior one needs a model in which investors’ risk aversion is both high and
varying, such as the external habit-formation model of Campbell and Cochrane (1995).

John Y. Campbell
Department of Economics
Littauer Center
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

The behavior of aggregate stock prices is a subject of enduring fascination
policymakers,

and economists.

In recent years stock markets have continued to show some fa-

miliar pat terns, including high average returns and volatile and procyclical
Economists

have struggled to understand these patterns.

fundamentals,

to investors,

then what exactly

are these fundamentals

price movements.

If stock prices are determined by
and what is the mechanism

by

which they move prices?
Researchers, working primarily with US data, have documented

a host of interesting styl-

imd facts about the stock market and its relation to short-term interest rates and aggregate
consumption.

1. The average real return on stock is high. In quarterly US data over the period 1947.2
to 1993.4, for example, the average real stock return has been 7.’2%at an annual rate.
(Here and throughout the paper, the word return is used to mean a log or continuously
compounded

ret urn. )

2. The average riskless real interest rate is low. 3-month Treasury bills deliver a return
that is riskless in nominal terms and close to riskless in real terms because there is only
modest uncertainty about inflation at a 3-month horizon.

In the postwar quarterly US

data, the average real return on 3-month Treasury bills has been 0.770per year.
3. Real stock returns are volatile, with an annualized standard deviation of 15.8% in the
US data.
4. The real interest rate is much less volatile.

The annualized standard deviation of the

real return on US Treasury bills is 1.8Y0, and most of this is due to short-run inflation
risk. The volatility of a measure of the ex ante real interest rate is likely to be lower
than 1.8%.
5. Real consumption
grwth

growth is very smooth.

rate of seasonally

The annualized standard deviation

adjusted real consumption

1.1% in the US data.

1

of nondurable

of the

and services is

6. Real dividend growth is extremely volatile at short horizons because dividend data are
not adjusted

to remove seasonalit y in dividend payments.

The annualized quarterly

standard deviation of real dividend growth is 29.070 in the US data. At longer horizons,
however, the volatility of dividend growth is intermediate between the volatility of stock
returns and the volatility of consumption

growth. At an annual frequency, for example,

the volatility of real dividend growth is 7.3% in the US data.
7. Quarterly

real consumption

growth and real dividend growth have a very weak cor-

relation of 0.05 in the US data, but the correlation

increases at lower frequencies

to

slightly exceed 0.20 at horizons from 2 to 4 years.
8. Real consumption

growth and real stock returns have a quarterly correlation

of 0.21

in the US data, The correlation increases to 0.34 at a l-year horizon, and declines at
longer horizons.
9. Quarterly real dividend growth and real stock returns have a very weak correlation
0.04 in the US data, but the correlation increases steadily with the horizon.

of

It is 0.14

at a l-year horizon, 0.28 at a 2-year horizon, and 0.53 at a 4-year horizon.
10. Real US consumption

growth is not well forecast by its own history or by the stock

market. The first-order autocorrelation
and services consumption

of the quarterly growth rate of real nondurable

is a modest 0.2, and the log price-dividend

less than 107o of the variation of real consumption

ratio forecasts

growth at horizons of 1 to 4 years.

11. Real US dividend growth has some short-run foreca.stability arising from the seasonality
of dividend payments.

But it is not well forecast by the stock market. The log price-

dividend ratio forecasts no more than about 9% of the variation of real dividend growth
at horizons of 1 to 4 years.
12. The real interest rate hm some positive serial correlation; its first-order autocorrelation
in postwar quarterly US data is 0.5. However the real interest rate is not well forecast

by the stock market, since the log price-dividend

ratio forecasts no more than 1% of

the variation of the real interest rate at horizons of 1 to 4 years.
13. Excess returns on US stock over Treasury bills are highly forecastable.

The log price-

dividend ratio forec~sts 2070 of the variance of the excess return at a l-year horizon,
almost 4070 at a 2-year horizon, and 5570 at a 4-year horizon.

These facts raise two important questions for students of macroeconomics

●

Why

is the average

on short

●

Why

stock

return

so high

in relation

and finance.

to the average

return

debt?

are stock

returns

so volatile?

Mehra and Prescott (1985) call the first question the “equity premium puzzle”.2
theory explains the expected

Finance

excess return on any risky asset over the riskless interest rate

as the quantity of risk times the price of risk. In a standard consumption-based

asset pricing

model of the type studied by Hansen and Singleton (1983), the quantity of stock market risk
is me=ured

by the covariance of the excess stock return with consumption

the price of risk is the coefficient of relative risk aversion of a representative

growth, while
investor.

The

high average stock return and low riskless interest rate (stylized facts 1 and 2) imply that
the expected

excess return on stock, the equity premium, is high.

But the smoothness

consumption

(stylized fact 5) makes the covariance of stock returns with consumption

of

low;

hence the equity premium can only be explained by a very high coefficient of risk aversion.
Some authors, such as Kandel and Stambaugh
indeed much higher than traditionally
puzzle”

of Weil (1989).

tbought.

However this can lead to the “riskfree rate

If investors are very risk averse, then they have a strong desire to

transfer wealth from periods with high consumption
consumption

(1991), have argued that risk aversion is

to periods with low consumption.

Since

has tended to grow steadily over time, high risk aversion makes investors want

‘For excellent recent surveys, see Cochrane and Hansen (1992) or Kocherlakota (1996).
Hansen discuss the puzzle using the methodology of Hansen and Jagannathan (1992).

3

Cochrane and

to borrow to reduce the discrepancy between future consumption

and present consumption.

To reconcile this with the low real interest rate we observe, we must postulate that investors
are extremely patient; their preferences give future consumption
current consumption,

almost as much weight as

or even greater weight than current consumption.

In other words they

have a low or even negative rate of time preference.
I will call the second question the “stock market volatility puzzle”,
puzzle, it is helpful to cl~sify

To understand

the

the possible sources of stock market volatility. Recall first that

prices, dividends, and returns are not independent

but are linked by an accounting

identity.

If an asset’s price is high today, then either its dividend must be high tomorrow, or its return
must be low between today and tomorrow,
one excludes the possibility
bubble”,

or its price must be even higher tomorrow.

that an asset price can grow explosively

If

forever in a “rational

then it follows that an asset with a high price today must have some combination

of

high dividends over the indefinite future and low returns over the indefinite future. Investors
must recognize this fact in forming their expectations,
expect some combination

of high future dividends

so when an asset price is high investors
and low future returns.

prices must then be associated with some combination
about future dividends

and changing expectations

Movements

of changing expectations

in

( “news”)

about future returns; the latter can in

turn be broken into news about future riskless real interest rates and news about future
excess returns on stocks over short-term

debt.

Until the early 1980’s, most financial economists

believed that there was very little pre-

dictable variation in stock returns and that dividend news was by far the most important
factor driving stock market fluctuations.
lenged this orthodoxy

LeRoy and Porter (1981) and Shiner (1981) chal-

by pointing out that plausible measures of expected future dividends

are far less volatile than real stock prices.

Their work is related to stylized facts 6, 9, and

11.
Later in the 1980’s Campbell
Poterba

and Summers

and Shiner (1988a,b),

Fama and French (1988a,b,

1989),

(1988) and others showed that real stock returns are highly fore-

cast able at long horizons.

Even more striking, excess returns on stock over Treasury bills

4

are just as forecastable
13. Campbell

as real returns on stock. This work is related to stylized facts 12 and

(1991) and Campbell

and Ammer (1993) use this evidence to show that the

great bulk of stock market volatility is associated with changing forecasts of excess stock returns. Changing forecasts of dividend growth and real interest rates are much less important
empirically.
The stock market volatility puzzle is closely related to the equity premium puzzle.

A

complete model of stock market behavior must explain both the average level of stock prices
and their movements

over time.

One strand of work on the equity premium puzzle makes

this explicit by studying not the consumption
consumption

covariance of measured stock returns, but the

covariance of returns on hypothetical

assets whose dividends

equal consump-

tion. The same model is used to generate both the volatility of stock prices and the implied
equity premium.

This was the approach of Mehra and Prescott (1985), and many subsequent

authors have followed their lead.
Unfortunately,

it is not easy to construct

a model that fits all the stylized facts given

above. Even if one follows the literature in equating consumption

and dividends, it is hard to

produce sufficient variation in stock prices without excessive variation in expected consumption (dividend)

growth and in riskless real interest rates.

The standard

model of Hansen

and Singleton (1983) and Mehra and Prescott (1985), with a constant variance for consumption (dividend)

growth,

only from predictable

gets variation in stock prices relative to consumption

variation in consumption

(dividend)

(dividends)

growth which creates predictable

variation in the riskless real interest rate. In this model there is no predictable

variation in

excess stock returns.
Since the data suggest that predictable variation in excess returns is an important

source

of stock market volatility, researchers have begun to develop models in which the quantity of
stock market risk or the price of risk change through time. ARCH models and other economet ric methods show that the conditional
conditional

variance of stock returns is highly variable.

If this

variance is an adequate proxy for the quantity of stock market risk, then perhaps

it can explain the predictability

of excms stock returns.

5

1 here are several problems

with

this approach.

First, changes in conditional

variance are most dramatic in daily or monthly

data and are much weaker at lower frequencies.

There is some business-cycle

volatility, but it does not seem strong enough to explain large movements
prices (Bollerslev,

variation in

in aggregate

stock

Chou, and Kroner 1992, Schwert 1989). Second, forecasts of excess stock

returns do not move proportionally

with estimates of conditional

variance (Harvey

1989,

1991, Chou, Engle, and Kane 1992), Finally, one would like to derive stock market volatility
endogenously

within a model rather than treating it as an exogenous variable. There is little

evidence of cyclical variation in consumption

or dividend

volatility that could explain the

variation in stock market volatility.
A more promising
Cochrane

possibility

is that the price of risk varies over time.

(1 995), building on the work of Abel ( 1990), Constantinides

have recently

proposed

Campbell

(1990),

a simple asset pricing model with this property.

and

and others,

Campbell

and

Cochrane suggest that assets are priced as if there were a representative agent who consumes
aggregate consumption;

but in a departure from the standard model, the agent’s utility is

a power function of the difference between consumption

and “habit”,

moving nonlinear average of past aggregate consumption.

where habit is a slow-

This utility function

makes the

agent more risk-averse in bad times, when consumption is low relative to its past history, than
in good times, when consumption

is high relative to its past history. Stock market volatility is

explained by a small amount of underlying consumption

(dividend)

risk, amplified by variable

risk aversion; the equity premium is explained by high stock market volatility, together with
a high average level of risk aversion.
This paper has two objectives.

First, it tries to summarize recent work on stock price be-

havior, much of which is highly technical, in a way that is accessible to a broader professional
audience.

Second,

the paper summarizes the behavior of stock markets in other countries

and asks which of the US stylized facts hold true more generally.
literature is used to guide the exploration
The organization

The recent theoretical

of the international data.

of the paper is as follows.

Section 1 introduces the international

data

and reviews stylized facts 1-9 to see which of them apply outside the United States. (Addi-

6

tional details are given in a Data Appendix

available from the aut her. ) Section 2 discusses

the equity premium puzzle, taking the volatility of stock returns as given.

Section 3 dis-

cusses the stock market volatility puzzle. This sect ion also reviews stylized facts 10-13 in the
international data. Section 4 presents the Campbell and Cochrane (1995) model of changing
risk aversion and explores its relevance for the international data. Section 5 concludes.

1

International

Stock Market

Data

The stylized facts described in the previous section apply to postwar quarterly US data. Most
empirical work on stock prices uses this data set, or a longer annual US time series originally
put together by Shiner (1981).

But data on stock prices, interest rates, and consumption

are also available for many other count ries.
To construct an international

quarterly data set, I use Morgan Stanley Capital Interna-

tional (MSCI) stock market data covering the period since 1970. I combine the MSCI data
with macroeconomic

data on consumption,

interest rates, and the price level from the Inter-

national Financial Statistics (IFS) of the International

Monetary

Fund. For some countries

the IFS data are only available quarterly over a shorter sample period, so I use the longest
available sample for each country. Sample start dates range from 1970.1 to 1978.4, and sample end dates range from 1993.3 to 1994,3. I work with data from 12 countries:
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,
United Kingdom,

Australia,

Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,

the

and the United States.

For some purposes it is useful to have data over a much longer span of calendar time.
I have been able to obtain annual data for Sweden and the UK over the period 1919-1993
to complement

the US annual data for the period 1890-1992.

The Swedish data come from

Frennberg and Hansson (1992) and Hassler, Lundvik, Persson, and Soderlind

(1994), while

the UK data come from Barclays de Zoete Wedd Securities (1995) and Economist
In working with international

stock market data, it is important

(1987 ).3

to keep in mind that

different national stock markets are of very different sizes, both absolutely and in proportion
to national GDP’s.
capitalization
each country’s

for the quarterly MSCI data.

Column

several measures of stock market

1 gives the market capitalization

MSCI index at the end of 1993, in billions of $US. Column

market capitalization
capitalization

Table 1 illustrates this by reporting

for

2 gives the

for each country as a fraction of its GDP. Column 3 gives the market

for each country ~ a fraction of the US MSCI index capitalization.

Column

31 acknowledge the invaluable assistance of Paul Sderlind with the Swedish data and David Barr with
the UK data. Pull details about the construction of the quarterly and annual data are given in a Data
Appendix available from the author.

8

4 gives the market capitalization
MSCI index capitalization.

for each country as a fraction of the value-weighted

world

Since the MSCI index for the United States is only a subset

of the US market, the last row of the table gives the same statistics for the value-weighted
index of New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange
Center for Research in Security Pric~

(CRSP)

stocks reported by the

at the University of Chicago.

Table 1 shows that most countries’ stock markets are dwarfed by the US market. Column
3, for example,

shows that the Japanese MSCI index is worth only 65% of the US MSCI

index, the UK MSCI index is worth only 30~o of the US index, the French and German
MSCI indexes are worth only 11% of the US index, and all other countries’
worth less than 107o of the US index.

indexes are

Column 4 shows that the US and Japan together

account for 6670 of the world market capitalization,

while the US, Japan, the UK, France,

and Germany together account for 86~o. In interpreting

these numbers one must keep in

mind that the MSCI indexes do not cover the whole market in each country (the US MSCI
index, for example,

is worth about half the US CRSP index), but they do give a guide to

relative magnitudes

across count ries.

Table 1 also shows that different countries’

stock market values are very different as a

fraction of GDP. If one thinks that total wealth-output

ratios are likely to be fairly constant

across countries, then this indicates that national stock markets are very different fractions
of total wealth in different countries.
Switzerland,

In highly capitalized

countries such m the UK and

the MSCI index accounts for about 80% of GDP, whereas in Germany, Italy,

and Spain, it accounts for less than 2070 of GDP. The theoretical
the stock market as a claim to total consumption,

differences in capitalization

of treating

or as a proxy for the aggregate wealth

of an economy, makes much more sense in the highly capitalized
international

convention

countries.

More generally,

deserve further study.

Table 2 reports summary statistics for international

returns. For each country the table

reports the mean, standard deviation,

and first-order autocorrelation

of the real stock return

and the real return on a short-term

debt instrument .4 Both means and standard

devia-

4As explained in the Data Appendix, the best available short-term interest rate is sometimes a Treasury
bill rate and sometimes another money market interest rate.

9

tions are given in annualized percentage

points.

To annualize the raw quarterly numbers,

means are multiplied by 400 while standard deviations are multiplied by 200 (since standard
deviations increase with the square root of the time interval in serially uncorrelated
The top panel of Table 2 gives numbers for the 12-country

data).

quarterly MSCI data; the

middle panel gives numbers for the standard postwar quarterly US data set summarized in
the introduction;

and the bottom

panel gives numbers for the long-term

The table shows that the first four stylized facts given in the introduction

annual data sets.
are fairly robust

across countries.
1. Stock markets have delivered average real returns of 5~o or better in almost every
country and time period.
concentrated

The exceptions

to this occur in short-term quarterly data, and are

in markets that are particulmly

that predominantly

small relative to GDP (Italy and Spain), or

represent claims on natural resources (Australia and Canada).

2. Short-term debt has rarely delivered an average real return above 3%. The exceptions
to this occur in two countries, Germany and the Netherlands,

whose sample periods begin

in the late 1970’s and thus exclude the surprise inflation of the oil-shock period.
3. The annualized standard deviation

of stock returns ranges from 16% to 28%.

It is

striking that the two markets with the highest volatility, Italy and Spain, are the two smallest
markets relative to GDP and the two markets with anomalously

low average returns.

4. In quarterly data the annualized volatility of real returns on short debt is 4% for Spain,
3% for Italy, Sweden, and the UK, and well below 3% for all other countries.

Volatility is

higher in long-term annual data because of large swings in inflation in the interwar period,
particularly
unanticipated

in 1919-21.

Much of the volatility

in these real returns is probably

inflation and does not reflect volatility in the ex ante real interest rate.

Table 3 turns to data on aggregate consumption
is organized

due to

and stock market dividends.

The table

in the same way m Table 2. It illustrates the robustness of two more of the

stylized facts given in the int roduct ion.
5. In the postwar period the annualized standard deviation of real consumption
is ,lever above 370. This is true even though data are used on total consumption,

10

growth
rather

than nondurable

and services consumption,

for all countries other than the US. Even in the

longer annual data, which include the turbulent interwar period, consumption

volatility is

only slightly higher than 370.
6. The volatility of dividend growth is much greater than the volatility of consumption
growth, but generally less than the volatility of stock returns. The exceptions
in countries with highly seasonal dividend
autocorrelations

payments;

to this occur

these countries have large negative

for quarterly dividend growth and much smaller volatility when dividend

growth is measured over a full year rather than over a quarter.
Table 4 reports the mntemporaneous

correlations among real consumption

growth, real

dividend growth, and stock returns. It turns out that these correlations are somewhat sensitive to the timing convention
the level of consumption

used for consumption.

A timing convention

is needed because

is a flow during a quarter rather than a point-in-time

we think of a given quarter’s consumption

data as measuring consumption

observation.

If

at the beginning of

the quarter, then consumption

growth for the quarter is next quarter’s consumption

divided

by this quarter’s consumption.

If on the other hand we think of the consumption

data as

measuring consumption
consumption
of- quarter”

at the end of the quarter, then consumption

divided by last quarter’s consumption.
timing convention

between consumption

Table 4 uses the former,

“beginning-

because this produces a higher contemporaneous

correlation

growth and stock returns.

The timing convention
longer horizons,

growth is this quarter’s

has less effect on correlations

Table 4 also shows how the correlations

when the data are measured at
among real consumption

real dividend growth, and real stock returns vary with the horizon.

growth,

Each pairwise correlation

among these series is calculated for horizons of 1, 4, 8, and 16 quarters in the quarterly data
and for horizons of 1, 2, 4, and 8 years in the long-term

annual data. The table illustrates

three more stylized facts from the introduction.
7. Real consumption

growth and dividend growth are generally weakly positively

corre-

lated in the quarterly data. In many, but not all, countries the correlation increases strongly
with the measurement horizon. The quarterly correlation is negative for the Netherlands but

11

turns positive at longer horizons,

Negative long-horizon

correlations appear for Italy (with a

very small stock market ), Japan (with anomalous dividend behavior),
correlations of consumption

and dividend growth are moderately

and Switzerland.

The

positive in the longer-term

annual data sets.
8. The correlations

between real consumption

variable across countries.

growth rates and stock returns are quite

In many countries the quarterly correlations are small but increase

somewhat at horizons of 1 or 2 years. The correlations are moderately

positive in the longer-

term annual data sets.
9. The correlations

between real dividend growth rates and stock returns are small at a

quarterly horizon but increase dramatically
country.

The correlations

with the horizon.

This pattern holds in every

also increase strongly with the horizon in the longer-term

annual

data.
After this preliminary look at the data, I now use some simple finance theory to interpret
the stylized facts.

12

2

The Equity Premium

To understand
representative

Puzzle

the equity premium puzzle, consider the intertemporal

choice problem of a

investor who can trade freely in some asset i and can obtain a gross rate of

return (1 -+ ~,t+l ] on the asset held from time t to time t + 1. If the investor consumes Ct at
time t and has time-separable
her first-order condition

utility with discount factor 6 and period utility U(Ct),

then

is

U’(C,)

= 6Et [(1 + &,t+l)U’(C~+l)]

(1)

.

The left hand side of (1) is the marginal utility cost of consuming one real dollar less at time
t; the right hand side is the expected

marginal utility benefit from investing the dollar in

asset z at time t, selling it at time t + 1, and consuming the proceeds.

The investor equates

marginal cost and marginal benefit, so (1) must describe the optimum.
The cl~sic

statement of the equity premium puzzle assumes that there is a representative

agent who maximizes a time-separable

power utility function:

w
c:;;
Max ~ b~ —
l–~’
j =0

(2)

where ~ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion. This utility function has several important
properties.

First, it is scale-invariant;

change over time as aggregate

with constant return distributions,

wealth and the scale of the economy

this, if different investors in the economy
utility function,

risk premia do not

increase.

Related to

have different wealth levels but the same power

then they can be aggregated

into a single representative

investor with the

same utility function as the individual investors. A possibly less desirable property of power
utility is that the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution

is the reciprocal of the coefficient

of relative risk aversion ~. Epstein and Zin (1991) and Weil (1989) have proposed
general utility specification

a more

that preserves the scale-invariance of power utility but breaks the

tight link between the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution.

13

Equation (2) implies that U’(Ct)=
I=Et

C~-v, sodividing
(l+

Ri,~+l)6

[

(l) by U’(Ci)

Ct+l-’
()] t
~

we get

.

(3)

This way of writing the model is due originally to Grossman and Shiner (1981); Hansen and
Jagannathan

(1992) have developed its implications in detail.

For simplicity I now follow Hansen and Singleton (1983) and assume that the joint conditional distribution of asset returns and consumption

is lognormal and homoskedastic.

While

these assumptions are not literally realistic – stock returns in particular have fat-tailed distributions with variances that change over time – they do make it e~ier to discuss the main
forces that should determine the equity premium.
When a random variable X is conditionally

lognormally distributed, it has the convenient

property that
log E,X = E, log X + ~Vart log X ,
where Vart log X s Et [(log X — Et log X)2].

If in addition X is conditionally

then Varf log X = E[(log X–E~ log X)2] = Var(log X–Et
lognormality

and homoskedasticity

(4)

log X).

homoskedastic,

Thus with joint conditional

of asset returns and consumption,

I can take logs of (3)

and obtain
O = E~ri,t+l + log 6 – ~EtAct+l +
Here Ct = log(Ct)

and Tit = log( 1 + Rit), while u: denotes the unconditional

log return innovations
consumption
innovations

(5)

~ [~~ + ~z~~ – 2~~iC] .
()

Var(~i,t+l – E~ri,~+l) , u: denotes the unconditional

variance of

variance of log

innovations Var(c~+l – EtCt+1), and uiC denotes the unconditional

covariance of

Cov(~i,~+l — Etri,l+l, C~+l— Etct+l).

Equation (5) has both time-series and cross-sectional
For this ~set

with a riskless real return ~j,t+l.

implications.

the return innovation

Consider first an asset
variance u; and the

covariance afC are both zero, so the risklas real interest rate obeys
~f,t+l

=

– logd

+ ~EtA~+l

72U:

– ~

.

This equation says that the riskless real rate is linear in expected
slope coefficient equal to the coefficient of relative risk aversion.
14

(6)
consumption

growth, with

The assumption of homoskedasticity

makes the log risk premium on any asset over the

riskless real rate constant, so expected real returns on other assets are also linear in expected
consumption

growth with slope coefficient ~. The log risk premium is

The varianm term on the left hand side of (7) is a Jensen’s Inequality adjustment
from the fact that we are describing expectations
if we rewrote the equation
log Et[(l + ~,t+l)/(l
premium

is determined

consumption

growth,

of log returns. This term would disappear

in terms of the log expectation

+ Rf,t+l)]

of the ratio of gross returns:

= ~O:c. The right hand side of (7) says that the log risk

by the coefficient

of relative risk aversion times covariance

Intuitively, an asset with a high consumption

low returns when consumption

arising

with

covariance tends to have

is low and the marginal utility of consumption

is high. Such

an asset is risky in that it fails to deliver wealth precisely when wealth is most valuable to
the investor. The investor therefore demands a large risk premium to hold it.
Table 5 uses equation

(7) to illustrate the equity premium puzzle.

For each data set

the table reports the average excess log return on stock over short-term

debt, adjusted for

Jensen’s Inequality by adding one-half the sample variance of the excess log return to get a
sample estimate of the left hand side of (7). This adjusted average excess return is multiplied
by 400 to express it in annualized percentage points. The table then reports the annualized
standard deviation

of the excess log stock return (given earlier in Table 2), the annualized

standard deviation of consumption

growth (given earlier in Table 3), the correlation between

the excess log stock return and consumption

growth, and the product of these three variables

which is the annualized covariance ~iCbetween the log stock return and consumption
Finally, the table gives two columns with implied risk aversion coefficients.
headed RRA( 1) uses equation
the estimated covariance

growth.

The column

(7) directly, dividing the adjusted average excess return by

to get estimated risk aversion .5 The column headed RRA(2)

the correlation of stock returns and consumption

sets

growth equal to one before calculating risk

SThe ~alculatlonis done correctly, in natural units, even though the table reports averageexcess ‘etUrns
and covariances in percentage point units.
multiplied by 100.

Equivalently, the ratio of t,he quantities given in the table is

15

aversion,

This is often done implicitly in calibration

exercises such as Mehra and Prescott

(1985), Campbell and C!ochrane (1995), or Abel (1996).
Table 5 shows that the equity premium puzzle is a robust phenomenon
data. The coefficients of relative risk aversion in the RRA(l)

in international

column are generally extremely

large. They are usually many times greater than 10, the maximum level considered plausible
by Mehra and Prescott
because

the estimated

but in these cues
low correlation

(1985).

In a few cases the risk aversion coefficients

covarianm

the covariance

between

of stock returns with consumption
is extremely

close to zero.

stock ret urns and consumption

best chance by setting the correlation

growth is negative,

Even when one ignores the

growth

to one, the RRA(2)

are negative

and gives the model

its

column still has risk aversion

coefficients above 10 in most cases. Thus the fact shown in Table 4, that for some countries
the correlation

of stock returns and consumption

increases with the horizon,

is unable by

itself to resolve the equity premium puzzle.
The risk aversion estimates in Table 5 are of course point estimates
to sampling error.
such as Cecchetti,

No standard errors are reported for these estimates.
Lam, and Mark ( 1993) and Kocherlakota

and are subject
However authors

( 1996), studying the long-run

annual US data, have found small enough standard errors that they can reject risk aversion
coefficients below about 8 at conventional

significance levels.

One response to the equity premium puzzle is to consider larger values for the coefficient
of relative risk aversion ~. Kandel and Stambaugh
this leads to a second puzzle.

Equation

(1991) have advocated

(5) implies that the unconditional

this.6 However
mean riskless

interest rate is
E~j,t+l=–log6+Tg–~,
where g is the mean growth rate of mnsumption.

72u:

(8)

Since g is positive, as shown in Table 3,

high values of ~ imply high values of ~g. Ignoring the term –720~/2

for the moment,

this

‘One might think that introspectionwould be sufficientto rule out very large valuesof 7, but Kandel and
Stambaugh(1991) point out that int rospection can deliver very different estimates of risk aversion depending
on the size of the gamble considered. This suggests that introspection can be misleading or that some more
general model of utility is needed.

16

can be reconciled with low average short-term real interest rates, shown in Table 2, only if
the discount factor 6 is close to or even greater than one, corresponding
negative rate of time preference.
Intuitively,

to a low or even

This is the riskfree rate puzzle emphasized by Weil (1989).

the riskfree rate puzzle is that if investors are risk-averse then with power

utility they must also be extremely unwilling to substitute intertemporally.
average consumption

Given positive

growth, a low riskless interest rate and a positive rate of time preference,

such investors would have a strong desire to borrow from the future to reduce their average
consumption

growth

rate.

A low riskless interest rate is possible in equilibrium

only if

investors have a negative rate of time preference that reduces their desire to borrow.
Of course, if the risk aversion coefficient ~ is high enough then the negative quadratic 72
term in equation

(8) dominates

the linear term and pushes the riskless interest rate down

again. The quadratic term reflects precautionary
consumption
to borrow.

streams have a precautionary

savings; risk-averse agents with uncertain

desire to save, which can work against their desire

But a reasonable rate of time preference is obtained only as a knife-edge case.

Table 6 illustrates the riskfree rate puzzle in international

data.

the average riskfree rate from Table 2 and the mean consumption
deviation of consumption
ficients calculated

growth rate and standard

growth from Table 3. These moments and the risk aversion coef-

in Table 5 are substituted

for an implied time preference

rate.

points per year; it can be interpreted
consumption

The table first shows

into equation

The time preference

(8), and the equation
rate is reported

is solved

in percentage

as the riskless real interest rate that would prevail if

were known to be constant forever at its current level, with no growth and no

volatility. The table shows that risk aversion coefficients in the RRA(2)
time preference rates, whereas larger risk aversion coefficients

range imply negative

in the RRA( 1) range imply

time preference rates that are often positive but always implausible and vary wildly across
countries.
The discussion in this section has taken the volatility of stock returns as given.
ask what accounts for this volatility.

17

I now

The Stock Market

3

Volatility

Puzzle

To understand the stock market volatility puzzle, it is useful to have a framework relating
movements

in stock prices to movements in expected

future dividends and discount rates.

The present value model of stock prices is intractably
turns are time-varying,
approximation

nonlinear when expected

stock re-

but Campbell and Shiner (1988a) have suggested a useful loglinear

to the exact present value model.

Campbell

and Shiner’s loglinear relation

between prices, dividends, and returns provides an accounting framework:

High prices must

eventually be followed by high future dividends or low future returns, and high prices must
be associated

with high expected

future dividends or low expected

future returns.

Simi-

larly, high returns must be associated with upward revisions in expected future dividends or
downward revisions in expected
The loglinear approximation
log(Pi,t+~ + D;,i+~) – log(Pit).

future returns.
starts with the definition of the log return on stock i, ri,t+l =

The timing convention here is that prices are measured at the

end of each period so that they represent claims to next period’s dividends.

The log return

is a nonlinear function of log prices pit and pilt+l and and log dividends di,t+i, but it can be
approximated
expansion.

around the mean log dividend-price

The raulting

approximation

‘i,t+l

where pi and

ki s – log(~i)
Pi

=

Pi/(Pi

+

ki are

=

+

is

PiPi,t+l

+

(1

parameters of linearization

– (1 – pi) log(l/~i
Di),

‘i

– 1).

ratio, (di~ – pit), using a first-order Taylor

–

Pi)di,t+l

–

pit

defined by pi s 1/(1 + exp(di~ – pit)) and

When the dividend-price

the ratio of the ex-dividend

(9)

,

ratio is constant,

to the cum-dividend

postwar quarterly US data shown in Table 3, the average price-dividend
on an annual b=is,
approximation

implying

stock price.

then
In the

ratio has been 26.4

that pi should be about 0.964 in annual data.

The Taylor

(9) replaces the log of the sum of the stock price and the dividend

exact relation with a weighted average of the log stock price and the log dividend.

in the
The log

stock price gets a weight pi close to one, while the log dividend gets a weight 1 — pi close
to mro because the dividend

is on average much smaller than the stock price, so a given
18

percentage

change in the dividend

has a much smaller effect on the return than a given

percentage change in the price.
Equation (9) is a linear difference equation for the log stock price. Solving forward, imposing the “no-bubble”

condition that limj~~

p{pt+j = O, taking expectations,

and subtracting

the current dividend, one gets

~i~ –

~i~ =

ki

—
I–pi

m
+

Et

~
P: [Adi,t+l+j
j=l)

This equation says that the log price-dividend

–

ri,t+l+j]

(lo)

.

ratio is high when dividends are expected

to

grow rapidly, or when stock returns are expected to be low. The equation should be thought
of as an accounting
by approximating
expectations.

identity rather than a behavioral

model;

it has been obtained

an identity, solving forward subject to a terminal condition,

Intuitively,

return and the assumption

merely

and taking

if the stock price is high today, then from the definition of the
that the stock price is non-explosive,

there must either be high

dividends or low stock returns in the future. Investors must then expect some combination
of high dividends

and low stock returns if their expectations

are to be consistent with the

observed price.
Equation (10) describes the log price-dividend

ratio rather than the log price itself. This

is a useful way to write the model because in many data sets dividends

appear to follow a

loglinear unit root process, so that log dividends and log prices are nonstationary.
case changes in log dividends
stationary provided

are stationary,

that the expected

dividends are cointegrated,

so from (10) the log price-dividend

In this
ratio is

stock return is stationary,

Thus log stock prices and

and the stationary linear combination

of these variables involves

no unknown parameters since it is just the log ratio.
Table 7 reports some summary
dividends.

statistics for international

The table gives the average price-dividend

prim-dividend

stock prices in relation

ratio, the standard deviation of the log

ratio in natural units, the first-order autocorrelation

of the log price-dividend

ratio, average growth rates of prices, dividends, and the log price-dividend

ratio in percentage

points per year, and a test statistic for the null hypothesis that the log price-dividend

19

to

ratio

has a unit root.

Following standard practice,

the price-dividend

ratio is measured as the

ratio of the current stock price to the total of dividends paid during the past year.
Average price-dividend

ratios vary considerably across countries but generally lie between

20 and 30. The extreme outlier is Japan, which has an average price-dividend
The volatility and first-order autocorrelation

of the log price-dividend

ratio of 86.

ratio are also unusually

high for Japan, reflecting an upward trend in the Japanese log price-dividend

ratio for much

of the sample period which is also visible in the average growth rates of prices and dividends
at the right of the table.
Other countries in the quarterly data set, with the exception
autocorrelation

coefficients for the log price-dividend

root tests do not reject the unit root null hypothesis

ratio of between 0.S5 and 0.95.
for most of these countries,

may reflect low power of the tests in short data samples.
log price-dividend

ratio must be stationary

of France, have first-order

Equation

if real dividend

Unit

but this

(10) implies that the

growth and stock returns are

stationary, so this gives some reason to assume stationarity for the series.
So far I have written asset prices as linear combinations
returns. Following Campbell
revisions in expected

This equation

of expected future dividends and

(1991 ), I can also write asset returns as linear combinations

future dividends and returns. Substituting

says that unexpected

of future dividends or real returns.

msociated

with a capital gain today, while an increae

ciated with a capital loss today.

(10) into (9), I obtain

stock returns must be associated

pectations

of

with changes in ex-

An increase in expected
in expected

future dividends

is

future returns is asso-

The reason is that with a given dividend

stream, higher

future returns can only be generated by future price appreciation from a lower current price.
I now use this accounting
Following

Campbell

(1986)

framework

to illustrate the stock market volatility

and Abel (1996)

I assume that the aggregate

denoted by subscript m, pays a dividend equal to aggregate consumption

puzzle.

stock market,

raised to a power

A. In logs, we have
(12)
20

Abel (1996) shows that the coefficient
standard

model of Lucas (1978),

(1985) h=

A = 1, but dividends

~ can be interpreted as a measure of leverage.

Grossman

and Shiner (1981),

The

and Mehra and Prescott

can be made more volatile than consumption

by setting

A>l.
The representative agent reset pricing model with power utility, conditional lognormality,
and homoskedasticit y (equations

(6) and (7)) implies that
Etr~,t+l = pm + ~EiAct+l

The expected

(13)

.

log return on the aggregate stock market, like the expected

other asset, is just a constant term plus 7 times expected
Substituting

consumption

log return on any

growth,

equations (12) and (13) into equations (10) and (11 ), I find that
(14)

and
w

rm,t+l — Et r~,t+l = ~(Act+l

— EtAct+l) + (A — ~)(Et+l

–

Et) ~

PLAcf+l+j

.

(15)

j=l

Expected

future consumption

growth has offsetting

effects on the log price-dividend

tie. It has a direct positive effect by increasing expected
has an indirect negative effect by incre~ing
The unexpected
consumption

expected

future dividends A-for-one, but it

future real interest rates ~-for-one.

log return on the stock market is A times contemporaneous

growth (since contemporaneous

raneous dividend A-for-one),
future consumption
These equations

ra-

consumption

unexpected

growth increases the contempo-

plus (A – ~) times the discounted

sum of revisions in expected

growth.
can be simplified if I assume with Mehra and Prescott

aggregate consumption

growth follows a first-order

autoregressive

(1985)

that

( AR( 1) ) process of the

form
(16)

Aci+l = (1 – ~)g + ~Act + Zt+l ,
where g is mean consumption

growth and Et+l denotes the innovation

coefficient ~ is the first-order autocorrelation

coefficient for consumption
21

in consumption.

The

growth, as reported

in Table 3. Equation (16) allows me to rewrite (14) and (15) as
,=km+(A–~g)+(A–

_d
pmt

m

T)#
~ _ ~md (Act -g)

l–pm

(17)

,

and
rm,t+l — Et rm,t+l =

(18)
(Al~:m:)

‘+1

These formulas show how difficult it is to account for stock market volatility within the
standard model.
autocorrelated.

First consider the case where # > 0, so consumption
In this case a positive consumption

growth is positively

shock raises the current dividend

and

expected future dividend growth, but it also raises real interest rates. These offsetting effects
make it hard to explain both the equity premium and the volatility of stock prices.

From

the previous section we know that a large ~ is needed to explain the equity premium;
then ~ – ~pm~ tends to be small (implying
negative (implying

that stock returns are not volatile)

that stock returns are negatively

correlated with consumption

but

or even
and the

equity premium is negative).
Next consider
current dividend,

the case where # < 0.
lowers expected

Here a positive

future dividend

growth,

consumption

shock raises the

and lowers real interest rat es.

Now A – Tpm# can be large and positive when 7 is large, implying volatile and procyclical
stock prices.
Unfortunately

this case has several unappealing

ratio is a linear function

of consumption

Negative autocorrelations

The log price-dividend

growth so it follows an AR(1)

same persistence parameter @ as consumption
have large positive autocorrelations

implications.

growth.

process with the

In the data, log price-dividend

(Table 7) which are inconsistent with ~ <0.

in consumption

growth also tend to make the riskless real in-

terest rate volatile relative to the log price-dividend

ratio. The price-dividend

ratio reflects

a discounted sum of long-run expected future real interest rates, and this discounted
less volatile than the current real interest rate when consumption
interest rate are negatively autocorrelated.
approaches

ratios

growth and hence the real

As 7 increases, the ratio Var(rft ) /Var(p~t

(1 – pm@)2, which is greater than one when @ <

22

0,

sum is

Empirically,

-

dmt
)

the standard

deviations for real ret urns on short-term debt given in Table 2 (which are reported in percentage points) are much smaller than the standard deviations for log price-dividend

ratios

given in Table 7 (which are reported in natural units).7
Finally, it is troubling that the standard model must rely so heavily on negative autocorrelation of consumption

growth, for which there is no strong evidence.

in Table 4 show negative autocorrelation
sistent pattern.

in consumption

While some countries

growth, this is by no means a con-

8 out of 12 quarterly datasets show negative autocorrelation,

these negative correlations

but only 4 of

are less than -I).1, and 2 out of 3 annual data sets show positive

autocorrelation.a
All of these calculations

rely heavily on the assumptions

model with power utility, lognormal distributions,

of the representative

and constant variances.

Another

agent
way to

use the loglinear asset pricing framework is to study the empirical relationships between log
price-dividend

ratios and future consumption

and excess stock returns. According
rational forecasts of dividend

or dividend growth rates, real interest rates,

to equation (10), the log price-dividend

growth rates and stock returns (which in turn are the sum

of real interest rates and excess stock returns), discounted
compare

the empirical

consumption

ratio embodies

importance

to an infinite horizon.

of these different forecasts

One can

by regressing long-horizon

and dividend growth rates, real interest rates, and excess stock returns onto

the log price-dividend

ratio.

Table 8 reports the results of this exercise.

For each quarterly data set, consumption

growth, dividend growth, the real interest rate, and the excess stock return are computed

in

natural units over 4, 8, and 16 quarters (1, 2, and 4 years) and regressed onto the log pricedividend

ratio divided by its standard deviation.

Thus the regression coefficient

gives the

71n most countries the level (not the log) of the dividend-price ratio haa a standard deviation close to that
of the riskless real interest. rate. Since the standard deviation of the dividend-price ratio is approximately
the average level of the dividend-price ratio times the standard deviation of the log price-dividend ratio, this
implies that the log price-dividend ratio has a standard deviation many times greater than the standard
deviation of the riskles real interest rate,
8There are sever~ data problems that may affect these autocorrelations, but they go in both directions.
Consumption for most countries includes durables, which tends to bias autocorrelation downwards, and is
time-averaged and seasonally adjusted, which tends to bias autocol relation upwards.

23

effect of a one standard deviation change in the log price-dividend

ratio on the cumulative

growth rate or rate of return in natural units. The table reports the regression coefficient,
heteroskedasticity-

and autocorrelation-consistent

In the benchmark
ability to forecast
horizon.

i statistic, and R2 statistic.

postwar quarterly US data, the log price-dividend

consumption

What it does forec~t

growth, dividend growth,

ratio has no clear

or the real interest rate at any

is the excess return on stocks, with t statistics that start

above 4 and increase, and with R2 statistics that start at 0.20 and increase to 0.55 at a
4-year horizon.

In the introduction

these results were summarized

as stylized facts 10, 11,

12, and 13. Table 8 extends them to international data.
10. Regressions of consumption
results across countries.
the Netherlands,
Italy, and Japan.

growth on the log price-dividend

ratio give very mixed

There are stat istically significant positive coefficients in Germany,

and Spain, but statistically
Canada,

significant negative coefficients

France, Sweden, Switzerland,

that they have no statistically significant consumption
11. Results are somewhat

in Australia,

and the UK resemble the US in

growth forecasts.

more promising for real dividend growth in many countries.

Positive and statistically significant coefficients are found in Canada, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Spain, Sweden, and the UK. It seems clear that changing forecasts of real dividend
growth have some role to play in explaining stock market movements.
12. The short-term

real interest rate does not seem to be a promising candidate for the

driving force behind stock market fluctuations,

One would expect to find high price-dividend

rat ios forecasting low real int crest rates, but the regression coefficients are significantly positive in France, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands,

Sweden, Switzerland,

and the UK. This pre-

sumably reflects the fact that stock markets in most countries were depressed in the 1970’s,
when real interest rates were low, and buoyant during the 1980 ‘s, when real interest rates
were high.
13. Finally, the log price-dividend
in almost every country.

ratio is a powerful forecaster of excess stock returns

The regression coefficients are uniformly negative, and statistically

significant everywhere except Japan.

24

In the long-term annual data for Sweden, the UK, and the US, I use horizons of 1 year, 4
years, and 8 years. In the US data the log price-dividend

ratio fails to forecast real dividend

growth, suggesting that authors such u Barsky and De Long (1993) overemphasize
of dividend forecasts in interpreting long-run US experience.
results, the log price-dividend

the role

Consistent with the quarterly

ratio also fails to forecast consumption

growth or the real

interest rate but does forecast excess stock ret urns.
The UK data are similar, although here the 8-year regression coefficients for consumption
growth and dividend growth are even statistically significant with the wrong (negative)

sign.

The 8-year regression coefficient for the real interest rate is also significantly negative, consistent with the idea that the UK stock market is related to the real interest rate. But much
the strongest relation is between the log price-dividend

ratio and future excess returns on

the UK stock market. The Swedish data are quite different; here the log price-dividend
forecasts dividend growth positively

but has no predictive power for consumption

ratio

growth,

the real interest rate, or the excess log stock return.
Overall, these results suggest that a new model of stock market volatility is needed. The
standard model drives all stock market fluctuations from changing forecasts of consumption
(dividend)

growth and real interest rates; forecasts of excess stock returns are constant.

The data for many countries suggest instead that forecasts of consumption

growth and real

interest rates are cons tant, while the stock market is driven by changing forecasts of excess
stock returns.

25

4

Changing Risk Aversion and the Stock Market Puzzles

In previous sections I have documented

a challenging array of stylized facts and have dis-

cussed the problems they pose for standard asset pricing theory. Briefly, the equity premium
puzzle suggests that risk aversion must be high on average to explain high average excess
stock ret urns, while the stock market volatility puzzle suggests that risk aversion must vary
over time to explain predictable
stock prices.

variation in excess returns and the associated volatility of

I now present the model of Campbell

and Cochrane

(1995), which has these

features, and show how it resolves at least some of the difficulties with the standard theory.
The Campbell- Cochrane model assumes that a represent at ive investor derives utility from
the level of consumption

relative to a time-varying subsistence or habit level. The importance

of habit has been emphasized
and Constantinides
Following

including

Constantinides

(1990),

Ferson

(1991), Heaton (1995), Ryder and Heal (1973), and Sundaresan (1989).

Abel (1990),

Campbell

sense that it is determined
the consumption

by many authors,

and Cochrane

assume that the habit is external in the

by the cons umpt ion of the community

of any individual investor. This assumption,

as a whole, and not by

which Abel calls “catching up

with the Joneses”, greatly simplifies the analysis since the investor does not have to calculate
the effect of today’s consumption
Campbell

and Cochrane

the observation

decision on future marginal utility of consumption.

assume that log consumption

follows a random walk. This fits

that most countries do not have highly predictable

growth rates (Tables 3 and 8). The consumption

Act+l = g +

where Zt+l is a normal homoskedastic

innovation

consumption

growth process is

Et+l ,

(19)

with variance u:.

This is just the AR(1)

model (16) of the previous section, with zero persistence in consumption
The utility function of the representative
Et ~

or dividend

growth.

agent takes the form

fij(c~+~ –

j=O

26

Xi+j)l-T
l–~

–

(20)

1
“

Here X~ is the level of habit, 6 is the subjective discount factor, and ~ is the utility curvature
parameter.

Utility depends on a power function of the difference between consumption

habit; it is only defined when consumption
It is convenient
consumption

and

exceeds habit.

to capture the relation between consumption

and habit by the surplus

ratio St, defined by

S=ct–xt
t
c,
The surplus consumption

(21)

“

ratio is the fraction of consumption

therefore available to generate utility in (20).

that exceeds habit and is

If habit Xt is held fixed as consumption

Ct

varies, the local coefficient of relative risk aversion is

(22)

where Uc and Ucc are the first and second derivatives of utility with respect to consumption.
Risk aversion rises as the the surplus consumption
approaches

ratio St declines, that is, as consumption

the habit level. Note that ~, the curvature parameter in utility, is no longer the

coefficient of relative risk aversion in this model.
To complete

the description

of preferences, one must specify how the habit Xt evolves

over time in response to aggregate consumption.
model for the log surplus consumption

ratio, St s log(St):

s,+, = (1 –v)~+vs,
The parameter

Campbell and Cochrane suggest an AR(1)

+~(st)zf+l

(23)

.

p governs the persistence of the log surplus consumption

“sensitivity

function”

~(st)

innovations

in consumption

controls

the sensitivity

ratio, while the

of st+l and thus of log habit Zt+l to

growth ~t+1.

Equation (23) specifies that today’s habit is a complex nonlinear function of current and
past consumption.
definition

St s log(l

A linear approximation
– exp(z,

that (23) is approximately

may help to understand

it. If I substitute

the

– et)) into (23) and linearize around the steady state, I find

a traditional habit-formation

27

model in which log habit responds

slowly and linearly to log consumption,

The linear model (24) has two serious problems.

First, when consumption

nous process such as (19) there is nothing to stop consumption
case utility is undefined.

follows an exoge-

falling below habit, in which

This problem does not arise when one specifies a process for st,

since any real value for St corresponds

to positive St and hence Ct > Xt. Second, the linear

model typically implies a highly volatile riskless real interest rate. The process (23) with a
non-constant

sensitivity function

J (st) allows one to control or even eliminate variation in

the riskless interest rate.
To derive the real interest rate implied by this model, one first calculates the marginal
utility of consumption

as

U’(et) = (Cf – x~)-7 =

(25)

st-~ct-v.

The riskless real interest rate is then

(1 +R{)

( :~:;;))-’=
(~Et(*)-’(*)-’)-’
.
6E,

=

Taking logs, and using equations

(26)

(19) and (23), the log riskless real interest rate is

T/ = –log(J)+Tg–

T(l –V)(st

–~)

–

Mz

[A(s,) + 1]2 .

(27)

The first two terms on the right hand side of (27) are familiar from the power utility
model (8), while the last two terms are new.
intertemporal
of consumption

substitution.
is high.

its mean, so marginal
would like to borrow

The third term (linear in (St – ~)) reflects

If the surplus consumption

However,

ratio is low, the marginal utility

the surplus consumption

utility is expected

to fall in the future.

and this drives up the equilibrium

what determines intertemporal
reversion in consumption

substitution

ratio is expected

28

the consumer

risk free interest rate.

is mean-reversion

itself. In this model consumption

Therefore,

to revert to

Note that

in marginal utility, not meanfollows a random walk so there

is no mean-reversion

in consumption;

but habit formation

gradually to a new level of consumption,

causes the consumer to adjust

cresting mean-reversion

in marginal utility.

The fourth term (linear in [A(st) + 1]2) reflects precautionary
incre~m,

consumers

become

marginal utility, not uncertainty

habit formation

Equation

about consumption

so there is no time-variation

makes a given level of consumption

utility when consumption

As uncertainty

more willing to save and this drives down the equilibrium

riskless interest rate. Note that what determines precautionary

process is homoskedastic

savings.

savings is uncertainty about

itself. In this model the consumption
in uncertainty about consumption;

but

uncertain y more serious for marginal

is low relative to habit.

(27) can be made to match the observed stability of real interest rates in two

ways. First, it is helpful if the habit persistence parameter ~ is close to one, since this limits
the strength of the intertemporal

substitution

effect.

Second,

the precautionary

savings

effect offsets the intertemporal subst itut ion effect if A(St) declines with St. In fact, Campbell
and Cochrane

parametrize

other everywhere,
function

implying

the A( st ) function
a constant

A(st) to satisfy three conditions:

predetermined

so that these two effects exactly offset each

riskless interest rate.

1) The real risk free rate is constant.

at the steady state St = E. 3) Habit is predetermined

or, equivalently, positive shocks to consumption
To understand conditions
a predetermined

is predetermined

near the steady state,

notion of habit makes it

variable. On the other hand habit cannot be predetermined

To make habit ‘as predetermined

growth would leave consumption

as possible”,

at and near the steady state.

possibility that positive shocks to mnsumption
Using these three conditions,

2) Habit is

may increase habit but never reduce it.

2) and 3), recall that the traditional

a sufficiently low realization of consumption

consumption

They choose the sensitivity

Campbell

and Cochrane

This also eliminates

everywhere, or
below habit.

assume that habit
the counterintuitive

cause declines in habit.

Campbell and Cochrane show that the steady-state

surplus

ratio must be a function of the other parameters of the model, and that the

sensitivity function A(st ) must take a particular form. Campbell

and Cochrane pick param-

eters for the model by calibrating it to fit postwar quarterly US data. They choose the mean

29

consumption

growth rate g = 0.4470 per quarter and the standard deviation of consumption

growth a. = 0.56% per quarter to match the moments of the US consumption
Campbell

and Cochrane follow Mehra and Prescott by assuming that the stock market

pays a dividend
dividend

data.

equal to consumption.

They use numerical

ratio for the stock market as a function

methods

to find the price-

of the state variable St. They set the

persistence of the state variable, p, equal to 0.97 to match the persistence of the log pricedividend ratio.g They choose ~ = 2.37 to match the ratio of unconditional
ditional standard deviation

of return in US stock returns.

that at the steady state, the surplus consumption
consumption.

mean to uncon-

These parameter

values imply

ratio S = 0.05 so habit is about 95% of

Finally, Campbell and Cochrane choose the discount factor 6 = 0.97 to give a

riskless real interest rate of 170 per year.
It is important

to understand

that with these parameter

average risk aversion to fit the high unconditional
is ~/S

= 2.37/0.05

values the model uses high

equity premium.

Steady-state

risk aversion

= 48. In this respect the model resembles a power utility model with a

very high risk aversion coefficient.
There are however two important differences between the Campbell-Cochrane
the power utility model with high risk aversion. First, the Campbell-Cochrane
the riskfree rate puzzle of Weil (1989).
consumption

model and
model avoids

Evaluating equation (27) at the steady state surplus

ratio and using the restrictions on the sensitivity function

A(st), the constant

riskless interest rate in the Campbell- Cochrane model is

r{ = –log(6)

+?g–

().

In the power utility model the same large coefficient
growth term and the consumption

2 02

:

~

~ would appear in the consumption

volatility term (equation

model the curvature parameter y appears in the consumption
lower than the steady-state

risk aversion coefficient ~/S

volatility term. Thus in the Gampbell-Cochrane

(28)

(8)); in the Campbell-Cochrane
growth term, and this is much

which appears in the consumption

model a much lower value of the discount

‘Rather than matching quarterlypersistencedirectly, Campbell and Cochrane use the fourth root of the
estimated annual persistenceof the log price-dividend ratio.

30

factor 6 is consistent

with the average level of the risk free interest rate, and the model

implies a less sensitive relationship between mean consumption
Second,

the Campbell- Cochrane

consumption,

growth and int crest rates. 10

model has risk aversion that varies with the level of

whereas a power utility model h= constant risk aversion. The time-variation in

risk aversion generates predictable movements in excess stock returns like those documented
in Table 8, enabling the Campbell-Cochrane

model to solve the stock market volatility puzzle.

Results are reported in detail in Campbell and Cochrane (1995).
A full application

of the Campbell-Cochrane

of keeping with the exploratory
exercise.

I use the traditional

spirit of this paper.
linear habit-formation

the difference between log consumption
average of past log consumption.

and “habit”,

Instead, I undertake
model (equation

According
consumption

a stochastically

Campbell

countercyclical
of stoch~tically

+ (1 –W)C~_l

series.

model, high levels of stochastically

also present a modification

~ is

This can be seen as a

low excess stock returns but do not forecast consumption

and Cochrane

to construct

equals consumption .11 The parameter

real interest rates. In this sense the stock market is “cyclical”
not.

(24))

detrended, stationary consumption

to the basic Campbell-Cochrane
forec~t

a more modest

where habit is just a backward moving

set to 0.97 in quarterly data, or 0.974 in annual data.

simple way to construct

data would be out

That is, I construct Ct–xt where Zt = g+~xt_l

and at the first date in the sample “habit”
arbitrarily

model to international

detrended
growth or

but the real interest rate is

of the model that allows modest

variation in the real interest rate; the modified model implies that high levels
detrended consumption

forecast low real interest rates.

Table 9 repeats the regressions of Table 8 using the stochastically
series for each country

as the explanatory

Once again the dependent

detrended consumption

variable in place of the log price-dividend

variables are measured

ratio.

in natural units and the explanatory

10The preferences suggested by Epstein and Zin (1991) and Weil ( 1989), which break the link between
the coefficient of relative risk aversion and the elsst icity of intertemporal substitution, also allow average
consumption growth to have a much smaller effect than consumption volatility on the risk free interest rate,
but these preferences do not display time-varying risk aversion.
11In the underlyingth~ry, of course, habit must lie below consumption but this is ~hieved in the linear
model by subtracting a constant from the “habit” variable. The constant does not affect the dynamics of
“habit” so I set it to zero in the empirical work.

31

variable is normalized

by dividing by its standard deviation.

In quarterly data, some countries show some evidence of long-run mean reversion in consumption growth; stochastically
at long horizons
United Kingdom.

in Australia,

detrended consumption
Canada,

Germany,

forecasts slow consumption

Italy, the Netherlands,

growth

Spain, and the

The long-run annual US data also show this pattern.

There is fairly strong evidence that the stochastically

detrended consumption

series fore-

casts real interest rates in the manner predicted by the modified Campbell- Cochrane model.
All countries except Germany and the UK show negative coefficients in quarterly real interest
rate regressions; however this effect is entirely absent in the long-run annual data.
Finally, the stochastically
returns.

detrended consumption

series often forecasts low excess stock

In quarterly data negative significant coefficients

the Netherlands,

are found in Australia,

France,

Spain, the UK, and the USA, while all three annual data sets display this

pattern.
While these results are encouraging

for the Campbell-Cochrane

model, one should inter-

pret them with some caution.

Plots of the data show that for many countries the stochas-

tically detrended consumption

series exhibits low-frequency

growth slowdown

of the mid-1970’s.

cyclical swings emphasized

These movements

movements

associated with the

are different in nature from the

by the Campbell- Cochrane model, and may distort some of the

results. A symptom of this problem is that the correlation between stochastically
consumption

and the log price-dividend

detrended

ratio, which should be positive, is negative in 7 out

of 12 quarterly data sets.
As a more direct way to examine the data, I plot consumption

and its backward moving

average for the annual Swedish, UK, and US data sets in Figures la, 2a, and 3a. I plot the
stochastically

detrended consumption

series and the log price-dividend

ized to have zero sample mean and unit sample standard deviation)

ratio (both normal-

for the same data sets

in Figures lb, 2b, and 3b.
These figures illustrate the sense in which national stock markets respond to mediumterm swings in national consumption.

In each of the three countries there are some important

32

b

common

movements

the movements

in detrended

consumption

and the log price-dividend

the two series that do not correspond.

are

But there are also some movements of

In Sweden, for example, detrended consumption

was

high in the 1920’s and much lower in the 1980’s, reflecting shifts in the long-

run growth rate of the economy
consumption

These

that can be fit by an asset pricing model based on aggregate consumption,

such as the model of Campbell and Cochrane (1995).

particularly

ratio.

and in the allocation

and government spending.

of national income between private

The log price-dividend

ratio on the other hand has

tended to rise over the pmt 75 years. The Campbell- Cochrane

model does not account for

these low-frequency

characteristics of the data.

33

Conclusion

5

In this paper I have presented a list of stylized facts about US stock market behavior.

I

have shown that many of these facts describe the behavior of other countries’ stock markets
M well. The facts present two puzzles for standard asset pricing theory.

The better-known

puzzle is the large size of the average equity premium, but this is easily resolved by assuming
that investors are highly risk-averse. The deeper puzzle is the high volatility of stock prices,
which seems to be associated with predictable time-variation
argued that this can be explained by a model of time-varying
presented by Campbell

in excess stock returns. I have
risk aversion such as the one

and Cochrane (1995).

In arguing for this model of stock market behavior

I have left several

mportant

topics

unexplored.

First, I have followed the literature and have assumed that dividends

equal

consumption

or equivalently,

This assumption

that the aggregate stock market equals total national wealth.

is clearly untrue even for the United States, and is even less appropriate

for countries with smaller stock markets. It is straightforward
slightly by modelling

stocks as a leveraged claim to aggregate con sump tion in the manner

of Abel (1996), but it may be appropriate
the model in the manner of Campbell
of stockholders

to generalize the assumption

to go further by introducing

(1996) or by distinguishing

and non-stockholders

human capital into

between the consumption

in the manner of Mankiw and Zeldes (1991).

Second, I have treated each national stock market as a separate entity with its own pricing
model.

That is, I have assumed that national economies

is no integrated world capital market.

This assumption

long- term historical data, but it seems qumtionable

may be appropriate

for examining

under modern conditions.

An interesting

exercise would be to study the pricing of imperfectly
a model with an integrated

world capital market.

the fact that the short-run

cross-country

short-run cross-country

correlations

correlated

national stock markets in

Such a model might be able to explain

correlations

of consumption

are entirely closed so that there

of stock returns are higher than the
or dividend growth rates. If there is a .

representative investor whose risk aversion varies over time, then shifting risk aversion would
move all countries’ stock markets together even if their dividends are only weakly correlated.
34

Third,

I have worked with a representative

agent utility function

what features of individual preferences produce this utility function.
recently argued that rigidities in market structure with heterogeneous

and have not asked
Several authors have
agents can produce

shifting aggregate risk aversion (Aiyagari and Gert ler 1995, Grossman and Zhou 1994). This
deserves further exploration.
I conclude with some more general lessons for economic policy makers and commentators.
The stock market is commonly

used as a leading indicator of the state of the economy.

The

results of this paper suggest that while the stock market does forecast medium-term

growth

rates of corporate

medium-term

growth

to downplay the importance

of eco-

dividends,

it is much less successful at forecasting

rates of aggregate consumption.12
There hm recently been a tendency
nomic fluctuations
habit formation
Fluctuations

for economists

in favor of an emphasis on long-term economic growth.

But the model of

presented here implies that consumers take fluctuations extremely seriously.

have important

negative effects on welfare because they move consumption

the short term, when agents have little time to adjust; reductions

in long-term

in

growth, on

the other hand, allow agents’ habit levels to adjust gradually.
This conclusion
process.

is not an artifact of a particular utility function

and habit formation

As Atkeson and Phelan (1994) emphasize, it must result from any utility function

that explains the level of the equity premium.

The choice between risky stocks and stable

money market instruments offers investors a tradeoff between the mean growth rate of their
wealth and the volatility of this growth rate. The fact that so much extra mean growth is
available from volatile stock market investments implies that investors find volatility to be
a serious threat to their welfare. Economic
they face policy tradeoffs between economic

policy makers should take this into account when
growth and macroeconomic

stability.

12This paper has not considered the ability of the stock market to forecmt national income growth. See
Cochrane (1994) and Campbell (1996) on the relations between a~regate consumption, income, and stock
prices in US data.

35

References

6

Abel, A.B. (1990), Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching Up with the Joneses,
American Economic
Abel,

A.B.

(1996),

Atkeson,

Markets,

1994 (The

Barclays
ment

Barsky,

Journal

Bollerslev,

Wedd

and J.B.

Cambridge),

and New York University.

the Costs of Business
eds., NBER

Cycles

with Incom-

Macroeconomics

Limited

(1995),

The

BZW

Market

since

1918, London.

De Long

(1993),

Why

Does

the Stock

Equity-Gilt

Market

Study:

Invest-

Fluctuate?,

Quarterly

in Finance:

A Review

107, 291-311.

T., R.Y. Chou, and K.F. Kroner
and Empirical

Evidence,

(1992),
Journal

ARCH

Modeling

of Econometrics

52, 5–59.

J.Y. (1986), Bond and Stock Returns in a Simple Exchange Model,

J.Y. (1991),

Annual

187-207.

Stock

Journal of Economics
Campbell,

Reconsidering

and J,J. Rotemberg,

Securities

of Economics

of the Theory

Campbell,

Press,

in the London

R.B.

(1994),

in S. Fischer

MIT

de Zoete

of Asset Prices in General Equilibrium,

paper, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

A. and C. Phelan

plete

unpublished

School, University of Pennsylvania,

R. and M. Gertler (1995), Overreaction

unpublished

80, 38-42.

Risk Premia and Term Prernia in General Equilibrium,

paper, Wharton
Aiyagari,

Review Papers and Proceedings

Quarterly

101, 785-804.

A Variance Decomposition

for Stock Returns,

Economic

Journal

101, 157-179.
Campbell,

J.Y. (1996), Understanding

Risk and Return, Journal of Political Economy

298-345.

36

104,

Campbell,

J.Y. and John Ammer (1993), What Moves the Stock and Bond Markets?

Variance Decomposition
Campbell,

J.Y. and J.H. Cochrane

placation
Campbell,

for Long-Term

of Aggregate

Asset Returns, Journalof

(1995), By Force of Habit:

A

Finance 48,3-37.

AConsumption-Based

Ex-

Stock Market Behavior, NBER Working Paper No. 4995.

J.Y. and R.J. Shiner (1988a),

The Dividend-Price

Ratio and Expectations

of

Future Dividends and Discount Factors, Review of Financial Studies 1, 195-227.
Campbell,

J.Y. and R,J. Shiner (1988b),

Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected

Dividends,

Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.
Cecchetti,

S.G., P.-S. Lam, and N.C. Mark (1993), The Equity Premium

Risk-Free Rate: Matching the Moments, Journal of Monetary

Puzzle and the

Economics

3l,2l-45.

Chou, R. Y., R.F. Engle, and A. Kane (1992)1 Measuring Risk Aversion from Excess Returns
on a Stock Index, Journal of Econometrics
Cochrane,

J.H. (1994), Permanent and Transitory Components

Quarterly Journal of Economics
Cochrane,

52, 201–224.
of GNP and Stock Prices,

CIX, 241-265.

J.H. and L.P. Hansen (1992), Asset Pricing Lessons for Macroeconomics,

Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds., NBER Macroeconomics

in O.J.

Annual 1992 (The MIT Press,

Cambridge).
Constantinides,

G. (1990), Habit Formation: A Resolution

of the Equity Premium Puzzle,

Journal of Political Economy 98, 519-543.
The Economist,
Epstein,

1987, One Hundred Years of Economic

L. and S. Zin (1991),

of Consumption
Economy

Substitution,

and Asset Returns:

Statistics, London,

Risk Aversion,

and the Temporal

An Empirical Investigation,

99, 263-286.

37

Behavior

Journal of Political

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (1988a),
Prices, Journalof
Fama, E.F.and
nalof

Permanent

and Temporary

Components

Political Economy 96,246-273.

K.R. French, (1988b), Dividend Yields and Expected

Financial Economics

and Bonds, Journal of Financial Economics
Ferson, W.E. and G, Constantinides

and Expected

Returns on Stocks

25, 23–49.

(1991), Habit Persistence and Durability in Aggregate

Empirical Tests, Journal of Financial Economics

Frennberg, P., and B. Hansson (1992), Computation
Returns 1919-1989,

Stock Returns, Jour-

22, 3–27.

Fama, E.F. and K.R. French (1989), Business Conditions

Consumption:

of Stock

Scandinavian

Economic

29, 199-240.

of a Monthly Index for Swedish Stock

History Review 40, 3-27.

Grossman, S.J. and R.J. Shiner (1981), The Determinants of the Variability of Stock Market
Prices, American Economic
Grossman,

Review 71, 222-227.

S.J. and Z. Zhou (1994), Equilibrium

Analysis of Portfolio

Insurance, unpub-

lished paper, University of Pennsylvania.
Hansen, L.P. and R. Jagannathan
Substitution

Marginal Rates of

Implied by Asset Returns, Journal of Political Economy

Hansen, L,P. and K.J. Singleton
Temporal

(1992), Restrictions on Intertemporal

(1983), Stochastic

Consumption,

Risk Aversion,

Behavior of Asset Returns, Journal of Political Economy

Harvey, C.R. (1989), Time-Varying

Conditional

els, Journal of Financial Economics

99, 225-262.
and the

91, 249-268.

Covariances in Tests of Asset Pricing Mod-

24, 289–3 17.

Hassler, J., P. Lundvik, T. Persson, and P. Soderlind, 1994, “ The Swedish Business Cycle:
Stylized Facts Over 130 Years”, in V. Bergstrom and A. Vredin eds. Measuring
Interpreting

Business Cycles (Clarendon

38

Press, Oxford).

and

Heaton, J.C. (1995), An Empirical Investigation
dent Preference Specifications,
Kandel,

S, and R.F,

Stambaugh

Journal of Monetary
Kocherlakota,

Econometrics
(1991),

Economics

N. (1996),

of Asset Pricing with Temporally

Depen-

63, 681-717.

Asset Returns and Intertemporal

Preferences,

27, 39-71.

The Equity Premium:

It’s Still A Puzzle, Journal of Economic

Literature 34, 42-71.
Le~y,

S.F. and R. Porter (1981), The Present Value Relation:

Bounds, Econometrics
Lucre, R. E., Jr. (1978),

Tests Based on Variance

49, 555-577.
Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,

Econometrics

46, 1429-

1446.
Mankiw, N.G. and S.P. Zeldes (1991), The Consumption
Journal of Financial Economics
Mehra,

R. and E. Prescott

Economics
Poterba,

of Stockholders and Non-Stockholders,

29, 97-112.

( 1985), The Equity Premium

Puzzle,

Journal of Monetary

15, 145-161.

J. and L.H. Summers (1988),

Implications,

Mean Reversion in Stock Returns:

Journal of Financial Economics

Evidence

22, 27-60.

Ryder, H. E., Jr., and G.M. Heal (1973), Optimum Growth with Intertemporally
Preferences,

Review of Economic

and

Dependent

Studies 40, 1-33.

Schwert, G. W. (1989), Why Does Stock Market Volatility Change Over Time?, Journal of
Finance 44, 1115-1153.
Shiner, R.J. (1981), Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to Be Justified by Subsequent Changes
in Dividends?,

American Economic

Sundaresan, S.M. (1989), Intertemporally

Review 71, 421–436.
Dependent Preferences and the Volatility of Con-

sumption and Wealth, Review of Financial Studies 2, 73–88.
39

Weil, P. (1989),
Monetary

The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puzzle, Journal of

Economics

24, 401-421.

40

Notes

for Tables

Notes for Tablel:

~isthestock

index market capitalization in billions of1993 US dollars.

All stock index data are from Morgan Stanley Capital International (MSCI), except for USACRSP which is from the Center for Research in Security Prices. ~-/GDPi
capitalization

as a percentage of 1993 GDP, ~/VuSMScI is the index market capitalization

as a percentage
percentage

is the index market

of the market capitalization

of the US MSCI index, and ~-/(~i

share of the index market capitalization

the MSCI indexes.

~)

is the

in the total market capitalization

of all

AUL denotes Australia, CAN Canada, FR France, GER Germany, ITA

Italy, JAP Japan, NTH Netherlands, SP Spain, SWD Sweden, SWT Switzerland, UK United
Kingdom,

USA United States.

Notes for Table 2: R

is the mean log real return on the market index, multiplied by 400

in quarterly data or 100 in annual data to express in annualized percentage
is the standard deviation

points.

a(r~)

of the log real return on the market index, multiplied by 200 in

quarterly data or 100 in annual data to express in annualized percentage points. p(r~) is the
first-order autocorrelation

of the log real return on the market index.

are defined in the same way for the real return on a 3-month

V, O(rj),

and p(~~)

money market instrument.

The money market instruments vary across countries and are described in detail in the Data
Appendix.

Notes for Table 3: ~

is the mean log real consumption

growth rate, multiplied by 400 in

quarterly data or 100 in annual data to express in annualized percentage points. o(Ac)
standard deviation of the log real consumption

growth rate, multiplied by 200 in quarterly

data or 100 in annual data to express in annualized percentage
order autocorrelation

of the log real consumption

points.

growth rate. Ad,

in the US, and total consumption

elsewhere.

p(Ac)

is the first-

u(Ad),and p(Ad)are

defined in the same way for the real dividend growth rate. Consumption
services consumption

is the

is nondurable

and

Notes for Table 4: The table gives the contemporaneous

cross-correlations

of real con-

sumption growth Ac, real dividend growth Ad, and the stock index return r~, where these
variables are measured at horizons of 1, 4, 8, or 16 quarters in quarterly data and 1, 2, 4,
or 8 years in annual data.
tion memured
consumption

The timing convention

in a given quarter corresponds

used for consumption

to beginning-of-quarter

is that consump-

consumption,

growth for the quarter is the log of next quarter’s consumption

so log

divided by this

quarter’s consumption.

—.
Notes for Table 5: aerm IS the average excess log return on stock over a money market
instrument, plus one half the variance of this excess return: ~
aer

= rm – Tf+az(rm

–rf)/2.

It is multiplied by 400 in quarterly data and 100 in annual data to express in annualized
percentage
er~ =rm

points.

a(er~)

and o(Ac)

— Tj and consumption

are the standard deviations of the excess log return

growth Ac, respectively,

multiplied by 200 in quarterly

data and 100 in annual data to express in annualized percentage
correlation

of e~~ an d Ac.

100aerm/cov(er~,

cov(er~,

Ac) is the product

of risk aversion calculated

At).

RRA(l)

growth. RRA(2)

is looaern/o(er~)o

using the empirical standard deviations

(Ac)”,

a measure

of excess stock returns

&

is the mean money market return from Table 2, in annualized

and a(Ac)

are the mean and standard

growth from Table 3, in annualized percentage

points.

deviation

of consumption

RRA( 1) and RRA(2)

are the risk

aversion coefficients from Table 5. TPR( 1) = v – RRA(l )Ac + RRA( l)2a2(Ac)/200,
TPR(2)

= ~ – RRA(2)&

+ RRA(2)202(Ac)/200.

These time preference

had zero mean and zero standard

deviation

and risk aversion were RRA(l)

and

rates give the

real interest rate, in annualized percentage points, that would prevail if consumption

respect ivel y.

is

growth, but assuming perfect correlation between these series.

Notes for Table 6: ~
percent age points.

a(er~)o(Ac)p(er,

p(er, Ac) is the

Ac), a measure of risk aversion calculated using the empirical covariance of

excess stock returns with consumption

and consumption

points.

growth

or RRA(2),

Notes for Table 7: P/D

is the mean price-dividend

deviation of the log price-dividend
p(p – d) is the first-order
augmented

Dickey-Fuller

the log price-dividend
log price-dividend

ratio.

a(p – d) is the standard

ratio in natural units (not annualized percentage points).

autocorrelation

of the log price-dividend

t-ratio for the lagged log price-dividend

ratio.

ADF(l ) is the

ratio when the change in

ratio is regressed on a constant, four lagged changes, and the lagged

ratio.

prim-dividend

(*) indicates a rejection of the unit root hypothesis for the log
_—
ratio at the 5% level. Ap, Ad, and Ap – d are the mean changes in log prices,

log dividends,

and the log price-dividend

ratio respectively.

Notes for Table 8: The table reports regression coefficients ~(k), t-statistics t(~(k)),
R2 statistics R2(k) for regressions whose dependent variables are real consumption

and

growth,

real dividend growth, real ret urns on 3-month money market instruments, or excess returns
on stock over money market instruments,
percentage

points)

at horizons

all measured in natural units (not annualized

k of 4, 8, or 16 quarters in quarterly

years in annual data. The independent

data or 1, 4, or 8

variable in every regression is the log price-dividend

ratio, normalized

by dividing

by its standard deviation.

The t-statistics are corrected

heteroskedasticity

and serial correlation in the equation errors using the Newey- West method.

Notes for Table 9: The table reports regression coefficients ~(k), t-statistics t(~(k)),
R2 statistics R2(k) for regressions whose dependent

variables are real consumption

for

and

growth,

real dividend growth, real ret urns on 3-month money market instruments, or excess returns
on stock over money market instruments, all measured at horizons k of 4, 8, or 16 quarters
in quarterly
gression
deviation.

data

or 1, 4, or 8 years in annual

is stochastically
Stochastically

tion G and a “habit”
at the first date
t-statistics

detrended
detrended

measure

in the sample.

are corrected

using the Newey-West

log consumption,

Zi, constructed

from

The

independent

normalized

log consumption

~t = g + ~xt.l
data

variable

by dividing

is the difference

~ = 0.97 in quarterly

for heteroskedasticity
method.

data.

+(1

in every

by its standard

between

log consump-

– ~)ct_l,

and 0.974 in annual

and serial correlation

re-

where
data.

in the equation

x = c
The
errors

Notes for Figures la, 2a, and 3a: The figures show log consumption
stochastic trend in log consumption
is constructed

as a dashed line. The stochtitic

~ zt = g + pZt_l + (1 — ~)ct_l,

and ~ = 0.974. Stochastically

as a solid line and the

trend in log consumption

where z = c at the first date in the sample

detrended log consumption

is the difference between the two

lines. Figure 1a uses Swedish annual data, figure 2a uses UK annual data, and figure 3a uses
US annual data.

Notes for Figures lb, 2b, and 3b:
solid line and stochastically

The figures show the log price-dividend

detrended log consumption

ratio as a

as a dashed line. The two series are

normalized so that they both have zero mean and unit standard deviation.

Figure lb uses

Swedish annual data, figure 2b uses UK annual data, and figure 3b uses US annual data.

TABLE
MSCI

MARKET

1

CAPITALIZATION
1993

Country

K/GDPi
(Bill. ~ US$)

%

~/vus~scI
%

K/(~i
%

AUL

117.9

41.55

4.65

1.85

CAN

167.3

30.62

6.60

2.63

FR

272.5

22.49

10.75

4.29

GER

280.7

16.83

11.07

4.41

ITA

86.8

9.45

3.42

1.37

JAP

1651.9

39.74

65.16

25.98

136.7

45.91

5.39

2.15

SP

81.2

18.64

3.20

1.28

SWD

62.9

36.22

2.48

0.99

SWT

205.6

87.46

8.12

3.23

UK

758.4

79.52

29.91

11.93

USA-MSCI

2535,3

37.25

100.00

39.88

USA-CRSP

4875.6

71.64

192.30

NTH

K)

TABLE

INTERNATIONAL

STOCK

2

AND

BILL

RETURNS

u(rm)

p(rm )

2.526

24.350

0.008

1.676

2.685

0.636

1970.1 -1994.3

3.892

17.294

0.119

2.630

1.989

0.674

FR

1970.2 -1994.3

6.620

23.090

0.063

2.601

1.892

0.733

GER

1978.4 -1994.3

7.633

21.271

0.077

3.450

1,213

0.313

ITA

1971.2 -1993.3

0.380

28.110

0.071

1.876

3.035

0.694

JAP

1970.1 -1993,4

5.828

22.126

0.007

1.497

2.477

0.485

NTH

1977.2 -1994.3

11.900

16.215

0.024

3.790

1.515

-0.010

SP

1974.2 -1993.3

-1.543

26.505

0.010

1.519

4.017

0.511

SWD

1970.1 -1994.2

7.948

24.216

0.053

1.422

3.054

0.186

SWT

1975.4 -1994.3

7.325

18.872

-0.093

0.508

1.828

0.451

UK

1970.1 -1994.3

6.672

22.349

0.102

0.838

3.191

0.457

USA

1970.1 -1993.4

4.974

18.177

0.065

1.307

1.802

0.582

USA

1947.2 -1993.4

7.205

15.815

0.098

0.737

1.800

0.506

SWD

1919-1993

5.795

19.126

0.099

1.901

6.111

0.652

UK

1919-1993

7.506

22.766

-0.018

1.185

5.482

0.590

USA

1890-1992

6.429

18.699

0.025

1.987

9.017

0.343

Country

Sample Period

AUL

1970.1 -1994.3

CAN

~

TABLE

INTERNATIONAL

3

CONSUMPTION

z

AND

DIVIDENDS

p(Ac)

Ad

u(Ad)

p(Ad)

2.292

-0.355

0.478

37.573

-0.452

2.001

2.256

0.023

-1.242

5.927

0.532

1970.2 -1994.3

1.981

2.142

-0.057

-1.158

13.161

-0.153

GER

1978.4 -1994.3

1.639

2.614

-0.330

0.225

8.813

-0.003

ITA

1971.2 -1993.3

2.459

1.805

0.308

-5.688

20.027

0.312

JAP

1970.1 -1993.4

3.581

1.983

-0.056

-2.411

4.604

0.349

NTH

1977.2 -1994.3

1.568

2.507

-0.087

3.419

5.013

0.272

SP

1974.2 -1993.3

1.432

1,918

0.421

-6.821

7.126

0.008

SWD

1970.1 -1994.2

0.710

1.949

-0.304

0.838

12.686

0.403

SWT

1975.4 -1994.3

0.790

2.766

-0.308

2.092

10.322

-0.257

UK

1970.1 -1994.3

1.962

2.688

-0.015

0.060

7.320

0.320

USA

1970.1 -1993.4

1.604

0.930

0.388

0.086

15.157

-0.656

USA

1947.2 -1993.4

1.777

1.113

0.196

2.059

28.968

-0.556

SWD

1919-1993

1.976

3.248

0.175

0.283

12.178

0.265

UK

1919-1993

1.431

2.916

0.276

1.808

8.014

0.230

USA

1890-1992

1.720

3.317

-0.126

1.484

14.300

-0.089

Country

Sample Period

AUL

1970.1 -1994.3

1.862

CAN

1970.1 -1994.3

FR

u(Ac)

z
o

,,,,

,!!1

11,,

TABLE

THE EQUITY

PREMIUM

PUZZLE
a(Ac)

5

IN INTERNATIONAL
m(erm,

DATA
Ac)

Country

Sample Period

aerm

u(erm)

AUL

1970.1 -1994.2

3.687

24.080

2,295

0.163

9,025

40.858

6.674

CAN

1970.1 -1994.2

2.439

17.209

2,207

0.154

5.849

41.689

6.421

FR

1970.2 -1994,2

6.763

23.060

2.153

-0.075

-3.712

GER

1978.4 -1994.2

6,596

21.331

2.634

0.044

2.480

ITA

1971.2 -1993.2

2.100

28.172

1.758

-0.005

-0.225

JAP

1970.1 -1993.3

7.181

21.689

1.951

0.129

5.463

131.442

16.972

NTH

1977,2 -1994.2

9.368

16.189

2.377

0.067

2.578

363.328

24.344

SP

1974.2 -1993.2

-0,309

25.668

1.931

-0.020

-0.986

31.310

SWD

1970.1-1994.1

9.537

23.8!32

1.945

0.004

0.167

5699,045

SWT

1975.4 -1994.2

8.852

18.726

2.622

-0.021

-1.013

<o

UK

1970.1 -1994.2

8.282

22.413

2.696

0.091

5.500

150.583

13.705

USA

1970.1 -1993.3

5.245

17.842

0.933

0.233

3.878

135.255

31.505

USA

1947.2 -1993.3

7.693

15.597

1,110

0,183

3.166

243.014

44.445

SWD

1919-1992

5.207

18.721

2.886

0.155

8.385

62.108

9.637

UK

1919-1992

8.525

21.802

2.842

0.352

21.833

39.048

13.761

USA

1890-1991

6.211

18.768

3.302

0.485

30.079

20.650

10.023

p(er, Ac)

RRA(l:

<o
265.960

RRA(2)

13.619
11.738
4.240

<o

<

0

20.520

18.027

TABLE

THE RISKFREE

RATE

PUZZLE

6

IN INTERNATIONAL

DATA
TPR(2)

RRA(l)

TPR(l)

2.295

40.858

-28.770

6.674

-9.303

2.105

2.207

41.689

-42.822

6.421

-9.885

2.601

1.981

2.153

<

13.619

-20.078

1978.4 -1994.2

3.450

1.622

2.634

11.738

-10.804

ITA

1971.2 -1993.2

1.876

2.554

1.758

JAP

1970.1 -1993.3

1.497

3.497

NTH

1977.2 -1994.2

3.790

SP

1974.2 -1993.2

SWD

Couritry

Sample Period

AUL

1970.1 -1994.2

1.676

1.821

CAN

1970.1 -1994.2

2.630

FR

1970.2 -1994.2

GER

q

0

265.960

N/A
2026.775

RRA(2)

0

N/A

4.240

-8.676

1.951

131.442

-129.418

16.972

-52.378

1.365

2.377

363.328

3236.598

24.344

-12.708

1.519

1.427

1.931

31.310

-24.899

1970.1 -1994.1

1.422

0.755

1.945

SWT

1975.4 -1994.2

0.508

1.004

2.622

UK

1970.1 -1994.2

0.838

1.998

2.696

150.583

USA

1970.1 -1993.3

1.307

1.592

0.933

USA

1947.2 -1993.3

0.737

1.760

SW-D

1919-1992

1.901

UK

1919-1992

USA

1890-1991

<

<o

N/A

20.520

-6.112

18.027

-6.414

523.998

13.705

-19.720

135.255

-134.408

31.505

-44.537

1.110

243.014

-63.375

44.445

-65.335

1.799

2.886

62.108

50.834

9,637

-11.569

1.185

1.346

2.842

39.048

10.176

13.761

-9.695

1.987

1.765

3.302

20.650

-11.220

10.023

-10.229

699.045610228.713
<

0

N/A

TABLE

INTERNATIONAL

STOCK

Country

Sample Period

AUL

1970.1 -1994.3

25.821

0.276

CAN

1970.1 -1994.3

29.132

FR

1970.2 -1994.3

GER

7

PRICES

AND

DIVIDENDS

Ap–d

ADF(l)

Ap

Ad

0.852

-3.126*

-1.537

0.478

-2.037

0.203

0.882

-2.319

0.013

-1.242

0.871

21.328

0.514

0.968

-1.310

0.525

-1.158

1.851

1978.4 -1994.3

26.739

0.296

0.914

-1.631

3.547

0.225

4.060

ITA

1971,2 -1993.3

39.716

0.305

0.871

-3.652*

-2.395

-5.688

3.031

JAP

1970.1 -1993.4

86.105

0.652

0.971

-1.763

4.140

-2.411

6.029

NTH

1977.2 -1994.3

20.234

0.253

0.928

-0.937

6.544

3.419

3.108

SP

1974.2 -1993.3

17.588

0.509

0.938

-1.505

-8.848

-6.821

-2.403

SWD

1970.1 -1994.2

33.776

0.417

0.923

-1.390

4.875

0.838

4.326

SWT

1975.4 -1994.3

41.582

0.200

0.872

-1.522

4.792

2.092

2.474

UK

1970.1 -1994.3

18.025

0.279

0.906

-1.695

0.782

0.060

0.459

USA

1970.1 -1993.4

26.654

0.212

0.894

-1.852

0.980

0.086

0.923

USA

1947.2 -1993.4

26.435

0.254

0.943

-2.008

3.102

2.059

1.356

SWD

1919-1993

26.113

0.319

0.721

-0.903

2.160

0.283

1.877

UK

1919-1993

20.756

0.239

0.503

-4.042’

2.242

1.808

0.435

USA

1890-1992

22.305

0.266

0.768

-2.241

1.741

1.484

0.385

P/D

u(p

–

d)

p(p

–

d)

A

malal

mm

mmm

000

a
m

o

,-lalcD

Oofl
000

000

0

m
b

0
0

0

0

E
al

m

m

I

o

0

awg

~oo
000

a)

r-+m
mmm

Sm

000

,

&

m
m
0
0

I
I

a)
UY

a
0

d

m

@l
0

m
m

0

0

0

0
0

d

Q

‘1
I

I

t-m
o
000

go

I

1

z

6–

~-6–

1

I

9“6–

1

I
9“6–

I

I

1
ZOl

1

1
-

I

1

I

9-ol–

I

I

1

O-l

L–

——

/

I

—_——————————

\

—

—

\
f—

b

r

z

—

7

L

0

l–

z–

Oz

1

I

I

I

1

I

1

I

1

I

1

I

1

1

I

1

1

)

I

1

I

1

I

1

I

1

8“1

9“1

ti’1

Z’L

0-1

80

90

.
\
““7 /
—— .

-—”

\—

–-===-

/

.
‘

0
m

)

I

1

I

I

I

I

I

1

I

I

I

,

.

0
0
0
w

z
m
.

0
m
m
.

0
*
o-l
.

0
N

m
.

0
0
m
.

0
al
CQ

8“Z

+-z

O“z

9’1

Z-L

8“0

*“O

0
0
0
N

0

m
m

I

z

I

(n
.

—— —

0
+

x
\_

m
.

.

._

—

——

.
/

—

—

——

\
——

——

0

I
.

m

—

o-l
.

r
——
——
/
/

,_

———

—

0
0

\
_—

—

—

—.

m
.

.

——

0
1

1,

-

c

I

z

1

I

1

1

I

0

1

I

l–

1

I

z–

1

I

c–

m
m
.

I

ti–

