                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          DOES IT PAY TO ATTEND AN ELITE
                          PRIVATE COLLEGE? CROSS COHORT
                            EVIDENCE ON THE EFFECTS OF
                           COLLEGE QUALITY ON EARNINGS




                                     Dominic J. Brewer
                                          Eric Eide
                                    Ronald G, Ehrenberg




                                     Working Paper 5613


                    NATIONAL     BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996


We thank Randy Hill and Matt Sanders for research assistance. We are grateful to Kathryn
Ierulli, Jeff Grogger, seminar participants at Brigham Young University and Vasser College, and
participants at the Society of Labor Economists Conference, Chicago, IL, May 3-4, 1996, for
helpful comments on an earlier version.         Brewer was supported by RAND’s Institute on
Education and Training with funding provided by grants from the Lilly Endowment and the Sloan
Foundation.     This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by Domenic J. Brewer, Eric Eide, and Ronald G. Ehrenberg. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                          NBER Working Paper 5613
                                                                                        June 1996

                               DOES IT PAY TO ATTEND AN ELITE
                               PRIVATE COLLEGE? CROSS COHORT
                                 EV~ENCE   ON THE EFFECTS OF
                                COLLEGE QUALITY ON EARNINGS




                                              ABSTRACT

        While there is evidence of a substantial and rising labor market premium associated with

college attendance in general, little is known about how this premium varies across institutions

of different quality and across time. Previous research which has estimated the return to college

quality has not taken into account that individuals       likely select the type of college they attend

based in part on the expected economic return and net costs.         In this paper we explicitly model

high school students’ choice of college type (characterized         by quality and control) based on

individual    and family characteristics   (including   ability and parental economic   status), and an

estimate of the net costs of attendance and expected labor market return. We estimate selectivity

corrected outcome equations, using data from both the National Longitudinal           Study of the High

School Class of 1972 and High School and Beyond, which permit us to determine the effects of

college quality on wages and earnings         and how this effect varies across time.          Even after

controlling    for selection   effects there is strong evidence    of significant   economic    return to

attending an elite private institution,    and some evidence that this premium has increased over

time.


Domenic J. Brewer                   Eric Eide                         Ronald G. Ehrenberg
RAND Corporation                    Department of Economics           Industrial and Labor Relations
1700 Main Street                    Brigham Young University          Cornell University
Santa Monica, CA 90407              Provo, UT 84601                   Ithaca, NY 14853-3901
                                                                      and NBER
1. Int reduction

           Previous research has shown that the labor market return to college overall has fluctuated:

for example, ktween the mid- 1970s and the mid- 1980s the proportionate difference in mean wages

between male college graduates and male high school graduates grew by 15 to 30 percentage points

(Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992; Levy and Mumane, 1992). It is not known

whether this higher return applies uniformly to attendees of all types of four year college, or only to

those at certain types of institutions.       In particular, there is limited evidence on the relationship

between college quality and labor market outcomes (Brewer and Ehrenberg, 1996; Daniel et al.,

1995, Behrman et al., 1995), Loury and Garman, 1995; James et al., 1989), and none on how the

return to college attendance has changed for different cohorts of students, or how the return varies

over time for individuals in a given cohort. In this paper, using data from the National bngirtiinal

Study of theHigh Scbol      Class of 1972 (NLS72) and High School and Beyond (HSB), we are able

to examine the effects of college quality on hourly wages and annual earnings of college attendees

from the high school graduating classes of 1972, 1980, and 1982 at various stages in the lifecycle:

six ye~s after high school (for the 1972 and 1980 cohorts), ten years after high school (for the 1982

cohort), and fourteen years after high school (1972 cohort).

          h addition to standard wage/earnings regressions similar to those used in prior research, we

estimate the return to college quality in the context of a structural model in which we explicitly

assume that choice of college quality is determined in part by the expected labor market payoff and

the net costs (tuition costs less financial aid) that individuals face at different types of colleges.

Estimation    of a reduced form college choice model permits calculation of selectivity terms which

reflect the probability that the college t~   observed for any individual was in fact chosen (Lee, 1983).

These selectivity terms are used to “correct” models predicting the wage rates or earnings of college

attendees, estimated separately for each college quality type.

          We iirtd evidence of a large labor market premium to attending an elite private institution, and

a smaller premium to attending a middle rated private institution, relative to a bottom-rated public

school.    There is weaker evidence of a return to attending an elite public university.     Our analysis
suggests the return to elite private colleges increased significantly for the 1980s cohorts as compared


                                                       1
to the 1972 cohort.       We also find that in general modelling the effects of college quality in the

context of a structural model of college choice does not affect our estimates.          These are important

findings in light of the large tuition incre~s   concentrated at elite institutions during the past 15 years

which, combined with declining federal student fiancial aid, has given rise to increased concern about

how to finance a college education (McPherson and Schapiro, 199 1).



~          ellin~ the Effects of College         alitv on Labor     arket Outc mes

          There have been several previous studies examining the relationship between college quality

and wages or earnings. 1 The basic methodology employed in prior analyses is similar.         The logarithm

of individual i’s (weekly or annual) earnings or hourly wage rate (ln W,) is regressed on a set of his

or her characteristics   (X,) and a set of college characteristics       for the school j he or she actually

attended (Zo).

    (1)                                      h Wi = p. + p~,         +   p2zti+ Jl,     y, - N(o,c12)



College quality measures are included in Z, often simply in the form of a single variable or set of

dummy variables indicating college quality, with the estimated ~z interpreted as the effect of college

quality on earnings. College “quality” is most commonly measured by indicators of selectivity of the

undergraduate    body (such as the average SATS of entering freshmen) or by resource measures

(instructional expenditures per student, libr~       size, and faculty per student).’    This research finds

that attending a higher quality college raises wages/eamings,       ceteris paribus, though the magnitude




    ‘ A detailed summary of each of these maybe found in Brewer and Ehrenberg (1996). The
studies are: Weisbrod and Karpoff ( 1968), Reed and Miller ( 1970), Wales (1973), Solmon, (1973,
1975), Solmon and Wachtel (1975), Wise (1975), Wachtel (1976), Griffen and Alexander (1978),
Morgan and Duncan (1979), James et al. (1989), Kingston and Smart (1990), Fox (1993), Loury
and Garman (1995) and Daniel et al, (1995).

   2 Kingston and Smart (1990) note that there is little change across time in institutional rankings,
and Solrnon (1975) shows the high degree of correlation among numerous alternative measures.
Conrad and Blackbum (1985) discuss the various methods by which departments and institutions
have been clmsified in prior research.

                                                      2




                                                                         ..
of the estimated effect varies from negligible to large.

        This simple methodology has a potentd     weakness: it does not take account of the systematic

selection of college quality on the basis of the expected labor market payoff to attending it. There

is considerable vtiation in tuition costs associated with colleges of different quality; in general, more

selective private institutions charge higher tuition than their less selective private counterparts, and

private institutions tie more expensive than public ones of similar quality. Why do students choose

to attend higher quality institutions despite these higher charges?      Why do they attend high cost

private institutions when comparable quality public institution are available? Presumably, the answer

is partly that attendance at these colleges is expected to yield a greater economic payoff in the labor

market, net of higher attendance costs, on termination of college.       If individuals invest in college

quality on the basis of expected returns, college quality cannot be treated as an exogenous

determinant of earnings..3

        In this paper we utilize a generalization of Willis and Rosen’s ( 1979) selectivity model applied

to the college quality context.   The structural model consists of a choice equation and an estimated

outcome equation for each choice. Individuals are assumed to select a public or private college in

an observable quality category j (= 1,...,K) which yields them the highest utility over the lifecycle.

The utility of a college choice for individual i is hypothesized to be a linear function of the expected

lifetime pecuniary (Y) returns derived from attending college catego~ j, the net direct costs (C)of

college catego~ j, the individual’s characteristics (X), and an individual specific taste shifter ~.4 Net

costs in this context refers to the dfierence between the tuition and financial aid an individual student
would face were they to attend college type j. Personal characteristics may affect utility differently

for different options (~ji does not necessarily equal bti in equation (2) below).



   3 There are a host of other problem with prior studies. These include the use of unrepresentative
samples and reliance on linear measures of quality. Some have treated within-college individual
charactefitics, which may depend on college quality, as exogenous in wage models . For example,
Loury and Garman (1995) include college major and GPA in their earnings models even though it
seems likely that these attributes may be correlated with institutional quality and unobse~ed
individud attributes. See Brewer and Ehrenberg (1996) for a discussion. See Grogger and Eide
(1995) for evidence on the returns to college major.

  4 Nonpecuniq       returns are ignored.

                                                    3
 (2)                                   UJ = u(Yj,cjyi,     cJ = 80 + bj~i       + b2YJ + &3cy +    E
                                                                                                       J“




College category j is chosen if:

 (3)                                                     Ii-=   UJ-Uh>O           v k.




Thestructural   model consistsof    (2), (3)and (4):




Assume the log wage rate (In W) for each individual is the outcome of interest.      Combining (4) with

(3) and (2) yields a reduced form estimating equation of the form:



 (5)                                             1,8 = do + di~i       + d2Cfl + d3Cti + c,.


Choice of college quality category depends on individual chwacteristics             and the dtiect costs

associated   with both the college quality type chosen, j, A          those not chosen.   Ln other words,

individuals are assumed to compare the net direct costs (and wage outcomes in the structural model)

associated with each of six sector/quality college types. Assuming { is independently and identically

distributed and has a type I extreme value distribution, (5) represents a multinominal logit model.

        Since wages are observed only for those who actually chose each type of college, the

estimated coefficients of a standard wage equation (like (1)) will not be consistent.     The appropriate

“selectivity correction” term for each individual (A), which reflects the predicted probability that an

individual selects a particular college quality type, computed using the methodology developed by

Lee (1983) and derived from the reduced form choice model, may be used to obtain selectivity

corrected estimates of log wages horn each choice. In this case (6), the estimated “b”s are consistent.

 (6)



                                                   4




                                                                 ..
These selectivity terms are identified by functional form, and by the inclusion of net costs in the

college choice equation (5). That is, net college costs are assumed to determine the college quality

chosen but not wages received subsequently.

           The labor market returns to college quality can be calculated using the predicted log wages

obtained from the estimation of(6).      We derive mean predicted wages for individuals who attended

each type of college, corrected for choice of college type, and calculate the differentials associated

with each college type. Finally, it is possible in principle to determine if the underlying hypothesis of

our model that college quality and labor market outcomes are jointly determined by estimating the

structural    college choice model.      This can be done by substituting the predicted wages for all

individuals in the sample obtained by (6) into (5).



    (7)                                  l,” = do + dj~, + d2Cj + d3Cti + ddh Wj + d5h Wb + v,.



~

           In the limited literature on the effects of college quality on labor market outcomes, no study

has been able to utilize data which prmit    the comparison of the differential effects of college quality

on labor mket      outcomes over time.     We use two nationally representative sources for our data on

college students: The National Longitudinal       Study of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS72) and

High School and Beyond (HSB), both conducted by the National Center for Education Statistics.

These data were explicitly designed for cross cohort analysis.5 They contain detailed individual,

family, and schooling characteristics       for three cohorts of students:   approximately    21000 who

graduated high school in 1972, and over 10000 students who graduated high school in 1980, and in

1982 (1980 high school sophomores).          Information regarding college attendance, graduate school

attendance, and post-high school wages andor earnings was collected in a series of subsequent

surveys.

           Characteristics of colleges are obtained from various components of the Higher Educafion


   5 There are some minor differences in the definition and construction of several variables across
cohorts such as the composite test score, high school GPA and high school athletic status.

                                                     5




                                                                                                             ..
General lnfomafion       Sumey (HEGIS).        This includes the state in which the college is located, its

form of control (public/private),     tuition levels, and undergraduate       enrollment.    Throughout   our

analyses, we employ a six fold classification of college quality type, derived from various editions of

Barron’s Projiles of American        Colleges.b    These ratings are based primarily on selectivity of

admissions decisions.’ We divide institutions into three groups based on a rating of most competitive

or highly competitive      (“top” or “elite”), very competitive        or competitive   (“middle”), and less

competitive or non competitive (“bottom’’).* We distinguish between privately and publicly controlled

institutions in each categoq.   Our samples consist of institutions in each quality/sector grouping for

which nonmissing enrollment and tuition data and a Barron’s rating are available. There were 79 (56)

elite institutions in 1972 (1982), 72 (51) of which were under private control.             Tuition was about

four times higher at private schools than at publics in 1972 and 1982. The largest percentage increase

(118%) in tuition which occurred between 1972 and 1982 was at top private schools; over the same

period the Consumer Price Index rose by 117%. In contrast, tuition rose at top publics by 87.5%,

and just 71.290 at bottom publics. The large increases in college tuition and fees occurred during the

1980s which are nor captured in our data.

           Nationally representative estimates of attendee characteristics are shown in Table 1 for the

high school clmses of 1972 and 1982, by type of college attended.          The patterns within a cohort are

clear. White students and students with higher family incomes, and more educated parents are more

likely to attend higher quality colleges.    Not surprisingly, those with greater academic talent (higher

high school GPAs and test scores) predominate at high quality schools.             Females, Hispanics, and

blacks we much more likely to be attending top and middle quality schools, both public and private,

in 1982 as compared to 1972. Finally, financial aid (from any source) is about twice as tigh for

students    attending private institutions    than public, with a larger fraction of students at public



   b There is some evidence in previous research that a categorical measure of college quality is to
be prefemed to a single linear measure (Kingston and Smart, 1990).

   7 Colleges are rated by Barren’s on the basis of entering students’ class rank, high school grade
point average, average SAT scores, and the percentage of applicants admitted (see Fox, 1993, p. 138).

    6 This threefold categorization is employed primarily because there are too few public institutions
in the most competitive group.

                                                      6




                                                                  ..
institutions receiving no aid. However, more students were receiving some aid in 1982 than in 1972

(as shown by the proportion receiving no aid in the last row of the table).




~

Estimating Samples
        In examining labor market outcomes we utilize three cohort samples from NLS72 and HSB.

We use the fourth (1979) and fifth ( 1986) NLS72 followups, which provide up to 3 and 10 years of

labor market experience for those students who initially attended a four year college after high school

and subsequently completed college in four years. For HSB we concentrate our attention on the 1982

cohort for whom the restricted 1992 (fifth followup) survey provides up to 6 years in the labor

market.9   In some instances, we also use the 1986 (third followup) survey for the 1980 cohort,

providing a maximum of 2 years labor market experience for those completing college. 10              In

principle, use of more than one cohort permits us to determine if there are systematic differences in

the college quality -- outcome relationship in the 1970s and 1980s. We confine our attention to those

students who attended a four year college upon completion of high school, regardless of final

graduation. ]] After eliminating missing values and merging all necessary data our sample sizes are



     9 The NLS72 fourth followup was conducted in the fall of 1979 and fifth follow-up was
conducted in the spring of 1986. (The sample sizes are small because we rely mostly on fifth follow-
up data for which ordy two-thirds of the original sample were surveyed. ) The HSB surveys were
conducted in the spring of each year.

   ‘0 Only the 1982 cohort of high school students were resurveyed in 1992. Some results for the
1980 cohort have been previously reported in Brewer and Ehrenberg (1996).

     ]] Our estimates of rates of return to college quality should be viewed as partly reflecting the
incremed likelihood of graduating from an elite institution. One could include final education level
in these outcome models but it is likely endogenous. Prima facie evidence for this may be seen for
the 1980 cohort: by 1986, 28% (30%) of those 1980 high school seniors initially attending top private
(public) colleges had not received a Bachelors degree; the figures were 50% and 55% for middle
private and public schools, and 5970 and 70% for bottom privates and publics. Also, Brewer and
Ehrenberg (1996) find some evidence that undergraduate college quality affects the likelihood of
graduate school attendance. In principle it may be possible to empirically model the endogeneity of
educational att-nt     but finding suitable instruments is problematic. Sirnilmly, confining attention

                                                  7




                                                                                                          ..
a -urn       of 3062 for the 1972 cohort and 2165 for the 1982 cohort. In each case slightly under

half of all students attend middle rated public institutions      (1416 in 1972, 954 in 1982).         One

noteworthy feature of our samples is that relatively few students attend top public schools (22 in 1972

and 35 in 1982) (and similarly for bottom privates in 1982), leading to difficulties in estimation,

Sample means and standard deviations for the major variables used in our analyses are shown in

Appendix Table 1.



Pooled Wage/Earnings       Models
         We now turn to our estimates of the effect of college quality/sector          on labor market

outcomes. The preferred measure of labor market performance is the logarithm of the hourly wage

rate for those employed.   This is available for the 1972 cohort for those working in 1979 and those

working in 1986. However, for the 1982 HSB cohort, data on hour] y wage rates were m collected

in the 1992 followup; rather annual earnings information           was gathered.      Unfortunately,    no

information on hours or weeks worked was collected, so it is impossible for this group to separate

labor supply decisions from wages, so the earnings measure muddies the interpretation of the effects

of college quality. It is also particular y problematic for women who are less likely to be employed

full time than men. Since college quality may be positively correlated with hours worked and weeks

worked, as well as wage rates, we might expect the estimated effects of college quality on earnings

to be larger than the estimated effects of college quality on wages. We use the logarithm of annual

earnings in 1992 for the 1982 cohort. 12 In order to reduce possible errors arising from this earnings

measure we also estimate all the models separately for men only, and as an additional point of

comparison we also utilize information on 1986 hour] y wages for the 1980 cohort of high school




to graduates ordy reduces sample sizes dramatically making implementation of our model difficult
with these data.

      12 We do ~ restrict the range of possible earnings values, save that repotied earnings are
positive. Pretiary   results did not suggest our results were sensitive to this decision; restricting tie
sample is essentially arbitrq    and further reduced sample sizes which makes estimation of our
structural model problematic.

                                                   8




                                                                    ..
                                                                     ..
graduates, and report annual earnings models for the 1972 cohort.13

            The simplest analysis of the effwts of college quality on labor market outcomes is to estimate

pooled models as given by equation (1) in Section 2, in which dummy variables indicating the college

quality/sector each student attended are included in a standard log wage/earnings model estimated

for all college attendees. 14 This is the approach taken in most previous research, although none has

focused on the issue of sectoral control or examined cross cohort or within cohort differences as we

are able to do.     Results of this exercise me shown in Table 2.



We show five dtemative          labor market outcome measures for our three cohorts.      The results are

striking.     In all cases, attendance at an elite private institution is associated with a statistically

significant and sizeable wage premium relative to bottom publics, the omitted group. There is some

evidence that this premium increases over time for a given cohort.          For those in the 1972 cohort

attending a top private school, hourly wages were 9% higher in 1979 but 14% higher in 1986;

however this change is not statistically significant.       A similar pattern is also exhibited for other

college types for the 1972 cohort;        the within cohort change is statistically significant for middle

privates and top publics.      With less certainty (since one is forced to compare wage and earnings

models) this pattern holds for the 1980/1 982 cohorts.

        There is dso evidence that the premium to attending an elite institution increased for the

cohort that attended college in the 1980s compared to those who attended in the 1970s.’5              For



   13 NLS72 contains sufficient information to construct an earnings measure comparable to the
1992 HSB earnings variable.

      14 These models include female, Hispanic, black, family size, family income, father’s education,
mother’s education, test score, and dummies indicating if the individual was employed part time, was
still an undergraduate, or a graduate student. The models are estimated for those individuals in our
sample with positive wages or earnings. We correct for employment selectivity using a standard
Heck.man ( 1979) procedure. In other words, we estimate a probit model for employment status using
the whole sample, calculate selectivity terms and add these to our wage/earnings model. The term
is identified by the inclusion of marital status and number of children at the relevant survey date in
the employment status equation, and by functional form.

     15Across cohorts, the change for 1979 wages/1986 wages is statistically significant for top
privates, middle privates, and top publics. For 1986 eamings/1992 earnings the change is

                                                      9
example, at comparable points in the lifecycle (6 years after high school graduation) the premium to

a top college was 2070 for the 1980 cohort and 9~0 for the 1972 cohort.             Despite having fewer

potentd    years in the labor market, the 1982 cohort enjoyed annual earnings an estimated 37% higher

at elite privates than those attending bottom publics in 1992, while those attending this type of college

in 1972 received a 15~opremium in 1986. There is weak evidence that a similar story is applicable

to top publics although the small number of attendees at these institutions suggest that these results

should be fieated with caution; however, the pattern of increasing labor market returns is @

replicated for middle and bottom rated institutions. ‘b



Selectivity Corrected Wage/Earnings          DHerentials
          The estimates reported in Table 2 do not control for the possibfity that students systematically

select a college quality/sector type on the basis of the expected labor market payoff. Our structural

model involves the estimation of a reduced form multinominal Iogit college quality choice model,

calculation of selection comection terms from this model, and the inclusion of these in wage/earnings

models estimated separately for each college quality/sector group. Here, since our primary focus is

on the resulting predicted wage/earnings derived from this procedure, we describe our methodology

only briefly.    (A complete set of results are available from the authors upon request.)

          Initially we calculate the net costs of all six alternative college quality/sector groups which

an individual might attend.     For tuition, we rely on the fact that a majority of individuals attend a

college in the state in which they went to high school.’7 For each state we calculate the mean tuition




statistically significant for top and bottom privates.

     16 A similar pattern is observed when the estimating samples are confined to males ordy,
although the returns to elite privates are higher for women than men.

    17HSB does not directly identify the state of each individual’s high school; it is possible to infer
the state using an algorithm used by us elsewhere (Ehrenberg and Brewer, 1994). The extent to
which students attend a college in the state in which they went to high school varies across college
type. For example, 85% of those at public colleges in the 1980 cohort [86% in the 1982 cohort]
came from within the state (67% [67~0] at top, 83% [84%] at middle, and 8870 [89Yo] at bottom
rated schook) compared to 5870 [5490] of students at private schools (40% [29%] at top, 62% [50~0]
at middle and 57% [58%] at bottom rated schools).

                                                     10
(weighted by enrollment) in the relevant year for each type of college, i.e., in top public institutions,

middle public, etc., and match this figure to the student’s high school state. For public colleges we

use in-state tuition figures. If no institution exists in a particular quality/sector group (typically top

public and top private) for a state we use a regional mean instead. 18

        Financial aid, disbursed through a variety of federal, state, and institutional programs, is

determined   largely by academic andor athletic merit, and by family financial status. 19 The aid an

individual with given characteristics receives is determined by the policies an individual institution

pursues including its tuition policies.   NLS72 and HSB contains the (self repofled) financial aid a

student received in the college he or she actually attended in the initial year of attendance.    We use

this information to construct estimates of annual predicted financial aid each individual in the sample

WOUUhave received in each of the six types of college.    For those attending each type of institution,

this was done by regressing       actual aid received on individual characteristics       including sex,

racdethnicity, academic ability (proxied by high school GPA and a test score measure), high school

athletic status, parental income and family size.    We also include a set of dummies for the state in

which the colleges attended are located to reflect price variation and differences in state aid policy .20

Coefficient estimates from these models are then used to construct predicted aid in that college type

for all individuals in our sample.2] Since many individuals receive zero aid a maximum likelihood tobit



    1sWe experimented with various definitions for the relevant tuition facing each student. For
example, use of regional means for the elite institutions, and out of state tuition for top public
schools. The reported results are not sensitive to use of these alternatives.

    ‘g By financial aid we are referring exclusively to direct current income received from federal
sources such as BEOG or Pen grants, ROTC scholarships, etc., as well as aid from state, institutional,
and private sources. This includes scholarships, fellowships, g-rants and benefits, but excludes loans.

     20 Note that net costs vary across individuals due to differential financial aid eligibility and
high school location. Predicted financial aid models are identified by including high school
athletic status and state dummy variables for college location (reflecting differences in state aid
policy) in the tobit aid model but not in the college choice model. Strictly speaking, these
financial aid models should also be corrected for potential selectivity bias, but we do not attempt
to do this here.

   21 In other words, while the models are estimated separately for each sector/quality group, the
coefficient estimates are used to generate out of sample predictions for those who actually attended

                                                    11
specification is used to obtain these predictions.”   Estimates of tuition and financial aid are combined

to produce    the predicted net costs each individual in our samples would face in each college

quality/sector type.
          High school students are assumed to select a college from the six college sector/quality

groups    on the bmis of the net costs associated          with each type of institution   and individual

characteristics such as sex, race/ethnicity, family income and parental education levels, high school

GPA and ~7~SB            test score We include two additional vtiables      in the model to proxy for the

likelihood of being admitted to a particular institutional type: the availability of college openings
(“slots”) in each sector/quality group in the high school student’s state23; and the student’s own

~72/HSB       test score minus the mean test score in the institution t~   actually attended squared (the

“test score difference’’) .24 The estimated reduced form college choice model is used to generate

selectivity terms for each type of college.25




other types of institution.   In all cases we use predicted aid.

     22We find that the amount of financial aid received is related to family economic status and
ability, though with some significant differences across institution type. For example, for every
additional dollar of family income, financial aid drops by about twice as much for top private or
public college attendees as compared to middle rated schools, a pattern consistent across cohorts.
The composite test score or high school GPA is associated with higher aid in almost every case,
and the amounts of aid are greatest at top institutions, both public and private, again consistent
across cohorts.

   23 The number of slots in each sector/quality group in the student’s region rather than state were
used in some specifications, but this does not affect the pattern of results reported in the paper.

   24 This follows a similar approach with SAT scores used by James et al. (1989).

     25 While one must treat these reduced form estimates cautiously, there is evidence that higher
family income, parental education, and measured ability are associated with a greater likelihood of
attending any institution relative to a bottom public, holding other characteristics constant. For
the college cost variables, one would expect that as the net costs of attending a college in the jth
category rise, a student would be less likely to choose to attend an institution in the jth group
relative to bottom publics. In fact, the evidence on this is mixed both within and across cohorts.
The number of slots variable is generally positive and statistically significant for both cohorts as
one would expect (the greater the number of slots in the jth catego~, the higher the probability a
student will attend a college in the jth catego~ relative to bottom publics).

                                                      12




                                                                   ..
         The logarithm of the hourly wage rate or logarithm of annual earnings is regressed on the

same set of standard explanatory variables used in Table 2, with the addition of selectivity terms

associated   with the systematic selection of each college type.        We use these models to obtain

predicted log wages or log earnings for those attending each college type and calculate the mean

predicted actual wage or earnings for these students.2b Since these models are estimated separately

for each college quality type, they have the advantage of not constraining the coefficients of the

control variables to be identical across college types. Wage or earnings differentials are calculated

for each co~ege quality group relative to bottom publics, which are shown in Table 3. Two estimates

are presented,    reflecting alternative methods of calculating the appropriate predictions, and have

slightly differing interpretations (for a discussion on the use of these alternative measures see Trost

and Lee (1983), and Gyuorko and Tracy (1988)). First, one can calculate conditional predicted log

wages/earnings for each individual as given by (8):




Second, one can calculate uncondi~ional predicted log wages/earnings as given by (9):

 (9)                                                  h   Wp = $0 + b-j~j         j=l...6,




where the estimated “b”s are identical to those in (8).     The unconditional measure “corresponds to

an experiment in which an individual, having observable characteristics         that are the same as the

average Uth college t~     attend=], is tden at random from the population.     Since we do not observe

this individual’s choice of =tors,   the [predicted wage] reflects only the varying returns for his or her

characteristics” (Gyuorko and Tracy, 1988, p. 241). On the other hand, in calculating the conditional
predicted wage we know the individual’s choice of ~tor      such that the prediction reflects the varying




    26 This is done using the following formula:
              Mean (predicted actual wage) = exp [mean predicted log wage+ 0.502)],
where OZis the sum of squared residuals divided by the degrees of freedom obtained from each
regression model.

                                                     13
returns to both obsemable and unobservable characteristics.     One is not able to determine which of

these measures is “best” but they may be viewed as two polar cases. The appropriateness         of each

“depends on whether the estimated selmtion effects primarily reflect differences in levels of or returns

to unobserved [student] characteristics” (Gyuorko and Tracy, 1988, p. 249).      We present estimates

of the differential based on the conditional mean predicted wage rate/annual earnings in row (1) of

Table 3 for each memure, and the differential based on the unconditional mean prediction in row (2)

of Table 3.



        Focusing fwst on the conditional     estimates, the patterns found in the pooled model are

replicated here. Specifically, for the 1972 cohort the premium to attending each college quality type

increases with labor market experience.    In general, the return to college quality increased fmter in

these sector-specific models relative to the pooled models.     This pattern does not hold across all

college quality types for the unconditional differentials, however. Similarly, the premium to college

attendance     increases across cohorts for recent graduates (wages about 6 years after high school

graduation).    The result also holds when comparing the earnings of the 1972 cohort with the 1982

cohofi, but only for private schools. The unconditional results for the bottom privates and top publics

should be interpreted cautiously due to small sample sizes. Comparing the selectivi~          corrected

estimates with those of the pooled models suggest that the pattern of results is similar, although the

magnitudes of the estimated rates of return vary. For example, the premium to attending an elite

private college in the selectivity corrected model is larger than in the pooled model.

        Finally we attempted     to test the underlying structural model by using (unconditional)

predicted log wages/earnings in estimates of a structural multinominal logit model of college choice.

In principle, these models provide an indication of whether wages/earnings     and net costs do in fact

tiect choice of college quality, but collinearity among the predicted wage/earnings measures for the

six college quality groupings makes inferences problematic.



5. Cone Iusion$
        In this paper we have presented estimates of the effect of attending colleges of different

quality on labor market outcomes.    Unlike previous studies, we are able to utilize longitudinal data


                                                  14
which permit us to examine how the labor market return changes across time for a given cohort, and

how the return changed for those cohorts who attended college in the ewly 1970s and the early

1980s. In addition, unlike previous attempts to determine the impact of college quality type on labor

market outcomes, we allow for the fact that students systematically select the college quality type

they attend on the basis of the expected labor market payoff and the net costs they face. While we

find little evidence that this correction for selectivity significantly affects our results, it is important

in principle.   We find that there is a large premium to attending an elite private institution, and a

smaller premium to attending a middle-rated private institution, relative to a bottom-rated           public

school.   There is weaker evidence of a return to attending an elite public university.        Our analysis

suggests the return to elite private colleges increased significantly for the 1980s cohorts as compared

to the 1972 cohort.    We do not attempt to determine the cause of this change, but it is a potentially

important finding in light of the large tuition increases concentrated at these institutions during the

put two decades.      These results suggest that the rising tuition at these elite private institutions was

at least partially made possible by the increasing returns to quality that took place.




                                                     15
                                            Reference$

Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman (1995), “Individual Endowments,
College Choice, and Wages: Estimates Using Data on Female Twins. ”    Revised paper for
NSF/RESTAT Conference on School Quality and Educational Outcomes.

Bound, John, and George Johnson, (1992), “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: AI-I
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review 82(3):37 1-92.

Brewer, Dominic J. and Ehrenberg, Ronald G. (1996), Does it Pay to Attend an Elite Private
College? Evidence from the Senior High School Clms of 1980, Research in bbor Economics,
forthcoming.

Conrad, CMon and Robert Blackbum ( 1985), “Program Quality in Higher Education: A Review and
Critique of Literature and Research,” in John Smart (cd.), Higher Education: Handbook of Theory
and Research, Volume 1, New York: Agathon Press.

Daniel, Kermit, Dan Black and Jeffrey Smith (1995), “College Quality and the Wages of Young
Men,” typescript, University of Pennsylvania, June.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Dominic J. Brewer (1994), “Do School and Teacher Characteristics
Matter? Evidence from High School and Beyond,” Economics of Education Review, 13(1).

Fox, Marc (1993), “Is it a Good Investment to Attend an Elite Private College?” Economics of
Education Review, 12 (2): 137-151.

G-,    Larry and Karl Alexander (1978), “Schooling and Socioeconomic Attainments: High School
and College Influences,” American Journal of Sociology, 84 (2):319-347.

Grogger, Jeff and Enc Eide (1995), “Changes in College Skills and the Rise in the College Wage
Premium,” Journal of Human Resources, 30(2):280-310.

Gyuorko, Joseph, and Joseph Tracy (1988), “An Analysis of Public- and Private- Sector Wages
Allowing for Endogenous Choices of Both Government and Union Status,” Journal of bbor
Economics, 6(2):229-253.

Heckman, James J. (1979), “Sample Selmtion Bias as a Specification Error,” Econometrics,   47:153-
162.

James, Estelle, Nabeel Alsal~ Joseph Conaty, and Duc-Le To ( 1989), “College Quality and Future
Earnings: Where should you send your child to college?,” American Economic Association Papers
and Proceedings, May,




                                                16
Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy ( 1992). “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1):35-78.

Kingston, Paul and John Smart (1990), “The Economic Payoff to Prestigious Colleges,” in Paul
Kingston and Lionel S. Lewis (eds.), The High-Sratus Track: Studies of Elite Privare Schools and
Stratification, Albany: SUNY.

Lee, Lung Fei (1983), “Generalized Models with Selectivity,” Econometrics,   51 (2):507-5 13.

Levy, Frank, and Richard Mumane ( 1992), “U.S. Earnings hvels and Earnings Inequality: A Review
of Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXX: 1331-1381.

Loury, Linda Datcher and David Garman (1995), “College Selectivity and Earnings”.      Journal of
bbor Economics, 13(2):289-308.

McPherson, Michael S. and Morton Owen Schapiro            (1991), Keeping    College Affordable,
Washington, D. C.: The Brookings Institution.

Morgan, James N. and Greg Duncan (1979), College Quality and Earnings, in Research in Human
Capital and Development, 1:103-121, JAI Press.

Reed, Ritchie and Herman Miller (1970), “Some Determinants of the Variation in Earnings for
College Men” Journal of Human Resources, V(2): 177-190.

Solmon, Lewis (1973) The Definition and Impact of College Quality,” in Lewis Solmon and Paul
Taubman (eds.), Does College Matter: Some Evidence on the Impacts of Higher Education, New
York: Academic Press.

Solmon, hwis (1975), “The Detition   of College Quality and its Impact on Earning s,”Exploration
in Economics Research, 2:537-587.

Solrnon, Lewis and Paul Wachtel (1975), “The Effects on hcome of Type of College Attended,”
Sociology of Education, 48:75-90.

Trost, Robert P. and Lung-Fei Lee (1984), “Technical Training and Earnings: A Polychotomous
Choice Model With Selectivity,” Review of Economics and Statistics,LXVI:151-  156.

Wachtel, Paul (1976), The Effect on Earnings of School and College Investment Expenditures,
Review of Economics and Statistics, 58:326-331.

Wales, Terence (1973), “The Effect of College Quality on Earnings: Results from the NBER-
Thomdike Data,” Journal of Human Resources, 8:306-317.




                                              17
Weisbrod, Burton and Peter Ka.rpoff (1968), “Monetary Returns to College Education, Student
Ability, and College Quality,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 50:491-497.

Willis, Robert J. and Sherwin Rosen (1979), “Education and Self Selection,” Journal of Political
Economy, 87: S7-S36.

Wise, David (1975), “Academic Achievement and Job Performance, ” American Economic Review,
65:350-366.




                                              18
%
..
     .
