NBER WORKING

PAPER SERIES

ROE V. WADE AND
AMERICAN FERT~ITY

Phillip B. Levine
Douglas Staiger
Thomas J. Kane
David J, Zimmerman

Working Paper 5615

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

We thank Jonathan Gruber for comments and Eileen Aguila, David Autor, and Tara Gustafson
for outstanding research assistance. This research was completed while Levine and Staiger were
on leave at the National Bureau of Economic Research, Kane was on leave at the Brookings
Institution, and Zimmerman was on leave at the University of Wisconsin’s Institute for Research
on Poverty. Financial support was provided by each of these institutions and Wellesley College.
This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Health Care. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Phillip B, Levine, Douglas Staiger, Thomas J. Kane and David J. Zimmerman. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5615
June 1996

ROE V. WADE AND
AMERICAN FERTILITY
ABSTRACT

We consider the effect of abortion legalization on births in the United States.
theoretical

model demonstrates

that the impact of abortion

legalization

on the birth rate is

ambiguous, because both pregnancy and abortion decisions could be affected.
in the timing of legalization
on birth rates.

We use variation

across states in the early 1970’s to estimate the effect of abortion

Our findings indicate that states legalizing abortion experienced

births relative to other states.

a 5% decline in

The decline among teens, women over 35, and nonwhite women

was even greater: 1390, 8Y0, and 1290 respectively.
much as births in wedlock.

A simple

Out-of-wedlock

births declined by twice as

If legalization in some states affected birth rates in neighboring

(through travel to obtain an abortion), comparing births between states will underestimate
actual reduction.
legalization

states
the

Using more distant comparison states increases the estimated impact of abortion

on birth rates to about 8%. Applying this estimate to the current level of births, a

complete decriminalization

of abortion would result in 320,000 additional births per year.

Phillip B. Levine
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02181
and NBER

Douglas Staiger
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

Thomas J, Kane
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

David J. Zimmerman
Femald House
Department of Economics
Williams College
Williamstown, MA 02167

I. INTRODUCTION
Since the early 1970’s, and certainly following the Supreme Court decision in Roe v.
Wade in 1973, abortion policy has been one of the most contentious issues in American politics.
Although
magnitude

positions

are largely developed

on philosophical

and moral grounds,

the empirical

of the effect of legal access to abortion is both important and rarely studied.

Our

purpose in this paper is to estimate the effects of abortion legalization and the Roe decision on
birth rates in the United States.
Recent research regarding the effects of abortion policy on fertility behavior has focused
on relatively minor restrictions

on abortion access, such as Medicaid funding restrictions

and

parental consent laws, rather than abortion legalization itself (c. f. Blank et al., 1994; Lundberg
and Plotnick,

1995; and Currie,

surprising restilts.

et al. , forthcoming).

Occasionally,

Papers by Kane and Staiger (1996), bvine

researchers

obtained

et al. (1996), and Matthews et

al. (1995) indicate that restrictions on the use of state Medicaid funds to pay for abortions leads
to fewer abortions,

but to either no change or possibly even a reduction

in births.

These

findings are consistent with a model of fertility behavior where women are less likely to get
pregnant in response to an increase in the cost of an abortion.
as a very substantial increase in its cost, then an extrapolation

If criminalized abortion is viewed
of these findings would suggest

that birth rates may similarly be unaffected or even reduced if abortion was made illegal.
Our purpose in this paper is to address the impact of abortion legalization
States on women’s fertility behavior.

First, we present a model indicating it is quite possible

that the effects of abortion

legalization

relatively minor restrictions

on abortions,

appear to be largely umffected

are different than an extrapolation
such as Medicaid funding.

by those restrictions

expect birth rates to be unaffected by legalization.
abortion liberalization

in the United

of the effects of

The fact that birth rates

does not necessarily imply that we should
Second, we use variation in the timing of

across states to estimate the effects on birth rates in the United States.

Using birth data from Vital Statistics between the years 1965 and 1980 and data from the 1980
1

Census, we examine three different types of quasi-experiments.
in “treatment

group” states following

liberalization

First, the change in birth rates

can be compared

to changes in “control

group” states, where the legal status of abortion was unaltered prior to 1973,
the treatment reversed.

States that previously had not legalized abortion underwent a treatment

and can be compared to states that legalized before Roe v. Wade.
legalizing

Second, in 1973

Finally, birth rates in states

abortion prior to 1973 can be compared to control group states that vary by their

distance to a legal state.

Since women could travel to a legal state and are more likely to do so

if they are closer, such comparisons

by distance can examine the extent to which birth rates in

control group states also declined as a result of access to legal abortions in other states.
Our findings indicate that legalization of abortion prior to Roe v. Wade in a handful of
states in 1970 resulted in a 5 % decline in birth rates in those states.
to a decline in births in affected states of roughly equal magnitude.
nonwhite women in early legalization

states experienced

The Roe decision itself led
Teens, women over 35, and

a greater reduction in births of 13%,

8%, and 12% respectively.

Out-of-wedlock

wedlock.

indicates that these statistics are understated

Further

between states.

evidence

births declined by twice as much as births inbecause of travel

The overall birth rate in states legalizing abortion in 1970 fell by 4% relative

to births in neighboring

states but by twice that relative to far away states.

Incorporating

these

“spillover effects” increases the estimated impact of abortion legalization on birth rates to about
8% nationwide.

II. PREVIOUS

RESEARCH

Before proceeding

ON ABORTION

with this amlysis,

date on the effects of abortion legalization.

LEGALIZATION
we briefly summarize

the research conducted

to

Most studies have focused on the experience of a

few states that fully legalized abortion in 1970 (Bauman, et al., 1977; Joyce and Mocan, 1990;
Kramer, 1975; Quick, 1978; and Tietze, 1973), ignoring the impact of the Roe v. Wade decision
in 1973.

These studies typically rely on a comparison of fertility behavior before and after the
2

change in law within those states.

This approach is likely to be confounded by general declines

in fertility occurring in the 1960s and early 1970s.
The exception is Sklar and Berkov (1974), who compare the decline in birth rates from
1965 to 1971 in states that liberalized their abortion laws versus states that did not.
find abortion liberalization

While they

was associated with a 2% decline in birth rates, this estimate may

understate the true effect because women from states with restrictive abortion laws were known
to travel to the more liberal states to obtain abortions (Pakter et al., 1973; Potts et al., 1977),
Moreover,

births in states with no legal changes are compared to all states that had undertaken

any type of liberalization,
to have very different

from outright repeal to modest reform laws that would be expected
effects on the birth rate.

experience of these early liberalization
by the Roe decision,

Furthermore,

it is unclear

whether

the

states is applicable to the states that were later affected

since women in more conservative

states that did not liberalize might be

less likely to obtain an abortion even after legaltiation.

III. MODEL OF FERTILITY

BEHAVIOR

In this section we develop a stylized model that shows that the relationship between birth
rates and the cost of abortion
abortion

is relatively

Impo~ntly,

is ambiguous.

inexpensive,

this model demonstrates

that if

a large increase in the cost of abortion could reduce the

number of abortions and lead to a higher birth rate.

A small increase in the cost of abortion,

however, may lower the number of abortions through a reduction in the number of pregnancies,
leaving the number of births largely umffected.

Thus, we cannot necessarily expect the impact

of, say, a repeal of Roe v. Wade to be similar to the recent experience with modest restrictions
on abortion access.
In this stylized model, suppose that a woman can choose her risk of getting pregnant,
PP,~~. There is a cost associated
increasing rate as the probability

with pregnancy

avoidance,

C(PP,.B), that increases

of getting pregnant is reduced (C’ < 0 and C”
3

at an

> O). If a

woman becomes pregnant, she can either give birth or have an abortion.

Let the cost of having

an abortion be A and of giving birth be B, where both types of cost include monetary

and

psychic costs. 1 If a woman acts to minimize costs, then the optimal choice of PP,,~can be found
Once a woman becomes pregnant,

by working backwards.

B <A. Thus, the cost of a pregnancy is min(A,B).
a simple cost minimization

Prior to becoming pregnant, a woman solves

problem:
Minimize
PP,.E

The assumption

she chooses to give birth only if

PP,.~omin(A,B)

that there are increasing

(C” > O) guarantees that dPP,,~/dA <0.

marginal

+ C(PP,,~)

costs of reducing

the risk of pregnancy

Thus, an increase in the cost of abortion will induce

a women to reduce her pregnancy risk.
The implications
cost of an abortion

is low enough

pregnancies

are aborted.

probability

of getting

contraception

of this model are illustrated in Figure 1, This figure shows that if the
(i.e.

less than the cost of giving

birth,

B),

Within this range, an increase in the cost of abortion
pregnant

as the

becomes more desirable.

by the increase in abortion cost.

alternative

The probability

of using

more

effective

then all
lowers the
and

costly

of giving birth, however, is unaffected

On the other hand, if there is a large increase in the cost of

abortion so that it passes the threshold set by the cost of giving birth (A > B), then women who
become pregmnt
option,

further

probability

will choose to give birth rather than abort.
increases

in the cost of abortion

beyond

Since abortion is no longer an

this level have no effect on the

of becoming pregmnt.

The implications
time pregnancy

decisions

of the model are similar if the cost of giving birth is uncertain at the
are made.

Between the time of getting pregmnt

and the time of

lFor those women who want to have a baby (i.e. B is negative), it is straightforward to show
that the solution to this problem is to set P ,eg = 1 and the abortion decision is irrelevant. The
remainder of this discussion assumes that fi 1s positive.
4

deciding on an abortion (generally 2-3 months), a woman may update her expectations

about the

cost of giving birth based on new information such as the reaction of the father or other family
members to the pregnancy. 2 Such a model would indicate that responses to a change in the cost
of abortion are “smoothed”,

rather than discrete as highlighted

in Figure 1. For example,

as

the cost of abortion approaches the expected value of the cost of giving birth, some women may
receive a relatively
addition,

low realized value of B and choose to give birth rather than abort.

small increases in the cost of abortion may actually reduce the probability

birth in a model with uncertainty:
as more women

get pregnant

In

of giving

When the cost of abortion is very low, births may increase

so that they may observe

the value of B and then make a

subsequent decision regarding birth. 3 Thus, when the cost of giving birth is uncertain at the time
of becoming
ambiguous

pregnant,

the relationship

However,

the birth rate and the cost of abortion

is

and may even be non-monotonic.

This simple model demonstrates
associated

between

with large decreases

that small increases in the cost of abortion

in abortion

but no change

or even a decrease

may be
in births.

the relationship between the cost of abortion and the birth rate can be both non-linear

and non-monotonic

so that larger increases in the cost of abortion may lead to more births.

Thus, even the sign of the relationship between abortion cost and the birth rate is necessarily an
empirical question.

Moreover,

the recent experience with relatively modest abortion restrictions

is of no use if one wishes to evaluate the potential

impact of more dramatic

restrictions

on

abortion access.

2Within this framework, access to abortion is different from access to birth control in at least
one important respect: abortion access alone provides insurance against the contingency that the
information learned after pregnancy makes motherhood less attractive.
3The implications
(forthcoming).

of this model are similar to the model developed

5

in Kane and Staiger

IV.

DATA AND METHODOLOGY
We use the legislative history of abortion legalization across states to identify the effects

of the policy change on birth rates.

Table 1 summarizes

this legislative history.

decades prior to 1967, all abortions were illegal in every state in America.
1970 a number of states implemented
abortions under special circumstances,
in five states in 1970 following
Washington,

For several

Between 1967 and

modest reforms making it legal for women to obtain
such as rape or incest. Abortion became widely available

repeal of anti-abortion

laws in four states (New York,

Alaska, and Hawaii) and a “de facto” legalization

in Califomia.4

Following

the

1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade, abortion became legal in all states.
This legislative history enables us to categorize states by abortion legality in different
years and provides the means to estimate the nationwide impact of legalization.
quasi-experimental

We employ a

design, defining so-called control and treatment groups and analyzing them

in much the same way that analysts examine randomized trials.

in states that changed

their

abortion laws prior to Roe v. Wade (the treatment group) can be identified by comparing

birth

experiments

are considered.

First,

the effect of liberalization

Three different types of quasi-

rates in these states to birth rates in states where the legal status of abortion was unaltered prior
to 1973 (the control group).

Two treatment groups are available to compare to control group

states. 5 In the analysis to follow we label these groups “repeal states” (among which we include

41n late 1969, the California State Supreme Court
abortion was unconstitutioml.
Furthermore, evidence
available in California beginning in 1970, with legal
California being comparable to rates for women living
pp. 75-77, 149, and see Garrow (1994) pp. 377-80,
footnotes 25 and 76 from chapter 7.

ruled that the pre-1967 law outlawing
indicates that legal abortion was widely
abortion rates among women living in
in New York. See Potts et al. (1977)
410-411, 457, and references cited in

5Another group of states may also be defined in which the status of existing abortion
prohibitions was unclear on the basis of lower court rulings. We have attempted to analyze this
group of states as an alternative treatment group and found no significant difference in fertility
patterns between women in these states and control group states. The power of this analysis is
limited, however, because of the difficulty involved in defining which states belong in this
category. Complications include the level of the court decision, the status of an appeal, and
temporary stays on prior rulings. For this reason, these states are included in the “control
6

California

beginning

in 1970), “reform states, ” and “control states, ” as classified in Table 1.

Second, in 1973 the treatment reversed.
that had not previously

The effect of Roe v. Wade in treatment group states

legalized abortion can be identified by comparing

birth rates in these

states to a control group of states that had legalized earlier.
The results of these analyses may be biased toward zero if, prior to the Roe decision,
women travelled to early legalization
consider a third quasi-experiment,

states to have an abortion.

comparing

To examine this bias, we

birth rates in states legalizing abortion prior to

1973 to control groups of states that vary by their distance to a legal state.

Since women could

travel to a legal state and are more likely to do so if they are closer, such comparisons

by

distance can address the extent to which birth rates in control group states also declined as a
result of access to legal abortions in other states.

Among states that had not legalized abortion

prior to 1973 (“non-repeal states”), we calculate whether the state is within 250 miles of a repeal
state, 250-750

miles from a repeal state, or more than 750 miles from a repeal state.

All

distances are calculated as the straight-line distance from each state’s population centroid to the
population

centroid of the nearest county in a repeal state.

Two types of amlyses are performed within this quasi-experimental

framework.

The first

simply compares average birth rates between groups of states (weighted by state population
women age 15-45) over the period 1965-1980.
the differences

Second, we use regression analysis to estimate

in log birth rates between groups of states.

state and year effects, state-specific
capture the socioeconomic

These regressions control for fixed

linear trends, and a set of state-level control variables that

environment

influence birth rates. b The regressions

group” in the amlysis

of

that vary across states in a nonlinear reamer
are weighted by state population

and may

and utilize over 800

reported here.

bThe state-level control variables include per capita income,
unemployment rate, The first two variables are obtained from
United States, and the insured unemployment rate is obtained
bbor, Employment and Training Administration (1983), Per
7

the crime rate,
the Statistical
from the U.S.
capita income

and the insured
Abstract of the
Department of
and the insured

observations

(16 years for each of the 50 states and Washington

analyses we examine whether any difference
following liberalization,

D. C. ).7

In both types of

in birth rates emerges between groups of states

and whether this difference dissipates after abortion is legalized in all

states in 1973.
We estimate the effects of abortion policies on birth rates, which are defined as the
number of births observed per 1,000 women of the appropriate demographic

group.

The number

of births by age and race of the mother, state of residence, and year are obtained for the years
1965-80 from Vital Statistics of the United States.
34, and 35-44.
the population

The age groups we consider are 15-19, 20-

Population estimates are obtained from the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Censuses, and
for intercensal years is linearly interpolated using these data.

We also examine

the impact of abortion legalization on births by “legitimacy status” using data from the 1980
Census. g These data contain the state of birth and quafler and year of birth for all respondents
as well as quarter and year of first marriage for all adults.

For all births occurring

between

1965 and 1979, we identify an “illegitimate” birth to be one where the child was born prior to
the mother’s first marriage.9

unemployment
rate are included to control for differences in economic conditions across
locations and the crime rate is included to control for differences in the social environment
within which pregmncy/birth
decisions are made.
7A few observations

are omitted because of missing data on some of the control variables.

‘Births by legitimacy status are only reported for a subset of states in Vital Statistics, For
this research, the lack of statistics for California and New York in the earlier years of our
sample period makes the use of these data impossible. Sklar and Berkov (1974) circumvented
this problem by contacting these states directly. We attempted this approach as well, but were
informed that some of these unpublished records from so long ago were no longer available.
9Legitimacy status cannot be detemined for about 10% of children in the Census.
We
estimated models of births by legitimacy status treating the missings as both legitimate and by
dropping them from the sample. We report results obtained when the missing data are dropped,
but results from both sets of estimates were similar.
8

V, RESULTS
A.

Nationwide

Patterns

Figure 2 graphs birth rates on a log scale from 1965 to 1980 separately for women age
15-44 living in repeal states and for women living in states that had no law change until 1973.
Birth rates fell sharply in repeal states between 1970 and 1972, by approximately

10%. It is not

surprising that the declines in birth rates first appear in 1971, since most abortions are performed
in the first trimester and would show up in birth rates 6-9 months later.
rates is difficult to interpret,
change as well.

The decline in birth

however, because birth rates were falling in states with no law

It is possible that some other factor was causing a general decline in birth rates

for all women, and that the decline in repeal states camot be attributed to abortion legalization.
Alternatively,

the observed decline in states with no law change may have been the result of

improved abortion access for those women who were able to travel to a repeal state.
The difference

in birth rates between repeal states and states with no law change is

presented in Figure 3. The pattern shows that differences are roughly constant through 1970.
A sharp drop of about 6% is observed in 1971 that remains through 1973, indicating that birth
rates fell in repeal states relative to states with no law change during this period. Through 197475 the difference narrows and then by 1976 and onward, there is very little difference again.
In other words, birth rates fell in repeal states relative to states with no law change in exactly
the years in which abortion was only legal in repeal states. The partial rebound in 1974-75 may
indicate that abortion access in states affected by Roe v. Wade may have grown less quickly
following

this decision compared to the rapid introduction

in 1970.

Corresponding

of abortion services in repeal states

figures for reform states versus states with no legal changes show no

distinctive pattern and are not displayed here for purposes of brevity.
The effect of abortion legalization on births by age are presented in Figure 4. The first
pattern that may be observed in this figure is that repeal states and states with no law change had
very different time series patterns in births by age.
9

In particular,

a delay in childbearing

that

was stronger in repeal states relative to states with no law change is apparent.

Births to teens

fell over time in repeal states when compared to states with no law change; the opposite was true
for women 35-44.

Nevertheless,

a reduction in births in 1970 and a rebound in 1973 in repeal

states relative to states with no law change is observed in all age groups.

The trend among teens

and older women makes it difficult to assess the size of the treatment effect for these groups.
For women 20-34 it appears that births to women in repeal states dropped

by roughly

5%

relative to women in states with no law change after 1970 and then fully rebounded by 1974.
Differences

in birth rates among nonwhite women between repeal states and states with

no law change are shown in Figure 5. Here, we see that a tremendous drop in births of roughly
15-20 % occurred during the 1971-73 period in repeal states compared to the pre-1970 period.
However, the rebound in births in states that legalized abortion in 1973 is quite small. This may
indicate that other changes took place in the early 1970’s that differentially

affected birth rates

of nonwhite women in repeal and other states.
Figure 6 displays differences

in legitimate

states and states with no law change.
estimated differences

Illegitimate

are somewhat erratic.

and illegitimate

birth rates between repeal

births appear to be a noisier measure and

Nevertheless,

a significant downward drop on the

order of 10-15% in the difference in the rate of illegitimate births is observed between 1971 and
1973.

The difference in the legitimate birth rate is roughly 5 % over this period.
These results can be summarized

and extended by the regression

results, reported in

Table 2, where the dependent variable is the log birth rate. The regressions control for state and
year fixed effects, state-specific trends and some socioeconomic characteristics
coefficients

of the state. The

reported in Table 2 are for a series of dummy variables that indicate whether the

state was in a repeal or reform state and also whether it was a year of abortion liberalization
prior to Roe (e.g. 1971-73 in repeal states), one of the years immediately following Roe (197475), or a later year (1976-80).

Note that these time periods lag the legal changes by one year,

since abortion access is expected to influence birth rates with a 6-9 month lag.
10

The omitted

category in the regressions is states with no law change prior to Roe, so all estimates are relative
to these states.
between

Inclusion of state effects in the regressions accounts for any differences that exist

states prior to abortion

liberalization.

Thus, for example,

the first coefficient

in

Column 1 of Table 2 indicates that birth rates were about 5 % lower in repeal states relative to
states with no law change in 1971-73, net of any difference that existed prior to 1971.
Findings reported in Table 2 are strongly supportive of an effect of abortion legalization
on birth rates.

Overall, births in repeal states fell by 5 % relative to states with no law change

between 1971 and 1973.
states is observed

No statistically significant difference in births between the two sets of

in 1974-75 or 1976-80.

Parameter

estimates by age, race, and legitimacy

status are consistent with the patterns found in Figures 4 - 6.
women’s birth rates fell by 13% and 8%, respectively,
law change.

This difference disappeared

slowly for teen births.
repeal,

In repeal states, teen and older

compared to women in states with no

in the years following Roe v. Wade, although more

Births to nonwhite women in repeal states fell by 12% just following

but were still over 7 % lower than births in other states by the 1976-80 period.

Illegitimate

births also fell by twice the rate of legitimate births (7,2% versus 3.6%) in repeal

states between 1971 and 1973.10 This difference was also eliminated in the years following Roe
v. Wade.

Further,

a comparison

of reform states and states with no law change provides no

evidence that modest abortion liberalization reduced birth rates.
into repeal and “non-repeal”

Therefore,

states are combined

states in all subsequent amlyses.

l~he larger effect of legalization on teens and older women, and on illegitimate births is
consistent with the fertility model presented above. In that model, abortion restrictions could
only reduce births for those women with a positive cost of giving birth. Women who “want”
to have a baby would have a negative cost of giving birth and the model predicts no effect on
births for these women. The groups whose birth rates are most affected by legalization are those
for whom the cost of giving birth is more likely to be positive.
11

B. GeoErauhic Patterns
Women from non-repeal states are known to have travelled to repeal states to obtain an
abortion before Roe v. Wade. 11 In effect , this amounts to a contamination
design,

i.e. birth rates in non-repeal

abortion in nearby repeal states.

of the experimental

states may have fallen as the result of access to legal

To the extent that this occurs, the relative decline in birth rates

in repeal states will understate the true effect of abortion legalization on birth rates.
to determine
differentiate

the extent of such “spillover

effects” on birth rates in non-repeal

them by how far they are to a repeal state.

One way
states is to

If the cost of having an abortion rises

with travel distance, differences in birth rates between repeal states and more distant non-repeal
states may provide a more accurate estimate of the total effect abortion legalization had on birth
rates.
Evidence of these geographic patterns is presented in Figure 7, which graphs differences
in birth rates between repeal states and non-repeal

states differentiated

by their distance to a

repeal state.

This figure shows that birth rates in repeal states were trending higher relative to

“neighboring”

states (within 250 miles), but trending lower relative to far away states (more than

750 miles).
rebound

Abstracting from these trends, differences in births show a significant dip and then

in all sets of states between

1971 and 1973.

This pattern

is exaggerated

when

comparing repeal states to farther away states, as we would expect if women living near repeal
states travelled to those states to get abortions.
Patterns

observed

in these figures are formalized

reported in Table 3. These regressions
the effect of abortion legaltiation
the non-repeal states.

in a regression

framework

and are

are analogous to those reported in Table 2 except that

is allowed to vary with the distance from the repeal state to

Following legalization in 1970, births in repeal states fell by about 4.3%,

6.1 %, and 8% relative to non-repeal states that are less than 250 miles away, between 250 and

llFor example,

see the discussion in Potts et al. (1977), pp. 76, 349, 354-56,
12

750 miles away, and greater than 750 miles away, respectively.
abortion legalization

This finding suggests that

in repeal states had a sizable impact on birth rates in nearby states that

would make the relative decline in repeal states appear smaller.
Another

interesting

pattern in the results reported in Table 3 is the rate at which the

difference in birth rates converged between early !egaltiation states and states legalizing in 1973.
In the set of states closest to early legalization
difference in birth rates by the 1974-75 period.
further away,
statistically

The rate of convergence

In the set of states furthest from early legalization

significant

convergence

states, there was no statistically

difference

significant

was slower in states

states, a smaller,

but still

in birth rates is observed during the 1974-75 period before

is observed by the 1976-80 period.

in abortion access in these states.

This pattern is consistent with a slower growth

As reported in Table 4, in 1976 states further from repeal

states still had lower abortion rates, had a lower percentage of women in counties with abortion
providers,

and had a much larger fraction of women living more than 50 miles from the nearest

abortion provider.
These estimates

can be used to estimate the extent of spillover.

If we assume that

legalization in repeal states had no impact on the birth rate in states more than 750 miles away,
then these estimates imply that abortion legalization reduced birth rates by 8% in repeal states. 12
By implication,

spillover effects on birth rates in states within 250 miles of repeal states were

3.7 % (equal to the 8% reduction in births in repeal states relative to far away states less the
4.3 % reduction relative to states within 250 miles), and 1.9% (8% less 6.1%) in states between
250 and 750 miles from repeal states. Taking a weighted average of all women by their distance
to a repeal state, these estimates

imply that

births to women in all non-repeaf states fell by

about 2 % as some women travelled to repeal states to have abortions performed before Roe v.
Wade legalized abortion mtionwide.

12To the extent that this assumption
prohibitions will still be understated.

is invalid, the estimated effect of repealing abortion

13

VI.

DISCUSSION
This analysis has examined the effect of abortion legalization

States.

on births in the United

A stylized model of fertility behavior was presented indicating that the predicted effect

cannot be extrapolated
an abortion.

from the effect of more modest restrictions on a woman’s ability to have

In particular, more modest restrictions may reduce abortions as well as births while

more severe restrictions

may lead to an increase in births.

Then we presented three separate quasi-experimental
legalization.

estimates of the effect of abortion

We showed that birth rates in states that legalized abortion prior to Roe v. Wade

took about a 5 % drop following legalization relative to states that experienced no change in their
law.

This effect was completely reversed following the Roe v. Wade decision.

The reduction

in births following legalization was largest for teens (13%) and older women (8%), for nonwhite
women (12 %), and for illegitimate births (7%). We also provided evidence suggesting that these
estimates are actually too low because women living near repeal states travelled to those states
to obtain an abortion.

Based on a comparison with states far from repeal states, we estimate that

spillover effects led to at least a 2% reduction in birth rates in non-repeal states before Roe v.
Wade.

Combining these estimates, we find that abortion legalization led to about a 7-8% decline

in births nationwide,

and the Roe decision itself led to a 5-6% decline in births in non-repeal

states. 13
What do these results tell us about the potential effects on births of a change in the
current legal status of abortion?
a result of, say, a constitutioml
birth rates.

If abortion became illegal everywhere

in the United States as

amendment outlawing abortion, we might expect an 8 YO rise in

If Roe v. Wade was overturned

by the Supreme Court and states had the right to

‘3These estimates may be obtained in one of two ways. The total effect of legalization may
be implied from the 8% effect on birth rates in 1971-73 between repeal states and control states
more than 750 miles away from a repeal state. It may also be derived from the initial 5 % effect
estimated in Table 2 plus the estimated 2% spillover effect. The effect of the Roe decision itself
can be calculated as the 7-8% total effect of Iegaltiation less the 2% spillover effect generated
from women traveling to repeal states prior to the Roe ruling.
14

outlaw abortion, the effect would depend upon the number of states in which abortion remained
legal and their geographic

distribution. 14 If only a few states, including California

and New

York, maintained the legality of abortion, then our findings indicate that births may still increase
by as much as 5-6% in those states that decriminalize abortion.

Obviously,

if more states kept

abortion legal, the effect on births would be smaller as spillover effects arising from interstate
travel to obtain abortions would increase.

Applying these estimates to the current level of births,

a reversal of the Roe decision that left abortion legal in the five states that had legalized in 1970
would result in an increase in births on the order of 150,000 per year (5% of the roughly 3
million births in those states that decriminalized).
nationwide

Based on the approximately

in 1993, we estimate that a complete decriminalization

4 million births

of abortion would result in

perhaps as many as 320,000 additional births per year.

14Currently, 13 states (Arkansas, Connecticut, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota, Pennsylvania and South Dakota) have laws on the
books that would likely make abortion illegal if Roe v. Wade was overturned (Alan Guttmacher
Institute, 1989).
15

References

Alan Guttmacher
1989.

Institute. “An Analysis of Pre- 1973 State Laws on Abortion. ” mimeo, March

Bauman, KE, AE Anderson, JL Freeman, and GG Koch. “Legal Abortions subsidized Family
Planning Services, and the US Birth Dearth. ” Social Biolo~v. Volume 24, 1977, pp.
183-191.
Blank, RM, CC George, and RA London, “State Abortion Rates: The Impact of Policies,
Providers, Politics, Demographics, and Economic Environment. ” NBER working paper,
no. 4853, September 1994.
Bureau of the Census.
Statistical Abstract of the United States.
Government Printing Office, various editions.

Washington,

DC:

U.S.

Currie, Janet, Lucia Nixon, and Nancy Cole. “Restrictions on Medicaid Funding of Abortion:
Effects on Pregmncy Resolutions and Birth Weight. ” Journal of Human Resources,
Volume 31 (l), Winter 1996, pp. 159-188..
Garrow,

DJ. Libertv and Sexuality: The Right to Privacv and the Making of Roe v. Wade.
New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1994.

Joyce, TJ and NH Mocan. “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Adolescent Childbearing in
New York City. ” American Journal of Public Health. Volume 80 (3), March 1990, pp.
273-278.
Kane, TJ and D Staiger. “Teen Motherhood and Abortion Access. ” C)uarterlv Journal of
Economics, Volume 111 (2), May 1996, pp. 467-506.
Kramer,

MJ. “Legal Abortion among New York City Residents: An Analysis According to
Socioeconomic
and Demographic Characteristics. ” Familv Plannin~ Perspectives.
Volume 7, 1975, pp. 128-137.

Levine,

PB, AB Trainor, and DJ Zimmerman.
Restrictions on Abortions, Pregnancies,
forthcoming, 1996.

“The Effects of Medicaid Abortion Funding
and Births. ” Journal of Health Economics,

Do fionomic Incentives
Lundberg, S and RD Plotnick. “Adolescent Premarital Childbearing:
Volume 13 (2), April 1995, pp. 177-200.
Matter. ” Journal of Labor Economics.
Matthews, Stephen, David Ribar, and Mark Wilhelm, “The Effects of Economic Conditions and
Access to Reproductive Health Services on State Abortion and Birth Rates. ” Pem State
University Population Research Institute Working Paper, #7-95-4, July 1995.
Merz, JF, CA Jackson, and JA Klerman. “A Review of Abortion Policy: Legality, Medicaid
Funding, and Parental Involvement, 1967 -1994.” Rand Labor and Population Program
working paper, no. 95-14, May 1995.

16

Pakter,

J, D O’Hare, F Nelson, and M Svigir. “Two years’ experience in New York City
with the Liberalized Abortion Law -- Progress and Problems. ” American Journal of
Public Health. Volume 63, 1973, pp 524-535.

Potts, M, P Diggory and J Peel. Abortion.

New York: Cambridge

University Press, 1977.

Quick, JD. “Liberalized Abortion in Oregon: Effects on Fertility, Prematurity, Fetal Death,
and Infant Death. ” American Journal of Public Health. Volume 68, 1978, pp. 10031008.
Sklar,

J and B Berkov. “Abortion, Illegitimacy
Volume 13, 1974, pp. 909-915.

and the American

Birth Rate. ”

Science.

Tietze, C. “Two Years Experience with a Liberal Abortion Law: Its Impact on Fertility Trends
Volume 5, 1973, pp. 36-41.
in New York City. ” Family Plamin~ Perspectives.
U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration. Unem~lovment Insurance
Financial Data (ET Handbook 394]. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office,
1983,

17

Table 1: Summary of Abortion Liberalization

Category
Repeal States (5):
States in which abortion was
legally available prior to Roe
v. Wade

Reform States (12):
States which implemented
modest reforms prior to Roe
v. Wade making it legal for
women to obtain abortions
under special circumstances.

Control States (33):
States in which abortion laws
were unchanged until Roe v.
Wade

State and Year of Liberalization
Alaska (1970)
California (1970)1
Hawaii (1970)
New York (1970)
Washington (1970)
Arkansas (1969)
Colorado (1967)
Delaware (1970)
Florida (1968)
Georgia (1968)
Kansas (1969)

Maryland (1968)
New Mexico (1969)
North Carolina (1967)
Oregon (1969)
South Carolina (1970)
Virginia (1970)

Alabama, Arizona, Comecticut, District of
Columbia, Idaho, Illinois, Iowa, Kentucky,
Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts, Michigan,
Mimesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montam,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New
Jersey, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma,
Pemsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming

Notes:
lCalifomia is categorked as a repeal state starting in
repeal legislation was passed. This coding is based upon
Court’s decision that the pre-1967 state abortion law was
that legal abortions were comrnordy practiced in the state
Potts, et al., 1977).

Sources:
Alan Guttrnacher

in the United States

1970 even though no formal
the 1969 state Supreme
unconstitutional and evidence
by 1970 (c. f. Garrow, 1994;

Institute (1989), Garrow (1994), and Merz, et al. (1995).

m&
m~
--

Table 3: Effect of Abortion hgislation on Birth Rates,
by Year and Distanceaway from Repeal State
(Coefficientsmultipliedby 100, standard errors in parentheses)
Distance less

than 250

Distancebetween
250 and 750

Distancegreater
than 750

Repeal State, 1971-73

-4.31
(0.84)

-6.11
(1.04)

-8.04
(1.11)

Repeal State, 1974-75

-0.76
(1.24)

-2.46
(1.45)

-3.21
(1.57)

Repeal State, 1976-80

0.51
(1.70)

0.27
(2,02)

0.35
(2.09)

Notes:

Dependentvariables in these models are the natural logarithm of the birth rate so that all coefficients can
be interpreted as percentage changes. All specifications include the following control variables: per capita
income. crime rate. insured unemDlovment rate. state and vear fixed effects. and state-sDecific trends.

m

F“

.—

m
c
0

m

0
z

c
.—

z

. .

r

—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
—

—
—

‘o
>

Z

-m

I
I

I

1
\
I

(

(

I
I

I
I
I

“’””’y
..
“*...,

1

%,....
..,.,.,,
,..,

‘“”’’’~
...
cl)

2

,,.Y

m

1

+

)

I

0

.0
m

C9
‘b

m

I

(

P
3
~
o

b

z

,..”

r
.—

3

,.,,
.,,,
‘..,...
.,,..
.,.

%

‘....,,

‘p

d..

.-E

o

I

(

I
I

\
I

\

