NBER WOR~G

PAPER SERIES

NETWORKS VERSUS MARKETS
INTERNATIONAL TRADE

IN

James E. Rauch

Working Paper 5617

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

This paper has benefited from discussions with Ross Starr. Comments by Jonathan Eaton and
Walter Heller have also been helpful. I wish to thank James Harrigan and Shang-Jin Wei for
generously supplying data and Donald McCubbin for outstanding research assistance. Previous
drafts were presented at the National Bureau of Economic Research, the World Bank, and the
following universities: British Columbia, Rice, Texas at Austin, California at Los Angeles, City
of New York Graduate Center, Princeton, New York, Maryland at College Park, Harvard,
Columbia, and Queens College of City of New York. Financial support was provided by NSF
grant #SBR 94-15480. I am responsible for any errors. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by James E. Rauch. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5617
June 1996

NETWORKS VERSUS MARKETS
INTERNATIONAL TRADE

IN

ABSTRACT

I propose a network/search
evidence

view of international trade in differentiated products.

that supports the view that proximity

and common language/colonial

I present

ties are more

important for differentiated products than for products traded on organized exchanges in matching
international buyers and sellers, and that search barriers to trade are higher for differentiated
for homogeneous

products.

I also discuss alternative explanations

James E. Rauch
Department of Economics
University of California, San Diego
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER

for the findings.

than

I. Introduction
Itis

well known that very few manufactured

traded on organized exchanges.

(as opposed to primary) commodities

It is also well understood that the heterogeneity of manufactures

along the dimensions of both characteristics

and quality interferes with the ability of their prices

to signal relative scarcity. I argue that this uninformativeness

of prices prevents “globally

scanning” traders from substituting for organized exchanges in matching international
sellers of differentiated products,

are

buyers and

Instead connections between sellers and buyers are made

through a search process that because of its costliness does not proceed until the best match is
achieved.

This search is strongly conditioned by proximity and preexisting

“ties” and results in

trading networks rather than “markets”.
This paper will explore the consequences of this network/search

view at a macro level by

examining world trade flows. In a companion paper (Rauch 1996) I explore the consequences

of

this view at a micro level by examining trade behavior, institutions, and policies in a partial
equilibrium context.

Section fl of this paper expands the argument adumbrated in the previous

paragraph sufficiently to allow for empirical application.
international

Section III uses a gravity model of

trade to see if proximity and common language/colonial

ties are more important for

differentiated products than for products traded on organized exchanges in matching international
buyers and sellers. Section IV examines whether differentiated products tend to be less traded
than homogeneous

products, indicating that search costs are acting as barriers to trade. Section V

considers alternative explanations,
preceding two sections.

not based on the network/search

view, for the findings in the

Conclusions and suggestions for further research are presented in

2
Section VI.

II. Organized Exchanges,

Reference Prices, or Neither

In the empirical work below I will divide internationally
groups:

traded commodities

into three

those traded on organized exchanges, those not traded on organized exchanges but

nevertheless possessing what I shall call “reference prices”, and all other commodities.

In this

section I will give the theoretical motivation for this tripartite division.
Let us first consider why some commodities
are not.

The conventional

are traded on organized exchanges and others

wisdom is that there is a cost to setting up “markets” (organized

exchanges) that is independent of the volume of transactions,

and that this non-convexity

will not

allow a market to open if the expected volume of transactions at the price expected to prevail in
equilibrium

is too small.’

For the sake of concreteness,

wisdom to two commodities
Classification

851) and had

at the three-digit level of the Standard Lntemational Trade

(SITC), which is the Iemt disaggregate

categorize commodities

let us attempt to apply this conventional

in the empirical work below.

level for which I will attempt to
The two commodities

are Footwear (SITC

(SITC 685, not to be confused with Lead Ores and Concentrates,

Suppose we use the dollar values of international

SITC 2874).

trade in 1990 between the 63 countries in my

sample below to indicate the “thickness”’ of the markets in these commodities,

admitting that this

is a bad proxy because it excludes domestic trade and does not account for the average size of

‘Much to my surprise, I could not find a formalization of this “conventional wisdom” in the
literature. The closest I found is Heller ( 1993). Market formation involves set-up costs in his
model, but his focus is on coordination failure where it is mutually profitable to open markets in
complementary commodities but not to open one of them individually.

3
transactions.

The figures are $27.3 billion for Footwear and $1.3 billion for Lead, of which

nearly 90 percent is Lead and Lead Alloys, Unwrought (SITC 6851) as opposed to Lead and Lead
Alloys, Worked (SITC 6852).

Unwrought lead is traded on the London Metal Exchange while

footwear is not listed on any organized exchange.
conventional

This information

wisdom on formation of organized exchanges.

appears to contradict the

However, one could argue that

“footwear” is not a well-defined commodity and needs to be disaggregated
shoes, each one of which may have a volume of transactions
know. in the limit this process of disaggregation
supplier:

into various types of

smaller than that of lead. As we

leads to shoes for which there is only one

shoes are “branded” or differentiated products.

Without necessarily endorsing this argument, let us explore it further by contrasting
Footwear with Polymerization

and Copol ymerization Products (SITC 583).

1990 international

trade in these chemicals for the 63 countries in my sample amounted to $47.6 billion.

Like

Footwear, they are not listed on any organized exchange, perhaps because they can be
disaggregated
Polymerization

into types for each of which the market is too “thin”.
and Copolymerization

Does this mean that

Products should be treated in the same way as Footwear in

the empirical analysis below?
The answer is no.

Polymerization

and Copolymerization

prices can be quoted for these products without mentioning

Products are not “branded”:

the name of the manufacturer,

and

these “reference prices” are found to be sufficiently useful by industry actors to be worth quoting
in trade publications.

For example, a price per pound of Polyoxyethylene

Sorbitan Monostearate

is quoted weekly in Chemical Marketing Reporter on the basis of surveys of suppliers.
Abstracting from transportation

costs, it is then possible for traders to assess the profitability

of

4
shipping polymerization

and copolymerization

products between any two countries solely on the

basis of the prices prevailing at the ports of those two countries.

One or more traders specialized

in a given one of these chemicals can keep informed of its prices around the globe and perform
international commodity arbitrage, matching distant buyers and sellers just as would traders on
an organized exchange.

As far as empirical analysis of matching international

is concerned, then, the reason to treat commodities
from commodities

buyers and sellers

traded on organized exchanges differently

that only have reference prices is that we know the former have specialized

traders that centralize price information while the same is only potentially true for the latter.
Shoes, on the other hand, do not have reference prices. Any observed price at another
location must be adjusted for multidimensional

differences in characteristics,

depends on the varieties of shoes available at that location and the distribution
preferences over varieties at that location.

I claim that these informational

and the adjustment
of consumer

demands are too great

to permit international commodity arbitrage,z and therefore traders will instead engage in a
sequential search for buyers/sellers

that terminates when some “reservation match” is achieved.

This search is facilitated by proximity and common language, and by any contacts who “know
the market”.

Of course the trader’s network of contacts will also be strongly influenced by

proximity and common language.

Discussing “psychological

barriers” to trade, Nothdurft (1992,

pp. 39-40) states, “Typically, trade begins close to home and then, as experience and confidence
grows, expands ‘like rings in the water,’ as one official of the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce

2Here I find it helpful to have in mind Hahn’s ( 1971) definition of markets as activities that
transfom “named” goods into “anonymous” goods. One could argue that the “anonymity”
provided by the price system is what makes international commodity arbitrage possible. It is not
possible for “branded” (named) commodities because they have not been transformed into
anonymous commodities by “markets” (organized exchanges) or by other means.

5
put it. ”s
For the purposes of the empirical work below, we can summarize the discussion of this
section as follows.
differentiated

Possession of a reference price distinguishes

products.

Homogeneous

commodities

homogeneous

from

can be further divided into those whose

reference prices are quoted on organized exchanges and those whose reference prices are quoted
only in trade publications.
differentiated
applicability

The networHsearch

model should apply most strongly to

products and most weakly to products traded on organized exchanges, with its
to other homogeneous

products unclear, Thus proximity and common language

should have the greatest effects on matching international

buyers and sellers of differentiated

products, and search costs should act as the greatest barrier to trade for differentiated

products.

These hypotheses will be examined in sections ~ and IV, respectively.

III.

Evidence From a Gravity Model of Trade

A. The Gravi~ Model
The standard (indeed, the only) empirical framework used to predict how countries match
up in international

trade is the gravity model. This model takes its name from the prediction that

the volume of trade between two countries will be directly proportional

to the product of their

economic masses (as memured by GDP or GNP) and inversely proportional

to the distance

between them. As Harrigan ( 1994) and others have pointed out, at least two different theoretical

‘It is tempting to extend this metaphor and suppose that, with the passage of time, the “rings
in the water” will flatten out and disappear. Perhaps this is conceivable in a world where the
varieties of differentiated product remain unchanged for long periods. In fact, product life cycles
even for “low-tech” goods like shoes are quite short so that the search for buyers/sellers is
constantly being renewed (see, e.g., Gereffi and Korzeniewicz 1990).

6
foundations can be given for gravity models of trade: the monopolistic
what Harrigan calls the Arlington

competition

model and

- Heckscher- Ohlin - Vanek model. The careful empirical

work of Hummels and Levinsohn ( 1995) led them to conclude (p. 828) “that something other
than monopolistic

competition

may be responsible for the empirical success of the gravity

model,” but the Arrnington-Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek

model is not strongly indicated as an

alternative.
Rather than discuss its possible macroeconomic

foundations,

that the gravity equation can be derived from the assumption

I would instead like to note

that every country consumes its

own output and that of every other country in proportion to its share of world demand.

This

leads immediately to the equation

Vq = siGDPj + sjGDPi,

(1)

where I have used the notation from Helpman ( 1987): Vti = bilateral volume of trade between
country i and countryj
s~=GDP n /~

and s,, = share of country n in world spending.

, where GDP

❑

Since under balanced trade

world gross domestic product, then assuming balanced trade

yields

Vti = 2GDPiGDP/GDP.

(2)

This is the basic gravity relationship, minus the inverse dependence of trade on distance.
argue that it is most useful to view this relationship

I would

as a basic “null” or starting point for further

analysis of trade rather than as something that itself needs to be explained.

In other words, it will

7
often be useful for “positive” theoretical and empirical work on trade to focus on explaining
deviations from this relationship, just as normative work takes autarky as its starting point and
measures gains from trade relative to autarky.
In the empirical work below I will estimate the gravity model separately for each of the
three commodity groups distinguished

in the previous section.

Following the same reasoning

that led to equation (1), we write
VO~ = siwj~GDP, + .YjWi~GDPi,

where wn~is the commodity k share of country n output.

Substituting

(3)

for Snas before yields

Vtik = (wik + wj~)GDPiGDP/GDP.

If Wti varies across n, due for example to comparative
a given k. In the final gravity model specifications
into a multiplicative

advantage, then wi~+ wj~is not constant for

below I will assume that w,~+ wj~is absorbed

emor term.

Following the usual gravity specification,
cause deviations from (4) multiplicatively.
language/colonial

(4)

I assume that factors that aid or resist trade

In addition to distance and common

ties, we shall include the other factors aiding or resisting trade that were used

by Frankel and co-authors in a series of papers on trading blocs (e.g., Frankel, Stein, and Wei
1993). They used the product of per capita GNPs in the belief that wealthier countries are more
open to international

trade. (They also used GNPs rather than the GDPs that appear in equations

(1) - (4)). They added a dummy variable indicating when two countries are adjacent, which is
important since the distance between Chicago and Mexico City, say, is a much less complete

8
measure of the physical separation between the United States and Mexico than is the distance
between Chicago and London of the physical separation between the United States and the
United Kingdom.

Finally, they added dummy variables indicating membership

in two

preferential trading blocs, the European Community (EEC) and the European Free Trade
Association

(EFTA).

I can now state the first gravity model to be estimated in subsection C below:

v.~ = UL(GNP,GNP,)p’(PGNPiPGNPj)y’DISTANCE
b’
x exp(cflDJACENT
+ ~&lNKs + qkEEC + 0kEF7° + Utik), k= 1,2,3,

where k = 1 denotes organized exchange commodities,
commodities,

(5)

k = 2 denotes reference priced

and k = 3 denotes differentiated commodities,

and PGNP denotes per capita GNP,

DISTANCE

equals the great circle distance between the principal cities of countries i and j,

ADJACENT

takes the value of one if countries i andj share a land border and zero otherwise,

LINKS takes the value of one if countries i andj share a language or colonial tie and zero
otherwise, EEC and EFTA equal one if countries i and j are members of the European
Community

and European Free Trade Association, respectively,

and zero otherwise, and

uti~is a Gaussian white noise error term associated with the dependent variable Vti~. Taking
natural logarithms of both sides yields

lnvti~ = lna~ + ~~ln(GNPiGNP,)
+ e@DJACENT

+ ~,LINKS

+ y~ln(PGNP,~GNPj)
+ q,EEC

+ O~EFTA +

+ 6~lIID]STANCE
Utik,

k= 1,2,3.

(6)

9
Equations (6) will be estimated by Ordinary Least Squares (OLS).”
The dependent variable Vti~is bounded below by zero, and some observations

achieve this

bound. Following Eaton and Tamura ( 1994), I also estimate a modified gravity model in which
the right-hand side of equation (5) must achieve a minimum threshold value a~ before strictly
positive values of Vti~occur. One reason we might observe a~ >0 is economies
transportation.

of scale in

The second gravity model to be estimated in subsection C below is then

VO~ = max[ -a~ + a~(GNP,GNP,)P’(PGNP, PGNP,)y’DISTANCEa’
x exp(~#DJACENT
+ ~~LINKS + q~EEC + O~EFTA + [lti~), O], k= 1,2,3.

(7)

Rearranging and taking natural logarithms of both sides yields
ln(a~ + Vok) = max[lna~ + ~~ln(GNPiGNPj) + yJn(PGNPiPGNPj)
+ 6~lfllSTANCE
+ ~@DJACENT + ~~NKS
+ q~EEC + O~EFTA + uv~, lna~], k= 1,2,3.

Equations (8) will be estimated by maximum likelihood,

(8)

where the likelihood function is

constructed using what I call a threshold Tobit model. The details of the estimation procedure
are given in Eaton and Tamura ( 1994, pp. 490-492).
Following the discussion in the previous section, the factors resisting or aiding trade in
which we are most interested are DISTANCE

and LINKS.

effects of these factors differ across the three commodity

We especially want to know how the
groups:

organized exchange, reference

The reader might note that it is possible to rewrite equations (5) and (6), replacing the
product of per capita GNPs with the product of populations, in which case the coefficient on the
product of GNPs would equal ~~ + y, and the coefficient on the product of populations would
equal -y~.

10
priced, and differentiated.
transportability,

However, if these three commodity groups differ in their

this will confound our interpretation

of the differences in their distance effects.

Ideally, then, we should add a variable for transportation
country i and countryj.

Unfortunately,

group k between

we shall see in the next subsection that available data

does not allow us to create such a variable.
transportability

cost of commodity

Instead we will compute a measure of

for each commodity group, and use these to more crudely correct distance effects

for differences in transportability

in subsection C below.

Equations (6) and (8) will be estimated separately for the years 1970, 1980, and 1990 in
order to check that the results are not the artifact of any particular time period and to allow for
changes in coefficients, especially on DISTANCE
(for example) to changes in transportation

and LINKS, that might have taken place due

and communication

technology.

In light of the theory

presented so far, in each of the three years we expect the following relationships
the coefficients after correcting for differences in transportability

across commodity

~,= I V k, 15, I c 16,1<1531, and ~, c <2< (3. The effects of DISTANCE
reference priced commodities

are expected to be intermediate

to hold among
groups:

and LINKS for

because, with regard to matching

international

buyers and sellers, their homogeneity

makes them like organized exchange

commodities

but their lack of organized exchanges makes them like differentiated

commodities.

B. Data
The sample of countries used in the estimation below is listed in Table 1. They are the
same 63 countries that were chosen by Frankel and his co-authors.
data for all of my right-hand side variables:

This allows me to use their

GNP and per capita GNP (in current dollars), great

circle distance between principal cities, and dummies for adjacency, common language/colonial

11
links, European Community membership,

and European Free Trade Areamembership.5

Unlike

Frankel et al., I use the World Trade Database of Statistics Canada as my source for bilateral
trade. The World Trade Database is derived from United Nations COMTRADE

data. Its

advantages are (1) it is much cheaper, especially important given that data at the 4-digit

SITC

level are being used. and (2) special care was taken to insure that trading partners were correctly
identified (as opposed to listing an entrep6t as the trading partner), mainly by making careful
efforts to insure that exports of country i to country j of commodity

k equal imports of country j

from country i of commodity k.d
As discussed in the previous section, commodities

are classified into three categories:

organized exchange, reference priced, and differentiated,

at the three- and four-digit

Trade reported at a less disaggregated level was omitted.

Fortunately,

SITC level.

this accounted for only 0.1

percent of the total value of trade in my sample in each of the three years. Commodities
classified in the following manner. All commodities
by looking them up in International

were

at the five-digit SITC level were classified

Commodi@ Markets Handbook and The Knight-Ridder

CRB

5Frankel et al. also used dummies for “membership” in the geographic areas East Asia and
Western Hemisphere. hcluding these dummies in the estimation below shrinks the coefficients
on DISTANCE (in absolute value) and LINKS, as one would expect, but does so in a proportional
way across all product categories so that the comparisons of these coefficients are virtually
unchanged. I prefer to exclude these dummies because they compound the problem of
interpretation presented by DZSTANCE: when comparing their effects across product categories,
one again needs to try to control for differences in transportability.
This method will not catch coordinated false reporting. Rozanski and Yeats (1994, p. 126)
note that falsification of statistics has been a problem for “trade in some products (particularly
petroleum or commodities covered by international quota agreements)”. Since under the
“conservative” aggregation discussed below Petroleum (SITC 3330) accounts for a low of 22.4
percent (in 1970) and a high of 53.0 percent (in 1980) of total trade in organized exchange
products in my sample (less under the “liberal” aggregation), it seems prudent to see how key
results might change if it were omitted. This will be done in footnotes to the next subsection.

12
Commodi~

Yearbook (to check for organized exchanges) and Commodi~

Prices (to check for

reference prices, e.g., price quotations published in trade journals such as Chemical Marketing
Reporter).

Clmsification

of the next higher level of aggregation was then done according to

which of the three categories accounted for the largest share (almost always more than halo of
the value of its world trade. Since the World Trade Database does not report world trade by fivedigit SITC, the sum of 1980 U.S. General Imports and Exports from the U.S. Department of
Commerce was used for this purpose.

Because ambiguities

sufficiently important to affect the classification
“conservative” and “liberal” classifications
of three- and four– digit commodities
priced and the latter maximizing

arose that were sometimes

at the three- or four-digit

level, both

were made, with the former minimizing

the number

that are classified as either organized exchange or reference

those numbers.

in the estimation below and their conservative

An appendix listing all of the commodities

and liberal classifications

used

is available on request.

Table 2 gives the shares of organized exchange, reference priced, and differentiated
commodities

in the value of total trade in my sample.

Not surprisingly,

differentiated

products

accounted for most of world trade, and their share rose between 1970 and 1990. The temporary
fall in 1980 can be explained by the huge increase in the price of petroleum, an organized
exchange product, between 1970 and 1980. The share of organized exchange commodities
course higher in the liberal than the conservative
commodities

aggregation and the share of differentiated

is lower, while the reference priced share is consistently

from the differentiated

is of

lower although it gains

category and loses to the organized exchange category in the liberal

aggregation.
The prefemed method of computing commodity

transportation

costs is to use the ratio of

13
the difference between the customs, insurance and freight (c.i.f.) and customs values to the
customs value for imports.

Unfortunately,

data for c.i.f. and customs values of imports at the

four-digit SITC level are readily available only for the United States (from the U.S. Department
of Commerce).’

Moreover, the United States does not import all commodities

in the sample, the subset of commodities
trade with the partner country shrinks.
measuring transportation
construction

from all countries

with positive imports tending to shrink as the volume of
I therefore decided to abandon construction

cost between country i and countryj

of a memure of “transportability”

of commodity

of a variable

group k in favor of

of commodity group k based on transportation

costs between the United States and Japan, from which the United States recorded positive
General Imports for over 86 percent of four-digit SITC commodities

in 1985.8 When positive

imports from Japan were not recorded, c.i.f. and customs data for nearby countries or countries a
comparable distance away were used.9 To aggregate these insurance and freight percentages up
to measures of transportability

for the three commodity categories, the shares of each three- or

four-digit SITC in the total value of trade in that commodity category were used as weights.
course insofar as more transportable commodities

Of

tend to be traded more this procedure tends to

71cannot rule out the possibility that a heroic and expensive effort could have uncovered
comparable data for other countries in the sample, at lemt potentially allowing for computation
of a true transportation cost variable rather than the measure of commodity “transportability” for
which I settle.
8h section IV this measure of transportability performs quite well in explaining the extent to
which commodities are traded rather than consumed or supplied domestically.
‘Countries were defaulted to in the following order: Korea, Taiwan, Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Chile, Brazil, New Zealand and Australia. My original intention
was to use U.S. General Import data from 1980 since that is the middle of the sample period, but
this data sometimes yielded negative transportation costs, apparently due to spurious inflation of
customs values.

14
bias the numbers downwards, but since only their relative values across commodity categories
rather than their absolute values will be used this should not be important.
Table 3 shows the results of this procedure.
in 1970, the transportabilities

We see that, except for the liberal aggregation

of the organized exchange and reference priced commodity groups

are quite close, while the differentiated product group tends to be roughly twice as transportable
as the other two groups. It will therefore be important to try to correct for transportability
comparing the effects of distance on trade in differentiated

when

products versus organized exchange

and reference priced products.

C. Resuits of Estimation
Tables 4-6

give estimates of equations (6), the first gravity model above. It should be

noted that no attempt was made to adjust for changes in classification

of commodities

by the

three categories that may have occurred during the period 1970- 1990. GNP data is not available
for Hungary and Poland in 1970, reducing the maximum possible number of observations
year from (63)(62)/2 = 1953 to (6 I)(60)/2 = 1830. The number of observations

in that

consistently

falls

well below the maximum, mainly because many countries do not trade with each other in certain
commodity groups or their trade is too small to be recorded.
these zero observations

We shall see below that dropping

has substantial consequences.

Turning to the hypotheses advanced at the end of subsection A, we see that ~~ is always
significantly different from one. The main hypotheses fare much better. The coefficients on
LINKS are always smaller for the homogeneous

commodity

groups than for the differentiated

commodity group, although the coefficients for the reference priced group are smaller than the

15
coefficients for the organized exchange group in i 970 and for the liberal aggregation in 1980.
Comparing distance effects for organized exchange and reference priced commodities,
which differences in transportability

between

are not an issue, we see that the former are always smaller.

Surprisingly,

distance effects are smaller for organized exchange commodities

differentiated

commodities

than for

even without adjusting for differences in transportability.

There is remon to believe that the results reported in Tables 4-6
main hypotheses I have advanced than is justified.

are more favorable to the

Note that the number of observations

declines, and thus the number of zero observations on V,,~increases, as one moves from
organized exchange commodities

to differentiated

commodities.

If zero observations

tend to

occur between countries that are far apart and do not share a common language/colonial
omitting them will tend to reduce the estimated effects of DISTANCE
reduction will be greatest for organized exchange commodities
commodities.

tie, then

and LZNKS, and that

and least for differentiated

With this in mind we turn to Tables 7-9,10 which give the estimates of equations

(8), the second gravity model above. [‘
I find these estimates to be preferable on two grounds.
subsection A better in the sense that ~~ is never significantly

First, they fit the gravity models of
different from one in 1990, is

‘“Observations are missing in these tables because sometimes both country i and countryj did
not report trade at all (or did not report trade with each other in the cue of China and Taiwan),
making it impossible to reconstruct trade between them. This mainly happened in 1990 due to
lags in reporting.
1lBecause the estimates of the thresholds a~ are positive (and statistically significant at the one
percent level), the estimates of the coefficients ~~, y~, and ~~converge only asymptotically to the
estimated elasticities of the dependent variable with respect to the corresponding independent
variables as the dependent variable approaches infinity. The estimated elasticities evaluated at
the mean values of the dependent variables can be found by multiplying the coefficient estimates
by (6,+ ~l,k)i ~Qk, a quantity that never exceeds 1.001.

16
significant y different from one only for organized exchange commodities
significantly different from one in for differentiated commodities

in 1980, and is not

in 1970. Second, the estimates

show a consistent, if slight, “shrinking of the globe” that we would expect to observe given the
improvements

in communication

and transportation

that occurred between 1970 and 1990. All

of the coefficients on DISTANCE decrease in absolute value from 1970 to 1980 and again from
1980 to 1990, unlike in Tables 4-6
and 1990.12 (In Tables 4-6

where they mostly increase in absolute value between 1980

four of the six coefficients on LINKS are smaller in 1990 than in

either 1980 or 1970 while this is true for five out of six in Tables 7- 9.).1’
Turning to the main hypotheses, the coefficients on UNKS are always less for the
homogeneous

commodity groups than for the differentiated

commodity

group, but the

coefficients for the reference priced group are always less than the coefficients for the organized
exchange group, except for the conservative aggregation in 1990.14 The most important change
from Tables 4-6

is that the differences between the organized exchange group coefficients

and

l*As distance-sensitive costs fall as a percentage of all costs, elasticity with respect to distance
itself falls (in absolute value).
lsOn the other hand, all of the coefficients on ADJA CENT increase dramatically from 1970 to
1980 and again from 1980 to 1990. Another strange aspect of the behavior of the adjacency
effects is that when one splits the differentiated commodity group into more and less
transportable subgroups, as I do below, the distance effect is larger for the less transportable
group as expected but the adjacency effect is smaller, leading one to wonder how much
transportability really affects the coefficients on ADJACENT. Given the erratic behavior of these
coefficients I thought it prudent to reestimated Tables 7-9 omitting the variable ADJACENT and
the (maximum on 67 country pairs for which it equals one. There were no qualitative changes in
any results pertaining to the main hypotheses, and the same “shrinking of the globe” is observed.
140mitting Petroleum from the organized exchange group yields the following coefficients on
LINKS for 1970, 1980, and 1990, reporting the conservative and liberal aggregations
respectively: 1.170 and 1.150, 1.141 and 1.093, 0.827 and 0.874.

17
the differentiated

group coefficients are much smaller.

exchange and reference priced commodities,
smaller.’s Unlike in Tables 4-6,

Comparing

distance effects for organized

we see that as in Tables 4-6

the former are always

however, distance effects are larger for the homogeneous

commodity groups than for the differentiated commodity group except in 1970.
Since Table 3 indicates that differentiated

commodities

as organized market or reference priced commodities,

are roughly twice m transportable

adjustment of the distance coefficients for

differentiated products is in order. The simplest way to do this is to estimate the sensitivity of
these coefficients to differences in transportability

within differentiated

commodities,

and use

this estimate to compute what the coefficients would have been had differentiated

commodities

been as transportable

To avoid

as either organized market or reference priced commodities.

greatly increasing the number of observations
simply split differentiated

commodities

for which vti~= O when producing this estimate, I

at the median value of transportability

into more and less

transportable groups, and then estimate the gravity equation separately for each group. The
resulting distance coefficients are reported in Table 10, where 1denotes the less transportable
group and m denotes the more transportable

group.

The adjustment of the distance coefficients for differentiated
then proceeds as follows.

Assume that the distance coefficients

functions of search costs and transportation

costs. Maintaining

commodities

in Tables 7-9

6 are additively separable
the hypothesis that search costs

are equal within a commodity category, 6, - ~~ leaves only the difference attributable to less
versus more transportability.

Now denote our measure of transportability

by t,and denote

150mitting Petroleum from the organized exchange group yields the following coefficients on
DISTANCE for 1970, 1980, and 1990, reporting the conservative and liberal aggregations
respective y: -0.678 and -0,730,-0.666 and -0.648,-0.662 and -0.636.

18
measures computed as in Table 3 for the less transportable
median) and the more transportable

group of differentiated

group (t s median) by ~1and fm,respectively.

the functional form clntfor the transportation

products (t>
If we choose

cost component of 6, 51- b~ yields cln(t\t~) so that

only relative values of t will matter in the adjustments.

We thus compute our estimate of c, the

sensitivity of the distance coefficients for differentiated

commodities

transportability,

using the formula (&l-8,n)/ln(tft,~).

coefficients for differentiated
transportability
commodities,

commodities

to differences in

We can then compute what the distance

in Tables 7-9

would have been had their

been equal to that of organized market commodities

and reference priced

respective y, by adding ~ ln(tl/t3) and 6 ln(r2/t3) to these coefficients,

where ‘kare

the appropriate numbers from Table 3. The results are reported at the bottom of Table 10.
With the exception of the liberally aggregated reference priced commodities
adjusted distance effects for differentiated
homogeneous

commodity

commodities

are larger than the distance effects for the

groups. Note that by construction

the differences between the

coefficients at the bottom of Table 10 and the coefficients on DISTANCE
organized exchange commodities
in the search components

in 1980, the

and reference priced commodities

in Tables 7-9

for

are equal to the differences

of these coefficients.

While the evidence presented in this section supports the hypotheses that proximity and
common language/colonial
of differentiated

ties are more important in matching international

products than homogeneous

Iemt important for homogeneous

buyers and sellers

products, and also the hypothesis that proximity is

products traded on organized exchanges, it does so only

weakly. The differences in the coefficients on DISTANCE

and LINKS are consistent in sign but

19
small in absolute magnitude. ‘b The implications of this for the value of the networkfsearch
approach to trade in differentiated

products will be discussed in the concluding

section of this

paper.

IV. Evidence from the OECD COMTAP Database
h the previous section we considered evidence for the networwsearch
differentiated

products that could be revealed by the contrast between the way countries matched

up in international trade in these products versus more homogeneous
traded on organized exchanges.
differentiated

view of trade in

This view also has implications

versus homogeneous

products, especially those

for the extent to which

products are traded at all, that is, for the shares of production

of different products that are traded rather than supplied or consumed domestically.
consider a commodity that is sufficiently homogeneous

Let us

to have a reference price, but for which

no trader is able to keep sufficiently informed of prices around the world to engage in
international commodity arbitrage.
(import) this commodity

We suppose therefore that any trader who wishes to export

must search for a price that is sufficiently higher (lower) than the

‘%e natural way to construct a formal test of whether or not the coefficients in Tables 7-9 are
significantly different across commodity groups is to estimate a pooled model. The error term uti~
would then presumably have a country-pair specific component that is constant across
commodity groups, making a random effects specification appropriate. This is very difficult to
combine with the maximum likelihood procedure for estimating the threshold Tobit model. Let
us nevertheless suppose that in each year the coefficients are not significantly different. We can
then ask, focusing on the conservative aggregation, what are the odds that the DISTANCE
coefficients (after adjustment for differences in transportability) would consistently rank lowest
for organized exchange products and highest for differentiated products (in absolute value) across
all three decades, and what are the odds that the LINKS coefficient for differentiated products
would rank consistently highest across all three decades? The answers are (1/6)3 and ( 1/3)~,
respectively, both of which events are significant at the .05 level.

20
domestic price to cover transportation.

tariffs, and so on.

I claim that this search will be much

less costly than a search for buyers (sellers) of a differentiated

product that are good “matches”,

because prices can vary along only one dimension while product characteristics
many,

can vary along

Hence the barrier to trade in products with reference prices is smaller than the barrier to

trade in differentiated

products, ceteris paribus, and we expect a higher proportion of production

of the former products to be exported and a higher proportion of their consumption

to be

imported.
To test this hypothesis we need data on trade that is matched with data on production.
Unfortunately,

trade data is collected according to the Standard International

Trade Classification

while production data is collected according to the International Standard Industrial
Classification

(ISIC).

The Compatible Trade and Production Database (see Berthet-Bondet

et

al., 1988, for a description) converts trade data to an ISIC bmis for the period 1970-1985 for the
OECD only, and only for manufacturing
data is disaggregated

industries (ISIC codes beginning with 3).

Production

to the four-digit ISIC level only for 13 of the 22 OECD countries, which

however account for 95.1 percent and 94,0 percent of total OECD manufacturing
1970 and 1985, respectively .17 A total of 82 industries are distinguished,
Scrap from Manufacture

production in

of which one, Metal

of Fabricated Metal Products (ISIC 3801), had to be dropped due to

fragmentary data. The analysis below is therefore based on the total production, exports, and
imports of the 13 reporting OECD countries for 81 manufacturing

industries.

Using OECD data presents a problem that would not occur if we had data for the entire

“The 13 countries are Australia, Belgium-Luxembourg,
Canada, Finland, France, Italy, Japan,
Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, United Kingdom, United States, and West Germany.

21
world, for which imports are identically equal to exports:

it might matter whether we test the

hypothesis that tradedness increases with reference pricing using the export share of production
or the import share of consumption.

In particular, the OECD tends to have a comparative

advantage relative to the rest of the world in differentiated
disadvantage

in homogeneous

or technologically

sophisticated,

manufactures

and a comparative

manufactures, perhaps because the former are more skill-intensive
leading to a bias against my hypothesis when tested using the

export share of production and in favor of my hypothesis when tested using the import share of
consumption.

I decided to simply use the average of the export share and the import share as my

dependent variable: 1s
SHARE =[Exports/Production+
The computation
complicated
available.

Imports/(Production

+ Imports - Exports)]/2.

of the percentage of each industry’s output that is reference priced is

by the fact that production figures for more disaggregated

levels of the ISIC are not

I therefore used the 1979 U.S. Department of Commerce publication

Between the United States and International
ISIC to the corresponding

Standard Industrial Class~ications

Correlation
to match each

four-digit U.S. SIC(s), and then classified each seven-digit U.S. SIC

component as reference priced or not.

I then aggregated up from the seven-digit level using

output figures from the 1977 U.S. Census of Manufactures

to estimate the percentage of each

ISIC’S output that is reference priced, where 1977 was chosen because it is the midpoint of the

laIn 1970 the average of the expofi share of production across 81 commodities was 13.8
percent compared to 12.6 percent for the import share of consumption. The comparable figures
for 1985 were 19.0 percent and 18.9 percent. Hence there is no comparative advantage revealed
for the OECD relative to the rest of the world in manufacturing as a whole. However, the
average absolute difference between the two shares was 3.3 percent in 1970 and 4.2 percent in
1985. Clearly these figures would be much larger if the OECD did not mostly trade with itself.

22
period covered by the COMTAP database.

For the purposes of this section I chose to use this

estimate as a continuous explanatory variable rather than to classify each industry as reference
priced or not. 19
Transportability

was estimated using the difference between c.i.f. and customs values of

U.S. imports as in the previous section.

Since the U.S. Department

produce trade data classified by ISIC, the transportability
those that make up the 4-digit

of Commerce does not

estimate for the largest U.S. SIC among

ISIC was used. Where the largest was not available (e.g., because

the Department of Commerce does not use it to record trade), a judgment
the SIC that is most representative

was made concerning

of the ISIC.

Since our estimates of transportability

and reference pricing do not change from year to

year, estimation will be reported for the beginning and end years of the sample only. (Results are
not qualitative y different for other years. ) Table 11 gives descriptive statistics for
transportability

(TRANSPOR~,

reference pricing (PRICING),

median for reference pricing is less than two percent:

and SHARE.

Note that the

most manufacturing

essentially no reference pricing, indicating that the zero-one classification

industries have
of commodities

reference priced or not in the previous section was not such a bad approximation,
manufactured commodities.

The minimum and maximum for TRANSPORT

Aircraft (ISIC 3845) and Cement, Lime, and Plaster (ISIC 3692), respectively.

as

at lemt for

correspond to
A comparison

of

the 1970 and 1985 values of SHARE shows a substantial increase in OECD openness during this

19Asmentioned above, reference pricing is typically based on the availability of price
quotations in U.S. trade publications based on surveys of U.S. wholesale markets. It follows that
there is minimal scope for “reverse causation”, where extensive international trade leads to more
price quotation and a high estimate of reference pricing.

23
period, as expected.
TRANSPORT

I also computed simple and rank correlation coefficients

and PRICING, obtaining 0.490 and 0.460, respectively.

between

These results are also in

line with expectations.
Table 12 reports regressions of SHARE on TRANSPORT

and PRIC’ING.20 Because

SHARE can only vary from zero to one but OLS can yield predictions outside this range, a
logistic transformation

of SHARE is used as the dependent variable.21 The results in the first and

third columns are not favorable to the hypothesis that reference pricing reduces barriers to trade:
TRANSPORT

has a robustly negative effect on SHARE while the effect of reference pricing is

statistically insignificant.

It may be, however, that the effect of reference pricing on tradeability

is being masked by industry characteristics

that are correlated with reference pricing and affect

traceability but are not picked up by TRANSPORT.
act as a barrier to trade for Manufacturing
account for this possibility,

For example, concern with “freshness” may

of Food, Beverages, and Tobacco (ISIC 31).

To

eight dummy variables for ISIC 31-38 (ISIC 39 is the omitted two-

digit industry) are included in the second and fourth columns of Table 12. F-tests reject
exclusion of these dummies at the one percent level in both 1970 and 1985.

We see that

reference pricing does have a statistically significant effect on SHARE within a two-digit
manufacturing

industry.

How important is reference pricing in lowering barriers to trade within a two-digit

20Use of the logarithm of TRANSPORT

leaves the results qualitatively

unchanged.

21The transformation is In[SHARE/( 1-SHARE’)]. In 1985 the value of exports for Fur
Dressing and Dyeing Industries (ISIC 3232) exceeded the value of production, presumably
because of difficulties in translating from SITC to ISIC, I therefore dropped this industry,
leaving 80 observations.
Simply substituting imports for exports and retaining this observation
does not qualitatively change the results.

24
industry?

Holding all other variables (including dummies) at their mean levels, we can compute

the predicted value of SHARE for an industry with zero reference pricing and one hundred
percent reference pricing using the formula exp(~ )/[ 1 + exp(j )], where ~ is the predicted value
of the transformed dependent variable. The results are 0.077 and 0.233 in 1970 and 0.126 and
0.270 in 1985, indicating that a change from no reference pricing to full reference pricing more
than doubles the tradedness of an industry within a two-digit clmsification.

The decrease in the

effect of reference pricing between 1970 and 1985 is consistent with the “shrinking of the globe”
found in the previous section.
transportability
TRANSPORT,

V.

A similar decrease (in absolute value) is found for the effect of

within a two-digit indust~:

the elasticity of SHARE with respect to

evaluated at the means, equals -0.96 in 1970 and -0.65 in 1985.

Alternative Explanations
I have examined evidence at the level of world trade flows in order to determine whether

the theoretical considerations

of section II make a difference at the aggregate level. Too often,

the effects of imperfect information are discussed only at the micro level, with no sense of how
or if they aggregate up to something observable at the macro level. Unfortunately,
such an aggregate level allows for many alternative explanations.
have to be supplemented

evidence at

This evidence will ultimately

by case studies of trading and marketing practices for different types of

products.
Many of the alternative explanations

for the results in sections III and IV can explain only

25
some of the results.22 Rather than try to discuss each one (and knowing that the reader can
always think of more), I will discuss one alternative explanation

that I find particularly

compelling because it can explain all of the results.23 Suppose that firms develop their varieties
of differentiated

products to suit niches in their home markets.

We suppose further that they do

this not because they know more about their home markets than about foreign markets, which
would again indicate an incomplete information structure where information
mediated by distance, but because positive transportation
ceteris paribus.

This could explain why differentiated

about buyers is

costs make this the best decision,

products tend to be less traded: there is

less demand for them outside the country in which they are produced.

Now suppose further that

the similarity of foreign preferences to those in the home country falls with distance and rises
with common language/colonial

ties. This could explain why trade in differentiated

products

dmreases more with distance and increases more with links than trade in homogeneous

products:

a geographic and linguistic application of the Linder hypothesis.z4

22Agood example is based on the natural resource intensity of organized exchange and
reference priced products. It can be argued that this leads these products to be traded more
extensively, and across greater distances (Kuwait and Saudi Arabia should not exchange much
petroleum), but this alternative explanation cannot explain the lower coefficients on LINKS for
these product groups. h any case, this argument should hold most strongly for countries that
share a land border, yet the coefficients on ADYACE~
in Tables 7-9 are always largest for
organized exchange products and smallest for differentiated products. The fact that the
coefficient on DISTANCEfalls
(in absolute value) when petroleum is omitted from the organized
exchange group (see footnote 15) also casts doubt on this alternative explanation.
*’On the other hand, there may be reasons to believe that the results would be stronger in the
absence of certain countervailing influences. For example, we know that there are many
preferential trading agreements for agricultural products based on colonial ties, and these should
work to make the Iinks effect larger for the homogeneous commodity groups.
240f course production of similar varieties in nearby countries and countries with a common
IanWage/colonial tie would increase too, but this may just stimulate “intraindustry” trade rather

26
While it is hard to believe that this alternative explanation

is completely unrelated to the

findings of sections III and ~, a clever study by Gould (1994) strongly suggests that it is not the
whole story. He finds that immigration to the United States increases U.S. bilateral trade with
the immigrants’ countries of origin, that this “immigrant-link

effect” is stronger for U.S. exports

than for U.S. imports, and that the effect on exports exhausts itself for a much smaller number of
immigrants than does the effect on imports.
important effect of immigration

Taken together these results indicate that the most

on trade is through the establishment

of business contacts, with a

secondary effect through increased U.S. preferences for goods produced in the country of origin.
By extension, the argument that preferences are mainly responsible for the findings of sections III
and IV is undermined.
If the theory of section H has merit, the immigrant-link
for differentiated
exchanges.

products and smallest for homogeneous

effect on exports should be greatest

products traded on organized

Gould did in fact disaggregate his dependent variable, U.S. trade in manufactures

from 1970 to 1986 (from the OECD COMTAP database used in section IV above), into what he
called consumer and producer goods. The four-digit industries he lists in the former category
tend to be less “priced” in the sense of section IV than those in the latter catego~.

Gould reports

(p. 3 10) that, “The immigrant information variable does not appear to be important in the
producer imports equation.”zs

than decreasing trade. Moreover, this production of similar varieties allows extension of the
alternative explanation to trade in producer goods as well as consumer goods.
25When Gould uses the logarithm of the immigrant stock as his explanatory variable, yielding
a constant elasticity specification (also used by Head and Ries 1995 in their work on immigration
and trade for Canada), it is significant in the consumer export equation but not in the equations
for consumer or producer imports or producer exports. It should be noted that Gould’s equations

27
VI.

Conclusions

and Suggestions for Further Research

In section III we saw that the differences in proximity and links effects across organized
exchange, reference priced, and differentiated commodities,
the network/search

while in the direction predicted by

view of trade in differentiated products, were quantitatively

small. In section

IV we saw that the effects of reference pricing on the extent of trade were present only within a
two-digit industry.

Are these results due to a small quantitative importance of networks and

search in trade, or to an overestimation

of the importance of “markets”, leading to networks and

search being very significant for homogeneous

as well as differentiated

products?

The latter

explanation is supported by the fact that the coefficients on LINKS consistently imply that
countries that share a common language/colonial

tie trade with each other products listed on

organized exchanges more than twice as much as countries that do not.zb Once again, however,
examination of more disaggregated data or even case studies of trader behavior will ultimately be
needed to answer this question.
An important aim of this paper is to put networks and search on the agenda for the study
of trade. One advantage of the network/search
helps to make sense of certain micro-institutional

view of trade in differentiated

products is that it

features of trade. In Rauch ( 1996) I show that

a simple partial equilibrium search model yields economies of scope in search for buyers of
differentiated products, which can help us understand the role of “social capital” in international

contain fixed effects for every U.S. trading partner, so the immigrant stock cannot be acting as a
proxy for distance or common language/colonial ties.
2bSince the value of this trade is dominated by grains, oil seeds, fuels, and both mineral and
nonmineral raw materials such as metals, a preference-based explanation for this finding is
highly implausible.

28
trade and the viability of general trading companies such as Japan’s sogo shosha.

I also note that

if search is subject to free-riding (through unintended information spillover) there may be a
rationale for ubiquitous export promotion policies such as subsidized trade missions.
broadly, the networtisearch

view of trade opens up space for greater consideration

personal contacts and relationship-building

in determining

More

of the role of

the geographic distribution

of

economic activity. This is the subject of many business press anecdotes but not much systematic
economic analysis (see Egan and Mody 1992 for an exception).
Foreign Direct Investment (FD~ projects bear the same relationship
investments as differentiated

products do to homogeneous

products.

to portfolio

Unfortunately,

as far as I

know it is impossible to obtain data on bilateral portfolio investment flows, making comparisons
of the kind performed in section ~ impossible.

Nevertheless,

the importance of proximity for

bilateral FDI flows could be seen as evidence in favor of the robustness of the network/search
view as an approach to understanding
being in “differentiated

economic transactions more generally, the transactions

projects” rather than differentiated

products.

Eaton and Tamura ( 1994)

examine U.S. and Japanese bilateral FDI flows. They use regional dummies rather than distance,
and find (p. 4), “Taking into account population,
have deeper trade and investment relationships

income, and factor endowments,

both countries

with countries in their respective regions than

with the rest of the world. ” This finding is especially striking when one considers that most FDI
is undertaken with the aim of penetrating the market of the host country, so that one should
expect distance to have a positive effect on bilateral FDI flows given the
proximity- concentration

tradeoff.

A long-ten-n goal for future research is formalization

of the network/search

view of trade

29
in a general equilibrium
applications

model.

It is possible that this could lead to many more empirical

and more detailed predictions.

We may, for example, be able to improve our

analysis of the effects of distance and common language/colonial
impacts of trade liberalization

ties in mediating the economic

agreements .27

*’Learner (1993, pp. 60-6 1) concluded that, “N~A
is not a free trade agreement between
Canada, the United States, and Mexico. It is really a free trade agreement between northern
Mexico, California, and Texas.”

30
References

Berthet-Bondet, Claude, Derek Blades, and Annie Pin. 1988. The OECD Compatible Trade and
Production Data Base 1970-1985. OECD Department of Economics and Statistics Working Paper
No. 60 (November).
Eaton, Jonathan, and Akiko Tamura. 1994. “Bilateralism and Regionalism in Japanese and U.S.
Trade and Direct Foreign Investment Pattern s.” Joumai of the Japanese and International
Economies 8: 478-510.
Egan, Mary Lou, and Ashoka Mody.
Development 20 (March): 321-334.

1992. “Buyer-Seller

Links in Export Development.”

World

Frankel, Jeffrey, Emesto Stein, and Shang-jin Wei. 1993. “Continental Trading Blocs: Are They
Natural, or Super-Natural?”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4588.
Gereffi, Gary, and Miguel Korzeniewicz. 1990. “Commodity Chains and Footwear Exports in the
Semiperiphery.” In William Martin, cd., Semiperipheral States in the World Economy (Westport,
Corm.: Greenwood): 45-68.
Gould, David M. 1994. “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications
Bilateral Trade Flows.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76 (May): 302-316.
Hahn, Frank H. 1971. “Equilibrium

with Transaction Costs.”

Econometrics

for U.S.

39 (May): 417-439.

Harrigan, James. 1994. “Scale Economies and the Volume of Trade. ” Review of Economics and
Statistics 76 (May): 321-328.
Head, Keith, and John Ries. 1995. “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric
Canada.” Faculty of Commerce, University of British Columbia (July),

Evidence from

Heller, Walter P. 1993. “Equilibrium Market Formation Causes Missing Markets,”
California, San Diego Discussion Paper No. 93-07 (February).

University of

Helpman, Elhanan. 1987. “Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence from
Fourteen hdustrial Countries.” Journal of the Japanese and lntemaliona) Economies 1: 62-81.
Hummels, David, and James Levinsohn. 1995. “Monopolistic Competition and International
Trade: Reconsidering the Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110 (August): 799-836.
hamer, Edward E. 1993. “U.S. Manufacturing
Journal of Economics and Finance 4: 51-89.

and an Emerging Mexico.”

North American

31
Nothdurft, William E, 1992. Going Global; How Europe Helps Small Firms Export
(Washington, D. C.: Brookings Institution).
Rauch, James E. 1996. “Trade and Search: Social Capital, Sogo Shosha, and Spillovers. ” Mimeo,
Department of Economics, University of California, San Diego.
Rozanski, Jerzy, and Alexander Yeats, 1994. “On the (Inaccuracy of Economic Observations:
An Assessment of Trends in the Reliability of International Trade Statistics.” Journal of
Development Economics 44: 103-130.

Table 1

List of Countries Used in Gravity Equations

COUNTRY

MAIN CITY

COUNTRY

MAIN CITY

Algeria

Algiers

Libya

Tripoli

Argentina

Buenos Aires

Malaysia

Kuala Lumpur

Australia

Sydney

Mexico

Mexico City

Austriab

Vienna

Morocco

Cmablanca

Belgium’

Brussels

Netherlandsa

Amsterdam

Bwil

Sao Paulo

New Zealand

Wellington

Bolivia

La Paz

Nigeria

Lagos

Canada

Ottawa

Norwayb

0s10

Chile

Santiago

Pakistan

Karachi

China

Shanghai

Paraguay

Asuncion

Colombia

Bogota

Peru

Lima

Denmark

Copenhagen

Philippines

Manila

Ecuador

Quito

Poland

Warsaw

Egypt

Cairo

Portugal’

Lisbon

Ethiopia

Addis Ababa

Saudi Arabia

Riyadh

Finlandb

Helsinki

Singapore

Singapore

France’

Paris

South Africa

Pretoria

Ghana

Accm

South Korea

Seoul

Greece=

Arhens

Spaina

Madrid

Hong Kong

Hong Kong

Sudan

Khartoum

Hungary

Budapest

Swedenb

Stockholm

Icelandb

Reykjavik

Switzerlandb

Geneva

[ndia

New Delhi

Taiwan

Taipei

Indonesia

Jakarta

Thailand

Bangkok

[ran

Tehran

Tunisia

Tunis

Irelanda

Dublin

Turkey

Ankara

Israel

Jerusalem

United Kingdom’

London

Italy’

Rome

United States

Chicago

Japan

Tokyo

Uruguay

Montevideo

Kenya

Nairobi

Venezuela

Caracas

Kuwait

Kuwait

West Germany”

Bonn

Yugoslavia

Belgrade

‘Member of European Community
bMember of European Free Trade Area

Table 2
Shares of Commodity Categories in Value of Total Trade (Percent)
1980

~

Conservative
Aggregation

Liberal
Aggregation

~

Organized Exchange

19,5

27.2

12.6

Reference Priced

24.0

21.3

20.3

Differentiated

56.5

51.5

67.1

Organized Exchange

24.7

31.7

16.0

Reference Priced

21.8

19.5

19.5

Differentiated

53.6

48.9

64.6

Note: Column total may not sum to 100,0 due to rounding error.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . -..

Transportability

Conservative
Aggregation

Table 3
of Commodity

,..

OO. ., ---- . .......

Categories

1970

1980

1990

Organized Exchange

15.59

12.45

13.51

Reference Priced

13.06

12.19

12.05

6.58

6.40

5.88

Organized Exchange

16.04

12.67

13.89

Reference Priced

11.24

11.03

10.74

Differentiated

Liberal
Aggregation

-.t

Differentiated

6.51

6.38

5.86

Note: Based on insurance and freight as percent of customs value of U.S. imports from Japan or
comparably distant country. Complete description of computation in text.

n

&m
wmm

00

00

w

00

n
.-

A

c

a
m

w-l

m

0

0

F

0

m
m

0

0 0

m

o

00

0

c
o
0

0

0

o
m
o
0

n

-

0

0

N
0 0

c

1

*n
.-

m

--w

n
.J

.-

00

-c
mm

.Y

coo

00

m m’
wC! o
mlW

ma

Om
00

00

00

w

0

,

.

.
11

1

II
n
.E

A

o
0
0

m

0

o
0

o

0

0

m
.
0

m
m
m

o
m

m

o

.
0

0

m

o

m
m

m

0

m

0

m

.

