                            NBER WORKING        PAPER SERIES




                              AGE DISCRTMINATION, JOB
                          SEPARATIONS, AND EMPLOYMENT
                            STATUS OF OLDER WORKERS:
                           EV~ENCE    FROM SELF-REPORTS




                                    Richard W. Johnson
                                      David Neumark




                                    Working Paper 5619




                   NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996




Johnson received support from a National Institute on Aging post-doctoral fellowship (grant 5-
T32-HD07329-06), and Neumark received financial support from NSF grant SES92-09575 and
NIA grant KO1-AGO0589.         We thank Richard Burkhauser and Alan Gustman for helpful
comments.   This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by Richard W. Johnson and David Neumark. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                                     NBER Working Paper 5619
                                                                                                   June 1996



                                      AGE DISCRIMINATION, JOB
                                   SEPARATIONS, AND EMPLOYMENT
                                     STATUS OF OLDER WORKERS:
                                    EVIDENCE FROM SELF-REPORTS


                                                  ABSTRACT



           This paper explores       the prevalence       and consequences          of age discrimination    in the

workplace by analyzing self-reports of discrimination by respondents in the National Longitudinal

Survey of Older Men. Age discrimination             was reported in seven percent of our cases, during the

period 1966-1980.        Workers with positive reports were much more likely to separate from their

employer and less likely to remain employed than workers who report no age discrimination.

The estimated        effect of reported      discrimination     remains     large and significant      even when

controlling     for the existence     of mandatory       retirement    provisions     on the current job.     These

findings      are generally robust to numerous           attempts to correct the estimates        for the inherent

limitations     of self-reported    data, particularly    the potential heterogeneity        bias that arises from

differences in the propensity        to report discrimination,        and the possibility    that discrimination   is

reported in response to other negative labor market outcomes.




Richard W. Johnson                                                                  David Neumark
Institute for Health, Health Care                                                   Department of Economics
  Policy, and Aging Research                                                        Michigan State University
Rutgers University                                                                  East Lansing, MI 48824
30 College Avenue                                                                   and NBER
New Brunswick, NJ 08903
I. Introduction

        Anecdotal evidence abounds of older workers who have experienced discrimination

because of their age. The popular press is replete with stories of individual employees who have

been replaced by younger workers, sometimes just before they become eligible for lucrative

retirement benefits.    Some older workers (in the past) were forced by mandatory retirement

provisions to leave their job before they would otherwise have chosen to retire. Others who remain

on the j ob claim that they confront hostile work environments or are demoted to less remunerative

positions because of their age. Concern by policy makers over these types of incidents prompted

Congress to enact the Age Discrimination      in Employment Act (ADEA) in 1968, which outlawed

discrimination    in the workplace against workers between the ages of 40 and 65. Later amendments

prohibited mandatory retirement before the age of 70 (in 1978) and then outlawed it completely

(with a few exceptions) in 1986. During 1990,10,485        complaints of age discrimination     were filed

with the Equal Employment       Opportunity Commission (Equal Employment         Opportunity

Commission,      1994).1

        However, there is little empirical research to document the prevalence or impact of age

discrimination    in the labor market. In fact, prima facie evidence of discrimination   against older

workers is less compelling than that for other demographic groups (Friedman, 1984). With respect

to labor market indicators frequently studied as evidence of discrimination     – income and

unemployment      (e.g., Lloyd and Niemi, 1979) – older individuals tend if anything to fare better.

Older workers have relatively high labor market earnings, at least into their fifties (Bureau of Labor

Statistics, 1989), high non-labor income (Hurd, 1990), and low civilian unemployment           rates.

        In addition, many economists have questioned the virtue of legislation outlawing mandatory


        lBy comparison, there were 43,532 complaints filed with the EEOC in 1990 under Title VII of the
Civil Rights Act of 1964, primarily for alleged discrimination based on sex or race.

                                                    -1-
retirement provisions, which are critical components of long-term incentive contracts (Lazear,

1979). In order to elicit effort from workers, employers may initially pay wages below the value of

marginal product in exchange for implicit promises of future wages that exceed the value of

marginal product for workers who remain with the firm. Mandatory retirement ages then become

necessary to induce high-wage workers to leave the flrrn, Workers find it in their interest to enter

into these long-term employment relationships with mandatory retirement, but once they reach the

mandatory retirement age they would prefer to continue working at their current wage. By

eliminating shirking, however, long-term contracting (with mandatory retirement) in the Lazear

model is efficient, leading Lazear to argue that legislation to ban mandatory retirement contracts

enables current older workers to “enjoy a small once-and-for-all        gain at the expense of a much

larger and continuing efficiency loss that affects all workers and firms adversely” (Lazear, 1979,

pp. 1283-84). Nonetheless, the ADEA may have a sound rationale if employers engage in

discriminatory   practices against older workers. Thus, the ADEA cannot be fairly evaluated before

first assessing the prevalence and impact of age discrimination        in the labor market, ideally relying

on data prior to the proliferation of age discrimination   lawsuits.

        The inherent difficulty in measuring age discrimination        probably accounts for the lack of

attention devoted to it by economists.   Many analyses of sex and race discrimination         in the labor

market proceed from the assumption that women and members of racial minorities are as

productive as men and white workers, after controlling for other observable factors that are likely to

affect productivity.   Differences in earnings that persist afier controlling for human capital and

other variables are then attributed to labor market discrimination.       However, this approach is clearly

not appropriate for the analysis of age discrimination,    since the very process of aging is likely to

affect worker productivity.   On one hand, older workers have more experience, which generally



                                                    -2-
increases productivity;    on the other hand, skills may deteriorate with age afier a certain point,

reducing productivity.2     Regardless of which effect dominates, the assumption that older workers

are equally productive as younger workers – controlling for variables such as education,

experience, and tenure – is not compelling.

        In this paper, we take a different approach to the analysis of age discrimination         by

investigating    self-reports of age discrimination.   We assess the effects of age discrimination      by

comparing labor market outcomes for older workers who claim that they have experienced

discrimination    on the job with outcomes for workers who do not report discrimination.           Although

the use of self-reports can be problematic – primarily because individuals may differ systematically

in their propensity to report discrimination,    and because such reports may reflect negative outcomes

that are, in fact, unrelated to discrimination   – in the absence of actual measures of productivity,

self-reports may offer the best available indicators of age discrimination.3          We are also able to

mitigate many of the problems associated with self-reports by comparing an individual’s responses

at different points in time and by utilizing some of the rich information available in the data to

control for potentially confounding factors.

        In contrast to investigating earnings, which is generally the outcome of interest in studies of

sex and race discrimination,     this paper focuses on the effects of age discrimination      on j ob

separations and spells of non-employment,        both of which maybe precursors to fill or partial



        ‘For evidence of such productivity declines see Hellerstein, et al. (1996).

         3Audit studies (see, e.g., Fix and Struyk, 1992) provide another tool for studying discrimination.
However, we are unaware of any academic audit studies assessing the role of age discrimination in hiring,
nor are they likely to prove very helpful in this particular context. One problem is that such methods are
useful primarily for studying entry-level jobs, which may not be the jobs in which age discrimination is
likely to occur. A second problem is that such studies attempt to make workers identical (at least on
average) on paper, except for the demographic characteristic being studied. But it is not possible to make
older and younger individuals identical on paper without giving the older individual extremely low job
experience, causing this individual to appear anomalous (Bloch, 1994).

                                                       -3-
retirement (Ruhrn, 1990), Of course, separations and changes in employment status are often

undoubtedly voluntary, and do not reflect discriminatory         behavior against older workers.   However,

they may sometimes stem from discrimination,       as suggested by the greater prevalence of

discouraged workers among the old (Rhine, 1978), by evidence of managerial preferences for

younger workers (Rosen and Jerdee, 1977), and by research indicating that older workers

experience discrimination    with respect to mobility and layoffs (Pames and King, 1977; Hutchens,

1988).

         Our findings suggest that age discrimination       may bean important factor in determining job

separations and employment status of older workers. Approximately            seven percent of our sample

of older workers report having experienced age discrimination         in the workforce, and these workers

are much more likely to separate from their employer and to experience spells of non-employment

than workers who do not report age discrimination.          The estimated effect of reported discrimination

remains large and significant even when controlling for the existence of mandatory retirement

provisions on the current job, implying that self-reported age discrimination       is not just reflecting ex

post dissatisfaction   with these provisions (Lazear, 1979). These findings are generally robust to our

attempts to correct our estimates for inherent limitations of self-reported data.

II. Data

         To assess the impact of age discrimination     on job separations and employment      status, we

analyze data from the National Longitudinal     Survey of Older Men (NLSOM).           The NLSOM

collected information in 1966 on a national probability sample of 5,020 men between the ages of 45

and 59. They were surveyed periodically until 1983, at which time they ranged in age from 62 to

76.4 At each interview, respondents were questioned about their labor force participation.         For


        ‘Respondents were interviewed in 1966, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1971, 1973, 1975, 1976, 1978, 1980,
1981, and 1983. A final follow-up was conducted in 1990, but given the time lag between this final

                                                      -4-
those at work, detailed information was collected on job characteristics,     including years of job

tenure, occupation, industry, sector, mandatory retirement provisions, hourly wages (for some

years), and employment     status, plus information about whether workers changed employers since

the previous interview.   Pension coverage on the current job is available only in 1966 (as well as

selected years late in the panel). The survey also solicited information periodically about men’s

attitudes toward their current job, asking them if they liked their j ob very much or fairly well, or if

they somewhat or very much disliked its

        Of particular interest for this study, and one of the unusual aspects of the survey, is the

information it includes about age discrimination.     In 1971, 1976, and 1980, men were asked the

following question:

                 During the past five years, do you feel so far as work is concerned,
                 you were discriminated against because of your age?

Those who reported discrimination     were then asked about the basis for their claims, and could cite

any of the following reasons: they were not hired or interviewed because of their age; they were not

promoted or assigned to a certain job because of their age; they were demoted or laid off because of

their age; they just feel the company discriminates; they feel there is general discrimination

throughout society; or some other unspecified reason.

III. Empirical Approach

        The basic empirical strategy of this paper is to track the employment behavior of older

workers following a self-report of discrimination,    to determine whether or not those who report

discrimination   are subsequently more likely either to leave their current employer or to experience



interview and the previous interview and the age of the respondents (who range in age from 69 to 83 in
1990), we chose not to analyze these data here.

        ‘Information on union membership is available for only selected years of the panel, and thus is not
incorporated into our analysis.

                                                     -5-
spells of non-employment     than otherwise similar workers.      Even if such an empirical relationship is

found, however, there are reasons to be cautious in concluding that a causal relationship exists

among older workers between age discrimination         in the labor market and j ob separations and

changes in employment      status. Consequently, this paper takes a number of different approaches to

assessing alternative explanations of such a finding.

         To assess the impact of age discrimination,      we estimate discrete-time hazard models of job

separations and employment status, This approach has been taken by a number of studies of

unemployment     and retirement, including Ham and Rea (1987) and Blau (1994). For each

respondent in the sample, we create a separate record for each year he works for pay. Men who

stop working at some point but subsequently return to work re-enter the sample once they resume

working.    Each time the respondent is obsemed at work, we observe two dichotomous           outcomes –

he either remains at the current job into the next period or he leaves; and he is either employed in

the next period or not. These outcomes are assumed to depend upon a set of predictors, many of

which vary over time.

         We assume that each worker has an underlying propensity to leave their current employer,

which we model as a function of self-reported discrimination        and other controls,G

                                L*i~= ~ + Xi~~+ Di~~+ ~i~ .                                      (1)

L“i, is the propensity of individual i to leave the employer at time t, Xi, is a vector of control

variables, Di~is a dummy variable equal to one if the individual reports age discrimination          during

some period before time t, and zero otherwise, and ~i~is a random disturbance term. L“it is not

observed; instead we observe a dummy variable Lit which equals one if L*i~exceeds some threshold

(normalized to zero), and zero otherwise.    Thus, the probability that we observe a job separation is


         bWe could equivalently frame the discussion in terms of employment status, the other outcome we
study.

                                                    -6-
equal to 1 – F(– a - Xit ~ – Di~y), where F is the cumulative distribution function for ~. If we

assume that ~ follows a logistic distribution, we can estimate the parameters of(1) as a logit model.

In this equation, a positive estimate of y would indicate that individuals who report discrimination

are more likely to subsequently separate from their employer.

        There are, however, a number of problems with inferring a causal impact of age

discrimination    on job separations from the estimate of y in equation (l). First, there is evidence

from existing work with self-reported discrimination         data (on sex discrimination)    that there may be

an important heterogeneity problem with respect to which individuals report discrimination               (Kuhn,

1987). In the present context, our estimates of y would be biased if an individual’s propensity to

report age discrimination    were correlated with certain labor force activities.    For example,

individuals who are highly committed to working at relatively old ages may be less likely to report

age discrimination,   regardless of the actual level of discrimination     experienced.     In this case, there

would be a bias towards finding that discrimination         leads to changes in employment,      when in fact

the association would not represent a causal relationship stemming from discrimination.

        One solution to this problem is to exploit the fact that most respondents provide more than

one self-report of age discrimination     over the course of the panel. Workers who change their

reports (in either direction) provide valuable information on discrimination        that may be

independent of individual-specific      propensities to report discrimination.    Thus, by identi~ing      the

“effect” of discrimination   from the labor market behavior of those who switch to reporting

discrimination,   we maybe better able to estimate the causal effect of discrimination          on the

employment decisions of older workers (see Neumark and McLennan, 1995). Focusing on multiple

responses from a given individual will not necessarily eliminate heterogeneity bias, however,

because there may be variation in the propensity to switch to reporting discrimination.



                                                      -7-
Nonetheless, the use of multiple responses should go a long way in reducing heterogeneity            bias.

        Multiple discrimination    reports can be incorporated into the hazard model in two ways.

First, we can replace Di~in equation (1) with three dummy variables to identi~          whether and in

which direction reports of discrimination     change. The equation defining our latent variable on

which we base our logit estimates becomes

                         L“i,= a+ Xi, ~+ NDi,6+DDi,         @+ DNi, A+ ~i,       ,                 (2)

where NDi~ is a dummy variable set equal to one if a worker at time t who had previously reported

no discrimination   then reports discrimination,   DDi~is a dummy variable which equals one if the

worker reports discrimination     continuously through time t, and DNi~is a dummy variable which

equals one if a worker who once reported discrimination        subsequently reports no discrimination        at

time t.7 The reference group is workers who never report discrimination         through time t. If the

fixed propensity to report discrimination    (independent of its actual existence) were positively

correlated with job separations, then the magnitude of $ would be large relative to 5 and -~. * We

would claim stronger evidence of age discrimination        having a causal effect on separations if we

were to find that b in equation (2) were significantly greater than zero, and that A were significantly

less than zero, although we regard the latter implication as less compelling since worker attachment

may be affected by past discrimination.

        A second approach to using multiple reports to reduce the heterogeneity problem is simply

to restrict the analysis to the subset of individuals who do not report discrimination      (and are

employed) the first time they are asked. Then, equation (1) can be estimated where D,t is the



         ‘In all cases, the second report used in defining these dummy variables is the most recent report as
of time t.

         8The parameter would also be large if the impact of discrimination experiences were cumulative,
so that workers are more likely to leave a job the more often they experience discrimination.


                                                     -8-
response to the discrimination      question the second or third time it is asked. By estimating the

equation for this subset of individuals, the heterogeneity problem should be eliminated or at least

reduced because y is estimated conditioning out differences in initial responses to the

discrimination      question.

          A second problem is that individuals may incorrectly attribute to age discrimination

negative outcomes that are in fact unrelated to such discrimination,       perhaps to rationalize these

negative outcomes.        Because the y may respond to these negative outcomes by leaving their

employer or the labor force, we could then obtain spurious evidence of an effect of age

discrimination.      We explore this potential problem by comparing the impact of discrimination

reports based on age with reports based on other factors, such as race. Some critics of age

discrimination      legislation argue that these laws merely provide middle-aged white men the

opportunity to sue employers for negative job outcomes, as blacks, Hispanics, and women have

been able to do since the passage of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (see Friedman, 1984, for

examples),    If this view is accurate, then non-whites should be less likely to report age

discrimination,     and instead report race discrimination    as the “cause” of an adverse labor market

outcome, particularly if race discrimination     reports are seen as more credible than reports of age

discrimination.      More importantly, the effect of age discrimination    reports on job separations and

employment        status should be considerably smaller for non-whites than for whites, while race

discrimination     should be strongly associated with job separations and non-employment        for non-

whites.   Since the NLSOM includes questions about discrimination          based on race, religion, and

nationality, in addition to age, we can test this idea by separately analyzing reports of age

discrimination     among non-whites, comparing the effects of reported age discrimination       and race

discrimination     (and the incidence of the former).



                                                        -9-
        A third problem with the interpretation of estimates of equation(1)          is that workers facing

the prospect of mandatory retirement as part of long-tern          incentive contracts might nonetheless

report age discrimination   prior to retirement, because mandatory retirement is involuntary ex post

on the part of the worker. In this case, evidence of a link between reported age discrimination            and

subsequent job separations or changes in employment status would not provide evidence in favor of

age discrimination   or against long-term contracts.     Rather, the self-reports would simply reflect

workers’ ex post dissatisfaction   with the prospect of mandatory retirement.         A solution to this

problem is to exploit the information in the NLSOM about the existence of mandatory retirement

provisions on the current job. We therefore add a dummy variable MRi~to equation (l), to indicate

whether a worker faced mandatory retirement during the period covered by the discrimination                self-

report, as in

                          L*iE= ~ + Xi~~+ Di~7 + M~[6 + ~i~ >                                        (3)

and test whether y is greater than zero (or the corresponding test for equation (2)).

        We also introduce additional explanatory variables into the estimating equations.            For

example, we control for workers’ afiitudes toward their cu~ent job. Disentangling             the effects Of

general dissatisfaction   with one’s job from the effects of reported age discrimination        reduces the

likelihood that our estimates of the effects of discrimination        merely reflect negative job

characteristics   or outcomes, which should be captured by the attitudinal measure.          In some of our

regressions, we also interact the age discrimination          indicator with the worker’s age and control for

the reasons cited by respondents for their age discrimination          reports, since workers who claim

discrimination    because of treatment received on the current job maybe more likely to leave that job

than workers who report discrimination      because they were not hired or interviewed for another job.

         A final problem we confront arises from limitations of the structure of the data. Workers



                                                       -1o-
are asked whether they have experienced age discrimination        at any time over the past five years,

Thus, we can link discrimination    to a particular job only for those workers who work at only one

job during the entire five-year period. Although we conduct some of our analyses on samples

restricted to workers with only one employer in any five-year period, the selectivity of this sample

makes these results somewhat suspect, since workers who remain with an employer perceived to

engage in discriminatory    practices may not be typical of most workers.     Most of our analysis is

instead based on the entire sample of workers, and we are in effect assuming that workers who

experience any discrimination    in the past five years experience discrimination     in all jobs over that

period. For example, a worker who reports age discrimination        over the last five years in 1971 is

treated as if he reports discrimination    continuously from 1966 to 1971, and we study the

relationship between discrimination       reported in 1971 and subsequent behavior.    By sometimes

incorrectly assigning reported discrimination     to jobs where none is perceived, this approach will

generate downward-biased      estimates of the effect of age discrimination   on employment.      Given that

we find evidence of effects of age discrimination,     this source of bias only strengthens our

conclusions.

IV. Description of Sample

        The NLSOM data that we analyze cover the period 1966 to 1980. While these data are not

very recent, we think it is instructive to study the effects of age discrimination    in the period prior to

passage or rigorous enforcement of the ADEA, in order to assess whether the ADEA was

responding to legitimate concerns regarding age discrimination.       Although the ADEA was passed

in 1968, responsibility   for its enforcement rested with the Department of Labor until 1978, and few

resources were devoted toward this goal. In 1978 enforcement shified to the EEOC, and the

director of that agency sought to give age discrimination     the same emphasis as race and sex



                                                     -11-
discrimination.   This seemed to occur. The Department of Labor received about 1,000 complaints

of age discrimination   in 1969, which climbed to 5,000 in 1976. By 1982, after enforcement had

switched to the EEOC, the number of complaints climbed to 11,000.            (Friedman (1984) provides a

historical overview of the ADEA.) The ADEA also had more significant effects beginning in 1978

because amendments to the Act increased the mandatory retirement age from 65 to 70 in that year,

bringing many additional workers under its protection.

        Our extract includes observations on all survey years in which a respondent was working at

a job, from 1966 to 1980, for a total of 19,270 observations on 3,001 respondents.9        (Since

information on discrimination    is not available in 1981 and 1983, observations for these years are

not included in the sample. However, employment information in 1981 is used to identifi workers

who leave employers or become non-employed between 1980 and 1981.) Sample means, for the

person-year observations,   are reported in columns 1-3 of Table 1, first for all workers and then

separately for those who do and do not report age discrimination.

        Overall, 22 percent of workers leave their job each year, and about one-half of these

separations lead to a spell of non-employment.      The incidence of spells of non-employment

increases sharply with age, Almost one-fifth of workers over the age of55 are not employed at the

following interview, compared to only four percent of workers age 55 and younger.           For 47 percent

of all observations, workers are subject to mandatory retirement, and for 65 percent of the

observations workers received pension coverage on the job they held in 1966. Health limitations,

defined each year as health problems which the respondent claims limit the amount or type of work




          9A11observations for men who were not working in 1966, or were self-employed in 1966, were
first eliminated from the sample. In addition, all observations with missing discrimination reports in any
year were excluded from the analysis. When other variables used in the analysis are missing in a
particular year, the value of the variable is set equal to zero and the corresponding missing variable
dummy is set equal to one.

                                                    -12-
he is able to perfom,   affect 23 percent of the sample. Only six percent of the sample dislike (either

somewhat or very much) their current job, The mean level of tenure on the current job is 14.6

years. Twenty percent of the sample is employed in the public sector.

        Approximately       seven percent of the observations include positive reports of age

discrimination   that occurred over the past five years, The incidence of discrimination     reports is

somewhat higher among workers over age 55 (8°/0) than among workers age 55 and younger (60/0).

Workers who report discrimination       are much more likely to separate from their jobs during the next

period (37Y0 vs. 21 Yo)and to experience a spell of non-employment(18%          vs. 11 Yo). These

differences hold both for workers age 55 and younger and for those over 55, although the

differences are larger in relative terms for the younger group. As a result of their higher separation

propensities, workers reporting discrimination     have 2.5 fewer years of job tenure, on average, than

workers who report no discrimination.       Reporters and non-reporters appear to differ systematically

in other ways, as well. For example, those who report age discrimination       have significantly more

schooling and more health problems and are significantly less likely to have had pension coverage

in 1966 or to be employed in the public sector. Non-reporters in the sample have higher hourly

earnings and are much less likely to dislike their job.

        As a purely descriptive exercise to reveal the partial associations between reported age

discrimination   and the other explanatory variables in our model, we estimate a logit equation for

reporting discrimination.     Results are presented in column 4 of Table 1, with standard errors

reported in parentheses and odds ratios in square brackets. As we expected, dissatisfaction         with the

current job is strongly positively correlated with discrimination    reports; the likelihood of reporting

discrimination   is more than twice as high among disgruntled workers than among workers who are

at least somewhat content with their j ob, holding other factors constant.    Workers with health



                                                     -13-
problems, divorced workers, and workers subject to mandatory retirement ages on the job are also

much more likely to report discrimination.     Age and schooling also have significant positive

associations.   Workers with higher wages and more years of experience with the employer,

however, are significantly less likely to claim discrimination,   as are those in the public sector and

those who were covered by pension benefits on the job held in 1966. Race does not appear to have

a significant effect on the likelihood of reporting age discrimination.    The significant associations

of reported age discrimination   with observable characteristics of workers highlights the importance

of attempting to eliminate bias from heterogeneity in the propensity to report discrimination.

V. Results

Job Separations

        Estimates from our basic hazard model of job separations are reported in Table 2. The

dependent variable is equal to one if the worker leaves his current employer before the next

interview (in either one or two years, depending on the interview year), and zero otherwise.       In

column 1, the explanatory variables include the self report of age discrimination,     year dummies to

capture macroeconomic     influences on individual labor market decisions and differences in the

number of years until the next interview date (and thus differences in the length of exposure to the

risk of job separation), and personal characteristics of the worker (the presence of any health

limitations, years of completed schooling, race, marital status, SMSA residence, and age entered up

to a quartic).10 Column 2 adds mandatory retirement provisions to the specification.       A dummy

variable indicating the existence of a mandato~     retirement age on the current job is interacted with

three age dummies, to enable the effects of mandatory retirement to differ for workers age 55 and




         ‘OInspecifications not reported here, the year dummies were replaced by a dummy variable
identifying two-year survey intervals. As expected, the likelihood of separating from the current employer
is greater during these longer intervals than during the one-year intervals.

                                                   -14-
younger, older than 55 butyounger       than65, andolderthan      65. Other jobcharacteristics   are added

in column 3, including an indicator for pension coverage on the job held in 1966, years of

experience on the current job (up to a quartic), a dummy variable identifying jobs held in the public

sector, and one-digit industry and occupational controls.       This specification is repeated in column 4,

after dropping the industry and occupational controls and including among the covariates the

predicted value of the real log wage (to avoid bias from influences of anticipated future behavior on

wages); the real wage is predicted by ordinary least squares, utilizing all the covariates included in

column 3. Column 5 adds a dummy variable to identi@ workers who report that they somewhat

dislike or very much dislike their current job. Column 6 repeats this specification, but excludes the

predicted wage and includes the occupational and industry controls in the estimating equation.

Finally, column 7 repeats column 6 after introducing interaction terms to permit the effect of

reported age discrimination    to differ between workers age 55 and younger and those older than age

55.

        The estimated coefficients on self-reported age discrimination       presented in Table 2 are

positive, large, and statistically significant.   In column 1, with the fewest controls, workers

reporting age discrimination    are more than twice as likely to separate from their employer than are

workers who report no age discrimination.         The estimated coefficient is quite robust to changes in

the way the estimating equation is specified.      For example, although the inclusion of the full set of

controls in columns 5 and 6 reduces the size of the estimated coefficient by about 20 percent,

relative to column 1, the reported odds ratios indicate that workers with positive reports are still 1.9

times as likely to separate as workers who do not report discrimination.        The logit model estimated

in column 5 indicates that workers who report no age discrimination         in 1966 will remain with their




                                                      -15-
current employer for 1.2 years longer than workers who report discrimination. 1t Although

discrimination    reports are somewhat more prevalent among workers over the age of 55, the

estimated effect of reporting discrimination      is substantially larger for workers age 55 and younger,

who may have more alternative employment options than older workers.

         Mandatory retirement provisions appear to affect job separation rates. However, the

inclusion of mandatory retirement in the estimating equation does not reduce the magnitude or

significance of the age discrimination      coefficient, as can be seen from comparing columns 1 and 2,

suggesting that workers are referring to employment practices that extend beyond the imposition of

mandatory retirement ages when they report age discrimination.           Workers between the ages of 56

and 65 on jobs which impose mandatory retirement ages are significantly more likely to separate

from their employers than workers on jobs with no mandatory retirement provisions, presumably

because these workers have reached the mandatory retirement age and are required to leave. The

estimated incremental effect ranges from 17 to 32 percent, depending upon the specification.’2            For

workers under 55, mandatory retirement provisions sharply decrease separation rates. This effect is

consistent with Lazear’s long-term incentive contracts.       According to Lazear’s model, senior

workers in firms with mandatory retirement provisions earn wages above the value of their

marginal product, or expect to earn high wages in the near future, which discourages them from

leaving the firm. Mandatory retirement has no significant effect on workers afier age 65, an age at




        “Based on the model estimates, the expected number of additional years on the current job for
workers in 1966 who never report age discrimination is 7.9 years, whereas for workers who always report
age discrimination expected additional years on the job is 6.7 years. For this calculation, other variables in
the model were set at their sample means, with tenure and age increasing each year after 1966.

       ‘zThecoefficient on the mandatory retirement dummy for workers ages 56 to 65 is negative in
column 2, however, when industry and occupation controls (and all other job characteristics) are excluded
from the specification,   suggesting that the imposition of mandatory retirement provisions varies by industry
and occupation.

                                                      -16-
which very few workers are still subject to mandatory retirement provisions.

         Another possible explanation for the strong observed effect of age discrimination         on job

separations is that workers who are simply unhappy with their job – perhaps because of some

negative job characteristic or outcome unrelated to discrimination         – separate and nonetheless claim

discrimination.      Including an indicator of job dissatisfaction helps to solve this problem, as long as

any such negative characteristics or outcomes are reflected in reported dissatisfaction,        Indeed, we

find that dissatisfied workers, who report that they somewhat dislike their current job or dislike it

very much, have much higher separation rates than men who are more content with their job. The

probability of a job separation is 74 percent higher among workers reporting job dissatisfaction.

However, the size of the discrimination      effect falls only slightly, by less than ten percent, when job

dissatisfaction    is added to the estimating equation.     Thus, the basis for claiming age discrimination

appears to go beyond general dissatisfaction      with one’s employer.

        Many of the other explanatory variables in the model have significant effects on job

separations.      Separation rates are higher among workers who are relatively old, experience health

problems that limit their ability to work, and earn high wages. These characteristics have also been

shown to increase retirement probabilities (e.g., Quinn, et al., 1990). Separation rates are lower

among workers who are married, well-educated, and employed in the public sector, and who have

many years of experience with the current employer and received pension coverage on the job held

in 1966. Separation rates do not vary significantly by race, controlling for the real wage. 13




         13The standard errors reported in Table 2 may be understated, due to the dependence among
repeated observations on individuals. To assess the influence on our conclusions of downward bias in our
standard errors, we re-estimated the model on a sample restricted to one randomly-selected observation per
respondent. The estimated effects of reported age discrimination remain large and highly significant. For
example, the coefficient on reported age discrimination is 0.83, with a standard error of 0.16, for the model
in column 5, and 0.82, with a standard error of 0.16, for the model in column 6.

                                                     -17-
Changes in Employment Status

         To this point, our analysis of job separations has ignored the employment         status of

separated workers.     However, workers who leave their current job have several options: they can

move to another job, become self-employed,       or stop working altogether.       We turn now to the

question of whether perceived age discrimination      increases the likelihood that workers will

separate from their employer and not find employment elsewhere.

        The hazard models are re-estimated using the same specifications as in Table 2, except that

now the dichotomous      dependent variable each year is equal to one only if the worker does not

report any work at the subsequent interview.     We do not separately identifi individuals who are

actively seeking work but remain unemployed, since the distinction between these workers and

discouraged workers is ofien arbitrary (Clark and Summers, 1979).]4 The results, which are

reported in Table 3, tell the same basic story as the findings for job separations.       As before, the

estimated coefficients on reported age discrimination      are positive, large, and statistically

significant, and robust to the inclusion of additional controls in the estimating equation,         Workers

who report discrimination    are between 72 percent and 83 percent more likely to experience a spell

of non-employment      than workers who report no discrimination,      depending upon the exact

specification.   Workers between the ages of56 and 65 subject to mandatory retirement provisions

and workers who report job dissatisfaction     are much more likely to experience a spell of non-

employment than are workers not subject to mandatory retirement and workers content with their

jobs.15 However, controlling for these factors has little effect on the size or significance of the




        14This maybe   particularly true for old workers for whom discouragement     is more prevalent
(Rhine, 1978).

         15Mandatory retirement provisions do not affect employment    rates for workers younger than 56 or
older than 65.

                                                    -18-
discrimination    coefficient, suggesting once again that age discrimination     reports do not simply

reflect dismay over mandatory retirement or general job dissatisfaction.        The estimates reported in

column 5 imply that workers who report no discrimination remain employed for 0.6 years longer

than workers who report age discrimination. 16 Relatively young workers (age 55 and under) with

positive reports are less likely to be employed than older workers who report discrimination.

         The effects of other variables in the model are generally consistent with the retirement

literature.   Rates of employment are lower among workers who are relatively old, experience health

problems, and earn high wages. 17

Correcting For Potential Heterogeneity Bias

         The estimated impact of age discrimination         on job separations and employment   status

reported in Tables 2 and 3 may be biased upward if heterogeneity in the propensity to report

discrimination    results in those workers who report discrimination     being more likely to leave their

jobs, independent of any causal effect of discrimination,       as noted in Section III above. Some

indication of the extent to which individual-level    heterogeneity affects the propensity to report

discrimination    may be provided by exploring the persistence of age discrimination      reports over

time. If positive discrimination   reports arise largely from the propensity of individuals to claim

discrimination,   regardless of the actual behavior of employers, then discrimination      reports by a

given individual are likely to be relatively consistent over time. In particular, an individual who




         lbThe model predicts that in 1966, for a worker with mean characteristics who never reports
discrimination, expected additional continuous years of employment is 8.8 years, compared with 8.2 years
for the mean worker who reports discrimination.

          “TO assess the influence of downward bias in our reported standard errors, we again re-estimate
the models on a sample restricted to one random observation per respondent. The discrimination
coefficients corresponding to columns 5 and 6, respectively, are 0.41 with a standard error of 0.20 and 0.37
with a standard error of 0.21. Thus, the evidence is a bit weaker for changes in employment status than for
separations overall.

                                                     -19-
reported discrimination     in the past would be likely to report discrimination    in the future, even after

moving to a different employer.      If, however, discrimination     reports were based solely on employer

practices, then individuals with positive reports in the past would be no more likely to report

discrimination   after changing employers than workers who never reported discrimination.

        We investigate persistence in discrimination        reports by relating the likelihood of reporting

discrimination   in the years 1973-1976 and 1978-80 to earlier discrimination        reports, permitting the

relationship to differ between workers who reported past discrimination          by former employers and

workers who reported past discrimination       by current employers.     Logit estimates are reported in

columns 1 and 2 of Table 4, for specifications which include the fall set of controls as in columns 5

and 6, respectively, of Table 2. Workers with positive past reports are significantly more likely to

report discrimination    in the current period. The coefficient on past discrimination      is much larger

for individuals who continue to work for the same discriminating          employer than for workers who

have moved to new employers, suggesting that many of these reports reflect employer-specific

behavior.   However, the large and positive effect on current discrimination        of past discrimination

reports that relate to former employers suggests that certain workers – even afier they change

employers – may be more likely to report discrimination         than others, regardless of employer

behavior.   Thus, if those workers who are more prone to report discrimination         are also more ikely

to leave their current job, the estimates reported in Tables 2 and 3 may be partly driven by

heterogeneity,   not the causal effect of age discrimination     on job separations and employment      status.

        We confront the heterogeneity problem by focusing on workers whose discrimination

reports change over the course of the panel, in effect conditioning out individual differences in

reporting behavior.     Panel A of Table 5 presents estimates based on the same specifications

described in columns 5 and 6 of Tables 2 and 3 (which utilize the full set of control variables), but



                                                     -20-
replacing the single dummy for reported age discrimination with three dummy variables which

serve to separately identi~ workers who switch discrimination       reports, workers who always report

discrimination,   and workers who never report discrimination.     The construction of these variables

is described below,

         Each of the three dummies is defined as of the year of the observation,     Between 1966 and

1971, workers are coded as “reports age discrimination      continuously” if they report discrimination

in 1971. They are coded similarly from 1972 to 1976 if they report discrimination        in 1971 and

1976, and likewise for 1977-80 if they report discrimination     all three times (in 1971, 1976 and

1980). About five percent of the sample reports age discrimination       continuously,   The second

dummy defines workers who switch to reporting discrimination.         By definition, this variable equals

zero for all workers during years 1966-71. From 1972-76, it is set equal to one for workers who

did not report discrimination    in 1971 but subsequently report discrimination    in 1976. The

“switching to reporting discrimination”    dummy equals one from 1977-80 for workers who report

discrimination    in 1980 but did not report any in 1971, 1976, or either year. About two percent of

the sample observations are included in this category.     The final dummy defines workers in years

they switch from reporting discrimination     to reporting no discrimination,   and is defined in the same

manner as the “switching to” variable. This variable is equal to one for 1.6 percent of the

observations.

         Turning to Panel A of Table 5, we see that workers who report discrimination       continuously

are much more likely to leave the current employer than workers who never report discrimination

or who report discrimination     in some but not all years. Controlling for the full set of personal and

job characteristics,   the predicted real wage, and attitudes toward the job, workers with continuous

discrimination    reports are more than twice as likely as non-reporters to separate from their jobs.



                                                    -21-
Workers who report discrimination       after having reported no discrimination    in a previous period are

about one-half as likely to leave the current employer as workers who report continuously,

Although this result might reflect the more persistent discrimination       experienced by the latter group

of workers, it also may identify intrinsic differences in job separation behavior between those who

do and do not report discrimination     continuously (i.e., heterogeneity bias). Nonetheless,       we

continue to find strong evidence for a causal effect of reported job discrimination       on j ob

separations; hazard rates are almost 50 percent higher among workers who switch to reporting

discrimination    than among workers who never report discrimination.’8

        Turning to employment status, the impact of continuously reporting age discrimination             is

quite similar in magnitude to the effect we estimate for job separation rates. Workers who

continuously report discrimination     are more than twice as likely to experience a spell of non-

employment       as workers who never report discrimination.    However, switching to reporting age

discrimination    has a much smaller positive effect on the employment hazard, suggesting that much

of the effect of discrimination   reports on employment status estimated in Table 3 may simply

reflect heterogeneity    bias. The estimated effect is insignificant in column 3, and is marginally

significant (p < .12) in column 4. Switching from reporting discrimination         has an insignificant

negative effect on the employment hazard, which is the anticipated sign if discrimination

discourages employment.

        An alternative way to implement this approach to the heterogeneity problem is to analyze

the impact of perceived age discrimination      among workers who initially report no discrimination

(in 1971). The specifications     from columns 5 and 6 of Tables 2 and 3 are repeated for the years


         ‘*No significant effect on job separations was found for reporting no discrimination afier having
made a positive report in a previous period, As mentioned earlier, we do not interpret this last result as
strong evidence against an effect of age discrimination on separations, since the impact of past
discrimination may persist into subsequent periods.

                                                     -22-
1973-80 for the sample of initial non-reporters.     More than six percent of the observations in this

sample include positive discrimination     reports. Estimated effects of reported age discrimination      for

this sample, reported in Panel B of Table 5, are substantially smaller than the corresponding

estimates in Tables 2 and 3, but they are nonetheless large and statistically significant.      Among

workers who initially report no discrimination,     workers who later provide positive reports are about

60 percent more likely to separate from their employer and up to 39 percent more likely to

experience a spell of non-employment       than workers who never report age discrimination.

Although these results confirm our suspicion that part of the observed effect of discrimination

reports reflects heterogeneity   in the propensity to report discrimination,    they also provide evidence

that age discrimination   has real effects on job separations and employment       status, with the evidence

particularly strong for separations. 19

        The other main problem with interpreting the evidence as identifying causal effects of

discrimination    is that workers may incorrectly attribute to discrimination    other adverse labor

market outcomes, to which they respond by leaving their j ob. We address this issue by focusing on

the reports of non-white workers. Non-whites maybe less likely than whites to attribute problems

in the workplace to age discrimination,    because they can “attribute” their problems to race

discrimination,   which may be more credible. Table 6 reports the results of re-estimating the logit

equations of columns 5 and 6 of Tables 2 and 3 and columns 1 – 4 of the lower panel of Table 5 on

a sample of non-white workers.      In addition to the covariates in the earlier estimations, the

equations now include an indicator for reporting discrimination       based on race, religion, or




         ‘9When the sample is further restricted to one random observation per respondent to correct for the
potential underreporting of standard errors, the estimated effects of age discrimination on job separations
becomes marginally significant (p < .09) in column 1 of Panel B, but remains significant (p < .05) in
column 2. The estimated effect on employment status become insignificant, as the standard errors in
columns 3 and 4 increase to 0.20 and 0.18, respectively.

                                                    -23-
nationality.     Among all observations on non-white workers in our sample, 6.8 percent report age

discrimination     and 6.5 percent report other types of discrimination        (most of which are based on

race).

         The percentage reporting age discrimination            is essentially the same as for the full sample,

indicating that white males are hardly more likely to report age discrimination;            in and of itself, this

casts doubt on the interpretation       of reported age discrimination     as reflecting primarily other adverse

labor market outcomes. More importantly, the estimated effects of age discrimination                on job

separations and employment status among non-whites are quite similar to the observed effects

among all workers. Non-white workers who report age discrimination                 are about twice as likely

both to separate from their employer and to experience a spell of non-employment                as non-whites

who report no age discrimination.         This effect is much larger than the effect of race and other types

of reported discrimination.       Non-white workers who report other types of discrimination           are only

39 percent to 45 percent more likely to separate from their job than workers who do not report other

types of discrimination.       The effect of other types of discrimination      on employment     status is small

and insignificant.     When the sample is restricted to non-white workers who initially report no

discrimination,    in order to reduce potential heterogeneity bias, the results, as reported in Panel B of

Table 6, are again quite similar to the results for workers of all races. Non-white workers who

report age discrimination       in the later years of the panel are between 60 percent and 75 percent more

likely to separate from their job and about 30 percent more likely to experience non-employment,

than are non-white workers who never report age discrimination.               However, the estimated effects

on employment        status are statistically insignificant.    The observed effect of other types of reported

discrimination     disappear when the sample is restricted to non-white workers who initially report no

age discrimination.      The results in Table 6 bolster the validity of the age discrimination        self reports.



                                                         -24-
Additional   Tests of Robustness

        Tables 7 and 8 report on additional analyses designed to further test the robustness of our

estimates of the effects of age discrimination     on j ob separations and employment status. We

investigate the impact of restricting the sample to workers with only one employer over the period

during which they report discrimination,      and of allowing the effects of discrimination     to vary by the

reason respondents give for their discrimination      reports, for a sample restricted to workers who

initially report no discrimination.

        Workers claim age discrimination       of different types, and our interpretation    of the effect of

discrimination   on job and labor force attachment can depend upon the type of discrimination           cited

by workers in their self-reports.     In particular, workers who report discrimination      because they were

not hired or interviewed because of their age may react differently than workers who base their age

discrimination   claims on other factors. On one hand, discrimination       based on withheld job offers

or interviews is unlikely to lead workers to leave their current job, since the discriminatory

behavior would not generally have been committed by the current employer,            Hence, the inclusion

of discrimination   of this type with other types of discrimination   may bias downward the overall

estimated effect of age discrimination     on job separations.   On the other hand, workers who report

discrimination   because they were unable to secure certain jobs or interviews were presumably

seeking new employment in the recent past and may be more likely to leave future j obs or to

withdraw from the labor force than other workers, leading to upward biased estimates of the effect

of overall age discrimination   on job separations and employment status.

        To account for these possibilities we distinguish reports of age discrimination         based on lost

job offers and interviews from other types of age discrimination       that more plausibly reflect

treatment received on the current job. Among workers who initially report no discrimination,



                                                     -25-
approximately     ten percent of workers who subsequently report discrimination           claim that the

discrimination    occurred because they were not hired or interviewed.20 Logit equations for both job

separations and employment         status are re-estimated, based on the specifications     from columns 1-4

of the bottom panel of Table 5, replacing the reported discrimination        dummy variable with a

dummy which equals one if the worker reports discrimination           because he was not hired or

interviewed because of his age (zero otherwise), and another dummy which equals one if the

worker reports discrimination      for any other reason (zero otherwise).    The results are presented in

Table 7.

        The estimated effects of reported age discrimination        not related to hiring or interviewing        are

quite similar to the results reported in Panel B of Table 5, which is not surprising since a small

fraction of reports are related to hiring or interviewing.      Workers who report discrimination          not

related to hiring or interviewing in the later years of the survey (afier initially reporting no

discrimination)   are about 66 to 70 percent more likely to separate from their job than workers who

never report age discrimination.      The effect on job separations of age discrimination       related to

hiring or interviewing is somewhat smaller than the effect of discrimination         not related to hiring,

and statistically insignificant.    Thus, in this sample of initial non-reporters, which is presumably

less susceptible to heterogeneity bias, discrimination       reports related to hiring do not appear to

reflect the relatively high quit propensities of these workers, Hiring-related       discrimination    has

larger effects on employment status than does discrimination         not related to hiring or interviewing.

Workers who report discrimination        because they were not hired or interviewed are about 70 to 75

percent more likely to experience a spell of non-employment          than workers who never report age

discrimination.    However, these estimates are imprecisely measured, and are at best marginally



        ‘“Among all workers, about one in four discrim ination reports are related to hiring or interviewing.

                                                      -26-
significant.    Workers who report discrimination    not related to hiring or interviewing are about 28 to

36 percent more likely to experience a spell of non-employment         than workers who never report

discrimination.

         The validity of our results may also be questioned because of the uncertainty surrounding

the timing of the discrimination    experience.   As noted earlier, the discrimination   reports available

in the data refer to experiences over the previous five years. Thus it is not clear when the

discrimination    began, or which employer is at fault when workers held more than one job during

the period. We explore the potential ramifications of this data limitation by re-estimating        our logit

models on a sample restricted to workers with no more than one employer during each of the five-

year reporting periods, and to workers who initially report no age discrimination.        The results,

reported in Table 8, are quite similar to our earlier estimates reported in Panel B of Table 5.

Controlling for the full set of explanatory variables, workers who report discrimination        are

approximately     50 percent more likely to separate from their current employer than workers who

report no discrimination,     The effect of age discrimination   on employment status is somewhat

smaller, as workers with positive reports are fi-om 32 percent to 41 percent more likely to

experience a spell of non-employment       than workers who report no discrimination.      Although these

estimates are based on a very select sample, they corroborate the fill-sample       results based on the

somewhat less accurate classification of workers experiencing discrimination         on the current j ob.

Additional     Consequences   ofAge Discrimination

        Although our evidence suggests that workers who report age discrimination           are more likely

to experience a spell of non-employment       than other workers, we have not explored the likelihood

that respondents reporting discrimination     retire from the labor force or the duration of their spells

of non-employment.      These issues are addressed by re-estimating the logit models reported in the



                                                     -27-
bottom panel of Table 5 using alternative measures of labor force status as the dependent variable,

Theresults   ~epresented         in Table9.   Incolumns     land2,   thedependent     variable equals oneifthe

respondent reports retirement as his major activity during the survey week of the subsequent

interview (zero otherwise).        In columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable equals one if the respondent

reports that he is not employed and not looking for work at the time of the subsequent interview

(zero otherwise).     Finally, in columns 5 and 6 the dependent variable equals one if the respondent is

not working in either of the next two interviews (zero otherwise).            The estimated coefficients on

age discrimination,     among workers who initially report no discrimination,           are small and statistically

insignificant in all of the specifications reported in Table 9, indicating that workers do not respond

to age discrimination        by retiring or otherwise dropping out of the labor force, and that age

discrimination     does not generate persistent spells of non-employment.            Instead, the effect of age

discrimination     appears to operate through job separations, which are sometimes followed by

relatively short spells of non-employment.

        Although this evidence does not indicate that age discrimination              leads to early retirement or

long spells of non-employment,          workers reporting age discrimination        who separate from their

employers or become non-employed              do appear to pay a substantial cost, in the form of lower wages

on their new job or when they become re-employed.                Table 10 reports ordinary least squares

estimates of equations for the change in the log real wage, measured from the time of the report to

the subsequent job or re-employment.           In column 1, the estimating equation includes the dummy

variable for reporting age discrimination.         In column 2, this variable is interacted with dummies

indicating whether or not the respondent subsequently left his employer,               In column 3, the age

discrimination     variable is interacted with dummies indicating whether or not a spell of non-

employment       followed.     In each column, the specifications also include changes in disability,



                                                          -28-
marital status, age and age squared, and SMSA residence.         Compared to workers who report no

discrimination,   the estimated wage change is seven percent lower for workers who report age

discrimination    and separate from their employer, and 13 percent lower for workers for workers who

report age discrimination    and experience a subsequent spell of non-employment.         Workers who

report age discrimination    but do not separate from their employer or do not become non-employed

do not experience lower wage growth than nonreporters,21

VI. Conclusions

        Although economists have devoted considerable effort to investigating          sex and race

discrimination    in the labor market, there has been very little empirical research on the prevalence

and consequences     of discrimination   based on age. The effects of age discrimination      are difficult to

measure because the standard economic approach to the study of discrimination           – attributing to

discrimination    the differences in labor market outcomes that persist afier controlling for all

observable differences in productivity-related     characteristics – cannot be applied in a compelling

fashion to older workers because of the strong possibility that age itself affects individual

productivity.

        In this paper, we take a different approach by analyzing self-reports of discrimination.         We

find that about seven percent of our sample of older male workers report that they experienced age

discrimination    in the workplace during the period 1966 to 1980. Workers who reported age

discrimination    were much more likely to separate from their employer and less likely to remain

employed, even afier controlling for many personal and job characteristics,        including the presence

of mandatory retirement provisions on the j ob and general j ob dissatisfaction,       These findings are

generally robust to our many attempts to correct our estimates for the inherent limitations of self-


        21Thislatter finding provides further evidence that age discrimination reports do not simply reflect
adverse labor market outcomes, at least insofar as they are reflected in lower wage growth.

                                                    -29-
reported data, particularly the potential heterogeneity bias that arises from differences in the

propensity to report discrimination,   and the likelihood of attributing to discrimination   other

negative labor market outcomes.

        Our evidence indicates that age discrimination    in the workplace maybe (or may have been)

a serious problem that provides a basis for legislation restricting discrimination   against older

workers.   Alternative approaches to studying the prevalence and consequences of age

discrimination,   and for assessing the impact of the ADEA, should be high on the research agenda of

those studying older workers in the labor market.




                                                   -30-
                                                          References

Blau, David M. 1994. “Labor Force Dynamics of Older Men.” Econometrics                           62:117-56.

Bloch, Farrell E. 1994. Antidiscrimination               Law and Minori~ Employment (Chicago:            University       of
         Chicago     Press).

Bureau   of Labor Statistics.           1989.   Handbook of Labor Statistics, Bulletin 2340.

Clark, Kim B. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1979. “Labor Market Dynamics and Unemployment:                                       A
       Reconsideration.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi@ 1:13-60.

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. 1994. Annual Report for Fiscal Year 1990.
       (Washington, D. C,: Government Printing Office).

Fix, Michael and Raymond J. Struyk. 1992. Clear and Convincing Evidence: Measurement                                 of
       Discrimination in America (Washington, D. C.: The Urban Institute Press).

Friedman, Lawrence. 1984. Your Time Will Come: The Law of Age Discrimination                             and
       Mandatory Retirement (New York: Russell Sage Foundation).

Ham, John C. and Samuel            A. Rea, Jr. 1987. “Unemployment            Insurance     and Male Unemployment
         Duration    in Canada.”         Journal of Labor Economics 5:325-53.

Hellerstein, Judith K., David Neumark and Kenneth R. Troske.                      1996. “Wages, Productivity,         and
         Worker Characteristics.” Mimeograph.

Hurd, Michael. 1990. “Research on the Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement, and Consumption
       and Saving.” Journal of Economic Literature 28:565-637.

Hutchens,   Robert    M.       1988,     “Do Job Opportunities    Decline     with Age?” Industrial and Labor
         Relations Review 42(1):89-99.

Kuhn, Peter J. 1990. “Sex Discrimination                in Labor Markets:     The Role of Statistical   Evidence.”
         American Economic Review 77(4): 567-83.

Lazear, Edward P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy
        87(6): 1261-84.

Lloyd, Cynthia B. and Beth T. Niemi.                 1979. The Economics f Sex Differentials        (New York:
       Columbia University Press).

Neumark, David and Michele McLennan.   1995. “Sex Discrimination                          and Women’s   Labor Market
        Outcomes.” Journal of Human Resources 30:713-40.

Parries, H.S. and R. King.             1977.    “Middle-Aged   Job Losers.”    Industrial Gerontology 4:77-96.
Quinn, Joseph F., Richard V. Burkhauser, and Daniel A. Myers. 1990. Passing the Torch: The
       Influence of Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement, (Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn
         Institute   for Employment   Research).

Rhine,   Shirley H, 1978. Older Workers and Retirement (New York: The Conference Board, Inc.).

Rosen, B.and T. H. Jerdee.       1977. “TooOldo rNotTooOld?”    Harvard Business Review 55:97-
       106.

Ruhm,    Christopher J. 1990. “Career Jobs, Bridge Employment    and Retirement.” In Peter B.
         Doeringer, cd., Bridges to Retirement: Older Workers in a Changing Labor Market (Ithaca,
         NY: ILR Press), pp. 92-110,
                                                  Table 1
            Descriptive Statistics and Correlates of Reported Age Discrimination,            1966-1980a


                                                     Descri~tive Statisticsa

                                                                                  Workers not
                                                     Workers reporting              reporting      Logit estimates
                                                     discrimination in         discrimination in      of reported
                                   All workers          last 5 years              last 5 years     discrimination

                                        (1)                   (2)                     (3)                 (4)

Reports age discrimination   in         .07                     ...                   ...                 ..
last 5 years                          (.002)


   Age <55                             .06                      ...                   ...                 ...
                                      (.002)

   Age>55                               .08                     ...                  ..                   ..
                                      (.003)

Job separation in next period           ,22                     .37                   .21                  ..
                                      (.003)                   (.01)                (.003)

   Age <55                             .16                      .29                  .15                   ..
                                      (.004)                   (.02)                (.004)

   Age >55                              .29                     .44                   .28                      .
                                      (.005)                  (.02)                 (.005)

Not working in next period             .11                     .18                    .11                 ..
                                     (.002)                   (.01)                 (.002)

   Age <55                            .04                      .08                    .04                 ..
                                     (.002)                   (.01)                 (.002)

   Age~55                              .19                      .26                   .18                 ..
                                     (.004)                   (.02)                 (.004)

 Mandatory retirement in current       .47                      .48                   .47                .29
job                                  (.004)                   (,027)                (.005)             (,08)
                                                                                                      [1.33]

Pension in 1966 job                    .65                      .60                   .65              -.16
                                     (.003)                   (.01)                 (.004)             (.07)
                                                                                                      [0.85]

Health limits work                    .23                      .31                   .22                 .39
                                     (.003)                   (.01)                 (.003)             (.06)
                                                                                                      [1.48]

Tenure                              14.59                    12.26                14.77                -.02
                                     (.08)                    (.31)                (.08)               (.003)
                                                                                                      [0.98]

                                               (Continued)
                                                       Table 1 (Continued)


                                                              Descriptive     Statistics’

                                                                                               Workers not
                                                              Workers reporting                  reporting      Logit estimates
                                                              discrimination in             discrimination in     of reported
                                           All workers           last 5 years                  last 5 years     discrimination

                                                [1)                    (2)                         (3)                (4)

   Dislikes current job                        .07                       .13                       .06                .85
                                              (.002)                    (.01)                     (.002)             (.09)
                                                                                                                    [2.33]

   Hourly wage ($1 966)                       3.28                     3.13                      3.29                -.05
                                             (1.97)                   (5.81)                    (2.07)               (.02)
                                                                                                                    [1.00]

   Public sector job                           ,20                        .17                      .20               -.30
                                              (.003)                    (.01)                     (.003)             (.08)
                                                                                                                    [0.74]

   Age                                      55.02                     55.88                     54.95                 .03
                                              (.04)                    (.13)                      (.04)              (.006)
                                                                                                                    [1.04]

   Years of schooling                        9.72                     10.15                      9.69                 .06
                                              (.03)                    (.11)                      (.03)              (.01)
                                                                                                                    [1.06]

   Non-white                                   .30                          .29                    .30                .05
                                              (.003)                    (.01)                     (.003)             (.07)
                                                                                                                    [1.06]

   Married, spouse present                     .89                          .87                    .89                 ,26
                                              (.002)                    (.01)                     (.002)             (.18)
                                                                                                                    [1.29]

   Divorced or separated                       .05                       .07                       .05                 .56
                                              (.002)                    (.01)                     (.002)             (.21)
                                                                                                                    [1.75]

   Widowed                                     .03                       .03                       .03                .27
                                              (.001)                    (.005)                    (.001)             (.24)
                                                                                                                    [1.31]

   SMSA                                        .73                          .74                    .73                .07
                                              (.003)                    (.01)                     (.003)             (.07)
                                                                                                                    [1.07]

   N                                          19.720                  1.403                      18.317             19,720
a. Standard errors are reported in parentheses. Means are sometimes based on less than the full sample because of missing data for
some variables.
b. Standard errors are reported in parentheses and odds ratios are reported in square brackets. The estimated effect of the real
wage is calculated from a separate logit for the subset of years for which wages are available.
                                                 Table 2
                             Logit Estimates for Job Separations,     1966-1980’


                                     (1)       (2)           (3)      (4)          (5)     (6)      (7)

Reports age discrimination           .82       .83           .69      .68       .65        .65      ..
   @ = 1,403)                       (.06)     (.06)      (.07)       (.07)     (.07)      (.07)
                                   [2.27]    [2.29]     [2.00]      [1.98]    [1.91]     [1.92]

Reports age discrimination           ...       ...           ...      .            ...      .       .79
   age <55 (N=640)                                                                                 (,10)
                                                                                                  [2.21]

Reports age discrimination           ..        ...             .      ...          ...     ...      .55
   age >55 (N= 763)                                                                                (.09)
                                                                                                  [1.74]

Health limits work                   .33       .34        .32         .36       .34        .30      .30
                                    (.04)     (.04)      (.04)       (.04)     (.05)      (.04)    (.04)
                                   [1.39]    [1.40]     [1.37]      [1.07]    [1.41]     [1.35]   [1.35]

Subject to mandatory                 ...     -1.09       -.55        -.70      -.72       -.57     -.58
   retirement, age s 55                       (.07)      (.08)       (.08)     (.08)      (.08)    (.08)
                                             [0.34]     [0.58]      [0.50]    [0.49]     [0.56]   [0.56]

Subject to mandatory                 ...      -.16        .28         .15       .13        .26      .27
    retirement, 55< age s 65                  (.06)      (,07)       (.06)     (,06)      (.07)    (.07)
                                             [0.85]     [1.32]      [1.17]    [1.14]     [1.30]   [1.31]

Subject to mandatory                 ...       .09        .51         .53       .54        .53       .53
   retirement, age >65                        (.40)      (.41)       (.41)     (.41)      (.41)    (.41)
                                             [1.09]     [1.67]      [1.7]     [1.72]     [1.69]   [1.69]

Covered by pension in 1966           ...       ...       -.09        -.27      -.27       -.08     -.08
                                                         (.05)       (,05)     (.05)      (.05)    (.05)
                                                        [0.92]      [0.76]    [0.76]     [0.92]   [0.92]

Predicted real log wageb             ...       ..            ...      .60       .62        ...       ..
                                                                     (.10)     (.10)
                                                                    [1.82]    [1.87]

Dislikes current job                 ...       ...           ...      ...       .55        .56      ,56
                                                                               (.07)      (.07)    (,07)
                                                                              [1.74]     [1.74]   [1.74]



                                               (Continued)
                                                       Table 2 (continued)



                                               (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)         (7)



     Other controls:
     Years of schooling                       Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Non-white                                Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Married, spouse present                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Divorced or separated                    Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Widowed                                  Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     SMSA                                     Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Age-age4                                 Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
     Year dummy variables                     Yes          Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes
     Tenure-tenure4                           No           No          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
     Public sector job                        No           No          Yes          Yes        Yes          Yes          Yes
     One-digit industry and                   No           No          Yes           No         No          Yes          Yes
     occupation


     Log-likelihood                         -9614.5      -9476.7     -8661.3       -8785.7   -8743.4      -8623.3      -8621.7
a, The sample, which is restricted to respondents with a job, not self-employed,     at the time of each survey, includes 19,720
observations. Observations missing data on the dependent variable or reported age discrimination are deleted. For all other
variables, missing observations are set to zero, and dummy variables indicating such observations are included in the estimating
equation. Standard errors of coefficient estimates are reported in parentheses, and odds ratios are reported in square brackets.
b, The real log wage is predicted by an OLS log wage equation estimated on the sample of respondents with valid wage data. In
addition to all of the variables in the separation logit, one-digit industry and occupation dummy variables are included in the log
wage equation.
                                                     Table 3
                                Logit Estimates for Employment               Status, 1966-1980’


                                             (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)

    Reports age discrimination               .60         .60          .58         .57          .54          .56        ..
       (N= 1,403)                           (.08)       (.08)       (.08)        (.08)       (.08)        (.08)
                                            1.83]      [1.83]      [1.79]        1.77]      [1.72]       [1.74]

    Reports age discrimination               ..          ...          ...          ..         ...          ..          .82
     age <55 (N= 640)                                                                                                 (.16)
                                                                                                                     [2.27]

    Reports age discrimination               ...         ...          ...          ...        ..           ...         .47
     age> 55 (N=763)                                                                                                  (.10)
                                                                                                                     [1.59]

    Health limits work                       .52         .52         .52           .55        .53          .51          .51
                                            (.05)       (,05)       (.06)         (.07)      (.06)        (.06)       (.06)
                                            1.68]      [1.68]      [1.69]         1.73]     [1.70]       [1.66]      [1.66]

    Subject to mandatory                     ...        -.13         -.10         -.14       -,14         -.10        -.11
       retirement, age s 55                             (.12)        (.12)        (.12)      (,12)        (,12)       (.12)
                                                       [0.88]      [0.90]       [0.87]      [0.87]       [0.91]      [0.90]

    Subject to mandatory                     ...         .42         .40           .38        .37           .40        .40
      retirement, 55< age s 65                          (.07)       (.08)        (.08)       (.08)        (.08)       (.08)
                                                       [1.53]      [1.49]       [1.46]      [1.45]       [1.49]      [1.50]

    Subject to mandatory                     ...        -.33        -.21          -.18       -.16         -.19        -.19
       retirement, age >65                              (.44)       (.46)         (.45)      (.45)        (.45)       (.45)
                                                       [0.72]      [0.81]        [0.83]     [0.85]       [0.83]      [0.83]

    Covered by pension in 1966               ...         ...         .10           .03         .03         .10         .11
                                                                    (.06)         (.07)      (.07)        (.06)       (.06)
                                                                   [1.11]        [1.03]     [1.03]       [1.10]      [1.11]

    Predicted real log wage                  ...         ...          ...          .32        .35          ...              .
                                                                                  (.14)      (.14)
                                                                                 [1.38]     [1.42]

    Dislikes current job                     ..          ...          ...          ...        .48          .46          .46
                                                                                             (.10)        (.10)       (.10)
                                                                                            [1,62]       [1.59]      [1.58]

    Log-likelihood
        “
                                           -5617.1     -5596.5      -5470.3      -5518.7     -5506.5     -5459.3      -5457.5
a. The dependent variable equals one if respondent is not employed at the next interview, zero otherwise. There are 19,720
observations. Additional control variables in each column are the same as in Table 2. See the footnotes to Table 2 for details.
                                   Table 4
         Logit Estimates for Age Discrimination             Reports, 1973-1980’


                                                           (1)                     (2)

Reports age discrimination in                             1.82                    1,67
  previous self-report, at same                           (.19)                   (.19)
  employer (N = 170)                                     [6.16]                  [5.31]

Reports age discrimination in                             1.11                    1.07
 previous self-report, with                               (.20)                   (.20)
 different employer (N= 181)                             [3.02]                  [2.90]

Predicted real log wage included                          Yes                      No

One-digit industry and occupation                          No                     Yes
 included


Log-likelihood                                          -1473.0                 -1455.2
a, There are 6,089 observations. The sample is smaller than in the previous tables because we
use data beginning only in 1973. The specification also includes all variables included in
columns 5 and 6 of Table 2, except for the age discrimination variables. See footnotes to Table
2 for details.
                                               Table 5
                     Logit Estimates of Job Separations and Employment Status,
                 Distinguishing Workers Who Change Age Discrimination Reportsa


                                         A. All Workers, 1966-1980b

                                                     Job Separations                      Em~lovment     Status

                                                    (1)             (2)                    (3)             (4)

Reports age discrimination                           .76            .77                    .81             .81
   continuously (N= 101 O)                         (.08)           (.08)                  (.11)           (.11)
                                                  [2.13]          [2.16]                 [2.25]          [2.24]

Switches to reporting age                           .39             .38                    .17              .21
  discrimination (N= 393)                          (.12)           (.12)                  (.13)           (.13)
                                                  [1.48]          [1,47]                 [1.18]          [1.23]

Switches from reporting age                        -.02             .02                   -.09            -.05
  discrimination (N= 3 10)                         (.13)           (.14)                  (.15)           (.15)
                                                  [0.98]          [1.02]                 [0.92]          [0.96]

Predicted real log wage included                    Yes             No                     Yes             No

One-digit industry and occupation                   No              Yes                    No              Yes
  included

Log-likelihood                                    -8740.1         -8619.6                -5498.7         -5452.8


                   B. Workers Initially Reporting No Age Discrimination,             1973-1980

                                                     Job Se~arations                      Em~lovment     Status

                                                     (1)             (2)                   (3)             (4)

Reports age discrimination                          .46             .47                    .28              .33
   (N=369)                                         (.12)           (.12)                  (.13)           (.13)
                                                  [1.59]          [1.61]                 [1.32]          [1.39]

Predicted real log wage included                    Yes             No                     Yes             No

One-digit industry and occupation                    No             Yes                    No              Yes
included

Log-likelihood                                    -3060.9         -3030.4                -2578.8         -2548.6
 a. There are 19,720 observations in Panel A, and 5,762 observations in Panel B. Additional control variables
 are the same as in columns 5 and 6 of Tables 2 and 3. See footnotes to Table 2 for details.
 b. The age discrimination reporting variables are defined here as of the year of observation. Thus, observations
 in 1966-1971 are coded as “reports age discrimination continuously” if workers report age discrimination in
 1971. They are coded similarly in 1973-76 if they report age discrimination in 1971 and 1976, and are coded
 similarly in 1978-80 if they report age discrimination in 1971, 1976, and 1980. Observations in 1972-1976 are
 coded as “switches to reporting age discrimination” if they report no age discrimination in 1971 and age
 discrimination in 1976. They are coded similarly for 1978-1980 if they report no age discrimination in 1971, no
 age discrimination in 1976, or no age discrimination in both 1971 and 1976. Observations are coded as switches
 from reporting age discrimination in parallel fashion.
                                                 Table 6
                       Logit Estimates of Job Separations and Employment                Status,
                                        Among Non-Whites Only’


                                         A. All Workers, 1966-1980

                                                      Job Se~arations                      Emt)lovment    Status

                                                     (1)             (2)                    (3)             (4)

Reports age discrimination                           .73             .73                    .63             .62
   (N= 405)                                         (.13)           (.13)                  (.15)           (.16)
                                                   [2.07]          [2.07]                 [1.88]          [1,86]

Reports other type of discrimination                 .37             .33                    .19              .19
   (N= 390)                                         (.14)           (,14)                  (.18)           (.18)
                                                   [1.45]          [1,39]                 [1.21]          [1.21]

Predicted real log wage included                     Yes             No                     Yes             No

One-digit industry      and occupation               No              Yes                    No              Yes
  included

Log-1 ikelihood                                   -2624.8          -2590.2               -1782.5          -1761.5


                     B. Workers Initially Reporting No Age Discrimination,           1973-1980

                                                      Job Se~arations                      Emulovment     Status

                                                     (1)             (2)                    (3)             (4)

Reports age discrimination                            .56            .47                    .31             .27
   (N= 83)                                          (.28)           (.28)                  (.29)           (.27)
                                                   [1.75]          [1.60]                 [1.36]          [1.31]

Reports other type of discrimination                  .01             .03                    .04             .03
   (N= 108)                                          (.26)           (.27)                  (.29)           (,29)
                                                    [1.01]          [1.03]                 [1.04]          [1.03]

Predicted real log wage included                     Yes             No                     Yes             No

One-digit   industry    and occupation               No              Yes                    No              Yes
included

Log-likelihood                                     -892.1          -876.2                 -781.4           -764.0
 a. There are 5,968 observations in Panel A, and 1,740 observations in Panel B. Other types of discrimination
 include discrimination based on race, religion, and nationality. Additional control variables are the same as in
 columns 5 and 6 of Tables 2 and 3. See footnotes to Table 2 for details.
                                                    Table 7
                    Logit Estimates of Job Separations and Employment Status, 1966-1980,
                             Distinguishing Basis for Age Discrimination Reports,
                           Among Workers Who Initially Report No Discrimination’


                                                            Job Se~arations                    Em~lovment     Status

                                                           (1)            (2)                    (3)            (4)

          Reports age discrimination    not related        .51            .53                   .25             .30
          to hiring or interviewing                      (.13)           (.13)                 (.15)           (.15)
          (N=31O)                                       [1.66]          [1.70]                [1.28]          [1.36]

          Reports not hired or interviewed                  .36            .35                   .53             .56
          because of age (N = 37)                         (.36)          (.36)                 (.37)           (.38)
                                                        [1.43]          [1.42]                [1.70]          [1.75]

          Health limits work                               .31             ,28                   .44             ,42
                                                         (.07)           (.07)                 (.08)           (,08)
                                                        [1.36]          [1.32]                [1.55]          [1,52]

          Subject to mandatory retirement,               -.53            -.40                  -.10            -.03
             age < 55                                    (.39)           (.39)                 (.45)           (.45)
                                                        [0.59]          [0.67]                [0.91]          [0.97]

          Subject to mandatory retirement,                .42              .49                   .53             .56
             55 c age s 65                               (.10)           (.11)                 (.11)           (.11)
                                                        [1.51]          [1.64]                [1.70]          [1.75]

         Subject to mandatory retirement,                 .52             .47                    ,19            .14
            age >65                                      (.44)           (.44)                 (,46)           (.47)
                                                        [1.68]          [1.61]                 1.21]           1.15]

         Covered by pension in 1966                      -.02              .10                  .23             .29
                                                         (.08)           (.08)                 (.09)           (.09)
                                                        [0.98]          [1.11]                 1.26]           1.34]

         Predicted real log wage                          .45             ...                    .22             ..
                                                         (.18)                                 (.20)
                                                        [1.56]                                [1.25]

         Dislikes current job                             .36             ,33                    .42             ,42
                                                         (.14)          (.14)                  (.15)           (.15)
                                                        [1.43]         [1.39]                 [1.52]          [1.52]

         Log-likelihood                                 -3039.9        -3010.3                -2561,1        -2532.4
a. The sample is restricted to individuals who report no discrimination in 1971. A handful of observations with missing
occupation and industry data are deleted in order to achieve convergence. There are 5,728 observations. Additional control
variables in columns 1 and 3 are the same as in column 5 of Tables 2 and 3. Additional control variables in columns 2 and 4 are
the same as in column 6 of Tables 2 and 3. See footnotes to Table 2 for additional details.
                                                   Table 8
                   Logit Estimates of Job Separations and Employment Status, 1973-1980,
                     Among Workers With Only One Employer Per Reporting Period
                                   Who Initially Report No Discrimination’


                                                            Job Se~arations                    Employment    Status

                                                           (1)            (2)                   (3)             (4)

         Reports age discrimination                       .40            .45                     .28           .34
            (N= 279)                                     (.15)          (.15)                  (.15)          (.16)
                                                        [1.49]         [1.57]                 [1.32]         [1.41]

         Health limits work                                .41            .39                   .44             .43
                                                          (.08)         (.08)                 (.08)           (.08)
                                                        [1.51]         [1.48]                [1.55]          [1.53]

          Subject to mandatory retirement,               -.26           -.18                    .11             .16
             age s 55                                    (.42)          (.42)                 (.45)           (.45)
                                                        [0.77]         [0.83]                [1.11]          [1.18]

         Subject to mandatory retirement,                 .52             .58                   .59             .62
            55 <age <65                                 (.11)           (.11)                 (.12)           (.12)
                                                       [1.68]          [1.78]                [1.81]          [1.87]

         Subject to mandatory retirement,                .40             .35                  -.04            -.11
            age >65                                     (.45)           (.46)                 (.49)           (.50)
                                                       [1.50]          [1.41]                [0.96]          [0.90]

         Covered by pension in 1966                      .18              .26                   .26            .31
                                                        (.10)           (.09)                 (.10)           (.09)
                                                       [1.19]          [1.30]                [1.30]          [1.36]

         Predicted real log wage                         .32                                    .15            ..
                                                        (.20)            ““”                  (.21)
                                                       [1.38]                                [1.17]

         Dislikes current job                            .35              .34                   .38             .39
                                                        (.15)           (.15)                 (.16)           (.16)
                                                       [1.42]          [1.40]                [1.47]          [1.48]

         Log-1 ikelihood                               -2400.6         -2373.7               -2228.9        -2199.0
a, The sample is restricted to respondents who report no discrimination in 1971 and who work for at most one employer
                                                                                                                  . .   durin~
each of the periods 1973-1976 and 1978-1980. There are 5,007 observations. Additional control variables in columns 1 and 3 are
the same as in column 5 of Tables 2 and 3. Additional control variables in columns 2 and 4 are the same as in column 6 of Tables
2 and 3. See footnotes to Table 2 for additional details.
                                                    Table 9
                               Logit Estimates of Labor Force Status, 1973-1980
                            Among Workers Who Initially Report No Discrimination


                                                                        Not Employed, Not              Not Employed
                                                      Retired            Looking for Work              for Two Periods

                                               (1)              (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)          (6)

       Reports age discrimination             -.05           -.02          .07           .12            .14         .19
                                              (.16)          (.16)        (.14)        (.15)          (.15)        (.15)
                                             [0.95]         [0.98]       [1.08]       [1.13]         [1.15]       [1.21]

       Predicted log wage included             Yes              No         Yes          No             Yes          No

       One-digit industry and                  No               Yes        No           Yes            No           Yes
       occupation included


       Log-likelihood                        -2310.2        -2109.1      -2384.7      -2358.3       -2335.1       -2307.2


a. The sample is restricted to individuals who report no discrimination in 1971, A handfil of observations with missing
occupation and industry data are deleted in order to achieve convergence. There are 5,728 observations. Additional control
variables in columns 1, 3, and 5 are the same as in column 5 of Tables 2 and 3. Additional control variables in columns 2, 4, and 6
are the same as in column 6 of Tables 2 and 3. See footnotes to Table 2 for additional details.
b. The dependent variable equals one if respondent reports retirement as his major activity during subsequent interview, zero
otherwise.
c. The dependent variable equals one if respondent does not report working or looking for work at subsequent interview, zero
otherwise.
d. The dependent variable equals one if respondent is not employed at either of the two subsequent interviews, zero otherwise.
                                          Table 10
                     Effects of Age Discrimination on Wage Changes
                    (OLS estimates, with standard errors in parentheses)


                                                           (1)              (2)              (3)

  Reports age discrimination                              -.01                               ...
                                                          (.01)             ““”

  Reports age discrimination and                           .,.             -.07
    separates from employer                                                (.02)             ““”

  Reports age discrimination and does                      ...              .02
    not separate from employer                                             (.02)             ““”

  Reports age discrimination and                           ...              ...             -.13
    experiences spell of non-employment                                                     (.04)

  Reports age discrimination and does                      ...              ...              .002
    not experience spell of non-employment                                                  (.01)


  Adjusted R’                                              .02              .02               .02


a. The dependent variable is the change in the real log wage. Changes in disability, marital status,
age, age squared, and SMSA residence are also included in the specification. N = 10,096.
