                              NBER WOR~G           PAPER SERIES




                            DOES EUROPEAN UNEMPLOYMENT
                              PROP UP AMERICAN WAGES?




                                         Donald R. Davis




                                       Working Paper 5620




                     NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                           June 1996




I would like to acknowledge, without implication, the helpful comments of Richard Brecher,
Carolyn Evans, John Leahy, Howard Shatz, David Weinstein, and Jeff Williamson.             I am also
grateful for the support for this project from the Harvard Institute for International Development.
This paper is part of NBER’s research program in International Trade and Investment.            Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

O 1996 by Donald R. Davis. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                            NBER Working Paper 5620
                                                                                          June 1996


                                DOES EUROPEAN UNEMPLOYMENT
                                  PROP UP AMERICAN WAGES?


                                              ABSTRACT



           We consider trade between a flexible wage America and a rigid real wage Europe.          In a

benchmark      case, a move from autarky to free trade doubles the European unemployment           rate,

while it raises the American unskilled wage to the high European level. Entry of the unskilled

“South” to world markets raises unemployment         in Europe. But Europe’s commitment     to the high

wage completely      insulates America from the shock.      Immigration     to America raises American

income, but lowers European income dollar-for-dollar,       while European unemployment       rises one-

for-one.     We consider a stylized game of the choice of factor market institutions.       Mitterand’s

Europe chooses a high minimum wage and Reagan’s America chooses a flexible wage for the

unskilled.    Paradoxically,   unskilled workers are worse off in Europe.    Trade equalizes wages, but

Europeans bear all of the unemployment         required to sustain the high wage.




Donald R. Davis
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 229
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
                        Does European Unemployment
                         Prop Up American Wages?

I. Introduction

        In recent years, ftior   market developments in the United States and United Kingdom

have contr~ed     sharply with those in mntinental Europe, In the US and ~        the relative wage of

the unskilled has declined significantly. In the span of a decade (1979-89) the relative wage of a

US worker in the 90th percentile to that of one in the loth percentile rose by over twenty per

cent. ~reeman   and Katz (1995)] This rising wage inequality was much less evident in continental

Europe. However, unemployment has risen sharply in Europe. The early postwar decades are now

thought of as a “Golden Age” for Europe, with unemployment rates of two to three per cent.

Beginning in the 1970s these rates have climbed dramatically, reaching double digits in many of

these countries [CEPR (1995)].

        An extensive empirical literature has considered the provenance of these factor market

developments. The studies are of two principal types ~reeman       and Katz (1995)]. The individual

country studies provide a rich account of local developments in institutions, factor supplies, and

demand conditions, The comparative (cross-count~)       studies abstract from local idiosyncrasies to

search for common themes. However, even the comparative studies suffer from an important

drawback: they remain a collection of individual stones. They do not pretend to provide a

common framework -- and the consistency ttis enforces --to provide a unified acwunt.

        This suggests the value of a third approach which maybe termed “global.” It is, in the

first instance, a general equilibrium story. Consistency is enforced by the fact that there is a

simultanmus   determination of equilibrium in all of the factor markets. Naturally, tractability limits
2

the degree of local institutional detail that maybe ~nsidered.     Considering some important

differences in factor market institutions will nonetheless be an important fature    of such an

approach,

         However, a global approach is more than just general equilibrium. It aims at a unzfied

explanation of very divergent experience. There are two reasons for seeking such a unified

account. First, many of the shocks hitting the industrial “North” are common -- for example, the

ent~ to the integrated world economy of important new trading partners from the newly-

industrialtig   “South.”l If we are to believe such accounts, we need to see how these shocks

interact with a variety of local institutions. A more subtle -- but by this more important -- reason

for considering a global approach is that the consequences even of purely local institutions and

shocks ofien depend crucially on the links to the global market.

         The mntral institutional detail that motivates the present work is the stylized

characterization of America as a flexible wage economy, and Europe as an economy in which a

variety of institutions -- unions, explicit minimum wages, etc. -- make wages more rigid Freeman

and Katz (1995)]. Thus, we will build a model of world trade between a flexible wage America

and a minimum wage Europe. In doing so, we build on the classic work of Brecher (1974z

1974b). FromKrugman(1995)         we appropriate the America vs. Europe dichotomy. The present

work has two distinctive fatures.   The first is the explicit focus on factor markets in both

countries, and particularly on their interaction. The second is the examination of a broader range

of shocks to the trading economy than have been considered in earlier work.




        1 Another source of common shocks -- those due to global technological change --is
analyzed in Davis (1996a).
                                                                                                       3

        This paper wnfirms that national factor market institutions matter. They profoundly affect

global patterns of output, employment, and wages. Surprisingly, thou~       in our context they have

no power in aaunting     for cross-county   differences in the evolution of relative wages. Often

forgotten in this mntext is that even countries with distinctive factor market institutions are linked

by world commodity prices and producers’ zero profit conditions. Hence an account of the

observed wage trends must move beyond an appeal to local institutional differences. A number of

potential accounts are mnsidered in this paper, as well as in Davis (1996~b).

        We highlight here some of the more surprising results of the analysis. In a world in which

America and Europe have identical endowments, a move from autarky to free trade doubles the

European unemployment rate while raising American wages to the European level. In effect,

Europe bears the unemployment cost of high wages for both itself and America. In addition,

Europe’s commitment to maintaining high wages effectively insulates America horn external

disturbances. Europe, thou~    is not insulated from shocks in America. For example, a rise in

America’s labor endowment (e.g. from immigration), which raises American national income,

lowers European national income dollar for dollar. It also raises European unemployment one for

one.

       We also examine the impact of the appearance of newly-industrializing     countries (NICs)

on the global stage. We find that the European commitment to maintain a high wage wholly

insulates America from this shock. In Europe, there is an incipient rise in unemployment. In effect

this implies American wages are set in Berlin, not Beijing.* Only if Europe responds with implicit

or explicit trade barriers to the NICS is America timed.   In this case, the negative employment


       2 See Freeman’s (1995) paper “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?’
4

effits    in Europe are mitigated, America sees increased trade with the NICS, and the relative wage

of the unskilled in America falls.

          When we mnsider strategic interaction in the choice of factor market institutions, it is

possible that two wuntries which in autarky prefer to maintain a minimum wage will abandon this

for a flexible wage under free trade. This muld be interpreted m what is sometimes called the

“r=      to the bottom” in labor standards.3 However, this is not a necessary, or perhaps even the

most likely outcome. As suggested above, conventional wisdom holds that America is closer to a

flexible wage economy, while Europe is closer to a minimum wage economy. This is another

equilibrium of the game we examine, and gives rise to what we term the Reagan-Mitterrand

paradox. In this case, unskilled workers are perversely worse off in the country nominally most

committed to protecting their interests. Reagan’s America and Mitterrand’s Europe shrue a

mrnmon wage. But Europe’s workers bear all the unemployment that sustains this wage,

          This paper has six parts. Section ~ examines the consequences of differing labor market

institutions for countries linked by world commodity trade in homogeneous      goods. Section III

examines the contrasting impacts on the stylized America and Europe posed by the appearance of

newly-industridizing    wuntnes.   Section IV examines the eff~s   of factor accumulation in our two

countries on wages and unemployment.       Section V considers the strategic choice of factor market

institutions, given our previous results, The final section concludes.




          3 See, for example, the essay by Ralph Nader (1993).
II. National Factor Markets and Global Trade

        A, Unemployment     in the Global Equilibrium

        Our aim is to develop a model of trade between two countries, one of which has flexible

wages, while the other imposes a binding minimum wage on unskilled labor. It is wnvenient to

develop this in three stages. The tist considers a conventional two sector general equilibrium

model of a closed economy and establishes some relations that are key to later analysis. The

second introduces a binding minimum wage within the closed economy. Finally, we show the

isomorphism between this economy and the two-country trading world of interest.

        Consider a closed flexible wage anomy.      There are two factors of productio~    skill and

labor, available in fixed supply given by ~   and LW.These are used to produce two goods.

Assume that at any common factor prices, good X is skill intensive relative to the numeraire good,

Y. Assume that preferences are homothetic, and that both goods are necessaty in consumption.

Let w be the return to unskilled labor, and r the return to skilled labor. Then the competitive cost

conditions insure that for each sector price equals unit cost:

                       Cx(w, r) = P            Cr (w, r) = 1

       Assume that marginal products are always strictly positive. Then flexible wages insure fill

employment. Factor market clearing requires that employment in the two sectors equal the world

endowment:

                       Hx+Hy=~                 LX+ LY=LW

By Walras’ law, goods market clearing is insured by equality of demand and supply of good X.

       Three relations are key to our analysis. The first is a relation between the price P in a

closed economy and the endowment ratio, h = Hz,         of that economy. The Heckscher-Ohlin
6

theorem insures that a rise in skill abundance reduces the relative price of the skill intensive good,

This relation can be expressed as:

                        P = k(h),        where    k’(h) <O.

        The second is the Stolper-Samuelson         relation between goods prices and factor prices.

Given our assumption that X is always the skill-intensive sector, this defines a monotonic relatio~

of which we focus on ordy a part. bt         w be the wage of labor in terms of the numeraire. Then by

Stolper-Samuelson:

                        w = ~),         where #‘~)    C O.

Thus given the endowment ratio of our closed economy, hw, we can determine directly the

equilibrium goods priu in the flexible wage case, P = lfiw’. Likewise, we can derive the

resulting flexible wage, #   = ~)        = ~l@W)), as well as the associated skilled wage. These

suffice to establish the basic characteristics of the world equilibrium.

        We now introduce within the closed economy a binding minimum wage for the unskilled

at rate w * > ~. This will be consistent with an equilibrium featuring diversified production if and

ordy if the relative goods price is P   ●   = @-‘ (w’) < ~. However these will be the equilibrium

goods and factor prices if and ody if empioyed factors are in the ratio h* = J -‘ ( #‘] (w”)) > hw.

The flexible rental for skill insures that it will always be filly employed. However with a binding

minimum wage, this need not be true for labor, Thus the manner in which relative employed

factors rise to h* is for the denominator to fdl via unemployed unstiled       labor. With w * give~ h*

is determined, and ~    and Lw are the fixed world endowments. Let N be the level of labor actually

employed. Then simple algebra shows that unemployment in this economy, U = LW - N, is given

by our third key relation (E3recher):
                                                                                                      7

                         U* =Lw -fl/h*        ~~”;fl,       L?,   where, ~ ‘@*) >0

        These three key relations

characterizing the minimum wage
                                                                          P
economy can be considered in Figure 1.                  s-s            P
                                                                       ———              H-O
                                                                      /+1
The Heckscher-OMn       relatio~ P = A(h),

appears in quadrant one. The Stolper-                   W

Sarnuelson relatio~ w = ~),      appears in

quadrant two. Finally, the link between

endowments, the employment ratio and                                                     Brecher
                                                                            u
the level of unemployment is depicted in

quadrant four. In the flexible wage case,       Figure 1      Determination     of Equilibrium

the employment ratio equals the endowment ratio hw. This determines wages, priws and

unemployment as ~, ~, and zero respectively. In the minimum wage case, the path of

determination is different. The given minimum wage w * > # directly determines the goods price,

the employment ratio, and the unemployment level, as P*, h*, and U* respectively.

        The basic link between the minimum wage and the appearance of unemployment in this

economy is ve~ simple. For competitive firms to pay the high wage w *, this must be supported by

an appropriate goods price P*. When the minimum wage binds, the appropriate goods price will

be attained ody if the relative scarcity of the labor intensive good rises relative to the flexible

wage equilibrium. And this will omur ody if a sufficient amount of labor is unemployed.

        We now establish an isomorphism between the closed economy with a minimum wage and

a trading world in which one economy imposes a minimum wage while the other maintains a
8

flexible wage. This relies on a mnupt      introduced by Dixit and Norman (1 980) known as the

integrated equilibrium. This establishes conditions under which trade in goods alone suffices to

establish the same world equilibrium as occurs in the closed economy with both goods and factor

mobility.

        Consider, them a world of two countries with free trade and zero transport costs. One

country -- America -- has flexible wages. The other country -- Europe -- has imposed a minimum

wage at the level w *. The technologies and preferences in the two countries are identical to those

in the closed mnomy.        The technologies are constant returns to scale, while the preferences are

identical and homothetic. Let a bar over a variable represent the level of that variable in the

integrated equilibrium. Let i index goods and j index countries. We can then describe the set of

divisions of world endowments among the two countries consistent with replicating the integrated

equilibrium. This is died     the FPE set, and is described as:




            FPE =

                                  (HAm,LAm) = ~      ai,~m(~(i),   ~(i))   i =X, Y
                                                 i




These conditions are very intuitive. If the integrated equilibrium is to be replicated, then world

unemployment must be at the same level as in the integrated economy, But unemployment cannot

arise in the flexible wage America. Hence Europe must endure the entire integrated equilibrium

level of unemployment,      U*, to maintain the wage w *. Beyond this, we need only satis~ the

conventional restrictions in terms of employed factors. These require that both countries use the
                                                                                                       9

integrated equilibrium techniques, that the integrated equilibrium output in both sectors be divided

among the countries, and that this exactly exhaust employed factors in the two countries.4 The

FPE set is depicted as the bold parallelogram in Figure 2.

        This allows us to state a key result: Under the conditions stated above, international trade

equalizes factor prices between the flexible wage and the minimum wage economies. The proof is

simply that under free and costless trade, competitive producers in the two countries face the

same goods prius,   have the same technologies, and are (at least weakly) diversified. The equality

of factor prius then follows directly from the common competitive cost conditions.



                              u              o Ewop
                                             I




                                         L
     oAm&
Figure 2    Equilibrium with Unemployment
              and Factor Pnw Equalization




         4 Since preferences are assumed to be identical and homothetic, the level of spending by
the unemployed does not matter for the pattern of world spending. Implicitly, thou~ we are
assuming that any spending by the unemployed is financed via lump sum transfers. The possibility
that the finance of the social safety net may itself fiect the level of unemployment is considered
fi.u-therin Davis (1996b).
10

        This is an important result. Even in the face of sharply divergent factor market institutions,

free commodity trade in a global market filly equalized factor prices. As we will consider more

fi~y below, this will sharply restrict the nature of shocks that can be appealed to in explaining

divergent wage trends between Europe and America.




       B. Trade and Unemployment

       We have shown how to construct a model of a trading world between a flexible wage

economy and one with a minimum wage. But we have not yet examined what impact trade has on

these economies relative to autm~.    It is convenient to start with a highly stylized example that

establishes a benchmark. Further insight into the workings of this model will be provided by the

many comparative statics in later sections.

       Take as a benchmark a world in which Europe and America are alike in every respect --

endowments, technologies, and preferences. The one exception is that America has a flexible

wage, while Europe has a minimum wage at level w *, assumed to bind in autarky. As before,

technologies are constant returns to scale. For simplicity, assume that preferences of the

representative consumer are homothetic.

       Figure 3 depicts the salient aspects of the equilibriums The t~hnological     production

frontier, CC; is common to America and Europe. In Europe, to support the wage w*, the

equilibrium price must be P*. The apposition     of demand at P* is given by a(P*). Thus under

fi.dlemployment, production at prius P* in Europe would be at A, and demand at A ‘. This implies

an incipient excess demand for X, tending to raise P and lower w below w *. The incipient fdl in


       5 This builds on a diagram of Brecher (1974a). See also Krugman (1995).
                                                                                                   11

the wage is instead stanched via a decline in unskilled employment in Europe. With goods prices

fixed at P*, this is just the Rybczynski theorem in reverse, shifiing output along a minimum wage-

constrained PPF indicated by AB. Autar@ equilibrium in Europe is at E, at which the constrained

supply exactly matches the demand at prices P *. The shift of production in Europe from A to E

reflects the contraction of employment just necessary to eliminate the excess demand indicated by

W < By contrast, in Ameri~     the autarky equilibrium features a price P > P* and so an unskilled

wage w < w* (not depicted). There is no unemployment in America.




                                  BC


Figure 3   Trade Doubles European Unemployment



       Now consider the equilibrium when America and Europe trade freely. In order to support

the minimum wage w ●
                   , Europe still needs to maintain the price P* in equilibrium. At prices P*,

the American net trade offer is indicated by M‘. Thus world equilibrium at these prices requires

that Europe be willing to make this trade at prices P*, This requires that European production be

at point F, and absorption at F‘. As demand is homothetic, and production linear at all points
 12

along ~,   the loss of employment in moving from E to F matches the pre-etisting     unemployment

indexed by AE.4

        This implies a striking contrast between Europe and America in the labor market.

Europe’s commitment to a high wage gave rise to unemployment in autarky. In our styked

example the opening of Europe to trade with America &ub/es European unemployment,           as it is

forced to absorb the fill integrated equilibrium level of unemployment to sustain W* for both. In

AmericA the absence of unemployment in autarky came at the cost to workers of a lower real

wage. However once trade commenced, American workers came to share the high European

wage even as they suffered none of the unemployment that sustains that wage. The fact that they

suffer no unemployment is a consequence of the flexible wage in America. The fact that they

nonetheless share the European high wage under trade follows from the fact that trade links

goods prices, that both countries remain diversified, and that producers still must meet price

equals unit cost conditions. In effect, trade has forced European workers to bear the burden of

high unemployment to maintain not only their own high wage, but that in America as well.

       How robust is this result? This is most easily illustrated by placing the same information in

a framework of export supply and import demand. A we have see~ the minimum wage

constraint makes European export supply at price P* multi-valued, comesponding to various

levels of unemployment.   Graphically, this implies that the constrained export supply curve has a

horizontal segment that corresponds to the Rybczynski segment of the constrained PPF. In Figure




      6 An alternative way of seeing this is to note that ~(h*; Hw, Lw ) is linear homogeneous     in
Hw and Lw for a tied h*, and that opening to America is the same as doubling the world
endowments (since Europe absorbs all of the unemployment).
                                                                                                    13

4 we depict this along with the American import demand cume for the case in which the countries

are otherwise identical.



                           P

                                   Unconstrained

        America                                     Europe
                             Constrained

                                           I
                                               AC
            >     A ~.<
                      .>”{

                    E T\                        B
 d D“                                                fSw
                           o

Figure 4    European Unemployment Props up
                    American Wages



        We now mnsider perturbations in the position of the American import demand curve, and

consider their implications for unemployment and wages. So long as the American import demand

curve cuts the export supply curve of Europe between A and B, the equilibrium price will be P *,

so the wage will be w *. In all such cases, were Europe to abandon the minimum wage policy, both

European and American wages would fdl in the free trade equilibrium. The eff~       of trade with

America on European unemployment depends on whether the American import demand curve

cuts the European export supply curve in the region TBJET, or AE. If the equilibrium is in the

region ~,   then European unemployment will more than double, reaching its maximum at B. If in

the region ET, European unemployment will be higher than in autarky, although at less than the

double rate. K, instead, the equilibrium is in the region AE, then trade with America actually
 14

lowers European unemployment. It continues to be true in all three cases, thou~      that under free

trade high American wages depend on the European minimum wage policy fi.Illyas much as

European wages do.




III. Shocks From the South: Implications for Europe and America

        The impact of growing trade with developing countries on labor markets in developed

countries has been a source of great concern. It was at the heart of the vigorous opposition of the

AFL-CIO to the North American Free Trade Agreement, and has figured prominently in the

presidential campaigns of Ross Perot and Patrick Buchanan. Correlate concerns have been raised

over rapid integration of Eastern Europe into the markets of the European Union.

       The evidence for the growing trade, particularly in manufactures, is indisputable. In the

period 1970-1990, the LDC share in manufactured imports of the United States and Europe more

than doubled -- rising to more than a third for the United States ~reeman (1995)].

Correspondingly,   the share of manufactures in total non-fiel exports from LDCS rose from less

than one-fourth in 1970 to nearly three-fourths by 1989 wood     (1994)].

       However, what role -- if any -- this played in the factor market developments in Europe

and America is still in wntest. Wood (1994) has been the strongest proponent of the view that

trade with the LDCS has mattered. Qualified support for this view has come from Learner (1995).

By contrmt, Krugman and Lawrence (1993) have argued forcefully that the volume of trade is

insufficient to account for relative wage movements in the United States. Similarly, Modi~lani

(1995, p. 7) insists that the argument that increased trade with developing countries raised

unemployment in Europe is “nonsense, reflecting economic illiteracy.”
                                                                                                     15

        Krugman (1995) examined the impact of a trade shock on a minimum wage Europe and a

flexible wage Americ~ concluding that it would raise unemployment in the former and reduce

wages in the latter. However his study, on a theoretical plane, belongs to the category earlier

identfied as “comparative.” That is, he examines this one country at a time. As we will see, the

results change importantly when we turn to a global approach     in which Europe and America exist

within the same world mnomy.’

        We begin again with a flexible wage Americ~ and a minimum wage Europe. For

simplicity, and without loss of generality, we shifi our base case to consider that in which P* is

the American autarky price. This is also the European autarky price with the minimum wage in

place. And so when free trade is allowed between America and Europe, P* is the equilibrium

price. Europe has the same level of unemployment as in autarky, and both have the same wages in

autarky as under free trade,

       We now consider the introduction of a previously isolated regio~ which we will call the

MCS, to the American and European free trade system. Asume        that at prices P*, the NICS are

importers of the good X. Our mncem will be to trace through the implications of this for Europe

and America. In our diagrq     this can be represented as a nghtward shifi of the joint Arnerican-

NIC import demand curve. However, given Europe’s commitment to its minimum wage, the

world price P* does not change (Figure 5).




         7 This comparative theoretical approach is at work as well in an argument by the Center
for Economic Policy Research (1995, p, 53). They argue that evidence, as in Lawrence and
Slaughter (1993), exculpating Stolper-Samuelson in Arneric~ likewise refites claims that trade
with the NICS may have raised unemployment in Europe. However, as the discussion here makes
clear, one r-n      that increased trade with the NICS may not account for falling wages in America
is precisely that it As raise unemployment in Europe.
 16

        At an unchanged world price, the American import demand is unchanged. So the US

absorbs none of the imports from the NICS. American wages continue to be protected by the

European mmrn.itment to a high wage policy, In Europe, by mntrast, there will be a surge of

imports from the NICS.E The impact of this is similar to that analyzed above. Given the European

commitment to a high wage policy, this will not show up in reduced wages, but rather in higher

unemployment.

                           P




Figure 5    Entry of the NICS to the Global Economy



       This integrated global ~onomy    presents an important contrast with the results of

Krugman (1995). There he treated the American and European cases as though they were part of

different global economies. However, as we see here, the links via goods trade are crucial for




        8 The actual pattern of trade -- whether MCS deliveries are to America or Europe -- is
inconsequential. The important point is that the price P* defines the world net offer to Europe.
Europe must absorb this net offer to maintain the price P*, and so accept the employment
consequences.
                                                                                                     17

understanding the broader story. So long as Europe maintains a commitment to both free trade

and a high wage policy, Arnenw is filly insulated from the NIC shock.

        As this suggests, the appearance of the ~Cs      might severely strain Europe’s commitment

to both a high wage policy and free trade. We will wnsider here the mnsequences         for Europe and

America of European restrictions on imports. We will analyze this for the case of a tariff, although

alternative policies would have similar implications.

        Asume,    them that Europe imposes a tariff on imports of Y, while maintaining its

mmmitment     to the wage w *. The latter commitment is equivalent to maintaining its domestic

price at P*. Hence so long as European imports are wealdy positive the world relative price of Y

must fd below P* by exactly the amount of the tariff. The tariff has two effects in Europe. It

raises revenue proportional to the remaining imports, and it attenuates the negative employment

eff’s   of the NIC shock. With the higher relative price of X resulting from Europe’s trade

restrictions, America experiences a surge of trade with the NICS. Moreover, the free trade,

flexible wage America finds that the resulting higher price of X has served to depress wages a la

Stolper-Samuelson.   Of course America suffers no unemployment.

        In sum the appearance of the NICS gives rise to a trade shock. America is fully insulated

from this shock as a result of Europe’s commitment to a high wage policy. Europe, by contrast,

finds the rests of this policy escalating sharply as it is forced to endure ever higher levels of

unemployment to sustain the high wages. Its commitment to maintaining both free trade and high

wages is under assault. If it responds by implicitly or explicitly rsising barriers to the NICS’

exportable (Y), then trade with the NICS is shunted toward America and the world price of the

labor intensive good falls. By Stolper-Samuelson    this pulls the American wage down.
18

IV. Global Labor Supplies, European Unemployment

        A. Discussion

        Leading labor economists have identified cross-count~        differences in the evolution of the

labor force as an important explanatory factor in the divergent evolution of wages between

mntinental Europe and the United States and United Kingdom. The underlying theoretical

framework for these studies makes the acknowledged “stark” assumption of a steady trend in the

growth of the SW intensity of labor demand. Under this assumptio~          a decline in the growth rate

of the skill intensity of the labor force will induce a rise in the relative wages of the skilled. If the

degree of substitutability between skilled and unskilled is sufficiently low, then these supply

changes could account for all -- even more than all -- of the obsewed rise in the skill premium in

the United States. In any case, the story matches reasonably well the experience of the United

States, Brit@   Japan and France Katz and Murphy (1 992), Ka~           et. al. (1995)].

        As insightful as this line of research hm bee~ it would be more satis~ng           to consider this

in a theoretical framework in which the cross-country structure of labor demand is endogenous. It

might seem obvious that cross-wuntry      differences in the levels and growth rates of relative factor

supplies should help to explain differences in relative wages. However, this need not be true when

countries are linked by commodity trade. In fact, the absence of such a relation is the central

message of SamuelSon’s Factor Price Equalization theorem (1949). Under the conditions in which

that theorem is valid, the structure of relative wages depends on the evolution of the global labor

force.9 However cross country differences in the imposition        or growth rates of the labor force



       9 In fact, this extends to a more general setting. It is straightfomard to write down a
model in which orIIy a subset of the world enjoys ftior price equalization ~avis, Weinste~ et.al.
                                                                                                    19

will contribute nothing to an understanding of divergent wage trends, Given that we have seen

that our model with unemployment likewise yields factor price equalizatio~     we w    likewise

conclude that differential labor for~ growth will not help to account for divergent wage

pattems,l”

        Although changes in relative factor supplies will not play a role in amounting for cross-

country dtierences   in relative wages, they will be essential for understanding the evolution of

unemployment in Europe. There will be a correlate to the Factor Price Equalization theorem: The

level of European unemployment depends on global -- not local -- factor supphes. One

consequence of this is that dramatic changes in American factor accumulation -- the shifts due to

baby booms and busts -- may leave their most profound mark not on American but European

labor markets. By contrast, the unemployment rate in Europe will depend importantly on where

factor accumulation occurs, The conditions under which European unemployment falls are less

stringent when factor accumulation is in Europe than in America.

       The model also features an important asymmetry. The fixed European minimum wage

insulates America from all shocks caused by factor accumulation in Europe. But the reverse is not

true. Factor accumulation in America has very profound effects on Europe.



(1996)]. Subject to the general restrictions underlying FPE [see Dixit and Norman (1980)], the
site of endowment changes among those sharing FPE matters neither for comparative nor
absolute wages.

         10It is tempting at this juncture to dismiss the factor price equalization framework by
noting that in f~ there tie been divergent wage trends. This would suggest investigating
alternative frameworks in which local relative factor supplies do matter for local relative wages.
This is a promising direction of research but not that pursued here. &we saw in Section III, one
path towards accounting for the divergent trends is to introduce differential trade policies. Davis
(1996~b) considers alternative accounts, including differential patterns of local technological
change and cross-muntry differences in the evolution of public finance.
20

         One striking example concerns the immigration of unskilled labor to America. Consider

the case of the Marie] boatlift, which raised the labor force in Miami by seven per cent. Card

(1990) has demonstrated       that this had no appreciable impact on wages or unemployment in

Miami. This is just as our model would predict. However, the model suggests that the drastic

eff-s    should have been found not in Miami, but Madrid and Marseilles. In fact, the model

predicts that Euro-        national inwme will fall dollar-for-dollar with the rise in American national

income, while European unemployment rises one-for-one with the incremental employment of the

M~ielifm.ll     Having committed itself to the fixed wage, Europe must brave the potentially harsh

winds of external shocks.

         In the mnventional    Heckscher-Ohlin    framework the central theorem dealing with

endowment changes is that of Rybczynsti. It says that at fixed goods prices, an increase in the

endowment of a factor leads to a more than proportional increase in output in the sector that uses

that ftior    intensively, and a contraction in the other sector. At the initial equilibrium price this

would be exp~ed        to create an excess supply of the good that uses that factor intensively,

lowering its equilibrium relative price, and by Stolper-Samuelson       reducing the return to that

factor. In the wnventional     setting, at fixed prices, changes in the endowment of one country have

no effect on output supplies in the other.




         11The story will be exactly true if Cuba is thought of u beiig fi~y isolated from world
markets and if the emigrants are homogeneous with American unskilled labor. A qualitatively
similar, though more nuand,      story emerges if migration is endogenous, but comes from a
country integrated into the global trading system. I plan to examine this in fiture work.
                                                                                                        21

                   B. Derivation of Principal Results

        We now turn to a systematic evaluation of the impact of factor accumulation in our

present model. We begin by wnsidering the implications for the global ewnomy, and ther~ turn to

examine how these eff~s        are distributed according to where the accumulation takes place. We

continue to assume throughout that Europe maintains the minimum wage at W* and that both

economies are diversified.

        Several observations will make the derivation of the results more transparent. Europe’s

commitment to maintain the high wage w * is likewise a commitment to maintain a domestic

relative price P’, as given by the zero profit conditions for the two goods. With free trade, this

will also be the world relative price. We saw above that the common goods prices yield factor

price equalization. Cost-minimizing firms with identical technologies will then pick the same

factor intensities in both countries, denoted hx and hy With P* fixed in all equilibria that we

consider, these factor intensities will also be fixed. Because of identical and homothetic demand,

P* also fixes the ratio in which X and Y will be consumed. This implies directly that world output

at equilibrium must be supplied in the same proportion. This absorbs factors in a certain

proportio~     denoted by h*, This represents both the minimum skill-intensity that the world

mnomy        needs to yield the wage w ● in a flexible wage world, and the actual skill-abundace   of

total employed factors in the world with at least one economy with a minimum wage at w*.

Unemployment will arise when the actual world endowment, hw, is such that hw < h *. The

Rybczynski Theorem is usually stated for a fixed exogenous price. Here we consider the case in

which the price is held 6xed by the commitment of Europe to maintain the minimum wage.

Finally, recall that unemployment can be written as U* = Lw - ~/h*.
22

         Although our principal interest is in the effects of factor accumulatio~    it is convenient to

begin with aversion of the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem for trade between a flexible wage economy

and a minimum wage economy. ht         M denote the skill to labor ratio in flexible wage America.

Given a minimum wage w * that binds where applied, and that both mnomies             are diversified, the

world employment ratio of skill to labor is fixed at h *. The flexible wage America will be an

exporter of the skill intensive good if and only if W > h*. The minimum wage Europe will have a

complementary trade pattem.The easiest way to see how the Heckscher-Ohlin theorem works

here is simply to delete Europe’s unemployed from Figure 2. They do not contribute income, so

consume ordy from transfers that they will spend in the same pattern as those employed. Having

done this, our diagram just bmmes      the conventional Heckscher-Ohlin    model, although now in

terms of emplopd    factors.

         We now turn to the results mncerning accumulation of factors. A rise in the world

endowment of skill expands the output of both goods proportionally. Employment rises to

maintain the ratio of employed factors at h *. If the skill accumulation occurs in flexible wage

Ameriq     it will have conventional Rybczynski effects, raising the output of X more than

proportionally and decreasing the local output of Y [see Figure 6]. However this also tiects

Europe, which has a rise in employment at rate UU’ = N        = &     /h*. It has Rybczynski effects

skewed the other directio~ with output of Y rising more than proportionally,        and output of X

declining. The net impact of the output changes in the two countries must, as noted, raise output

of X and Yin proportion to the initial world output.
                                                                                                    23



                                                        O*I
                                        f   L
             t}                                         10*
        H




         o                                          r
Figure 6 Skill Accumulation in Flexible Wage America



       If instead the skill accumulation occurs in minimum wage Europe, we have a very different

picture. In Europe we ftil to have conventional Rybczynski effects. Incipient excess supply of X

threatens to raise the wage above w * at the initial level of employment. This allows employment

to rise by N      = ti   / h ●. That is, total employment of factors in Europe has risen in exact

proportion to total initial employment in the world as a whole, h*. Thus, output in Europe

expands propofiional to initial world output. America is entirely unaffected, as its net trade vector

is fifly determined by the constant price ratio P*.

       Now mnsider the effect of accumulation of unskilled labor. At the global level,

unemployment rises by the fill increment to the labor force. There is no effect on global output. If

the accumulation occurs in minimum wage Europe, unemployment rises directly with no effect on
24

output in either country. However, if accumulation of unskilled labor happens in Arneric~ there

are very dramatic sh.ifis [see Figure 7]. America continues to have conventional Rybczynski

efftis,   raising the output of Y more than proportionally, and reducing the output of X. Income in

America rises linearly, so &    = w* ALA.Europe is also strongly tiected.   In fact, European

unemployment rises one for one with accumulation of unskilled labor in America, And European

inwme fds dollar for dollar with the rise in American income. Its shifi in output exactly offsets

that of Americ~ so that global output is unchanged.




                                                   *I




                                           1       ‘L’

Figure 7    Unskilled Labor Accumulation in America
                                                                                                   25

V. The Reagan-Mitterrand Paradox

        So fw we have treated the policy choice of flexible wages versus a minimum wage as

determined exogenously. Yet these institutions have changed over time. One of the most

noteworthy aspects of this change has been the sharp decline in private sector union membership

in the United States in recent decades. The constellation of forces that led to declining strength of

labor in the US and a continuing strength in Europe are numerous. In this section we consider a

highly stylized version of this social choice problem. We imagine that the choice of factor market

institutions is the work of a single decisionmaker representing each “country” -- Reagan in

Americ~ and Mtterrand     in Europe.

       The choice each must face is whether to impose a minimum wage at w* or to maintain a

filly flexible wage, Under this assumptio~   and given the symmetry of underlying economic

conditions, there are four types of payoffs that sewe as arguments to their social welftie finction:

       F: Define F to be the symmetric payoff when both choose a flexible wage policy.

       M: Define A4to be the symmetric payoff when both choose to impose the same binding

minimum wage. We take as the central case that in which this results in an even division of the

resulting unemployment. 12

       T: This is the payoff when a country that has flexible wages while the counterpart has a

minimum wage. “T’ reflects the fact that this country comes out on top in the bargai~ enjoying

the higher wage without having to suffer unemployment.



        ‘2 This is the division that one would anticipate if all other aspects of symmetry were
preserved but European and American goods were imperf’t substitutes. One can consider our
case as the limit of a sequence of anomies     in which the substitutability of European and
American goods rises toward tinity.
26

        B: This is the payoff to a country when it has a minimum wage while the counterpart has a

flexible wage. “B’ reflects the fti   that this count~ comes out on bottom in the bargai~ enjoying

the higher wage but bearing the burden of high unemployment for both countries.

                                            CHART ONE


                   Reagan
                                          Flexible Wages                    Minimum Wage
 Mitterand            ~ur, ~)

       Flexible Wages                           (F, F)                            (T, B)

       Minimum     Wage                        (B, T)                             MM



We begin with a few general observations. First, both Reagan and Mitterrand must always rank

T ~ M. That is, if a country can maintain the wage w *, it always prefers that the other country

bear the burden of unemployment that supports it. Thus, even if each in autarky would choose to

impose the minimum wage, this game will never support a trade equilibrium in which both

maintain the minimum wage. As well, it will always be the case that M > B. That is, one would

always prefer to share the unemployment burden of maintaining the wage w * rather than have to

bear it alone. It will also be true that T > F. This is equivalent to the observation that America

enjoyed (conventional) gains from trade in our general equilibrium above, and that on top of this

w = w* for the wuntry with outcome T. Thus for both muntries in all cases, T > F, and T > M >

B. The games thus diffw only in two dimensions: wherein this ordering below T that F goes for

each and whether the rankings by Reagan and Mitterrand are the same. In the following we will

restrict our attention to pure strategy equilibria on the grounds that major institutional features of

the labor market cannot be changed from day to day, or perhaps even born year to year.
                                                                                                     27

        We now consider the equilibria resulting from the game between Reagan and Mitterrand.

Chart Two empfiis         two points. The first concerns the type of equilibria that emerge. Here

there are ody two basic types. In one of the~         both America and Europe allow a flexible wage. In

the other type of equilibriu~    one country bears the entire burden of unemployment for sustaining

the high wage. Notice that both countries imposing a minimum wage is not an equilibrium. The

-nd     point from Chart Two is that the type of equilibrium is determined by the countries’

relative rardcings of the flexible outcome, F, and the outcome of bearing alone the cost of

supporting the minimum wage, B.

                                             CHART TWO


                     Reagan


                 F> B                       ~, F)                   (T, B)
                                   m
                                                            !
                                   I        ~,   T)         I (B,
                                                                T)or (T,
                                                                       B)

        We will consider the characterization that America has flexible wages relative to those in

Europe a a suggestion that Reagan ranks the equilibrium in which both have flexible wages as

preferable to one in which America ends up on bottom. In this case, flexible wages area dominant

strategy for Reagan. However, we may leave open the question of whether Mitterrand rds            F ~

B or the reverse. If Mitterrand does rh     F > B, then the equilibrium will feature flexible wages in

both auntries.    This includes the case in which both rti      M ~ F > B. This wou[d be a case in

which each would impose the minimum wage in autarky, but both turn to flexible wages under

trade. In common terms this maybe viewed m a “race to the bottom.”
28

         However, a race to the bottom is not a necessary outcome. Nor may it be the most likely

outcome. Our earlier discussion suggested that Mitterrand may have a stronger wrnmitment        to

maintaining the minimum wage. Thus Reagan ranks F > B, and Mitterrand the reverse. h this

case, the equilibrium f-tures   a flexible wage in America and a minimum wage in Europe. Where

do the unskilled end up better o~ This is precisely the case analyzed earlier. They end up better

off in Reagan’s America than in Mitterrand’s Europe. The reason is that they both enjoy the same

high wage, but European workers must endure the unemployment that sustains it.




VI. Conclusion

         This paper has one overarching message. Even when factor markets are strictly local, with

idiosyncratic institutional features, they cannot be considered in isolation when goods markets are

global. This strongly suggests the importance of a unified “global” approach to explaining recent

factor market developments in Europe and America, This will be an important complement to

existing studies, which are either of individual countries or comparative.

         A striking example of the importance of the global perspective emerges in the contrasting

effects of trade on a flexible-wage America and a minimum-wage Europe. In our central example,

trade doubles the European unemployment rate while leading American wages to converge to the

high European level.

         Moreover, commodity trade leads local institutional f~tures   to have important spillover

effects on other countries. These go fm beyond the simple general equilibrium fact that they will

tiect   the level of wages and the composition of production. They may findarnentally alter the

nature of a country’s relation with the international environment. For example, if Europe and
                                                                                                        29

America are both flexible wage economies, then the entry of the NICS to world markets may

depress wages in each. However, we saw that when Europe imposed a minimum wage, it

absorbed the fi.dl impact of the NIC shock and wholly insulated America from its effects. That is,

a lmd European institutional f=ture has sharply altered America’s relation to the trading world.

          The local institutional f~tures   may likewise introduce important asymmetries in the

relations between the countries. As noted, America is wholly insulated from external shocks,

including factor supply shocks in Europe. By contrast, factor supply shocks in America have very

powefil     effis   in Europe. A striking example owurs with a rise in the unskilled labor force in

America. This raises American income, yet lowers European income dollar for dollar, while

raising European unemployment one for one.

          The importance of considering the links via commodity trade is particularly important

when thinking about the evolution of wages. In spite of important differences in factor market

institutions, which in a closed economy would induce differences in factor prices, goods trade

here insures fill factor price equalization. Perversely, labor ends up worst off in the country

nominally most supportive of its aspirations.

          These powerfi.d effects of trade suggest that muntnes   must consider international markets

when designing local labor market institutions. When we allow for a strategic choice of labor

market institutions, we see that it is possible that two countries may resofi to a low flexible wage

under trade even if in autarky they support a minimum wage, In common terms, this maybe

viewed as a “ram to the bottom.” However this is not a neces~         result of integration of global

goods markets. Nor, perhaps, does it seem to be the one most in accord with stylized accounts of

American and European experience. This account, which emphasizes the relatively strong
30

European commitment to labor, may actually signal that American labor has received a free ride --

high wages supported by unemployment in Europe.

          This paper has derived these results in a stylized model. Care should be taken in reading

these results too rdily    into actual historical experience. Nonetheless the issue that it raises of the

powefil    interaction between local factor market institutions and global goods markets are no

doubt very important. And the results are sufficiently provocative to warrant closer examination.
References

Berm~      E., Bound, J. And Giliches, Z. (1994) “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Lsbor within
         US Manutiri.ng:     Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures,” QuarterZy
         Journal of Economics, May, 109,367-97.
Brecher, Richard A. (1974a) “Minimum Wage Rates and the Pure Theory of International Trade,”
         Quarter~Joumal     of fionomics, 88, No. 1,98-116.
Brecher, Richard A. (1974b) “Optimal Commercial Policy for a Minimum-Wage Economy,”
        Jourml of International Economics, 4, No. , 139-149.
Card, David (1990) “The Impactof the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,”
        Industriai&-Labor-Rebtiom-Review;          43(2), January, 245-57.
Center for Economic Policy Research [CEPR] (1995) Unemplo~ent: Choices for Europe, in the
        series “Monitoring European Integration 5,” London: CEPR.
Davis, Donald R. (1996a) “Technology, Relative Wages, and Unemployment in a Global
        Ewnomy,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Davis, Donald R. (1996b) “Unemployment and Finance of a Social Safety Net in a Global
        Economy,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Davis, Donald R., Weinste@ David E., et al. (1996) “The Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Model of
        Trade: Why Does it Fail? When Does it Work?” mimeo, Harvard University.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Norm-       Victor F. (1980) ~eo~ o/ International Tr&, Cambridge:
        Cambridge University Press.
European Commission Directorate-General for Employment, Industrial Relations and Social
        Mtirs (1995) Emplo~ent        in Europe, Brussels: ECSC-EC-EAEC.
Freem~ Richard B. (1995) “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?”, Journal of fionomic
        Perspectives, Summer, 9:3, 15-32.
Freem~ Richard B. md Ka@ Lawrence F. eds. (1995) Dlflerences d             Changes in Wage
        Structures, Chicago: University of Chicago.
Ka@ Lawrence F., et.al. (1995) “A Comparison of Changes in the Structure of Wages in Four
        OECD Countries,” in Freemq Wchard B. and Katz, Lawrence F. eds, (1995) DZflerences
        d     Changes in Wage Structures, Chicago: University of Chicago.
Krugmw Paul (1995) “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences,” mimeo Stanford
        University, prepared for the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, April 6-7, 1995.
Learner, Edward (1995) “In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Effats Between Trade and US Wages”
        mimeo, Yale and UCLA.
Learner, Edward (1994) “Trade, Wages and Revolving Door Ideas” NBER Working Paper No.
        4716, Apd.
Modigliani, Franco (1995) “The Shame&l Rate of Unemployment in the EMS: Causes and
        Cures,” mima.
Mus@ Michael A. (1979) “The Two-Sector Model in Terms of its Dual: A Geometric
        Exposition” Jouh       of International Economics, 9, No. 4,513-526.
Nader, Ralph et al. (1993) “Introduction: Free Trade and the Decline of Democracy,” in me
        Case Against Free Tr&: GA ~ NAFTA, and the Globalization of Corporate Power,
        San Francisco: Earth Island Press.
Samuelso~ Paul A. (1949) “International Factor Price Equalization Once Agaiq” reprinted in
       Jagdish Bhagwati, cd., International Tr&: Selected Redngs,   2ti ed, (1987)
       Cambridge: MIT.
