                             NBER WORKING        PAPER SERIES




                          TRADE SENSITIVITY, TECHNOLOGY,
                             AND LABOR DISPLACEMENT




                                       John T. Addison
                                       Douglas A, Fox
                                     Christopher J. Ruhm




                                     Working Paper 5621




                    NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 1996




We would like to thank Eli Berman and Lori Kletzer for helpful comments on an earlier version
of this paper. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Labor Studies and International
Trade and Investment.    Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by John T. Addison, Douglas A. Fox and Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper 5621
                                                                                         June 1996


                             TRADE SENSITIVITY, TECHNOLOGY,
                                AND LABOR DISPLACEMENT

                                               ABSTRACT



        This study examines the relationship       between international       trade, technology,     and the

probability   and consequences    of job displacement,     using data on displaced workers as well as

those at risk of job dislocation for 1984-86 and 1989-91.         Workers employed in industries with

elevated import shares and high levels of investment in computers appear to have increased rates

of job loss, with the results for export penetration varying on the time period examined.               These

risks do not, however,      translate   into unfavorable    postdisplacement     labor market       outcomes.

Indeed, there is some evidence that individuals displaced from export-oriented          sectors have fewer

adjustment    problems   than the generality    of dislocated   workers, while those terminated          from

sectors investing    heavily in computer technologies       are more likely to retain health insurance

coverage.     That being said, our findings are frequently sensitive to the choice of specifications

and time periods.




John T. Addison                                            Douglas A. Fox
Department of Economics                                    Pennsylvania State University -Shenango
University of Hull                                         147 Shenango Avenue
Nottingham Road                                            Sharon, PA 16146
Hull HU6 7RX
GREAT BRITAIN

Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina Greensboro
Greensboro, NC 27412-5001
and NBER
                        Trade Sensitivity, Technology, and Labor Displacement

I. Introduction

        The last 25 years have witnessed a substantial growth of inequality throughout most

industrialized     nations.   In the United States this has taken the form of an increasingly unequal

distribution     of earnings, whereas in Europe it has resulted in a dramatic rise in joblessness. 1 The

sources of these trends have been the subject of much study. Two main factors, technological

change and international trade, have received the bulk of attention.

         Most economists have emphasized the role of technology, arguing that skill-biased

technological      improvements     have reduced the relative wages of less skilled workers in the

United States and, given its lower levels of labor market flexibility, resulted in substantially

higher unemployment           for such workers in Europe. Conversely, a minority of researchers believe

that international trade is of key importance.       They hold that the growth of trade with less

developed countries has led to a dramatic increase in the stock of available unskilled workers,

thereby reducing the returns to “raw” labor. Trade has also received more attention from the

public and policy-makers;         for instance, much of the debate over NAFTA reflected concerns over

its likely effects on wages and job destruction.

         Trade or technology could, in principle, increase inequality without causing any

employment        consequences.     However, this would require wages to exhibit an exceptionally       high

degree of downward flexibility, so that it is more likely that employment reductions will be one




] For example, the differential in log wages between the ninetieth and the tenth percentile of U.S.
males grew from 1.15 in 1969 to 1.49 in 1989 (Katz, Loveman, and Blanchflower, 1995). The
male unemployment rate in European OECD countries averaged 3 .4 °/0 over the 1974-79 period
but then trended upward to an average of 8.1 % between 1990 and 1993 (Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development, 1995).


                                                        Page I
important consequence of trade or technology shocks. And, unless these can be accomplished

through attrition, some persons will suffer permanent layoffs.

        Displacements      are of particular concern because they initially increase unemployment

and subsequently   result in substantial and lasting reductions in earnings.2 This has led to a

variety of government efforts aimed at aiding dislocated workers.      Significantly,   despite the lack

of research confirming the contribution of increased economic integration to labor displacement,

special assistance has long been available, through categorical programs, to those perceived as

losing jobs as the result of international trade (e.g. the Trade Assistance Adjustment Program

and, most recently, the NAFTA Transitional Adjustment Program),3 By contrast, special support

has generally not been provided to workers dislocated by reason of changes in technology,          even

though this might be a more important source ofjob loss and reemployment          difficulties.

        This paper provides new evidence on the relationship between trade sensitivity,

technological   change, and labor displacement.     We analyze both the exposure to job loss and a

variety of postdisplacement     outcomes.   In addition to providing a more detailed analysis than

previous investigations,    data are employed on workers who are either displaced or at risk of job

loss for the intervals 1984-86 and 1989-91, with postdisplacement      outcomes being measured in

1988 and 1992, respectively.      This allows us to examine whether the relationship between trade



2 For instance, Ruhrn(1991 ) estimates that the long-term earnings losses of displaced workers
are at least 10°/0per year, while Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan (1993) indicate still larger
reductions, in the region of 25°/0, for higher-tenure (over 5 years) workers who change jobs.
3 The rationale for these programs is that it is equitable to compensate those whose loss of
employment makes possible the societal gains resulting from increasingly open economies. This
case has also been supplemented by second-best efficiency arguments, emphasizing the ability of
producer interests to jeopardize firther relaxation of trade barriers, unless social clauses or
adjustment programs are inserted into trade agreements. Ehrenberg (1994) provides a detailed
discussion of the importance of adjustment policies in assisting the process of economic
integration.


                                                     Puge 2
or technology and the probability or consequences of economic dislocation has been stable over

time – although our technology measure pertains to a single intermediate year.

          Inevitably the issues involved are more complex than our simple regression analysis

allows.   For example, much of our discussion focuses on relative outcomes among individuals

experiencing     displacements.     This neglects the consequences for persons who, though technically

nondislocated,    may nevertheless have been affected by heightened international trade or changes

in technology,     Nonetheless,     we believe that this first-pass empirical procedure is justified by the

paucity of relevant research in the job loss literature, in contrast to the far more numerous studies

examining how trade and technology affect the relative wages of employed individuals.

          To summarize the findings which follow, we report that persons employed in industries

with high import shares or rapid technological         change, as proxied by investments     in computers,

are more likely than other workers to experience job displacements;          more ambiguous results are

obtained for the industry export variable.        There is also some evidence of improved

reemployment       prospects, following the displacement event, for persons previously employed in

export-oriented     industries, but there is little indication that the probability of avoiding

joblessness    or the duration of any resulting spells is strongly correlated with either the trade or

the technology variables.         Similarly, there is little evidence that reemployment    earnings are

materially affected by trade or technology developments           in the predisplacement    industry,

although persons leaving positions in sectors with high rates of computer investment do appear

more likely to retain or obtain health insurance coverage.




                                                         Page 3
II.   Previous Literature

        An extensive literature has recently developed examining how increases in international

trade have affected the relative wages (and the employment     levels) of less skilled workers.    The

approach most commonly used by labor economists has involved calculating the “factor content”

of imports and exports to estimate the changes in factor endowments resulting from trade; these

changes are then combined with assumed demand and supply elasticities of labor to calculate

how trade has affected equilibrium wages.4 Conversely, trade economists have more frequently

focused on changes in relative prices, noting inter al. that the threat of import competition could

affect prices, and consequently wages and employment,       even if no trade actually occurs.s

        Generally, the effect of technological   change has not been estimated directly; rather the

proportion of the time trends which cannot be attributed to changes in trade or other observed

factors (e.g. demographic characteristics,   unionization rates, and so on) is assumed to result from

skill-biased technological   change. This residual approach is somewhat unsatisfactory,     most

obviously because any errors in calculating the effects of the other factors will lead to

(potentially serious) errors in the estimated effect of technology.   This problem has led some

researchers (e.g. Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994) to include direct proxies for technological

improvements,   which is also the approach used in our analysis.G



4 A series of articles in the Summer 1995 issue of the Journal ojEconomic Perspectives (viz.
Freeman, 1995; Richardson, 1995; and Wood, 1995) provides an excellent introduction into
research on these issues. Useful alternative sources are Burtless (1995) and the January 1995
issue of the Economic Po/icy Review, published by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
which is entirely devoted to an examination of wage trends in the United States.
5 Learner (1 994) provides a forcefil exposition of this argument.
G In addition, Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1 994) show that the ratio of skilled to unskilled
workers has increased primarily within industries as would be expected with skill-biased
technological change, rather than across industries as might occur if international trade were the
dominant factor.
          Employment   reductions caused by trade or technology maybe accompanied by falling

wages or greater rates of job attrition.   Other things being equal, greater wage flexibility will be

associated with smaller numbers of permanent layoffs. This notwithstanding,         decreases in real

wages or heightened quits do not provide the same stimulus for policy activism as j ob

displacements.’    Conversely, increasing employment may coexist with rising import shares if

foreign production is more elastic than domestic supply. Nonetheless,        if product demand is

controlled for, growth of imports will generally be associated with some disemployment         effect.

Technological     change has a more ambiguous impact. The new technologies reduce the need for

labor, at given levels of output, but product demand will increase as cost-savings     are passed onto

customers.     Displacement   per se is still more complicated, since net employment   could decline,

without permanent layoffs, if firms are able sufficiently to reduce the rate of hires or induce

quits.s

          The consensus of much of the early literature (e.g. Grossman, 1987; Mann, 1988;

Dickens, 1991 ) was that rising imports were responsible for, at most, only a small portion of the

domestic employment      reduction observed in trade sensitive industries.   This result, coupled with

the increased relative use of skilled workers across a variety of industries at a time of rising skill

differentials, led most researchers to conclude that technological change, rather than international

competition,    has been the most important factor explaining changes in relative wages and




7 Furthermore, union bargaining strategies could even be associated with rising wages in some
declining industries (Lawrence and Lawrence, 1985).
8 Kletzer’s (1995) study of trade and job displacement attempts to account for these types of
labor market transitions.


                                                    Page 5
employment during the last 15 years.9 However, some more recent studies (e.g. Freeman and

Katz, 199 1; Revenga, 1992), using both quantity-based       and price-based measures of import

competition,    obtain much stronger trade disemployment     effects. 10

        There have been relatively few studies of the relationship between trade and displacement

and, to our knowledge, none that explicitly link technological change to probabilities        of j ob loss.

Using data from the Displaced Worker Supplement (DWS) to the January 1984 Current

Population     Survey (CPS) and the NBER Trade and Immigration data file, Kruse (1988) reports

that an increase in the import share of the worker’s predisplacement       industry is positively

associated with the subsequent duration of joblessness.      He argues that this occurs because

workers displaced from high import change industries have characteristics         that are associated

                                                                                                          II
with increased adjustment difficulties and because import growth is related to industry decline.

Shelbume andBednarzik(1993)          provide evidence that trade sensitive industries are

geographically    concentrated,   which increases the impact of job losses on local unemployment

rates and makes it more difficult for displaced workers to adjust. 12



9 The link between wages and employment is quite direct. Thus, for example, Juhn, Murphy, and
Topel (1991) show that both wages and working hours declined most over time for those at the
bottom of the earnings distribution in the United States. See alsoTopel(1993).
10Borjas and Ramey ( 1995) provide a recent quantity-based extension, which reports that
international trade could explain roughly one half the decline in employment in highly
concentrated trade sensitive industries. The authors argue that the observed increase in wage
inequality in the U.S, can be directly linked to this phenomenon, since these industries are
believed to share rents with their workers and also to employ a disproportionate number of less
educated individuals who bear the brunt of the adjustment to rising imports. See also Borjas and
Ramey (1994), and Wood (1995).
11Similarly, Bednarzik (1993) indicates that workers in import-sensitive industries are more
likely than those in export-sensitive industries to be female, black, Hispanic, young, and part-
time workers and that they are less likely to be college graduates and to hold professional,
managerial, or technical jobs.
12They do point out, however, that the geographical concentration of export-sensitive industries
on the one hand and import-sensitive sectors on the other does not coincide.


                                                    Page 6
           Addison, Fox, and Ruhm ( 1995) provide a more comprehensive            albeit descriptive

treatment of the relationship between trade sensitivity, displacement rates, and reemployment

outcomes.       Their investigation,   which is restricted to workers employed in or displaced from

manufacturing        industries, uses data from the January 1988 DWS matched with industry trade

data provided by the U.S. Commerce Department for the period 1982 through 1986. The authors

demonstrate that exposure to trade is positively associated with risk of job loss but uncover little

indication that import or export penetration rates are correlated with postdisplacement           adjustment

problems, as measured by subsequent joblessness,            earnings, or health insurance benefits.

           Most recently, Kletzer (1995) has studied the impact of trade sensitivity on displacement

rates, reemployment        probabilities,   and changes in earnings, using displacement   data from the

1984 through 1992 DWSS matched with trade information contained in the NBER Trade and

Immigration        data file. Industry-level   displacement probabilities are shown to be increasing

(decreasing) in the growth of imports (exports), although the import change coefficient estimate

is statistically    insignificant. ]3 Kletzer also examines the probability of reemployment,       using

individual data and measuring trade sensitivity by levels (rather than changes) in imports and

exports.    Statistically insignificant results are obtained for both trade variables, once

demographic        characteristics   are controlled for. Finally, neither exports nor imports emerges as a

statistically   significant determinant of postdisplacement       earnings changes.

           Overall, the impact of trade on displacement probabilities and subsequent adjustment

difficulties appears rather muted and we know even less about the effects of investments               in




13In a separate specification capturing trade sensitivity via changes in domestic prices of the
import goods (relative to the aggregate price level), and which controls for changes in GDP and
industry, the import measure also narrowly fails to achieve significance at the .10 level.


                                                         Page 7
technology.     As indicated above, this is only one part of the story since trade or technology could

reduce total employment     or increase income inequality without leading to higher rates of

permanent layoffs, Displacement is the focus of our current analysis, however, because of the

limited attention paid to it in the trade/technology     literature and its particular relevance for public

policy. We improve upon earlier related studies by utilizing more recent data, by investigating          a

broader set of outcomes, including a preliminary analysis of the role of technology, and in

examining whether the results are robust to changes in the time period analyzed,

        Our investigation    of the effects of international trade is quantity rather than price based

(i.e. we look at trade penetration rates rather than changes in relative prices) for several reasons.

First, we are persuaded by the Krugman’s (1995, p.35) theoretical argument that the factor

content approach is “entirely j ustified in the context of a general equilibrium model when the

trade share is sufficiently small”. Second, as Krugman also points out, changes in relative prices

may reflect developments     that would have occurred even in the absence of increased trade (e.g.

changes in tastes).   Third, the results of empirical examinations which focus on price changes

turn out to be quite fragile, that is, they are sensitive to changes in measurement      and

specification. 14 Finally, the factor price equalization arguments which underpin the exclusive

focus on relative prices imply that wages will be unaffected by domestic labor market

developments.     This asstimption is at odds with the substantial body of evidence indicating that

earnings differentials are influenced by local changes in the supply and demand for labor (e.g.




‘q For example, see the interchange between Lawrence and Slaughter (1993) and Sachs and Shatz
(1994) on whether or not computer prices should be included in the calculations of relative price
changes.


                                                       Page 8
cohort changes in the size of the labor force, local or international migration, changes in

educational attainment, etc.). 15

III.   Data and Methods

        This analysis uses data from the Displaced Worker Supplements to the January 1988 and

1992 Current Population Surveys. The DWS contain retrospective information on individuals

permanently     losing their jobs during the previous five years. 1G When examining

postdisplacement     outcomes, our samples are comprised of workers terminated from jobs in a

manufacturing      industry (since our trade data relate solely to manufacturing)   by reason of plant

closing, slack work, or abolition of shift or position, Corresponding     information on persons

employed in manufacturing       industries at the survey date but not reporting a job loss during the

previous five years is also used in our prior analysis of displacement probabilities.      The only

other restriction is that we confine our samples to those aged 25 to 60 years at survey date.

Younger workers are excluded because they change jobs frequently, making displacement              less

traumatic and less meaningful for them (see Topel and Ward, 1992). Older persons are excluded

because their labor market experiences may be dominated by the retirement decision.

         This inquiry also uses Department of Commerce trade data on manufacturing           industries

for the periods 1984-86 and 1989-91, between which intervals the industry definitions were

changed.   For the earlier period the data conform to 1972 SIC codes, whereas for the latter period




15 See Katz and Murphy (1992) for an example of research emphasizing the impact of changes in
domestic supply and demand upon relative wages.
‘bThe surveys, which have been conducted biennially since 1984, are well described elsewhere
(e.g. Herz, 1990).


                                                      Page 9
the 1987 categories apply. 17 We obtained data on imports, exports, and U.S. product shipments

at the 4-digit industry level. 18 Therefore, the SIC-based trade data had to be aggregated to obtain

consistency with the industry basis of the displaced worker data set, which conforms to the

Census of Production Industrial Classification   (CPIC) system. Aggregating the 4-digit trade data

to the most detailed industry level available in the CPIC system (the 3 -digit level) yielded

samples of 74 manufacturing     industries for each of the two periods.

        The import penetration rate for each industry is defined as the value of imports of goods

into the United States divided by domestic supply (total imports plus domestic product

shipments).   Export penetration rates are the ratio of U.S. exports to total U.S. product shipments

for the industry.   Annual import and export penetration rates, for each industry, were averaged

over the three year sample periods to produce the trade measures we focus upon in this analysis.

We also calculated changes in the import and export penetration measures, defined as the

percentage point difference in levels of import or export shares between the beginning and end of

each sample period. However, given the brevity of the periods over which the changes were

measured, as well as some ambiguity concerning the best measure of changes in trade sensitivity,

we do not emphasize the results using these variables below. 19




17 Our sample periods are dictated by the three-year periods for which data were available. The
Commerce Department did not match product shipment data to SIC codes in 1988 and we
avoided using 1987 to maintain consistency of the SIC code definitions across sample years.
18We thank Robert Bednarzik of the Bureau of International Affairs, U.S. Department of Labor
for providing us with the 1984-86 data and Marge Paviliscak of the Office of Trade and
Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce for supplying the corresponding information
for 1989-91.
19For instance, in calculating changes in trade sensitivity, it is not obvious whether it is
preferable to use percentage point differences in levels or corresponding growth rates.


                                                   Page 10
        Finally, we merged onto the data set information on the ratio of computer expenditures to

total investment (hereafter also referred to as the computer investment ratio) for the year 1987,

The computer investment ratio is included as a proxy of technological       change. This is justified

by the evidence that computerization     has played an important role in most technological

innovations during the 1980s (Mark, 1987) and by the successful deployment of this variable as a

measure of technology in past research (e.g. Berman, Bound, and Griliches, 1994). As with the

trade data, the 4-digit SIC level information on computer expenditures was aggregated to 3-digit

Census industries.20

        The relationship between trade sensitivity and probability of job loss was analyzed by

constructing   a dichotomous     dependent variable taking the value of one for CPS respondents who

stated that they experienced a permanent layoff during the three year sample period and zero if

no job loss was reported.      In analyzing the consequences job dislocation, six outcome measures

were identified:   1) the probability that the displaced worker moved directly into new

employment     without any intervening period of j oblessness; 2) the duration of joblessness    for

individuals experiencing    some period out of work; 3) the probability that the individual was

reemployed     at the survey date; 4) the weekly earnings of reemployed workers; 5) the probability

that the individual had employer-based      health insurance at the survey date; 6) the probability that

employer-based     health insurance was lost as a result of the displacement event (i.e. the



20 We thank Eli Berman for providing us with this data. The information originally came from
the Census of Manufactures and some industries did not report computer investments. We used
the following procedure to deal with the missing data. If the data were available for some, but
not all, of the 4-digit SIC industries included in the 3-digit Census classification, the investment
ratio was calculated over just the non-missing components. If the computer data were
unavailable for all of the SIC industries, as was the case for three of the Census industries (230,
321, and 322), the computer investment ratio was treated as a missing value in most of the
analysis and assigned a zero value in some of the regressions, as reported below.


                                                     Page 11
probability of having no health insurance at the survey date, conditional on being covered in the

predisplacement      job).

        All of the dichotomous      dependent variables were modeled as maximum likelihood probit

equations.   The duration of joblessness was estimated using a Cox proportional hazard

specification. 21 The Cox model uses information on the rank ordering of the outcomes and

leaves the parametric form of the baseline hazard unspecified.        Higher hazard rates (larger

positive coefficients) correspond to shorter durations ofjoblessness,22       Finally, the wage

equations were estimated by OLS, with the dependent variable expressed in natural logs. We did

not attempt to control for selection bias, given the difficulty in obtaining variables which might

appropriately      be included in the reemployment equations but which do not determine wages,

         Many of our regression specifications include controls for demographic and job

characteristics,    in addition to computer investment ratios and trade penetration rates, These data

were obtained from the DWS and the parent CPS, plus some additional sources as noted below.

Wherever possible, we have used a common regression specification for all of the dependent

variables, although there are minor differences        in the displacement rate and postdisplacement

outcome equations.

         The demographic      characteristics   include dummy variables for sex, race (white vs.

nonwhite), marital status, completed years of schooling (5 categories), and the presence of minor




21In proportional hazard models, the hazard rate at duration t (i.e. the probability of exiting the
state at t, conditional on remaining in it at t-1) is modeled as: hi(t) = hO(t)exp(Xi~), where hi(t) is
the hazard rate at t and hO(t) is the baseline hazard.
22As an alternative, we also estimated a flexible 3-parameter extended generalized gamma
accelerated failure time (AFT) duration model. The AFT results correspond closely to the hazard
estimates and are not reported here.


                                                       Page 12
dependent children inthehousehold       atthe survey date. Continuous variables include(a

quadratic in)years ofage, the stateunemployment         rate, uniondensity     (namely, theproportion       of

individualsin   the industry covered by acollective     bargaining agreement), and the change in

domestic product demand.       In some ofthe displacementprobability         equations, relative industry

earnings are also controlled for.23 Changes in domestic product demand, calculated as the

percentage change in product shipments between the beginning and the end of the sample

period(s), were included to capture the effects of shifis in labor demand.        The state

unemployment      rate and union density measures were calculated for the year ofjob loss in the

displacement    probability equations and were averaged over the three-year sample periods when

                                             24
considering postdisplacement     outcomes.

        Finally, the outcome equations contain several controls for characteristics           of the

predisplacement    job and for the sources of the employment termination.         These include dummy

variables for the type of layoff (plant closing, position or shifi abolished, or slack work), region

(4 categories), year of displacement,   and a quadratic in years of tenure on the predisplacement

job.

        Table 1 displays sample means for key variables during each of the two time periods.                In

all cases the statistics refer to subsamples of displaced manufacturing        workers, rather than to all

CPS respondents,    and are weighted so as to be nationally representative.        Beginning with the




23 Industry relative earnings are calculated by regressing the natural log of weekly earnings, (for
the full CPS sample) on education, age, age squared, marital status, sex, region, and 74 industry
dummy variables. The coefficients on the industry variables are constrained to sum to zero and
represent the relative wage.
24 Information on state unemployment rates were obtained from U.S. Department of Labor,
Bureau of Labor Statistics (various years) while that on industry unionization rates is from
Hirsch and McPherson (1993).


                                                      Page 13
trade variables, it can be seen that average import and export shares are higher in the more recent

sample -- import penetration rises from 13°/0to 1So/Oand export penetration from 8°Ato 13°/0.

These findings are consistent with the increasing openness of the U.S. economy,          The

demographic    and skill profiles of the samples are roughly comparable across the time periods.

But there are some differences in other variables and, particularly, in the outcome measures.          The

percentage of displaced workers covered by collective bargaining agreements falls over time,

reflecting declining unionization    rates in U.S. manufacturing   industries.   Also the share of

workers losing jobs by reason of plant closings decreases, while terminations due to slack work

become more important in the later period.

        Workers displaced between 1989 and 1991 have shorter durations of joblessness            but

larger wage losses and greater probabilities of losing health insurance benefits than those

terminated during the earlier sample period. Some of these differences reflect disparities in the

number of years between the date of displacement and the survey. In particular, the sample of

respondents taken from the 1988 DWS lost jobs at least one but no more than four years prior to

being interviewed,   while those from the 1992 survey did so at some point within three years of

the survey.   As a result, fewer unemployment     spells are censored in the earlier sample ( 12°/0vs.

27Yo) and durations of joblessness    are longer. Furthermore,     since respondents to the later survey

had less time to adjust to the loss of jobs, their reemployment     wages are likely to be lower and

they will less often have health insurance.    There are also signs, however, that the overall

economic climate became more favorable over time (e.g. unemployment              rates fell, employment

growth rose, and a higher percentage of displaced workers avoiding joblessness          altogether

increased), which may also explain some of the observed differences.




                                                    Page 1J
IV.   Displacement     Probabilities

        Probit models estimating the probability of job loss are summarized in Table 2. Column

(1) examines the effects of trade sensitivity, ignoring all other determinants.    In both periods, the

level of import penetration seems to be positively related to displacement rates. For their part,

higher export shares appear to increase probabilities of job loss in the earlier period but either to

have no effect on them or to lower the risk in the latter interval. The inclusion of controls for

changes in domestic product demand (column (b)) reduces the import and export share

coefficients, although the former remain positive and statistically significant in both periods.

The addition of demographic covariates (column (c)) does not substantially        change the estimated

import penetration rate effect but cuts the negative export coefficient estimate by more than

50%.25

         We next entered relative industry earnings as an additional regressor, to examine whether

displacements    were concentrated among high- or low-paying sectors. The results, shown in

column (d),      indicate that persons employed in industries with negative wage differentials were

substantially   more likely to be displaced between 1984 and 1986 but not during the 1989-91

period.2G To the extent that other included explanatory variables are causally related to

displacement    probabilities   and also are associated with industry rents, the inclusion of the




25We also investigated the role of changes in import and export penetration rates. For the earlier
period, increases in export share were associated with lower displacement probabilities, while
higher growth in import penetration raised them. For the latter period, we obtained exactly the
opposite results. We have little confidence in these findings, given the fragility of the estimated
effects to the time period chosen and because the changes were estimated over such short (three
year) time periods.
26 Conversely, Borjas and Ramey (1995) argue that workers receiving rents became more prone
to trade-induced displacement in recent years. One explanation for the difference in results is
that our analysis controls for trade sensitivity directly, whereas their investigation does not.


                                                      Page 15
relative pay variable may introduce bias. For instance, Bernard and Jensen (1995) indicate that

exporters offer relatively high wages. Since well-paid workers were also less likely to be

displaced during the 1984-86 period, the addition of the relative earnings variable sharply inflates

the coefficient estimate for export penetration (increasing it from .5029 in column (c) to 1.493 in

column (d)). This indicates that estimates which control for relative earnings may be

problematic,      to the extent that this covariate mediates the impact of the trade sensitivity variables

but does not actually cause changes in displacement rates. For this reason we abstract from

relative earnings considerations      in the balance of this exercise.

        Columns (e) and (~ add the 1987 computer investment ratio, our proxy for technology,             as

a final regressor.     The distinction between the two specifications is that model (e) includes data

for all industries, with a zero value entered for cases where information on the ratio was missing,

while (f) includes only those industries for which information on computer investment was

actually available.

        Workers have relatively high probabilities of losing jobs in industries with high rates of

technological      change, as measured by the computer investment ratio. The point estimate is large

and highly significant for the 1984-86 period and is also substantial in both 1989-91

specifications,     although not quite statistically significant in model (f).27 The inclusion of the

computer investment variable has only slight effects on the import share coefficients but more

obviously reduces the estimated effect of exports. The latter result is consistent with the

possibility that export industries have relatively high rates of technological      change.



27Similar point estimates are obtained for equations that exclude demographic characteristics.
For instance, the coefficient estimate for the computer investment ratio obtained for a model
analogous to column (O, but without the additional regressors, is 1.240 for the earlier period and
.9262 for the latter interval.


                                                       Page 16
         Results for the full vector of covariates are shown for one specification (model (c)) in

appendix Table A. 1. The coefficient estimates for the demographic variables are often

statistically insignificant   and there is sometimes an indication of differences across sample

periods.2g For example, race has the standard effect on the probability of job loss in the latter

period but has no impact in the earlier one. There is also a sign reversal in respect of the

dependent children covariate, although on this occasion the difference is not statistically

significant.    Conversely, married individuals are clearly less likely to be displaced in both

periods, while another common influence is the role of growing industry demand in reducing the

likelihood of individual displacement.

         In order to more easily summarize the effects of trade and technology on the probabilities

of job loss, Table 3 shows the predicted effects of moving from one standard deviation below the

average value of the specified variable to one standard deviation above it. These estimates are

obtained from specification (~ of Table 2 and are calculated assuming that covariates, other than

that specified to change, are set equal to their sample means. For example, increasing the import

penetration rate from one standard deviation (9. 1 percentage points) below its mean value to one

standard deviation above it, during the 1984-86 period, is predicted to raise displacement

probabilities   from 7.3% to 8.7Y0, an increase of 19.8V0. Corresponding      increases in export

penetration rates and computer investment ratios boost expected permanent layoff rates by 5V0

and 310/O. For 1989-91, the specified movement in imports, exports, and computer investment

ratios changes expected displacement probabilities by 18°/0, -5°/0,and 12°/0 respectively.        These

results suggest that import sensitivity and technological      advance are associated with relatively



28Virtually identical estimates are obtained for the demographic coefficients in the other
specifications of the job loss equation not reported here.


                                                     Puge 17
large increases in dislocation rates, while changes in export propensities have uncertain and

much weaker effects. However, the findings are again qualified by the sensitivity of the

predicted effects to the choice of time periods, which signals that our empirical specifications        fail

to capture at least some important determinants of layoffs.

V.   Postdisplacement      Outcomes

        We next consider the relationship between trade sensitivity and postdisplacement

outcomes for individuals losing jobs during the specified time period. The dependent variables

in Table 4 include the probabilities     of being reemployed at the survey date and of avoiding

postdisplacement     joblessness,   as well as the duration of joblessness   (conditional on some

positive spell). Table 5 summarizes results for the natural log of postdisplacement          earnings and

the probability of having or losing employer-based         health insurance coverage,   For each outcome

we display the results of three regression models.       Column (a) includes controls for just the two

trade variables; column (b) adds the full set of product demand, demographic,           and job covariates;

and, finally, column (c) contains all of the aforementioned       regressors plus the computer

investment ratio. The three specifications of the earnings equation also include predisplacement

wages as an explanatory variable.

        Results for covariates other than the trade penetration rates and computer investment

ratio, which are not displayed in the tables, are fairly conventional.       Thus, whites, males, married

individuals,    and more educated persons generally have fewer adjustment problems than their

counterparts.    Many of the coefficients are statistically insignificant, however, and there are

numerous differences across outcomes and time periods.




                                                       Puge 18
        As shown in Table 4, there is little indication that either exposure to international      trade or

employment       in industries with high levels of computer investment ratios impairs the ability of

workers to find new jobs following the displacement event. Import penetration rates are never

significantly    related to rates of survey date reemployment,     the probability of avoiding

joblessness,    or the duration of time out of work. Export probabilities      are postively related to the

probability of working at the survey date, significantly so in the earlier period, but there is again

little evidence that export shares are associated with either the probability of experiencing

joblessness     or with the duration of the jobless spell. Finally, a statistically significant

relationship    is never obtained between the level of technology, as proxied by the computer

investment ratio, and the three employment variables and the sign of the coefficients can be seen

to differ across time periods for two of the three outcomes.

         The wage results in Table 5 are rather interesting.      Other things equal, workers losing

jobs in industries with high levels of exports earn relatively high wages on the new job. Those

terminated from industries with substantial import penetration or high computer investment

ratios also fare relatively well in the early period but poorly in the latter. The trade results are

sensitive, however, to the method of controlling for predisplacement          wages. The coefficient on

previous wages (not shown on the table) is .5933 for the 1984-1986 sample and .5212 for the

 1989-1991 group.29 Both of these point estimates are highly significant and indicate that slightly

over half of the wage differentials received on the old jobs are transferred to the new

employment.




29 These coefficients are for specification (b). Similar results are obtained for the other models.


                                                        Page 19
       As previously noted, export sensitive industries pay relatively high wages. Therefore,

when previous earnings are not held constant, the export coefficient increases substantially      in

size and becomes highly significant, while the import coefficient declines in magnitude

Conversely, when the outcome variable is the change in wages, which effectively constrains the

coefficient on previous earnings to one, the export coefficient falls while that on imports rises.

There are no such corresponding    patterns for the computer investment coefficient estimates,

which suggests the absence of a strong relationship between earnings and investments in

computer technology .30

        The last six columns of Table 5 indicate that persons displaced from industries with

elevated computer investment ratios are relatively more likely to have group health insurance

coverage at the survey date, and comparatively    infrequently lose this fringe benefit as a result of

the job termination.   The relationship between trade penetration rates and group health insurance

benefits is much weaker. The data do provide some suggestion that persons leaving jobs in

industries with high rates of exports are more likely to retain insurance coverage in the future,

but this result occurs entirely because export industries offer higher levels of compensation      and

highly paid persons typically receive a disproportionate     share of their total compensation   in the




30 For the fully specified model (column (c)), the coefficient estimate (standard error) for import
penetration rates is -1.592 (.2628) and -.7465 (.1938) for the earlier and later period, respectively,
when predisplacement wages are not controlled for. The corresponding coefficients on export
penetration rates are .7416 (.4014) and .8895 (.2717) and for the computer investment ratio they
are 1.555 (,73 16) and -.7596 (.6206). Coefficient estimates for imports, exports, and the
computer investment ratio in the wage change equation, are .4301 (.2470) and .1713 (.1907), -
.0774 (.3771) and .1714 (.2676), and .8960 (.6874) and -1.002 (.61 11) for the earlier and later
period, respectively.


                                                   Page 20
form of fringe benefits.   By contrast, the strong positive effect of computer investments   on

coverage rates does not result from confounding with high wages,3 ]

VI.   Conclusion

         Previous research highlights the importance of international trade and technological

change as sources of secular changes in inequality or unemployment.        Yet none of the prior

studies has focused on job displacements,    which represent a potentially important component of

the trends and receive particular attention from policy-makers    and the public. We provide

evidence that the risk of job loss is relatively high for workers employed in industries investing

heavily in computer technologies and for those in sectors with substantial exposure to import

competition.   Conversely, we find little evidence of a consistent relationship between export

levels and rates of job loss. There is some indication that individuals terminated from export-

oriented industries have easier transitions into new employment,     or into jobs offering high pay or

generous fringe benefits, than their peers displaced from sectors with less export activity.       It is

not clear, however, to what extent these differences are due to inter-industry heterogeneity       in

worker or geographic characteristics and to what degree trade performance itself is causing the

disparities.

         Many of our estimates vary considerably across model specifications      or time periods.

This fragility reduces our confidence in the findings and provides a cautionary note for this and

related research.   Ideally, it would be desirable if theoretical developments   could guide the

choice of empirical specifications.   Absent this, it is incumbent on researchers to carefully check




31 Thus, the computer investment coefficients remain virtually unchanged when the
predisplacement wage is included as an additional regressor.


                                                    Puge 21
the robustness of their results to reasonable changes in model specification, to utilize alternative

data sources, and to investigate the effects over a variety of time periods.

         Our limited analysis suggests that both trade and technology contribute to employment

instability.   However, we find little evidence that the adjustment problems of displaced workers

depend critically on the characteristics   of the previously held job identified here. This at the very

least raises questions about the usefulness of existing categorical programs providing special aid

to workers losing jobs as the result of international trade.




                                                    Page 22
                                          References

Addison, John T., Douglas A. Fox, and Christopher J. Ruhm. “Trade and Displacement        in
      Manufacturing,” Monthly Labor Review 118 (April 1995): 58-67.

Bednarzik, Robert W. “An Analysis of U.S. Industries Sensitive to Foreign Trade.” Monthly
     Labor Review 104 (February 1993): 15-31.

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor Within
     U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures.” Quarterly
     Journal ofEconomics 109 (May 1994): 367-397.

Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S.
      Manufacturing: 1976 -1987.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~: Macroeconomics
      (1995): 67-112.

Borjas, George S., and Valerie A. Ramey. “Foreign Competition, Market Power, and Wage
      Inequality.” Quarterly Journal ojEconomics 110 @ovember 1995): 1075-1110.

Borjas, George S., and Valerie A. Rarney, “Time-Series Evidence of the Sources of Trends in
       Wage Inequality,” American Economic Review 84 (May 1994): 10-16.

Burtless, Gary. “International Trade and the Rise in Earnings Inequality.” Journal of Economic
         Literature 33 (June 1995): 800-816.

Dickens, William T. “The Effects of Trade on Employment: Techniques and Evidence. ” In
      Laura D’Andrea Tyson, William T. Dickens, and John Zysman (eds.), The Dynamics of
      Trade and Employment. Cambridge, MA: Ballinger, 1988,41-85.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. Labor Markets and Integrating Na[ional Economies.      Washington,        D. C.:
      The Brookings Institution, 1994.

Freeman, Richard B. “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?” Journal of Economic Perspectives           9
     (Summer 1995): 15-32.

Freeman, Richard B,, and Lawrence F, Katz. “Industrial Wage and Employment Determination
     in an Open Economy.” In John M. Abowd (cd.), Immigration, Trade, and the Labor
     Market. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1991,235-260.

Grossman, Gene. “The Employment and Wage Effects of Import Competition.”        Journal of
     International Economic Integration 2 (1987): 1-23.

Herz, Diane E. “Worker Displacement in a Period of Rapid Expansion:     1983 -87.” Monthly Labor
      Review 113 (May 1990): 21-33.



                                                Page 23
Hirsch, Barry T., and David A, McPherson. “Union Membership and Coverage Files from the
      Current Population Survey: Note.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 46 (April 1993):
      574-78, and related computer data files.
Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel Sullivan. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
      Workers.” American Economic Review 83 (September 1993): 685-709.

Juhn, Chinui, Kevin Murphy, and Robert Topel. “Why Has the Natural Rate of Unemployment
      Increased Over Time.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~ (1991, No. 2): 75-142.

Katz, Lawrence F., Gary W. Loveman, and David G. Blanchflower. “A Cofiparison of Changes
      in the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries.” In Richard B. Freeman and
      Lawrence F. Katz (eds.), Dfjerences and Changes in Wage Structures. Chicago, IL:
      University of Chicago Press, 1995,25-65.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. “Changes in Relative Wages in the United States,
      1963-87: Supply and Demand Factors.” Quarterly Journal ofEconomics 107 (February
      1992): 35-78.

Kletzer, Lori G. “International Trade and Job Displacement in U.S. Manufacturing, 1979-199 1.“
      Working Paper #33 1. University of California, Santa Cruz, September 1995.

Krugman, Paul. “Technology, Trade, and Factor Prices.” National Bureau of Economic Research
     Working Paper No. 5355, November 1995.

Kruse, Douglas, L. “International Trade and the Labor Market Experience of Displaced
      Workers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 41 (April 1988): 402-417.

Lawrence, Colin, and Robert Z. Lawrence. “Manufacturing Wage Dispersion: An End Game
     Interpretation.” Brookings Papers on Economic Ac/ivity (1 985, No. 1): 47-106.

Lawrence, Robert Z., and Matthew Slaughter. “Trade and U.S. Wages in the 1980s: Giant
     Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
     A4icroeconomics (1993), 161-210.

Learner, Edward E. “Trade, Wages, and Revolving Door Ideas.” NBER Working Paper No.
      4716, April 1994.

Mann, Catherine L. “The Effect of Foreign Competition in Prices and Quantities on the
     Employment in Import-Sensitive U.S. Industries.” International Trade Journal 2 (Summer
     1988): 409-444,

Mark, Jerome S. “Technological Change and Employment:     Some Results from BLS Research.”
     Monthly Labor Review 60 (April 1987): 26-29.




                                               Page 2A
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Historical Statistics: 1960-1993.
      Paris: OECD, 1995.

Revenga, Ana L. “Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
     wages in U.S. Manufacturing.” Quar[erly Journa/ of Economics 107 (February 1992): 255-
     284.

Richardson, J. David. “Income Inequality and Trade: How to Think, What to Conclude?”
      Journal of Economic Perspectives 9 (Summer 1995): 33-56.

Ruhrn, Christopher J. “Are Workers Permanently Scarred By Job Displacements?”      American
      Economic Review 81 (March 1991): 319-323,

Sachs, Jeffrey D., and Howard J. Shatz, “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing.”   Brookings
      Papers on EconomicAc[ivi@(1994,     No. 1), 1-84.

Shelburne, Robert C., and Robert W. Bednarzik. “Geographic Concentration    of Trade Sensitive
      Employ merit.” Monthly Labor Review 116 (June 1993): 3-13.

Topel, Robert H. “What Have We Learned horn Empirical Studies of Unemployment         and
      Turnover?” American Economic Review 83 (May 1993): 110-115,

Topel, Robert H. and Michael Ward. “Job Mobility and the Careers of Young Men.” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 107 (May 1992): 441-479.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Geographic Profile of Employment and
      Unemployment. ” Washington, D, C.: U.S. Government Printing Office (various years).

Wood, Adrian, “How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers.” Journal ofEconomic        Perspectives    9
     (Summer 1995): 57-80.




                                                Page 25
Table 1: Sample Means For Key Variables



                                                                       Period of Displacement:



Variable                                                    1984-1986                            1989-1991



Dependent     Variables

Employed at Survey Date                                       79.8 %                              62,8   y.
Joblessness Avoided                                            8.9 Y.                              10.7 %
Weeks of Joblessness                                         29,3 wks                            22.1 wks
Weekly Wages at Survey Date                                    $324                                $271
Health Insurance at Survey Date                               71.7%                               58.5 Yo
Loss of Health Insurance                                      18.8 Y.                             26.0 %

Explanatory    Variables

Import Penetration Rate                                       13.0%                               15.1 %
Export Penetration Rate                                        8.0 %                              13.0 %
Computer Investment Ratio (in 1987)                            6.8%                                6.9%
Male                                                          64.7    %                           62. I %
White                                                         86.5    Y.                          81.8V0
Married                                                       69.3    ~0                          66.2 %
Education:
    <12 years                                                 19.5 %                              20.9 %
    12 years                                                 50.3 %                               42.1 %
    13-15 years                                               17.3 %                              23.6 V.
    16 years                                                   9,2%                                10.6 “h
     >16 years                                                3.7 0/0                              2.8%
Age                                                          39.0 yrs                             39.2 yrs
Children in Household                                        49.0 %                               45.1 %
Predisplacement Job Tenure                                    6,9 yrs                              5.7 yrs
Worker Anticipated Displacement                              59.1 %                                54.7 Yo
Reason for Displacement:
    Slack Work                                                34,7%                               46.2%
    Plant Closing                                             56.3 Yo                             42.8 “A
    Position or Shift Abolished                                9.0 %                              12.0 %
Unionization Rate                                             28.1 %                              21.3%
State Unemployment Rate                                        7.4 %                               6.0 %


No[e: Sample includes persons between the age of 25 and 60, at the survey date, who were displaced from
manufacturing jobs during the time period specified. Table shows sample means of specified variables, weighted so
as to be nationally representative.
Table 2: Determinants     of the Probability of Job Loss



SampleNariable                           (a)           (b)           (c)          (d)           (e)           (f)



Period of Potential Displacement:    1984-1986

Import Penetration Rate                  1.006        .6971        .6913         .2747         .5037         .5280
                                       (.1973)       (.2052)       ,2101)       (,2249)       (.2189)       (.2197)

Export Penetration Rate                 .7389         .4198        .5029         1.493         .2356         .2008
                                       (.3179)       (.3211)      (,3300)       (.3769)       (.3391)       (.3470)

Change in Product Demand                              -1.051       -1.057        -1.031        -1.424        -1.436
                                                     (.2304)       (.2074)      (.2186)       (.2408)       (.2408)

Industry Earnings                                                                -!.076
                                                                                (.1988)

Computer Investment Ratio                                                                       I ,495        1.523
                                                                                              (.5173)       (.5312)

Period of Potential Displacement:    1989-1991

Import Penetration Rate                 .7602         .6579         .4654        .4153         .4288         .4351
                                       (.1481)       (.1553)       (.1592)      (.1661)       (.1595)       (.1611)

Export Penetration Rate                 -.2799        -.3640        -.1654       -.0820        -.2146       -.1353
                                       (. 1659)      (.1706)       (. 1797)     (. I975)      (. I799)      (.2096)

Change in Product Demand                              -.4752        -.6571      -.6546         -.8151        -.8931
                                                     (.2002)       (.2151)      (.2153)       (.2262)       (,2448)

Industry Earnings                                                               -.1734
                                                                                (.1687)

Computer investment Ratio                                                                      .8694         .6959
                                                                                              (.3854)       (.4344)


Demographic Covariates                   No            No           Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes


Note: Sample includes persons between the age of 25 and 60 at the survey date who were either working in
manufacturing jobs at the time of the interview or who were displaced from manufacturing employment during the
time period specified, Equations show coefficients from probit equations estimated by maximum likelihood.
Asymptotic standard errors in parentheses. Specifications (e) and (~ differ in that the former includes observations
for all industries, with a zero values entered for the computer investment ratio in cases where information on this
variable is missing, whereas the latter includes observations only for those industries for which data on the computer
investment ratio were obtained, Sample sizes are 9359 in columns (a) through (e) and 9235 in column (~, for 1984-
86. Corresponding sample sizes for 1989-91 are 9618 and 9227, respectively.
Table 3: Predicted Displacement     Probabilities   at Different Trade Penetration   Rates and Computer
Investment Ratios



                                                    19S4-1 986                                 1989-1991



                                          1 St. Dev.          1 St. Dev.         I St. Dev. Below          I St. Dev.
                                         Below Mean          Above Mean                Mean            Above Mean



Import Penetration Rate                     7.29%                8.73%                10.86%                12.84%

Export Penetration Rate                     7.81%                8,16%                12.11%                11.53”A

Computer Investment Ratio                   6.96%                9.1270               11.18V0               12.49~o




Note:   Predicted displacement rates are calcu Iated from probit estimates of specificat ion (~ in Table 2, with
variables other than the respective trade penetration rate or computer investment ratio set equal to their sample
means. The standard deviations of the import penetration rate, export penetration rate, and computer investment
ratio are respectively 9. lYo,5.90A,and 4.8V0for the 1984-86 sample; 11.5V0,10.8V0,and 4.8°A for 1989-91.
                  0




         -s
         mo       N
         *W       m
         mm       m
              u




                  w
                  N
                  0




    u
    0
    .-
    L

C   z                 c
w   w




        u
        .-0
        b

        z
Table A.1: Detailed Estimates of the Determinants    of the Probability   of Job Loss

                                                            Period of Potential Dis~lacement

Variable                                            1984-1986                              1989-1991

Import Penetration Rate                               .6913                                     .4654
                                                     (.2101)                                   (.1592)

Export Penetration Rate                               .5029                                    -.1654
                                                     (,3300)                                   (.1797)

Change in Product Demand                             -1.057                                     -.657 I
                                                     (.2074)                                   (.2151)

Male                                                  -.0181                                   -.0460
                                                     (.04!7)                                   (.0364)

White                                                 .0207                                     -.1407
                                                     (.0580)                                   (.0465)

Married                                               -.1019                                    -.1015
                                                     (,0468)                                   (.0402)

Education: 12 years                                   .0051                                     -.1966
                                                     (.05 14)                                  (.0458)

Education: 13-15 years                                .0219                                     -.2075
                                                     (.0628)                                   (.0528)

Education: 16 years                                  -.1332                                     -.3935
                                                     (.0748)                                   (.0626)

Education: >16 years                                  -,1330                                    -.4486
                                                     (,0971)                                   (,0970)

Age                                                   -.0381                                    -.0121
                                                      (.0 I75)                                 (.0157)

Age Squared                                            .0004                                    .000 I
                                                      (.0002)                                  (.0002)

Children Present                                       .0473                                    -.0297
                                                      (.0451)                                  (.0393)

State Unemployment Rate                                .0141                                    .0432
                                                      (.0105)                                  (.0161)

Unionization Rate                                      -.0009                                   -.0047
                                                      (.0014)                                  (.0014)

No~e: The specification conforms to column (c)of Table 2.
