                              NBER WORKING        PAPER SERES




                            WAGES, PRODUCTIVITY, AND
                        WORKER CHARACTERISTICS : EVIDENCE
                          FROM PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTION
                         FUNCTIONS AND WAGE EQUATIONS




                                      Judith K. Hellerstein
                                        David Neumark
                                       Kenneth R. Troske




                                     Working Paper 5626


                    NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          June 1996



We are grateful to Joe Altonji, Zvi Griliches, Bruce Meyer, Dek Terrell, and seminar participants
at the University of Chicago, Hebrew University, Michigan, Michigan State, Northwestern, NYU,
UCLA, UCSD, the FI’C, the Census Bureau, and the NBER for helpful comments, and to Daniel
Hansen for research assistance. The opinions expressed herein are solely those of the authors and
do not in any way reflect the views of the U.S. Census Bureau or the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This research was supported by NSF grant SBR95-10876.              Neumark’s
research was also supported by NIA grant KO1-AGO0589. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Labor Studies.

@ 1996 by Judith K. Hellerstein, David Neumark and Kenneth R. Troske. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                            NBER Working Paper 5626
                                                                                          June 1996


                              WAGES, PRODUCTIVITY, AND
                          WORKER CHARACTERISTICS:  EVIDENCE
                            FROM PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTION
                           FUNCTIONS AND WAGE EQUATIONS


                                               ABSTRACT


        We use a unique new data set that combines individual worker data with data on workers’

employers to estimate plant-level production functions and wage equations, and thus to compare
relative marginal   products   and relative wages for various groups of workers.               The data and
empirical framework    lead to new evidence on numerous questions regarding the determination

of wages, questions    that hinge on the relationship     between wages and marginal products              of

workers in different demographic     groups.    These include race and sex discrimination         in wages,
the causes of rising wages over the life cycle, and the returns to marriage.           First, workers who

have   ever been    married    are more productive      than never-married         workers    and are paid

accordingly.   Second, prime-aged     workers (aged 35-54) are equally as productive             as younger
workers, and in some specifications      are estimated to receive higher wages.              However,   older
workers (aged 55+) are less productive than younger workers but are paid more. Third, the data

indicate no difference between the relative wage and relative productivity              of black workers.
Finally, with the exception of managerial and professional          occupations,   women are paid about
25-35% less than men, but estimated productivity differentials for women are generally no larger
than 1570, and significantly   smaller than the pay differential.


Judith K, Hellerstein                  David Neumark                         Kenneth R. Troske
Department of Economics                Department of Economics               Center for Economic Studies
Northwestern University                Michigan State University             EPCD, Room 211 -WPII
2003 Sheridan Road                     East Lansing, MI 48824                U.S. Census Bureau
Evanston, IL 60208                     and NBER                              Washington, DC 20233
and NBER
I. Introduction

         Competing models of wage determination hinge on the relationships between wages,

productivity,     and worker characteristics.   However, direct measures of worker productivity    are hard

to obtain, so economists usually rely on proxies for productivity when conducting empirical research.

The difficulty with this approach is that whether these proxies reflect productivity is always in doubt,

making it difficult to distinguish between competing models.

        This lack of data on worker productivity plagues numerous areas of empirical research related

to issues of wage determination.       For example, with data only on wages and worker characteristics

over the life cycle, it is difficult to distinguish human capital models of wage growth (such as Ben-

Porath, 1967; Becker, 1975; Mincer, 1974) from incentive-compatible          models of wage growth

(Lazear, 1979) or forced-saving models of life-cycle wage profiles (Loewenstein and Sicherrnan,

1991; Frank and Hutchens, 1993). Typical wage regression results report positive coefficients on

age, conditional on a variety of covariates, but these positive coefficients neither imply that older

workers are more productive than younger ones, nor that wages rise faster than productivity.

Similarly, without direct measures of the relative productivities     of workers, discrimination   by sex,

race, or marital status cannot be established based on significant negative estimated coefficients on

female or black dummy variables, or positive estimated coefficients on a married dummy variable, in

standard wage regressions, since the usual individual-level      wage regression controls may not fully

capture productivity     differences (e.g., Becker, 1985).

         To overcome these difficulties, we use a unique new data set that combines individual worker

data with data on workers’ employers to estimate and compare relative marginal products and relative

wages for various groups of workers,        This employer-employee    data set, the Worker Establishment

Characteristics     Database (WECD), matches long-form respondents to the 1990 Decennial Census to

data on their employers from the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD). These data are a major

                                                         1
improvement over previously available data sources because they combine detailed demographic

information on workers in a sample of plants with information on plant-level inputs, outputs, and

labor costs. ]

         We use these data to estimate production finctions            in which workers with different

characteristics    are perfectly substitutable    labor inputs with potentially different marginal products,

and plant-level earnings equations which represent the aggregation of individual-level                    regressions

over workers employed in a plant.          The estimates of these equations allow us to compare the

relative marginal productivities       and relative wages of workers distinguished           by various

demographic       characteristics .2’3 Thus, the data and empirical framework lead to new evidence on

numerous topics regarding the determination           of wages, including race and sex discrimination           in

wages, the causes of rising wages over the life cycle, and the returns to marriage.

II. The Relationship) BeWeen Wapes and Productivity

IL1 The Null HvDothesis

         In order to motivate the approach we take in this paper, we first present the simplest model

illustrating the relationship between wages and productivity under perfect competition.                   Consider an


   ‘However, they are somewhat limited in that they are only cross-sectional, ordy cover the manufacturing sector, and
are weighted toward large plants.
    ‘The WECD is a very rich and useful data set, and has so far been utilized only in a few other studies (Troske, 1994;
Barrington and Troske, 1994). There are clearly many important issues which these data maybe able to address; we limit
this paper solely to the analysis of the relationship between the productivity and wage differentials among workers with
different demographic characteristics.
   ‘This paper builds on the framework used in Hellerstein and Neumark (1994 and 1995, hereafter HNa and HNb) to
analyze Israeli manufacturing data (although the WECD offers numerous advantages over the Israeli data), and it
represents a departure from most of the existing empirical literature on wage determination. As discussed in HNa and
HNb, there is little existing research comparing productivity and wage data, and even less using firm-level data. Brown
and Medoff ( 1978) estimate a production function using state-by-industry level data to test whether the union wage
premium is associated with higher productivity of union labor. Leonard (1984) uses similar data over time to examine the
impact of affirmative action laws on productivity in the U.S. One firm-level productivity and wage study examines
evidence of sex discrimination using data from the nineteenth-century French textile industry (Cox and Nye, 1989).
Studies applied to more narrowly-defined industries have been pursued in the union literature (Allen, 1984; Clark, 1980).
Other research has used proxies for productivity, including using piece-rate pay to measure productivity in time-rate work
(Foster and Rosenzweig, 1993) and performance ratings (Holzer, 1990; Korenman and Neumark, 199 1; Medoff and
Abraham, 1980).

                                                            2
economy consisting of plants that produce output Ywith a technology that utilizes two different types

of perfectly substitutable labor inputs, L1 and L2. The production fanction of these plants is

                                               (1)    Y=F(L, + $L2),

where @ is the marginal productivity of L2 relative to L,. These plants are assumed to operate in

perfectly competitive spot labor markets, and labor supply is assumed to be completely inelastic.                  The

price of the output Y is normalized to equal one. Wages of workers of types L, and L2 are w, and W2,

respectively.    Define the relative wage rate (w2/wl) to be A. Given this setup, the proportional             mix of

the two types of labor in each plant will be determined by the relationship between $ and A. If $=A,

then under profit maximization       or cost minimization plants will be indifferent to the proportional mix

of the two types of labor in the plant. If there is a wedge between the relative marginal product and

relative wage so that @+A, then profit-maximizing          or cost-minimizing     plants will be at a comer

solution, hiring either only workers of type L, (if $<A) or only workers of type L2 (if $> A). The only

equilibrium in this model is when wages adjust so that $=1, and plants are indifferent between the

two types of labor.

           Evidence that $#A is inconsistent with the assumption that we are observing profit-

maximizing or cost-minimizing        plants in a competitive spot labor market.4 This paper can be

interpreted as providing empirical tests of this characterization         of labor markets.     We estimate

variants of the plant-level production tiction        in equation (1) simultaneously       with plant-level wage

equations in order to obtain estimates of $ and A for various types of workers.               We interpret cases

where we cannot reject the equality of $ and k as evidence consistent with competitive spot labor

markets.     Cases in which we reject the equality of@ and A indicate some deviation from this

characterization   of labor markets, such as long-term incentive contracts or discrimination.



   4Labor supply could be less than completely inelastic; as long as market wages remain above reservation wages, the
conclusions are unchanged.

                                                           3
112 An Alternative Hvuothesis: Discrimination

         One such deviation that receives a lot of attention in this paper is labor market discrimination.

If there is employer discrimination             against L2 labor, as in Becker(197 1), then employers maximize

utility defined as

                                (2)     U(n,L,,L2) = F(L1 + $L2) - w,L, - W2L2- d.L2,

where d is the discrimination          coefficient capturing an employer’s distaste for L2. In this case utility

maximization    implies

                                                       (3)   $ = A + dlw,

implying that $>A.

        If d varies across employers, this case presents the problem that many firms should be at

corner solutions.    Faced with the market wage ratio A, firms will hire only L2 if d < $MP1 - Wz,and

only L] if d > @MP1 - W2. We do not appear to observe this type of segmentation                 in hiring. However,

this predicted segmentation           is a result of the particular specification of employers’ discriminatory

tastes. An alternative, considered in Neumark (1988), is

                          (4)         U(n,L,,L2) = F(L, + $L,) - w,L, - W2L2 - d.[L2/L,].

        In this case, employers care about the relative level of L2, rather than the absolute level. With

this utility fmction,   maximization            of (4) implies

                                          (5)      $ = [w,+(d/L, )]/[w,-(d.L2/L,2)].

         In this case the marginal disutility from an additional unit of L2 labor is not fixed, but depends

on the relative level of L2. Thus, even if d varies across employers, employers facing the same A will

hire both L, and L2 labor. Of course, those with a higher value of d will hire less L2 and more Ll, as

equation (5) shows. Thus, the simple employer discrimination                  model with heterogeneity   in




                                                                 4
discriminatory    tastes does not preclude all (or most) firms hiring both types of labor, even though

they face the same wage ratio.5

III. A Structural Production Function ADDroach

         To estimate parameters corresponding to $--the relative marginal productivities                  of various

types of labor--we estimate a translog production finction in which the value of output Y is a

finction of capital K, materials M, and a quality of labor aggregate QL.6 In logs, this is


                      (6)      ln(~    = In(A) + aln(K)    + ~ln(M) + yln         :( K, M,QL)    p,




where g(K,M,QL) is the second-order terms in the production function (Jorgenson, et al., 1973), and

p is an error term.

         For each plant in our data set, we have demographic information on a sample of their

workforce from the WECD.              We assume that in the quality of labor aggregate QL, workers with

different demographic characteristics are perfectly substitutable inputs with potentially different

marginal products.7 For example, assume that workers are distinguished                  only by sex. Then QL

would be defined as


                                               (7)        QL L(I   ($F-l);),




where L is the total number of workers in the plant, F is the number of women in the plant, and $~ is

the marginal productivity      of women relative to men. Substituting equation (7) into equation (6), we



   5Another well-known objection to this model is that employers with discriminatory tastes against a particular group
cannot survive in a competitive marketplace (Becker, 1971), However, Goldberg (1982) shows that we can frame the
model in terms of nepotism toward type L, labor rather than discrimination against Lj, in which case the results are
qualitatively the same, but discrimination (actually, nepotism) will not be competed away.
   6The results reported in the paper were very similar when a Cobb-Douglas production function was used. The only
noteworthy difference is that the evidence consistent with sex discrimination was stronger.
   ‘Issues relating to this specification of the labor input are discussed in Rosen (1983). Below, we report some estimates
dropping the perfect substitutes assumption.

                                                              5
obtain a production function with which we can estimate $~, using plant-level data on output, capital

and materials inputs, and data on the number of workers and the sex composition           of the workforce.

         We actually define QL to assume that workers are distinguished not only by sex but also by:

race (black and non-black); marital status (ever married); age (divided into three broad categories--

under 35, 35-54, 55 and over); education (defined as having attended at least some college); and

occupation (divided into four groups--(l)     operators, fabricators, and laborers (unskilled production

workers), (2) managers and professionals,      (3) technical, sales, administrative,   and service, and (4)

precision production, craft, and repair), A firm’s workforce can then be fally described by the

proportions of workers in each of 192 possible combinations         of demographic groups.

         To reduce the dimensionality     of the problem, for much of our work we impose two

restrictions on the form of QL. First, we restrict the relative marginal products of two types of

workers within one demographic group to be equal to the relative marginal products of those same

two types of workers within another demographic group. For example, the relative productivity             of

black women to black men is restricted to equal the relative marginal productivity         of otherwise

identical non-black women to non-black men. Similarly, the race difference in marginal productivity

is restricted to be the same across the sexes. Second, we restrict the proportion of workers in an

establishment      defined by a demographic group to be constant across all other groups; for example,

we restrict blacks to be equally represented in all occupations, education levels, marital status groups,

etc. We impose these restrictions due to data limitations.      For each establishment,    we do not have

data on the actual number of workers in each of the 192 possible combinations           of demographic

characteristics,    but instead estimate that number using our sample of workers matched to the plant. It

is likely, therefore, that we cannot obtain accurate estimates of the representation      of workers in

narrowly defined sets of demographic groups. For example, in many plants there are no workers in

our sample in some of the demographic groups, even though it is likely that there are, in fact, some

                                                       6
workers in these groups. Our restrictions on QL reduce the number of sample estimates based on

small numbers of workers, as well as the number of parameters.                          The effects of relaxing these

restrictions on QL are considered in the empirical results below. To foreshadow the results, relaxing

the equiproportionate     assumption with regard to the distribution of workers, even in cases in which it

is least likely to hold (such as the distribution of men and women across occupations) has relatively

minor consequences       for the results.

         With these assumptions, the quality of labor term in the production function becomes


                           QL = yln[(L+(@F-l)F)       (l+(@B-l)~)(l       +($R-l)~(l       +(@G-l)fi
                   (8)
                                 (l+(@, -l);    +(@o-l);(l      +(@N-l):+(@,-l)           ;+(@c-l)~],




where B is the number of black workers, R is the number of workers ever married, G is the number of

workers who have some college education, P is the number of workers in the plant between the ages

of35 and 54, 0 is the number of workers who are 55 or older, and N, S, and C are the numbers of

workers in the second through fourth occupational categories defined above.8 Note that the way QL


   aFor example, suppose workers are distinguished by race and sex. Then the unrestricted quality of labor term is



                             QL = L + ($F-l)WF          + (@B-l)BM        + ($F$B”$FXB-l)BF             ,



where W is the number of white females, BM the number of black males, and BF the number of black females. The
restriction of equal relative marginal productivities implies o~x~ = 1. The equiproportionate distribution restriction
implies BF = B“(F/L), BF = B( 1-(F/L)), and W = F(I -(B/L)). Substituting, we obtain


                    QL = L + ($F-l)F(l      -(B/L))   + (@B-l)B(l     -(F/L))    + ($F$B@FxB-l)B(FIL)       ,



which reduces to



                                      QL = (L + (@F-l)F)(l            + (@, -l)(B/L))       ,




                                                               7
is defined, productivity      differentials between groups are indicated when the estimate of the relevant @

is significantly different from one (rather than zero). For example, a finding of $~ = 1.3 would imply

that ever-married workers are 30V0more productive than never-man-ied workers.9

         We also allow productivity to vary by size of plant (see Lucas, 1978; Baily, et al., 1992),

industry, region, age of plant, and whether or not the plant is part of a multi-plant firm, by adding

controls for these plant-level characteristics to the production function.’0

         Because materials are likely to be an endogenous input, when we estimate the production

function with output as the dependent variable, we instrument for materials with lagged materials.t 1

If plants differ systematically      (i.e., in a persistent manner) in terms of output, and the differences are

correlated with materials, then lagged materials is not a valid instrument.                 However, if the output

differences over time are due to uncorrelated period-specific               effects, then a lagged value of materials

is a valid instrument.




paralleling equation (8).
    91n the text of the paper, we sometimes report the estimate of $, and whether it is significantly different from one, and
sometimes refer to the implied percentage differential (@- 1), and whether it is statistically significant (i.e., significantly
different from zero). The tables report estimates of the $’s.

    ‘OAsGriliches andRingstad(1971) point out, estimates of the fust-order terms in the translog production function are
not invariant to the units of the data. We therefore de-mean the (log ofi capital, materials, and labor quality inputs prior
to estimating the production function, so that the coefficients on the productive inputs in the production function are
estimated at the mean of the sample. Following Crepon and Mairesse (1993), we de-mean the log quality of labor term,
ln(QL), by first estimating the translog production function without demeaning, constructing plant-level estimates of
ln(QL), and then taking the mean over the sample of the estimated values of ln(QL). This allows us to measure the returns
to scale parameter by adding up the coefficients on the linear terms.

    1‘To instrument for materials, we form the predicted value of log materials, form the nonlinear variables involving
materials using this predicted value, and use the latter as instruments (Bowden and Turkington, 1984). We are most
worried about the endogeneity of materials, given that materials inputs are the easiest for firms to adjust in the short-run.
Nonetheless, it is possible that capital and labor quality are also endogenous. We unfortunately do not have good
instruments for these latter two inputs. First, as we discuss below, the capital measure we use in the production function
is actually a measure of lagged book value of capital. Second, the data on the demographic composition of workers in a
plant is cross-sectional data, so we have no lagged measures of worker quality, nor do we have any other good candidates
for instruments. To the extent that these problems affect the coefficients in the wage and productivity equations similarly,
our test for the differences between relative wages and productivities should be unaffected, In Section VIII we return to
this issue in the context of omitted variable bias in the production finction.

                                                               8
         We also estimate a value-added version of the production fi_mction, using /n~-M)            as the

dependent variable.     Griliches mdWngstad       (1971)list   nmerous    justifications   forthe value-added

specification.    First, materials may be a particularly endogenous input, and the value-added

specification avoids estimating a coefficient on materials.       Second, the value-added specification

enhances comparability       of data across industries and across establishments     within industries, when

industries or establishments     differ in their degree of vertical integration.   Third, the value-added

specification can be derived from quite polar production finction specifications:           one in which the

elasticity of substitution between materials and value added is infinite (i.e., Y= f(K,QL)+~;           and one

in which this elasticity of substitution is zero (so that materials have to be used in a fixed proportion

to output).

IV. Earninps Differentials Amonp Workers

         We have three compensation       measures available in our data set: the plant’s total annual wage

and salary bill; the plant’s total annual wage and salary bill plus expenditures on non-wage

compensation;     and an estimate of the plant’s total annual wage and salary bill derived from our

sample of workers matched to the establishment.         For simplicity, in the following discussion we refer

to each of these measures as the plant’s total wages. We examine results with each of the

compensation     measures.

         The plant-level wage equation we estimate for most of the results retains the

equiproportionate    distribution restriction made in defining QL in the production function.         We also

(again paralleling the production fiction)      restrict the relative wages of workers within a

demographic      group to be constant across all other demographic groups. Furthermore, we assume that

all workers within each unique set of demographic groupings are paid the same amount, up to a

multiplicative   random error. Then total log wages in a plant can be written as




                                                        9
                        in(w)= a’ + ln[(L+(AF-l)F)(       l+(AB-l)~)(l        +(AR-l) ~(l+(AG-l)~
                (9)
                             (l+(A, -l) E+(Ao-l)Q)(l        +(AN-l) !+(a~-l);         +(Ac-l)}]      + E,
                                        L             L                  L




where a‘ is the log wage of the reference group (non-black, never married, male, no college, young,

unskilled production worker) and the 1 terms represent the relative wage differentials associated with

each characteristic.

        This plant-level equation can be interpreted as the aggregation over workers in the plant of

the individual-level   wage equation.    To show this, consider a simpler version of the wage equation

involving only men and women.         The total wage bill in levels implied by equation (9) is

                                            (10)    w = w~(L-~               + w,F,

where w~ and w~ are the average wages of men and women. This can be rewritten as

                                 w = w~(L-fl + A~wMF= WM(~ + (A~-1)~,

which in logs is

                                            in w = a’+ ln(L + (A,-l)m,

as in equation (9), where a’= ln(w~).

        Next, consider the individual-level         wage equation in levels

                                             (11)      Wi   =WMMi+W~Fi,

where M, and Fi are dummy variables for men and women, respectively.                              Clearly, the aggregation of

this equation over all workers in the plant yields equation ( 10), from which, as we have shown, the

wage equation (9) can be derived.

         We interpret equation (9) not as a behavioral equation but simply a definitional one. It

assumes that all plants are wage takers in a competitive labor market so that wages do not vary




                                                              10
systematically    across plants. 12 In order to relax this assumption somewhat, in the empirical analysis

we allow wages to vary systematically           with industry, plant size, region, and age of the plant. 13 In

addition, we include as regressors in the wage equation the capital and materials expenditures                    of the

plant. These inputs in the wage equation may account for the possibility that capital and materials are

proxies for unobserved ability of workers, possibly because of complementarities                   between capital and

unobserved dimensions of skill (Griliches, 1970), or they may be proxies for other differences across

plants that shifi wages.

         We estimate equation (9) jointly with equation (6). We then compare estimates of the k’s

with the corresponding       estimates of the $’s from the production function, and test whether the

relative wages of workers with different demographic characteristics are significantly different from

their relative marginal products.

V. The Data

         The WECD, constructed at the U.S. Census Bureau, links information for a subset of

individuals responding to the long form of the 1990 Decennial Census with information about their

employers in the 1989 LRD. Long-form Census respondents report the location of their employer in

the prior week, and the type of business or industry in which they work. The Census Bureau then

assigns a code for the location of the employer, corresponding to a unique city block for densely

populated areas, or corresponding         to a unique place for sparsely populated areas. The Census Bureau

also classifies workers into industries using Census industry codes so that, in effect, respondents can

be assigned to a unique industry-location         cell. The Census Bureau also maintains a complete list of

all manufacturing     establishments     operating in the U.S. in a given year, along with location and



   “AS discussed in Section II, this is the correct assumption to make given that we are testing the null hypothesis of
competitive spot labor markets.

    “We also estimate the wage equation and production function for various subsets of the data, in which case wage
differentials across workers are not constrained to be equal in all plants.

                                                            11
industry information for these establishments       that is similar to the data available for workers.     Thus,

it is also possible to assign all plants in the U.S. to an industry-location     cell. The WECD is

constructed by first selecting all manufacturing      establishments   in operation in 1990 that are unique in

an industry-location   cell. Then all workers who are located in the same industry-location           cell as a

unique establishment     are matched to that establishment.      This results in a data set consisting of

199,558 workers matched to 16,144 plants.

         To obtain data on a worker’s employer, these data must be matched to the plant-level data in

the LRD. The LRD is a compilation of plant responses to the Annual Survey of Manufacturers

(ASM) and Census of Manufacturers          (CM). The CM is conducted in years ending in a two or a

seven, while the ASM in conducted in all other years for a sample of plants. The LRD contains plant

data from every CM since 1963 and every ASM since 1971. Data in the LRD are of the sort typically

used in production finction estimation, such as output, capital stock, materials expenditures,           and

number of workers.     In addition, the LRD contains information on total salaries and wages and total

non-salary compensation      paid by the plant in a given year (McGuckin and Pascoe, 1988).

         Since worker earnings and labor force information in the Decennial Census refer to 1989, we

match the worker data to the 1989 plant data in the LRD. Since 1989 is an ASM year, data are only

available for a sample of plants. Furthermore, since plant-level capital stock information is only

available in Census years, we require all plants to be in the LRD in both 1989 and 1987.14 Finally, to

increase the representativeness    of the sample of workers in each plant, we require plants in our data

set to have at least 20 employees in 1989 (as reported in the LRD), and at least 5°/0 of their workforce

contained in the WECD.       Our final sample contains data on 3,102 plants and 129,606 workers.

Summary statistics for plant-level data are given in Table 1. The average plant has 353 employees,


   “Total capital in the plant is measured as the sum of the end-of-year book value of buildings and machinery in
1987, Again, because 1989 is an ASM year, we use materials from 1987 when we instrument for materials in 1989,
since in 1987 materials are available for most firms in the LRD as of 1989.

                                                        12
and on average 12°/0of a plant’s workforce is matched to the plant.’5

           Troske (1993) concludes that workers are matched to their correct plants--based              on the match

rate and on high correlations between variables available in the two data sets--with approximately                     So/O


of workers from the Census long-form represented in the WECD. The matching process does not,

however, yield a representative      sample of workers, as non-black, male, married workers are over-

represented in the WECD. Below we discuss some of the implications of this for our empirical

results.

VI. Individual-Level       Wage Repressions with the WECD Data

           Before turning to the results of the jointly estimated plant-level production function and wage

equations, we report in Table 2 the results of individual-level         wage regressions using the wage data

from the WECD.       The wage regression results provide a comparison between the WECD data and

standard wage regression results reported elsewhere.            More importantly, the plant-level wage

equation is derived as the aggregation of individual-level         wage regressions, as explained above.

Thus, comparing results from the plant-level wage equation with those fi-om the individual-level

regressions gives us an informal test of this aggregation, and is also useful in assessing other potential

biases in the plant-level estimates.

           The sets of regressors in the first two columns of Table 2 are among those typically found in

wage regressions, and the results are consistent with standard results. The dependent variable in

column (1) is the log hourly wage of the individual, defined as annual earnings divided by the

product of weeks worked in the year and usual hours worked per week. The dependent variable in

the second column is log annual earnings, so the differentials reflect differences in hourly pay as well




   ‘5We have no fewer than two workers per plant. Table 1 also reports the distribution of plants based on number of
workers matched.

                                                           13
as hours worked.      We focus on results using the annual earnings data because they most closely

parallel the earnings measures available in the LRD.

           The estimates display features common to numerous other data sets. There is a significant

wage gap between men and women, and a smaller but still significant wage gap between blacks and

non-blacks. ‘b The estimated life-cycle wage profile has the usual quadratic shape. The positive

marriage premium (of 16°/0)parallels that found elsewhere--t ypicall y for men. Below, we examine

results that let marriage-wage      and marriage-productivity        differentials vary by sex.

           To see how individual-level      wage regression estimates are influenced by the addition of

plant-level controls in the WECD, column (3) uses the specification in column (2) but adds the plant-

level covariates of total employment, capital, materials expenditures, and age of the establishment,                   as

well as individual occupational controls. Adding these variables shrinks the estimated relationship

between earnings and education, particularly for highly-educated               workers, consistent with these

controls being correlated with worker quality. Nevertheless, a significant positive relationship is still

present.    The estimated coefficients on the other demographic variables (race, sex, age, marital status)

do not change much. As inTroske(1994),              including the plant’s capital stock causes the plant-size

wage premium to be negative.

           As explained above, to get more reliable estimates of the demographic composition                   of plants’

workforces, in the plant-level estimation we define workers’ demographic characteristics more

broadly than is typical for individual-level       wage equations.      In order to provide direct comparability

between individual-level      wage equations and the plant-level equations we discuss below, column (4)

of Table 2 reports the results of the individual-level         regression using the more aggregated forms of




    ‘6A race-wage gap of this magnitude (7VO) is standard, and suggests that we may be unable to detect significant
differences between blacks and non-blacks in plant-level estimates of wage equations (and production functions).

                                                            14
these characteristics that we use in the plant-level regressions.            The only major qualitative difference

is that the magnitude of the estimated marriage premium almost doubles in size.

          Finally, in the plant-level wage and output equations, identification of productivity                 and wage

differentials associated with demographic characteristics of workers comes from covariation across

plants in the demographic composition of the workforce, and output and earnings.                      If we find

evidence that, for example, women are paid less than men, the plant-level data do not enable us to

determine whether the lower wages of women come from the segregation of women into low-wage

plants (e.g., Blau, 1977), or lower pay for women than men within plants. We can, however, add a

plant fixed effect to equation (9) to estimate within-~lant wage differentials associated with

demographic characteristics        of workers.    Estimates of the specification in column (4), including plant

fixed effects, are reported in column (5). Most of the estimated wage differentials (with the

exception of that associated with race) are slightly smaller in absolute value. But the differentials

remain, and the slight reductions indicate that the wage differentials we are studying are largely

within plants .17 Given this, it seems valid to interpret the plant-level wage equation (9) as the plant-

level aggregation of the individual-level         wage equations in column (4) of Table 2. In contrast, if the

differentials were largely between plants, we could not confidently interpret our estimates as

measuring differences between demographic groups. In the absence of measures of productivity                           for

individual workers, we of course cannot test whether estimated productivity differentials also reflect

primarily within-plant      differentials; we assume this to be the case.

         Moreover, as we show below, the results we obtain from estimating the plant-level wage

equation resemble closely the individual-level           fixed-effects results in Table 2. As we illustrate, some

of the differences that do exist are driven by differences in the measurement                of wages. Other


   ‘7Groshen (1991) finds a larger role for between-plant wage variation in the male-female wage gap. However, her
results are not very comparable to ours: first, she has much finer controls for occupation; second, she studies only five
detailed industries, three of which are not in manufacturing,

                                                             15
differences may be due to the fact that there is some systematic variation across plants. Nonetheless,

the qualitative results of the fixed-effects estimates in Table 2 nearly always persist in the plant-level

results and, in fact, the point estimates for sex and marriage differentials in the plant-level results are

virtually identical to those in Table 2. Finally, it is important to note that the differences that we do

find between the plant-level and individual-level    wage equation estimates do not indicate systematic

biases toward zero in the plant-level estimates.    This suggests that measurement    error in the estimated

demographic composition     of plants’ workforces (which we discuss further below) is not significantly

affecting our results.

VII. Plant-Level Production Function and Wape Eauation Estimates: Basic Results

        The basic results of the joint estimation of the wage and productivity equations are reported

in Table 3. In this table, we use LRD wages and salaries to measure earnings.        We have more

confidence in this plant-level earnings variable than the variable constructed from Census data,

because the Census earnings data measure wages and salaries earned by the worker from all jobs, not

necessarily the job in the plant to which the worker is matched.    In Section VIII, we report results

with Census earnings variables, and report a number of other analyses of the sensitivity of the results

and of potential sources of bias.

        There are two caveats to the results we report that should be noted at the outset. First,

although we only have estimates of the percentage of workers in each demographic         group, we have

treated the various elements of QL for each plant as known for the purposes of estimation.

Therefore, there may be biases in both the coefficient estimates and the standard errors which we

report here, Note, however, that under the null hypothesis, measurement error in the estimates of the

percentages of workers in each demographic group will affect both the productivity       and the wage

equations similarly, and it is the comparison between corresponding      coefficients in the two equations

which is of primary interest. In addition, as noted above, the plant-level wage equation estimates

                                                     16
generally do not differ much from the individual-level           estimates, suggesting that the plant-level

estimates are not biased much by measurement error. Below we discuss results from a simulation of

the extent of measurement-error        bias, and conclude that our results are robust to this problem.

Second, some of the estimated wage and productivity differentials by occupation and education are

surprising.   For example, we typically estimate that the marginal product of managerial/professional

labor is below that of unskilled production labor. This result may arise because our data set covers

production units. Managerial/professional          labor may be concentrated at other sites, and the

proportion that happens to be located at the production site may have little to do with output. ]8

However, we also tend to find that the productivity of skilled blue-collar workers (precision

production, crafi, and repair) is below--although         not significantly--that    of unskilled workers, in the

output specification.     We also typically find that productivity differentials by education substantially

exceed wage differentials by education, although we are aware of no theory that predicts this result; it

may be in part related to problems in estimating occupational differentials.               However, the results

reported below were completely insensitive to constraining the productivity and wage differentials by

education or occupation to be the same, so whatever problems may plague estimation of the latter

differentials, they do not influence our conclusions.

VII.1 Differentials     bv Sex

         For both the output and value-added specifications, the estimates of $~ and ~~ are repofied in

the first row of Table 3. The point estimate of the productivity differential, OF, in the output

specification is 0.85, which implies that women are 15°/0less productive than men, a difference that

is significantly different from zero. 19 For the value-added specification, the estimate of ~~ is 0.96,


   ‘EInprinciple, we could compare the results horn the fill sample with those for the subsample of single-plant firms.
The latter, however, constitute only 18% of our plants. Given that some firms have multiple plants in the data set, we may
not have fully accounted for the correlations in the errors of our equations. However, of the 3,102 establishments in our
data set, 1,731 have no matched establishment.
   ‘gWhen we do not instrument for materials, the estimate of $, slightly exceeds one (although not significantly).

                                                            17
and is insignificantly    different from one.20

         In contrast, the estimates of ~~--the relative wage--are 0.68 and 0.66 in the two specifications

and are both significantly less than one. The p-values from tests of the equality of the wage and

productivity     differentials, reported in columns (3) and (6), indicate that for both the output and value-

-added specifications,    we reject equality.     This implies that, on average, women’s lower wages do not

reflect lower relative marginal products.         One interpretation of this finding is that men and women

fill the same jobs in plants, and despite being equally productive, women are paid less, consistent

with the standard wage discrimination          hypothesis,    Based on the most conservative estimate of the

difference between the sex wage gap and the sex productivity gap (in the output specification),

women are estimated to be 15°/0less productive than men, but are paid 32°/0 less, consistent with just

over half of the wage gap being attributable to discrimination.

         There are other possible interpretations        of this finding, however, some consistent with

discrimination     and some not. First, the result may arise because women tend to be employed in

lower-paying jobs or occupations (at a level of detail finer than the occupational breakdown we use),

although these jobs or occupations are not less productive.             This could arise because of taste

discrimination     as in Becker (1971), coupled with legal impediments to paying unequal wages to men

and women in the same j ob or occupation.           We do not have the detailed occupation and job-level

information with which to address this alternative discrimination              hypothesis, nor would we be likely

to be able to address it in the production function context even if we had such data, since it seems

unlikely that we could obtain reliable estimates of productivity differentials across narrow



However, we would expect thereto be upward endogeneity bias in the estimated coefficient of materials, and, given that
there is a fairly strong negative correlation between materials and the percent female, the estimate of $~ would also be
upward biased.
   ‘“We have also estimated the specifications in Table 3 without including controls for capital and materials usage of the
plant in the wage equation. Although these variables are significant in the wage equation, excluding them has almost no
quantitative effect on the other estimated coefficients.

                                                             18
occupations and jobs.       Second, because we are estimating between-plant relationships,           another

possibility is that women tend to be employed in lower-paying plants, although these plants are not

much less productive, on average, than other plants. This is not primarily the case, however, because

as column (5) in Table 2 shows, the sex difference in wages in these data arises mostly within plants.

At any rate, in either case we would still conclude that there is a sex gap in wages that does not

reflect a difference in marginal productivity.

           Alternatively,   the finding that women’s relative wage is below their relative marginal product

may arise if plants vary in the degree to which they have implemented labor-saving technological

change. If such change is not filly accounted for in the book value of capital (and we would not

expect it to be), and if it tends to eliminate production worker jobs which are disproportionately              filled

by men, then unobserved technological         differences could bias upwards our estimate of $~, because

labor is more productive in plants that have implemented relatively more labor-saving technological

change.”     (At the same time, the estimate of ~, would not be biased upwards, if wages are set equal

to opportunity wages in other plants.) We would only expect this problem not to arise if

technological     change is capital augmenting, and is correctly captured in capital price deflators.          While

these desirable circumstances       seem unlikely to hold exactly, Baily, et al. (1992) find that results for

total factor productivity regressions are the same using book value of capital and a more carefilly

constructed capital series based on initial capital stocks and annual investment data. Below, we

examine this question further.

VII.2 BlacWNon-Black         Differentials

         The second row of Table 3 reports the estimated coefficients in the production function and



    *’For evidence that technological change has reduced the proportion of production worker employment, see Berman, et
al. (1994) and Doms, et al, (1994). We need not assume that the technological change saves on production labor. This
assumption simply provides a more compelling reason to believe that mismeasured technology or capital is correlated
with the percent female,

                                                          19
wage equation on the percentage of blacks in the plant, and the tests of the equality of these

coefficients.   The relative productivity of blacks, ~~, is estimated to be 1.09 in the output

specification and 1.07 in the value-added specification; these estimates are not significantly different

from one. The estimated relative wage is 1.06 and is also not significantly different from one. Not

surprisingly given these estimates, the tests reported in columns (3) and (6) do not reject equality of

relative wages and relative marginal products of black workers.

         The plant-level wage results contrast with the individual-level            wage regressions reported in

Table 2 (and the commonplace         finding), according to which the wage differential between blacks and

non-blacks, while small, is significant and negative.           Our estimates of $B and ABare likely biased

upward for two reasons.        First, as discussed in Section V, our sample of workers underestimates              the

number of blacks working in manufacturing,             The under-representation      of blacks would cause the

estimate of ABto be biased away from one. Since the estimate of @~is likely to be similarly biased,

however, the test of the equality of the wage and productivity differentials is still valid.22 Second, the

fixed-plant-effects     estimates of wage differentials between blacks and non-blacks in the WECD are

smaller than the cross-section differentials, indicating that within plants, blacks earn less than non-

blacks, but that blacks work in slightly higher-paying plants (see also Barrington and Troske, 1994).

This suggests that the production finction and wage equation estimates--which                  use across-plant

variation--mask       lower relative wages paid to blacks. Nonetheless, our results should be biased

towards finding no evidence of discrimination          only if blacks tend to work in plants that pay relatively

higher wages, but in which productivity is not relatively higher. Given that we cannot measure

within-plant productivity      differentials between workers, all we can conclude is that our results from

the between-plant       estimates are not consistent with discrimination       against black workers.      This


   ‘zStrictly speaking, this is true under the null hypothesis that $B= AB,as explained in HNa. Because, white, male, and
married workers are overrepresented in the WECD, the same argument may apply to the estimated ~’s and A’sfor women
and marital status,

                                                           20
conclusion, however, may be premature, as the within-plant productivity differentials between blacks

and non-blacks cannot be explored with these data.




          As shown in the third row of Table 3, the estimated productivity of workers aged 35-54

(prime-aged workers) relative to younger workers is 0.98 in the output specification md 1.16 in the

value-added specification.      Neither estimate is significantly different from one, indicating that the

results are consistent with a flat productivity profile through this age range. The results from the

wage equation indicate that prime-aged workers are paid 8-9°/0 more than younger workers, and

although this differential is statistically significant, the p-values from tests of the equality of the wage

and productivity    differentials are 0.22 and 0.54, and hence we do not reject the equality of the

differentials.

          In contrast, the results for workers aged 55 and over, shown in the fourth row, provide more

compelling evidence that wage growth exceeds productivity growth. In the output specification, the

results indicate that older workers are significantly less productive than younger workers, with their

relative marginal productivity estimated to be 0.75. In the value-added specification, this estimate is

0.89, not significantly below one. In both specifications, the wages of workers aged 55 and over are

significantly higher than the wages of younger workers, with estimates of 1.09 to 1.11. In the output

specification we reject equality of the relative marginal products and wages of older workers, with a

p-value of effectively zero. In the value-added specification the evidence is weaker, with a p-value of

0.13,23

   “We also examinedresults using the proportionsof workers in five age groups ( <25, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, and 55
and over). The estimatesrevealedno significantevidenceagainsta flat productivityprofile through age 54, and, as in
the earlier results, significantlylower productivityof workers aged 55 and over. On the other hand, the estimates
reveal significantlyhigher wages for all groups of workers aged 25 and over, relative to the youngestgroup, and little
differenceamong these groups (althoughthe estimatesare not inconsistentwith a quadraticearningsprofile). Finally,
the hypothesistests indicatedthat the wage premium for all groupsof workers aged 25 and over significantlyexceeds
any productivitydifferential. Thus, these results parallel those in Table 3, except that the evidencefor workers aged
35-54 is somewhatstronger. Note that we are estimatingrelativewage and marginalproductivityprofiles;thus, our

                                                          21
VII 4 The Marriape Premium

         In Table 3, the estimated wage differential associated with marriage is approximately                        26%

and is statistically significant.     The productivity differential is estimated to be somewhat higher, at

29% or 58% depending on the specification, and both estimates are statistically significant.                         The p-

value for the test of the equality of the wage and productivity marriage premia is 0.76 in the output

specification, and 0.22 in the value-added specification.             These findings imply that married workers

are compensated      for being more productive than unmarried workers.                The fact that the marriage wage

premium reflects an underlying productivity premium suggests that the premium is not attributable to

discrimination    in favor of married workers, but is instead consistent with married workers being

more productive--whether         because of selection or a true productivity effect (see Korenman and

Neumark, 1991).

VIII. Analvsis of Robustness           and Potential Biases

         We now turn to numerous analyses of the robustness of the results reported in the previous

section, and of potential sources of bias. To some extent we focus on sex differentials in relative

wages and marginal products, since these results are likely to be most controversial.                    Accordingly,         we

also focus on the output specification, which yields a more conservative estimate of the evidence

consistent with discrimination        against women.24

VIII 1 Alternative     Wape Measures

          First, in Panel A of Table 4 we report translog output results using the alternative wage

measures .25 As shown in the first row of the table, the estimate of ~~ is stable, ranging from 0.84 to




results do not necessarily imply that older workers are paid more than their marginal product.
   241ngeneral, results for the analyses that follow were qualitatively similar for the value-added specification.
  ‘sAnnual total wage and salary information reported by the plant in the LRD corresponds very closely to annual total
wage and salary information in the plant estimated from the worker data, with similar means and a correlation of 0.98.


                                                             22
0.86. The estimated earnings differential (AF)is similar using LRD compensation        instead of wages

and salaries. Using the Census earnings measure, the estimate of AFdrops to 0.57. One reason for

the lower estimate of IF may be that women are less likely to report earnings from more than one job.

The results for black workers are consistent across the different wage measures, as are the results for

marriage differentials in wages and productivity.

          The estimated life-cycle profiles in Table 4 using the alternative earnings measure from the

Census indicate that wages rise significantly faster than productivity (which is estimated to have a

flat age profile).   Using LRD compensation,    the p-values for equality of relative marginal products

and wages are 0.09 for prime-aged workers, and effectively zero for older workers.      Using Census

wages and salaries, the p-values are effectively zero for both age groups. The estimated wage growth

in the Census may be upward biased, however, if prime-age workers are more likely to report

earnings from more than one job. Nonetheless, the combined evidence in Table 4 for life-cycle wage

and productivity profiles suggests that wage profiles are steeper than productivity profiles.

VIII. 2 Hours-Weighted     Estimates

          To this point, the percentages of labor input from each demographic     group were estimated

from the percentages     of workers in each demographic    group in the sample of workers matched to

each plant.   We now report results in which we instead compute these percentages based on hours

worked, calculated from weeks worked and usual hours worked per week as reported in the

Census.    As for the Census earnings measure, these data are problematic      because hours worked do

not necessarily correspond to hours worked solely at the matched establishment.         On the other

hand, it is desirable to try to incorporate hours information to avoid systematic biases in the

estimates of the @‘s and the k‘s.      For example, if women work fewer hours on average (for a

single employer) than do men, then the estimates of & and AFwill be downward biased.



                                                    23
         The specification    reported in Panel B of Table 4 is the hours-weighted       counterpart     to that in

columns (l)-(3) of Table 3. The estimates of&           and AFboth rise by 0.11, to 0.96 and 0.79,

respectively.   Similarly,   the estimates of&    and AR(the parameters for married workers) fall by

roughly the same amount, presumably reflecting the greater hours worked by married men.                    The

other estimated $‘s and A‘s change by less, but, as we would expect, always change in the same

direction for a particular demographic      characteristic.   The similar changes in the estimates of the

corresponding   @‘s and A‘s confirm our general presumption         that mismeasured     variables may bias

estimates of the $‘s and the A‘s, but are much less likely to bias estimates of the differences

between them.     As a result, the qualitative conclusions in Table 4 are the same as those in Table 3.

We still find that the sex gap in wages significantly exceeds the productivity         gap, that older

workers receive relative wages in excess of their relative marginal products,          and that there is no

evidence consistent with discrimination       against blacks, or in favor of ever-married    workers.

VIII 3 Relaxinp the Eauiurovortionate       and Eaual Relative Productivity Restrictions

        The way that labor enters the production function and the wage equation to this point is

restrictive in two senses. First, the relative marginal productivities    (wages) of two types of workers

within one demographic       group are restricted to equal the relative marginal productivities   (wages) of

those types of workers within another demographic group. Second, the proportion of workers

defined by one demographic group is restricted to be constant across all other groups.

        In Panels A and B of Table 5 we relax certain aspects of these restrictions.        To explain how

we do this, we discuss the methods and results underlying Panel A of Table 5 in detail, before going

onto the other results in the table, In Panel A, we relax both types of restrictions with regard to

marriage, race, and sex, based on evidence that the marriage wage premium for men does not carry

over to women, and that the race differential is larger for men than for women (e.g., Corcoran and



                                                       24
Duncan, 1979). These race andsexdifferences                    inwages suggest that itisofinterest       torelax the

restriction of equal relative marginal products that we imposed on QL, to see if similar patterns are

detectable with respect to productivity differentials.               In the production function, this yields a quality

of labor term of the form:

                         QL=(L+(@F-l)WFS     +($, -l) WMR+(@B-l)BMS+( $,”~B-l)BMR
                           +(@~”@F-@FI~
                                      -l)W~R +(@F”@B”@FxB
                                                       -l)~~~+(@F”@B”@~”@Fx~’@FIB
                                                                                -l)B~R)
               (12)
                            (l+(oG-l);)(l    +(@p-l):+(oo-l)      ;(l+($N-l):+(o,     -l):+   ($c-l)~!




where WFS denotes the number of non-black, never-man-ied females in the firm, WMR the number of

non-black married males, BMS the number of black, never-married males, etc. Introducing these

variables relaxes the equiproportionate           restriction regarding the distribution of workers.        The term

@,m is the coefficient on the interaction for being female and married. A finding that @,m=l would

indicate that the marriage productivity premium for women is no different than that for men. The

term ~~m is the interaction coefficient for black females, where $~m=l would imply that the

productivity     differential between men and women does not vary by race. We similarly augment the

wage equation to incorporate these interaction terms. Introducing these parameters relaxes the equal

relative productivity y restriction,zb

         We first estimate the unrestricted model, using the expression for QL in equation ( 12) and the

corresponding         term in the wage equation.       We then test which of the “interaction” coefficients (such

as @~~ are significantly different from one, and reestimated the equations retaining only these; if

either the productivity       or wage interaction is significant, we retain both of them for the corresponding

demographic characteristic.            We report the latter (restricted) set of estimates.       However, in the table

we always use the disaggregated estimates of the distribution of workers (WFS, WMR, etc.).


   260ne way to see that the formulation in equation (12) is correct is to impose this restriction on the parameters, impose
the equiproportionate assumption on the data (e.g., WMR = (R/L).(1 - {F/L})”(l - {B/L})), and note that the original
quali~ of labor term in equation (8) results.

                                                                25
         For neither wages nor productivity were any of the estimated interaction coefficients

significantly different from one. We therefore report the filly restricted model, but without imposing

the equiproportionate     restriction on the data.27 The estimates and test results closely parallel the

corresponding      estimates in Table 3. Thus, the imposition in Table 3 of the equiproportionate

assumption on the data--at least for the demographic categories that we have considered here--has

little or no effect on the estimates,

         In Panel B we carry out a similar exercise, but relax the restrictions with regard to sex and

occupation, allowing the proportion of the workforce in each occupation to vary by sex, and wage

and productivity     differentials to vary by sex across occupations.          Our primary interest is in the

sensitivity of estimated wage and productivity differentials by sex to these restrictions--especially               the

restriction that the occupational distribution by sex is the same.

         In the unrestricted model, only the interactions for managerial/professional            workers and

technical, sales, etc., workers were significant, so the specification retaining these is reported in Panel

B, In this case, the coefficients for female in the top panel refer to unskilled workers (operators,

fabricators, and laborers) and precision production, crafi, and repair workers.             Among these workers,

the relative wage of women is less than their relative marginal productivity             (0.64 vs. 0.77), and the

estimates are significantly different from each other (p-value = 0.03). The last two rows of the panel

report sex differences in wages and productivity for the other two occupational categories .28 The sex

gap in wages exceeds that in productivity (significantly) for technical, sales, etc., workers, but for

managerial/professional     workers, the opposite is true, although the difference between the sex gap in

wages and in productivity      is insignificant.          The extra information that we obtain from Panel B of


   27Manipulationof the equationsin footnote8 showsthat this leadsto a differentspecificationfrom the fully-restricted
version.
   26Weobtain these by multiplyingthe parameterestimatesfor the referencegroupby the estimatedinteraction
parameters. For example, the marginal productivity of managerial/professional women (relative to
managerial/professional men) is 0.77   x   0.87 = 0.67.

                                                                26
Table 5, then, is that the evidence consistent with sex discrimination        comes from the non-managerial

and non-professional    occupations, in which 86°/0 of the women in the sample work.

VIII 4 Relaxing the Pe<kct Substitutes Assum~tion

           We next consider estimates of a production function in which workers are imperfect rather

than perfect substitutes.     It seems to us most natural to separate labor inputs along occupational       lines.

We therefore estimate a production function of the form


             (13)    In(Y) = ln(~) +~ln(K) +~ln(M) +yPln(QLP)   + yNPln(QLNP) + g(K,M, QLP, QLNP) + P,




where the subscripts ‘P’and ‘NP’ denote production and non-production            workers, respectively,    and

g(K,M, QLr, QL~p) represents the higher-order terms in the translog production function.29 The QL

terms in equation(13)       are of the same form as equation (8), but defined for the two subsets of

workers.    The wage equation is of the same form as equation (9), except that production and non-

production workers (in each demographic group) are broken out separately.             We assume that the $’s

and A’s are the same for both types of workers, which permits us to focus on the effects of relaxing

the perfect substitutes assumption.30 In interpreting these results, recall our earlier caveat that

estimates for non-production      workers may be problematic because the sample of plants includes

production units only. Nonetheless, the evidence indicates that the specification of the labor input in

terms of perfect vs. imperfect substitutes does not affect the results; the estimates reported in Panel C

of Table 5 lead to very similar conclusions to those for the perfect substitutes specification.3’


   ‘gProductionworkersincludethe two blue-collaroccupations,and non-productionworkersincludethe other two
occupations, Withthis form of the productionfunction,output is zero for any plantswithout workersin an occupation
category. We had to drop 219 plants with eitherno productionworkersor no non-productionworkersin the matched
sampleof workers. Had we enteredall four occupationsas imperfectlysubstitutablelabor inputs,we would have had to
drop many more observations.
   301nestimatesrelaxingthis assumption,the only qualitativedifferencewas that ordy for productionworkers (and only
for older workers) was there significantevidencethat wages rise faster than productivity.
   3’Infact, the estimatesalso changeslightlybecausethe sampleis smaller. Whenwe estimatedthe perfect substitutes
output specificationon this sample,all of the statisticalconclusionswere the same. However, the relative marginal

                                                        27
VIII. 5 Results<for SubsamA~les ofthe Data

         The WECD only contains information on a cross-section of workers from 1990. Because of

this, we are unable to account formally (say, through a fixed-effects analysis) for differences across

plants in unobservable        that maybe correlated with the demographic characteristics           of a plant. If

these unobservable plant-level characteristics affect both the productivity of the plant and the wages

that the plant pays (which would occur if labor markets are segmented along the dimension of these

unobservable),     then, as we argue above, we would expect the omission of these plant-level

characteristics to bias in the same way both our estimates of productivity differences and wage

differences so as not to negate our test of the equality of the two differentials.           If, however, these

plant-level characteristics     solely affect the productivity of the plant but do not affect wages, then we

have reason to worry that only our estimated productivity differentials are biased. While we cannot

account for all unobservable plant-level differences, in this section we try to get a sense of the

magnitude of this problem by breaking up the sample along dimensions in which we think plants may

differ. By doing this, we account for at least some differences across plants that maybe related to

their demographic composition.         In the next section, we look at additional evidence on the role of

unobservable.

         Durables and Nondurable

         In Panel A of Table 6, we split the sample into those plants producing durable goods and

those producing nondurable goods. This division is informative because women tend to work in

plants that produce nondurable goods, such as textiles, and because the percent female in a plant is

negatively correlated with the use of materials in that plant. These considerations              suggest that




product of women was noticeably higher (0.94 vs. 0.85 in Table 3), as was the relative marginal product of married
workers (1.50 vs. 1.29 in Table 3).

                                                          28
women may tend to work in industries with production technologies different from those in which

men work.

         The results for both durable- and nondurable-producing      plants are similar to the full-sample

results. The estimates of the sex differential in productivity suggest that women may be less

productive, especially in nondurable.      But the estimated wage gaps (40Y0 in nondurable,       and 32V0

in durables) are both significantly larger than the productivity gaps, consistent with sex

discrimination.    The results for the other coefficients are consistent with the full-sample results,

although the estimates are less precise. The results for the tests of the equality of the productivity       and

wage differentials are unchanged, with older workers earning relative wages that exceed their relative

marginal products.

        Percent Female

        In Panel B of Table 6, we divide the sample into plants with above- and below-median

percentages female in the workforce, for three reasons. First, the nature or extent of sex

discrimination    may differ in plants with varying proportions of female workers.     Second, women may

work disproportionately    in plants with technologies different from plants which employ mostly men.

Finally, we can help address the argument that labor-saving technology biases upward the estimate of

$,, which we return to below. If our previous estimates of $, were biased upward because of

variation across plants in labor-saving technology coupled with positive covariation between such

technology and the percent female, then when we split the sample into plants with relatively higher or

lower percentages of women, the estimate of $~ should fall, as we effectively condition on this

technology.

        The results are different for the two subsamples.     First, in the predominantly   female plants

women are estimated to be 210/0 less productive than men and to be paid 26°/0 percent less. These

differentials are not significantly different from each other, consistent with no sex discrimination.        In

                                                      29
the predominantly      male plants, the estimated productivity differential falls to 1‘A, although the wage

differential stays large at 28%. There is a large standard error on the productivity differential,

however, so that even though the gap between the point estimates of the relative productivity                    and

wage is 27°/0, we cannot formally reject the equality of the two. The results therefore indicate that the

extent of sex discrimination      is lower in plants with large numbers of women, and that this finding is

driven by differences in relative productivity, not in relative wages. With regard to biases from

labor-saving technological       change, we do not find that the estimate of $~ falls in both subsamples;

moreover, it actually rises in plants with fewer women, casting doubt on this interpretation                  of our

findings .32

          Em~lovment Levels

          Finally, we disaggregate the plants into those with employment levels above and below the

median.    These results may provide some indication of possible differences in the extent of

discrimination    between large and small plants. In addition, because the division of plants by

employment       levels corresponds closely to the division of plants based on number of workers matched

to a plant, these results give us some sense of the effect that measurement error in the percentage of

workers in each demographic category may have on our results. That is, we match large numbers of

workers to large plants but few workers to small plants, so that measurement                 error should be less

problematic in large plants.

          The estimated degree of discrimination         against women (measured by the estimate of $~ - ~,)

is smaller in the smaller plants ( 16°/0versus 430/0). These results suggest that smaller firms are less

able to indulge in sex discrimination,       which may be in part because they have less market power


   32Splitting up the sample into industries (as opposed to plants) with high and low percentages of women produces
results that more strongly point to differences between plants in the degree of sex discrimination. Specifically, in
industries with below-median percent female, there is no estimated productivity gap, but the estimated wage gap is 38°/0
and statistically significantly different from the productivity estimate. For industries with above-median percent female,
there is no statistically significant difference between the sex wage and productivity gap.

                                                            30
(Becker, 1971). As with the results for the subsamples broken out by percent female, this is driven

by differences in relative productivities    between men and women rather than differences in relative

wages. In addition, in the smaller plants there is now marginally significant evidence that prime-age

males (aged 35-54) are paid in excess of their relative marginal product.     Overall, though, the other

qualitative conclusions are similar for the large and small plants. In addition, we do not find that

estimates of the $’s and l’s are consistently closer to one in the sample of small plants, as

measurement      error might lead us to expect (in the absence of other differences in parameters between

large and small plants).

VIII 6 Biases from Labor-Savin~      Technical Innovation

           We next examine evidence on whether biases from unmeasured labor-saving technical

change can explain why we find that the relative pay of women falls short of their relative marginal

product.    For a subset of industries we have independent information on technological     innovation

from the Census Bureau’s 1988 Survey of Manufacturing          Technology (see Doms, et al., 1994), This

survey covered over 10,000 establishments        in SIC industries 34-38 (which are high-technology

industries).   Over 350 establishments      in the WECD can be matched to establishments    in this survey.

The matched establishments      can be used to ask whether the use of advanced technologies     is in fact

associated with lower percentages of production workers, and whether, for those technologies that

appear to replace production workers, there also tends to be a higher percent female.

           The results are reported in Table 7. Panel A first reports the percent production workers and

percent female, for plants that did and did not use each of the advanced technologies      indicated.    Panel

B reports summary findings.      The first finding is that there is no evidence that these advanced

technologies    are associated with fewer production workers; Panel B shows that just over half (nine)

of the technologies    are associated with a lower percentage of production workers.    We also find that

the percent female tends to be lower, rather than higher, in plants using the advanced technologies.

                                                       31
As Panel B shows, of those technologies associated with a lower percentage of production workers,

seven are associated with a lower percent female, and only one is associated with a higher percent

female. Moreover, only two of the advanced technologies are associated with a higher percent

female. Thus, for this subset of industries at least, there is no evidence suggesting that the estimated

relative marginal productivity of women is biased upward because the percent female tends to be

higher in plants that have installed technology that saves on male production labor, or on male labor

generally .33

VIII 7 Measurement        Error

         Although we only have estimates of the percentage of workers in each demographic                      group in

each plant, until now we have treated these percentages as known for the purposes of estimation.                        In

this section, we explore more fully the potential effects of measurement error that arises from

estimating these percentages.       It should be noted that measurement error in the estimates of the

percentage of workers in each demographic group will affect both the wage and productivity

equations, and it is the comparison between corresponding coefficients in the two equations that is of

primary interest. Nonetheless,       to the extent that productivity differentials across workers may be of

independent interest, and to the extent that measurement error may under some circumstances                      bias

coefficients different y in the wage and productivity equations, it is an issue that merits consideration.

         We have already discussed two types of indirect evidence suggesting that measurement                      error

is not causing large biases in our results: first, the results from the individual-level           wage equations in

Table 2 do not differ greatly from the plant-level wage equation results in Table 3; and second, the


   “The reader might wonderwhetherthe relativelylow estimatesof the marginalproductivityof older workersin the
precedingtables stem from a negativeassociationbetweenthe use of advancedtechnologiesand the proportion of
workersaged 55 and over, perhapsbecausedecliningplants do not updatetheir technologiesand do not hire as many new
workersas other plants. However,the proportionof workersaged 55 and overwas virtuallythe same for plants that did
or did not use each of the technologieslisted in Table7. For 13 of the 17 technologies these proportions were equal (to
two digits), and the proportions never differed by more than .02. Thus, our estimates of lower productivity of older
workers do not appear to be attributable to the association of less-advanced technologies with high proportions of older
workers.

                                                           32
results do not differ greatly when we break the sample into large and small plants. In this section, we

quantify the magnitudes of measurement error biases with a Monte Carlo simulation.34

          Consider the production fanction and wage equations given by equations (6), (8), and (9).35

From the data, we know the true values of Y, K, M, and L for each plant. All of the remaining

variables (F/L, WL, etc.) are estimated from the sample of T workers within each plant. We simulate

the effects of measurement        error by creating a synthetic workforce of L workers for each plant. We

do this by creating L/T (rounded to the nearest integer) synthetic workers for each of the T workers in

the sample. With this new synthetic workforce of L workers, we sample randomly without

replacement T workers, and use this simulated sample to estimate the proportions of workers in each

demographic      group.3G Finally, we use these simulated estimates of these proportions to jointly

estimate the production function and wage specifications in columns (1) and (2) of Table 3, obtaining

new estimates of the productivity and wage differentials (the $’s and A’s) across demographic                       groups,

We repeat this process 1000 times, yielding 1000 different values for each of the ~’s and k’s. This

procedure enables us to assess the impact on our results of measurement error in the estimated

proportions of workers in each demographic group, by comparing model estimates based on the

simulated data to model estimates based on the WECD data, which we treat as true. In other words,

we assess the impact of measurement error on the estimated $’s and A’sby adding sampling error to


   34A1though we know the number of workerssampledin eachplant, we do not implementa formalcorrectionfor the
measurementerrorbias that results from samplingerror. This correctionwouldrequirea consistentestimateof the
varianceof the measurementerror,which variesby plant dependingon the true proportionof workers in any particular
catego~, (For example, at one extreme, in a plant with no female workers the variance of the measurement error in the
proportion female is zero,) In other contexts, measurement-error corrections of this type (with non-homogeneous error
variances across observations) result in near-singular covariance matrices, because of a high ratio of error variance to total
variance (Cockbum and Griliches, 1987).
   351nthis section we do not estimate a separate coefficient for blacks versus non-blacks. The simulation requires
repeated sampling of workers within a plant, and there are too few blacks in the sample to successfully estimate a race
coefficient for many of the simulations.
   3GForexample, suppose in the WECD we have four men and six women matched to a plant (T=l O), and we know from
the LRD that there are 100 workers in the plant (L=1OO). We then create a simulated sample of forty men (four x 100/1 O)
and sixty women (six x 100/1O). Finally, we sample 10 members of this sample, and obtain a new estimate of the
proportion female.

                                                             33
the estimated proportions of workers in each demographic group, and re-estimating these

parameters.37

          Summary results of the 1000 simulations are reported in columns (3) and (4) of Table 8, and

can be compared to the results from Table 3 (repeated in columns (1) and (2)) to assess the

magnitude of the biases caused by estimating the demographic proportions.                    The results indicate

measurement      error biases that, as expected, pull the estimated coefficients toward one, and are

greater in magnitude the farther fi-om one is the true value. For example, the mean estimate of ~~ in

the simulations is 0.89, and the estimate using the actual data is 0.85; the mean estimate of AFin the

simulations is 0.75, and the estimate using the actual data is 0.68. These results show that the effect

of measurement      error is to bias us toward finding no discemable productivity or wage differentials

across workers, and toward finding no differences between the relative productivity                   and wage

estimates for a given type of worker (since estimates of parameters that are further from one have

larger absolute biases toward one). Thus, the power of the tests of the equality of wage and

productivity    differentials is somewhat reduced because of measurement error.

         We therefore conclude from the simulation that our earlier estimates indicating significant

estimated gaps between relative wages and productivity for women and older workers are robust to

the measurement      error problem.     On the other hand, we consistently found evidence of the equality of

relative wage and productivity premia for married workers, using the actual data. However, the

closeness of the point estimates of these premia, the relatively large estimated standard error of the

productivity    premium, and the similarity between the distributions of the simulated estimates for the

wage and productivity       premia in Table 8, lead us to believe that even in the absence of measurement




   “Because the estimated proportions of workers in each category that we treat as known for our simulation are
overdispersed relative to the true population distribution, the extent of measurement error bias indicated by our simulation
method is a lower bound for the magnitude of measurement error in the real data.

                                                            34
error, we would still find no significant difference between the wage and productivity premia for

married workers.3 g

IX. Conclusions

         This paper uses individual-level      data on workers matched with plant-level data on inputs,

output and earnings, to estimate the relative wages and relative marginal products of workers with

different demographic characteristics,       We use a production function approach to plants’

technologies,   and a simple model of the wage structure of each plant, coupled with a unique data set

matching workers and employers.         We interpret the results in the context of numerous issues

regarding the determination      of wage differences between demographic groups, which have previously

been addressed based largely on individual-level         wage regressions, in the absence of evidence on

productivity.

         Our basic results indicate that for certain groups of workers, wage differentials do, in fact,

match productivity       differentials, while for others they do not. Workers who have ever been married

are paid more than never-married workers and the wage premium they receive reflects a

corresponding    productivity premium.      This suggests that the marriage premium does not simply

reflect discrimination     against unmarried workers, but reflects actual productivity y differences.

However, our data do not distinguish between the hypothesis that marriage reflects an unobservable

variable associated with higher wages, and the hypothesis that marriage makes workers more

productive.

         We find that prime-aged workers (aged 35-54) are equally as productive as their younger

counterparts, but in some specifications, the relative wage is significantly higher than any estimated


   ‘*The distribution of the productivity premium bounds that of the wage premium. Below the median, the productivity
premium is slightly below the wage premium; above the median, the productivity premium is greater than the wage
premium. The magnitude of the estimated standard error on the marriage productivity premium in Table 3 alone suggests
that measurement error would have to be reducing the gap between the wage and productivity premia by a factor of seven
before we would reject equality of the wage and productivity marriage premia.

                                                         35
relative productivity   differentials.   Results for older workers (aged 55 and over) are more robust, with

the evidence generally indicating a wage premium that exceeds any estimated productivity

differential (which is, in fact, sometimes significantly negative).      This evidence is probably most

consistent with Lazear’s (1979) explanation of rising earnings over the life cycle.

        We consistently find no evidence consistent with discrimination         against blacks in

manufacturing,    in the fill-sample     as well as the disaggregated results. In addition, there does not

appear to be any productivity differential between blacks and non-blacks which might be attributable

to pre-market discrimination      or other unobserved characteristics, although we are less confident in

our separate estimates of the race gap in wages and the race gap in productivity than in our estimates

of the difference between them.

        Finally, in nearly all of our specifications and samples we find that women are paid

significantly less than men, with the wage differential between men and women generally estimated

at about 25-3 5°/0, depending on the wage measure we use. The productivity          differentials between

men and women are less robust. The most conservative translog estimates indicate that women may

be as much as 15V0less productive than men, although this differential may reflect differences in

hours worked,     Regardless of this, across of a wide variety of analyses the sex wage gap is

significantly larger than the sex productivity gap, consistent with sex discrimination.       There are only

two exceptions.    First, for plants with a large proportion of female workers, we estimate that women

are less productive and are paid less, but we do not find a wage gap that is much larger than the

productivity   gap. Second, we do not find evidence consistent with sex discrimination         in wages for

managerial/professional     workers.

        As we discuss above, we cannot filly account for unobserved plant-specific          differences that

are correlated with the quality of workers. If these omitted plant-specific      factors affect productivity

but not wages (or vice-versa), our tests of the equality of relative wages and relative productivities

                                                         36
may be biased.      We have examined this problem as fully as we can within the context of our cross-

sectional data, however, and have not found much evidence that supports this. In particular, our

conclusion that the sex wage gap is significantly larger than the sex productivity gap in many plants

and for most occupations will only be overturned by compelling evidence from other data that

women are systematically      working in less-productive    (but not lower-paying) plants.

         We have interpreted the results presented herein a structural framework, in which the

estimates from the production function represent relative marginal products of workers and the

estimates from the wage equation represent relative wages. We readily acknowledge that the results

can interpreted in a less structural manner, as comparing average productivity differentials across

plants to average wage differentials, and relating these differences to the characteristics     of the

workers in those plants. Even with this interpretation, this research still teaches us considerably more

than what we can learn solely from individual-level        wage regressions.   Finally, under either

interpretation    of our estimates, our results suggest many important avenues for fature research--using

the WECD--on the variation of wages and productivity across workers both within and between

establishments.




                                                      37
                                                        References



Allen, Steven G. 1984. “Unionized Construction Workers Are More Productive. ” Quarterly Journal
ofEconomics 91(4): 543-69.

Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell, 1992. “Productivity Dynamics in
Manufacturing Plants.” Brookings Papers: Macroeconomics, pp. 187-266.

Becker, Gary S. 1985. “Human Capital, Effort, and the Sexual Division of Labor.” Journal of Labor
Economics 3(1, Supp.): S33-S58.

—.       1975. Human Ca~ital (Second Edition, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press).


—.      1971. The Economics of Discrimination              (Second Edition, Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press).

Ben-Porath, Yoram. 1967. “The Production of Human Capital and the Life Cycle of Earning s.”
Journal of Political Economy 75(4, Pt. 1): 352-65.

Bergmann, Barbara R, 1974. “Occupational Segregation, Wages, and Profits When Employers
Discriminate by Race and Sex.” Eastern Economic Journal 1:1199-1221.

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches. 1994. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor within
U.S. Manufacturing: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufactures, ” Quarterly Journal of
Economics      109(2): 367-98.

Blau, Francine       D. 1977. Eaual Pav in the Office (Lexington,          MA: Lexington        Books).

Bowden,      Roger J., and Darrell   A. Turkington.      1984. Instrumental     Variables      (Cambridge:      Cambridge
University    Press).

Brown,    Charles,      and James L. Medoff.   1978. “Trade Unions         in the Production     Process.”     Journal of
Political Economy 84:355-78.

Barrington, William        and Kenneth   Troske.   1994.     “Intefilrm   Racial Segregation.     ” Mimeograph,         Johns
Hopkins University.

Clark, Kim. 1980. “The Impact         of Unionization       on Productivity:   A Case Study. ” Industrial         and
Labor Relations Review 33(4): 451-69.

Cockbum, Ian, and Zvi Griliches. 1987. “Industry Effects and Appropriability                     Measures      in the Stock
Market’s Valuation of R & D and Patents,” NBER Working Paper No. 2465.

Corcoran, Mary, and Greg J. Duncan. 1979. “Work History, Labor Force Attachment,                             and Earnings
Differences Between Races and Sexes.” Journal of Human Resources 14:3-20.
Cox, Donald, and John V. Nye. 1989, “Male-Female  Wage Discrimination                                     in Nineteenth-Century
France.” Journal ofEcorzomic History XLIX(4): 903-20.

Crepon,      Bruno,     and Jacques      Mairesse.      1993. “Productivity,        Recherche-Developpement             et
Qualifications.”         INSEE-Methodes           37-38:181-200.

Doms, Mark, Timothy                Dunne,    and Kenneth        R. Troske.     1995. “Workers,       Wages,    and Technology.”
Mimeograph,           Center for Economics           Studies,    U.S. Census Bureau.

Foster,    Andrew       D., and Mark R. Rosenzweig.                1993. “Information,        Learning,     and Wage Rates in
Low-Income         Rural Areas.” Journal of Human Resources 28(4): 759-90.

Frank, Robert          H., and Robert       M. Hutchens.        1993. “Wages,      Seniority,     and the Demand        for Rising
Consumption           Profiles.”   Journal of Economic Behavior and organization                      21(2):251-76.

Goldberg,      Matthew        S. 1982. “Discrimination,           Nepotism,      and Long-Run        Wage Differentials.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 97(2): 307-19.

Griliches,     Zvi. 1970. “Notes on the Role of Education                     in Production     Functions     and Growth
Accounting.      ” In W. L. Hansen,          Ed., Education.        Income.     and Human       Ca~ital     (New York: Columbia
University      Press), pp. 71-115.

Griliches, Zvi and Vidar Ringstad. 1971. Economies                        of Scale in the Form of the Production                Function
(Amsterdam:   North-Holland  Publishing Company).

Groshen,      Erica.    1991.      “The Structure     of the Female/Male          Wage Differential:         Is h Who You Are,
What You Do, or Where You Work?”                        The Journal of Human Resources, 226(3): 457-472.

Hellerstein, Judith K., and David Neumark.                      1995. “Are Earnings Profiles Steeper than Productivity
Profiles? Evidence from Israeli Firm-Level                      Data?” Journal of Human Resources 30(1): 89-112.


—.    1994. “Sex, Wages, and Productivity:                      An Empirical      Analysis      of Israeli Firm-Level        Data.”
Mimeograph,  Michigan State University.

Holzer,      Harry J. 1990. “The Determinants               of Employee        Productivity      and Earnings.”     Industrial
Relations 29(3): 403-22.

Jorgenson,      Dale W,, Laurhs          R. Christensen,        and Lawrence       J. Lau. 1973. “Transcendental
Logarithmic        Production       Frontiers.”   Review of Economics and Statistics 55(l): 28-45.

Korenman,    Sanders, and David Neumark. 1991. “Does Marriage                             Really Make Men More
Productive?”   Journal ofHuman Resources 26(2): 282-307.

Lazear,      Edward     P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory                 Retirement?”         Journal of Political Economy
87(6): 1261-84.
Leonard, Jonathan S. 1984. “Anti-Discrimination                 or Reverse Discrimination:   The Impact of Title VII,
Affirmative Action and Changing Demographics                    on Productivity. ” Journal of Human Resources 19:
145-74.

Loewenstein,          George,   and Nachum     Sicherman.     1991. “Do Workers         Prefer Increasing     Wage
Profiles?”     Journal ofLabor       Economics 9(l): 67-84.

Lucas, Robert         E., Jr. 1978. “On the Size Distribution       of Business    Firms. ” Bell Journal of Economics
9 (Autumn):       508-23.

McGuckin,        Robert     and George    Pascoe.   “The Longitudinal      Research     Database     (LRD):   Status and
Research      Possibilities,”    Survey of Current Business (November             1988): 30-37.

Medoff,      James L., and Katherine        G. Abraham.      1980. “Experience,       Performance,     and Earning    s.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 95:703-736.

Mincer,      Jacob.    1974. Schoolin~.    Experience.      and Earnings   (New York: Columbia          University    Press).

Neurnark, David. 1988. “Employers’ Discriminatory Behavior                     and the Estimation       of Wage
Discrimination.” Journal of Human Resources 23:279-95.

Rosen,     Sherwin.      1983. “A Note on Aggregation          of Skills and Labor Quality.”         Journal of Human
Resources 18(3): 425-31.

Troske, Kenneth R. 1993. “The Worker-Establishment                    Characteristics     Database.”    Mimeograph,
Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.


—~     1994. “Evidence on the Employer Size-Wage Premia From Worker-Establishment                                 Matched
Data.” Mimeograph,    Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau.
                                                                         Table 1
                                                   Descriptive Statistics for Matched Establishments


                                                              Standard                                                                   Standard
                                                              ~                                                                          deviation
                                                    (1)          (2)                                                                        (4)
LRD Data                                                                        Census of Population Data
bg output ($1,Ooo)                               10.19          1.33            Log estimated wages and salaries ($1,000)     8.38         1,17

hg value added ($1,000)                           9.34          1.39            Proportion of LRD employment matched          0.12         0.08
hg capital ($1,000)                               8.82          1.53
Log cost of materials ($1,000)                    9.43          1.51              Proportion   with   2-5 workers matched     0.14
                                                                                  Proportion   with   6-10 workers matched    0.18
bg wages and salaries ($1,000)                    8.40          1.17              Proportion   with   11-20 workers matched   0.24
Log compensation costs ($1 ,000)                  8.62          1.18              Proportion   with   21-40 workers matched   0.21
                                                                                  Proportion   with   41+ workers matched     0.24
Employment                                      353.0         846.8
                                                                                Proportions:
Establishment age:                                                                Female                                      0.30         0.23
  1-13 years                                      0.22
  14-26 years                                     0.33                            Black                                       0.07         0.12
  27-39 years                                     0.28
  40+ years                                       0.17                            Aged 34 or less                             0.39        0.20
                                                                                  Aged 35-54                                  0.48        0.18
Establishment size:                                                               Aged 55 or more                             0,13        0.12

  1-75 employees                                  0.22                            Some college                                0,36        0.21
  76-150 employees                                0.25
  151-350 employees                               0.29                            Ever married                                0,84        0.14
  351 + employees                                 0.25
                                                                                  Managerial/professioml workers              0,15        0.15
Industry:                                                                         Technical, sales, administrative,
  Food products and tobacco products              0.16                              and service workers                       0,20        0.15
  Textile mill products, apparel, and leather     0.07                            Precision production, craft,
    and leather products                                                            and repair workers                        0.20        0.15
  Lumber and wood products and furniture          0.04                            Operators, fabricators, and laborers        0,45        0.22
    fixtures
  Paper and allied products and printing         0.16
    and publishing
  Chemicals and petroleum refining               0.10
  Rubber and plastics                            0.05
  Stone/clay/glass/concrete                      0.04
  Primary metals                                 0.08
  Fabricated metal products                      0.08
  Machinery/computer equipment                   0.06
  Electrical/Electronic equipment                0.06
  Transportation equipment                       0.06
  Instruments/clocks/optical goods               0.03
    and miscellaneous manufacturing

Region:
  Northeast                                      0.29
  Midwest                                        0.44
  south                                          0.23
  West                                           0.05

Multiple-establishment unit                      0.82

There are 3,102 establishment-level observations, and 128,460 matched individuals from the Census. The sample is restricted to those establishments
with total employment of 20 or more, for which at least 5% of employees are matched
                                                         Table 2
                                 Individual-Level Census bg Wage/Earnings Regressions


                             Specifications with Usual Individual-        Specifications with Variables      Fixed
                                   and Plant-Level Controls               Used in Plant-Level Analvsis    Plant Effects
Dependent Variable:   Log wage            Log earnings     Log earnings           Log earnings            Log earnings
                         (1)                   (2)              (3)                     (4)                    (5)
Individual-level
 variables:
Female                -0.29               -0.38             -0.33                   -0.35                   -0.32
                       (0,002)            (0.003)           (0.003)                  (0,003)                 (0.003)

Black                 -0.03               -0.07             -0.06                   -0.05                   -0,08
                      (0.004)              (0.01)           (0.01)                  (0.01)                  (0.01)


Age                    0.05                0.09              0.07                      ,..                      ..
                       (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.001)

Agez x 10-2            -0.05              -0.09             -0.08                          .                   ..
                       (0.001)             (0.001)          (0.001)

Age 35-54                 ..                   .                                     0.21                    0.19
                                                                                    (0.003)                 (0.003)

Age 55+                  ..                                                          0,20                     0.18
                                                                                    (0,005)                  (0.004)

Ever married           0.10                 0.16              0.14                   0.27                    0.25
                       (0.003)             (0.004)           (0.004)                 (0.004)                (0.004)

Hiehest deeree
attained:
High-school diploma     0.12                0.17              0.13                         ..
                       (0.003)             (0.004)           (0.004)

Some college/           0.20                0.26              0.18                     .
 no degree             (0,004)             (0.005)           (0.004)

A. A. degree            0.24                0.32              0.21                         .
                       (0.01)              (0.01)            (0.01)

B.A. or B.S. degree     0.46                0.56             0.35                      .
                       (0.004)             (0,01)            (0.01)

Advanced degree         0.62                0.72              0.46                                              .
                       (0.01)              (0,01)            (0,01)

Some college             ...                                    .                     0.13                    0.11
or higher                                                                            (0,003)                 (0.003)

MSA                     0.13                0.13              0.09                         .
                       (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.003)

Dnmmv variables
included for:
Region (4)               Yes                 Yes               Yes                     Yes                      .
Occupation               No                  No                Yes                     No                      No
 (one-digit)
Occupation (4)            No                  No               No                      Yes                     Yes
                                                                 Table 2 (continued)


                                           Specifications with Usual Individual-        Specifications with Variables       Fixed
                                        ~                                               Used in Plant-hvel Analvsis     Plant Effects
Dependent Variable:                 Log wage           Log earnings      Log earnings           Log earnings            Log earnings
                                       (1)                  (2)               (3)                     (4)                    (5)

Phnt-level
variables:
Log establishment                       ..                 ..             -0.05                     ...                         ..
 employment                                                               (0,002)

Log capital                            ...                 ...              0.07                   0.06
                                                                           (0,002)                (0.002)

Log materials                          ...                 ,,.             0.04                    0,04                     .
                                                                          (0.002)                 (0,002)

Dummv variables
 included for:
Industry (two-digit)                   Yes                 Yes               Yes                    No                      . .
Industry (13)                          No                  No                No                     Yes                     ,..
Establishment size (4)                 No                  No                No                     Yes                      ..
Establishment age (4)                  No                  No                Yes                    Yes                      ..

R’                                    0.43               0.43              0.49                    0.42                     . .

Standard errors of the estimates are reported in parentheses. The sample size is 128,460. The sample includes all individuals matched to the
establishments used in the analysis in the following tables. Less than high-school diploma is the omitted education category.
                                                                     Table 3
                   Joint Production Function and Wage Equation Estimates: Translog Output and Value-Added Production Functions,
                                                         Using LRD Wages and Salaries


                                          Outout specification                                       Value-added s~ecification
                                            ~g(wages and           p-value,                               Log(wages and         p-value,
                           Loe(outDttt\        H                 CO1.(l)= COI.(2)      Log(value added~      a                CO1.
                                                                                                                                 (4) =CO1.(5)
                               (1)                 (2)                  (3)                   (4)               (5)                 (6)
~
characteristics:
Female                       0.85               0.68                 0.02                   0.96                0.66                0.00
                            (0.06)             (0.02)                                      (0.08)              (0.02)

Black                        1.09               1.06                 0.76                   1.07                1.06                0,91
                            (0.11)             (0.04)                                      (o. 14)             (0.04)

Aged 35-54                   0.98               1.08                 0.22                   1.16                1,09                0.54
                            (0.07)             (0.03)                                      (0.11)              (0.03)

Aged 55+                     0.75               1.09                 0.00                   0.89                1.11                0.13
                            (0.10)             (0.04)                                      (0.14)              (0.04)

Ever married                 1.29               1.25                 0.76                   1.58                1.27                0.22
                            (0.15)             (0,05)                                      (0.26)              (0.05)

Productive inDuts:
Log capital                  0,09               0.08                                        0.25                0.11
                            (0.01)             (0.01)                                      (0,02)              (0.01)
Log capital x                0.06                 . .                                       0.04                  . .
 log capital                (0,01)                                                         (0,01)
hg capital X                -0,06                  .                                          ..                  .,.
 log materials              (0.01)
bg capital X                 0.01                ..                                        -0.03                       .
 Iog labor quality          (0.01)                                                         (0.02)
Log materials                0,54               0.05                                          .                        .
                            (0.01)             (0.01)
hg materials X               0.17                .                                                                ,..
 log materials              (0.01)
Log materials x             -0.10                .,.                                                                  ..
 log labor quality          (0.01)
Log labor quality            0.44                                                           0.82
                            (0,02)                                                         (0.04)
Log labor quality            0.09                ,..                                        0.03                  .
 X log labor quality        (0.02)                                                         (0.04)

Other worker controls:
Some college                 1.74               1.27                                        1.55                1.28
                            (0.14)             (0.04)                                      (0,16)              (0.04)

Managerial/                  0,80               1.12                                        0.93                1.08
professional                (0,09)             (0.04)                                      (0.13)              (0,04)

Technical, sales,            1.04               1.14                                        1.15                1.13
administrative and          (0.09)             (0.04)                                      (0.12)              (0.04)
 service

Precision production,        0.86               1.03                                        0.99                1.01
 craft, and repair          (0.09)             (0.04)                                      (0,12)              (0.04)

Standard errors of the estimates are reported in parentheses. The sample size is 3,102. Estimates of tbe intercept are not reported. Test statistics
are from Wald tests. The excluded occupation is operators, fabricators, and laborers. Other control variables included in the production function
are: industries (13); size (4 categories); region (4); and establishment part of multi-plant firm. Other control variables included in the wage
equation are: industries (13); size (4 categories); region (4); and age of plant (4). These control variables were selected by estimating the
production function and wage equation jointly without the demographic controls, and retaining those sets of control variables that were jointly
significant at the one-percent level. For the output specification, we instrument with log materials in 1989 with log materials in 1987. The model
is estimated with the data transformed so that output is homogeneous of degree S in the inputs, where S is the sum of tbe coefficients of the linear
terms for the production function inputs. For variables that enter linearly, we use deviations from the means. For variables that enter nonlinearly,
we first estimate the model using the data in levels, and then take deviations from the means of the nonlinear terms. This two-step procedure is
valid because the estimated coefficients of all of the nonlinear terms are invariant to the deviations from the mean transformation.
                                                                      Table 4
                        Joint Production Function and Wage Equation Estimates: Translog Value-Added Production Function,
                              Using LRD Compensation Costs and Census Wages and Salaries, and Weighting by Hours,
                                               Estimated Coefficients of Demographic Characteristics




                                          LRD Compensation Costs                                       Census Waees and Salaries
                                                                  p-value,                                  Log(wages and         p-value,
                           Loz(outr)ut)     ~                   CO1.(1)= CO1,
                                                                           (2)             Loc(outout)         -               Col.(4) =coI. (5\
                               (1)                  (2)                (3)                     (4)                 (5)                (6)
Female                       0.84                 0.67             0.02                      0.86               0.57               0.00
                            (0.05)               (0.02)                                     (0.06)             (0.01)

Black                        1.09                 1.05              0.74                     1.09                1.02               0.62
                            (0,11)               (0.04)                                     (0.13)              (0.04)

Aged 35-54                   0.97                 1.11              0.09                     0.99                1.35               0.00
                            (0,07)               (0,03)                                     (0.08)              (0.03)

Aged 55+                     0.76                 1.15              0.00                     0.72                1.27               0.00
                            (0.09)               (0.05)                                     (0.11)              (0.04)

Ever married                 1.30                 1.29              0.95                     1.32                1.45               0.48
                            (0.14)               (0.05)                                     (0.17)              (0.06)

                                                               B. Weiehtine bv Hours

                                                                   bg(wages     and       p-value,
                                                  Loe(outDuo          ‘ti              Col.il) =Col (2)
                                                       (1)                (2)                 (3)
Female                                              0.96               0.79                0.00
                                                   (0.06)             (0.02)

Black                                               1.10               1.10                0,96
                                                   (0.12)             (0.04)

Aged 35-54                                          0.97               1.07                0.17
                                                   (0.07)             (0.03)

Aged 55+                                            0.77               1.14               0.00
                                                   (0.10)             (0,04)

Ever married                                        1.13               1.11                0.92
                                                   (o. 12)            (0,04)

See footnotes to Table 3 for details.
      “>




all
                                                                          Table 6
                              Joint Production Function and Wage Equation Estimates: Traoslog Value-Added Production Function,
                       Using LRD Wages and Salaries, Estimated Coefficients of Demographic Characteristics, Subsamples of the Data Set


                                                               A, Norrdurables and Durables

                                            Nondurable (N= 1694]                                            Durables (N= 1408)
                                               Log(wages and            p-value,                              Log(wages and           p-value,
                            be(outout)            salaries)             H                 Loe (oumut~            M                    -
                               (1)                (2)                    (3)                 (4)                 (5)                   (6)
Female                       0.85                0.60                  0.00                0.91                 0.68                 0.00
                            (0,08)              (0.02)                                    (0.07)               (0.03)

Black                        0.97                  1.03                0.64                 1,22                 1.08                0.36
                            (0.14)                (0,05)                                   (O.16)               (0,07)

Aged 35-54                   0.98                  1.09                0.29                 1,07                 1.12                0,63
                            (0.11)                (0,04)                                   (0,09)               (0.05)

Aged 55+                     0.78                  1.03                0.07                 0.84                 1.25                0.00
                            (0.15)                (0.06)                                   (o. 12)              (0.07)

Ever married                 1,23                  1.33                0,61                 1.20                 1,15                0.76
                            (0,19)                (0.08)                                   (0,16)               (0,07)

                                                              B. High and Low PercerrI Female

                     ~)                                                             Plants At or Below Median Percent Female (N= 1594)
Female                       0.79                  0,74                0.59                  0.99                 0,72              0.24
                            (o. 10)               (0,03)                                    (0.22)               (0.07)

Black                        1.27                  1.06                0.27                 0.74                 1.03                0.09
                            (0,17)                (0.06)                                   (0.16)               (0.06)

Aged 35-54                   0.89                  1.05                0.19                 1,05                 1.07                0,89
                            (0.11)                (0.05)                                   (0, 10)              (0.04)

Aged 55+                     0.83                  1.07                0.16                 0.65                 1.11                0.00
                            (0.15)                (0.07)                                   (0.13)               (0.05)

Ever married                 1.63                  1.29                0,27                 1.07                 1.18                0.50
                            (0,31)                (0.08)                                   (0, 15)              (0.06)

                                                               C. High and Low Employment

                           Below Median [166) Emulovment (N = 1551)                       Above Median Emulovment (N= 1551)
Female                      0,78                 0,62               0.00                   1.06               0,63                   0.00
                           (0.05)               (0.02)                                    (0.11)             (0.02)

Black                        1.10                  1.06                0.73                 0.82                 1.06                0,12
                            (0.11)                (0.04)                                   (0,16)               (0.06)

Aged 35-54                   0,98                  1.10                0.08                 1.11                 1.30                0,23
                            (0.07)                (0.03)                                   (0, 17)              (0.07)

Aged 55+                     0.78                  1.13                0.00                 0,58                 1.24                0,00
                            (0.09)                (0.05)                                   (0.20)               (0.09)

Ever married                 1,31                  1.27                0,78                 1.25                 1.54                0.37
                            (0,14)                (0.05)                                   (0.34)               (0,15)

See footnotes to Table 3 for details.
                                                         Table 7
                   Evidence on Percent Production Workers and Percent Female, Based on Technology Use


                                                   Uses technolo~v                         Does not use technolo~v
                                              Y. Production 9. female                      o~roduction y. female
                                                   (1)          (2)                           (3)           (4)
A. Individual technologies

m
Computer-aided engineering                          .67            .28                           ,76       .31
Computer-aided design/computer-aided                .67            .25                           ,70       .31
  manufacturing
Computer-aided design procurement                   .64            .27                           .71       .30
Automated material handling:
Automatic storage and retrieval system              .67            .24                           .70       .30
Automatic guided vehicle system                     .70            .23                           .69       .30
Fabrication. machinine. and assemblv:
Flexible manufacturing cell                         .69            .27                           .69       .30
Computer numerically controlled                     .67            .26                           .74       .36
Lasers                                              .70            .28                           .69       .29
Pick and place robots                               .73            .31                           .67       .28
Other robots                                        .73            .27                           .68       .30
Automated sensor based ins~ection
and/or testine eauipment:
Process materials                                   .67            .29                           .70       .29
Final product                                       .67            .31                           .70       .29
Communications and control:
LAN for technical data                              .67            ,27                           .71       .31
LAN for factory use                                 .70            .27                           ,69       .31
Intercompany computer network                       .69            .27                           ,69       .31
Programmable controllers                            .70            .27                           .67       .34
Computers on factoq poor                            .68            .28                           .71       .31

B. Summary

Number of technologies for which percent female*          for plants using technology:                    14
Number of technologies for which percent female -          for plants using technology:                    2

Number of technologies associated with lower percent production workers:                                   9
 Of these, number of technologies for which percent female w     for plants using technology:              7
 Of these, number of technologies for which percent female w      for plants using technology:             1

Data come from 1988 Survey of Manufacturing Technology, in the following 2-digit SIC industries: fabricated metal products,
industrial machinery and equipment, electronic and other electric equipment, transportation equipment, and instruments and
related products. The survey covers 10,526 establishments, 358 of which are in our sample. In Panel A, technologies that are
associated with lower proportions of production workers are highlighted with italics.
                                      Table 8: Measurement Error Simulation Results


                      Estimated                                           Simulated mean
                     productivity              Estimated wage               productivity            Simulated mean
                     ~                           differential                differential           waee differential
                          (1)                         (2)                         (3)                     (4)
Female                  0.85                        0.68                        0.89                     0.76
                       (0.06)                      (0.02)                      (0.04)                   (0.01)

Aged 35-54               0.98                       1.08                        0.98                      1.05
                        (0.07)                     (0.03)                      (0.05)                    (0.02)

Aged 55+                 0.75                       1.09                        0.82                      1.09
                        (0.10)                     (0.04)                      (0.05)                    (0.02)

Ever married             1.29                       1.25                        1.16                      1.13
                        (0.15)                     (0.05)                      (0.08)                    (0.03)

~eestimated productiviV mdwagedifferentials incolums (l)md(2) are from Table 3,colum(l)md                     (2). The
standard errors of the estimates, and the standard deviations of the simulated values, are reported in parentheses.
