                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       R&D SPILLOVERS       AND GLOBAL GROWTH




                                      Tamim Bayoumi
                                        David T. Coe
                                      Elhanan Helpman




                                     Working Paper 5628




                    NATIONAL     BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996




This paper was prepared for the June 1996 meeting in Vienna, Austria of the International
Seminar on Macroeconomics,       which is jointly sponsored by the NBER and the European
Economic Association.     Elhanan Helpman thanks the NSF and U.S.-Israel BSF for financial
support. We thank John Helliwell, Alexander Hoffmaister, Douglas Laxton, Paul Masson, and
Steven Symansky for comments on an earlier version of the paper; and Toh Kuan and Susanna
Mursula for research assistance. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in International
Trade and Investment.    Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
International Monetary Fund, the National Bureau of Economic Research or any other institution.

@ 1996 by Tamim Bayoumi, David T. Coe and Elhanan Helpman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source,
                                                                          NBER Working Paper 5628
                                                                                        June 1996


                         R&D SPILLOVERS           AND GLOBAL GROWTH


                                              ABSTRACT



       We examine the growth promoting roles of R&D, international R&D spillovers, and trade

in a world econometric   model.      A country can raise its total factor productivity   by investing in

R&D.   But countries can also boost their productivity      by trading with other countries that have

large “stocks of knowledge” from their cumulative R&D activities.         We use a special version of

MULTIMOD       that incorporates   R&D spillovers among industrial countries and from industrial

countries to developing countries.     Our simulations suggest that R&D, R&D spillovers, and trade

play important roles in boosting growth in industrial and developing countries,




Tamim Bayoumi                                                           David T. Coe
International Monetary Fund                                             International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW                                                     700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431                                                    Washington, DC 20431



Elhanan Helpman
Eitan Berglas School of Economics
Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and NBER
                         R&D SPILLOVERS AND GLOBAL GROWTH

                by Tamin Bayoumi, David T. Coe, and Elhanan Helpman




                                  I. Introduction




     National economies are embedded in a global system that generates

mutual interdependence    across countries.   In this system each country

depends on the supply of consumer goods, intermediate products, and capital

goods from its trade partners, and it relies on the trade partners to supply

markets for its own products.     But--as is-becoming more and more apparent--

countries also rely on each other for technology transfer, and they learn

from each other manufacturing methods, modes of organization, marketing, and

product design.     These features affect their well being and link their

growth rates.

     Much research has been done in recent years to clarify such links.

Some of it has been theoretical, some has been empirical.     In this paper we

contribute to the empirical literature by providing a quantitative

evaluation of the importance of R&D and trade in influencing total factor

productivity and output growth.     For this purpose we incorporate estimates

of international R&D spillovers-- among industrial countries and from

industrial to developing countries- -into a multicountry macroeconometric

model in order to simulate the influence of changes in R&D and trade on the

evolution of the world economy.

     Estimates of international R&D spillovers, which underline       trade

relations as the major transmission mechanism, are taken from Coe and
                                             A

                                       -L-




Helpman (1995) and Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister    (1996).   They have been

embedded in the IMF’s MULTIMOD econometric model for this study.      The

augmented model was then used to simulate changes in R&.D in the industrial

countries and in the exposure to trade of the developing countries in order

to obtain estimates of induced changes in total factor productivity,

capital, output, and consumption in each of twelve “countries.”      The

countries consist of the G-7 countries plus five industrial and developing

country regions.

     Our simulations suggest that the interplay between R&D and capital

investment is important.    mile   R&D has a direct effect on productivity     and

thereby on output, about one fourth of the total increase in output results

from investment in capital that is induced by the higher levels of

productivity,   And we find that international R&D spillovers, leveraged by

investment, are very important.    Were the United States to increase its R&D

investment by k of 1 percent of GDP and maintain the new R&D/GDP ratio

thereafter, it would raise its output by about 9 percent after 80 years, the

output of the other industrial countries by more than 3 percent, and the

output of the developing countries by over 4 percent.     If all industrial

countries were to raise their R&D investment by % of 1 percent of GDP, their

output would rise after 80 years by almost 20 percent and the output of

developing countries would rise by almost 15 percent.     Clearly, not only

industrial countries benefit from R&D investment; developing countries are

also major beneficiaries   of R&,D investment in the industrial countries.     We

also find that further expansion of trade by the developing countries by 5

percentage points of their GDP would raise their output by about 9 percent
                                          -3-




after 80 years.      This indicates that trade expansion can contribute

importantly to growth in developing countries.

     We outline in the next section the theoretical framework of MULTIMOD

and the theoretical considerations       that have guided the specification of the

R&D spillover equations incorporated into the model.          In Section III we

describe key features of the empirical model that are important to

understand the simulations reported in Section IV.          Conclusions are drawn in

the closing section.




                              II.   Theoretical Framework




     The theoretical structure that drives MULTIMOD’S        long-run supply

behavior are neoclassical.      Each country has a Cobb-Douglas production

function of the forml

     Y=   FPL1-a ,   O<a<l,                                                       (1)

where Y is output, K is capital, L is labor, and F stands for total factor

productivity.   Although the coefficients and variables differ across

countries, and the variables differ across time, we omit country and time

subscripts for expositional convenience.

     The world capital stock is ultimately determined by the level of world

saving, which is derived from an aggregate consumption function.         The




  lFor more details about MULTIMOD see Masson, Symansky, and
Meredith (1990). When we refer to a feature of a country, we mean a feature
of a country or a country block. Our exposition focuses on the structure of
industrial countries and the newly industrialized countries.  Developing
countries are treated somewhat differently, as explained in the next
section.
                                               -4-




allocation of consumption over time is derived from the maximization of an

intertemporal utility function subject to a budget constraint.              An

individual’s flow of utility at time r is given by
                     ~l-u
     UT      -                                                                          (2)
                     1 -u’

where CT is the individual’s aggregate consumption at time r.             The parameter

u determines the intertemporal elasticity of substitution             in consumption.

For an individual who is alive at time t and who will live until T > t, the

discounted flow of utility at time t equals


                 T
     Ut =
             J   t
                     e-d(’-t)urdr,                                                      (3)


where 6 represents his subjective discount rate and Ur is given in (2) .

     Following Blanchard             (1985), it is assumed that every individual faces a

time and age invariant probability of death, A, and has access to perfect

annuity markets.            As a result, an individual who is alive at time t

maximizes the expected value of UC (given in (3)).             The consumer faces an

intertemporal budget constraint that has the following features: at each

point in time, the expected present value of aggregate consumption equals

the expected present value of labor income plus the value of capital owned

at time t.       The solution to this problem yields a consumption function,

where consumption is proportional to wealth (human and financial).               The

factor of proportionality            depends on the subjective rate of time preference,

on the probability of death, and on the intertemporal            elasticity of

substitution in consumption.             Aggregating across individuals yields an

aggregate consumption function for the country, with consumption

proportional         to the country’s aggregate human and non-human wealth.       For the
                                     -5-




country as a whole, the factor of proportionality   depends on the same

parameters as the individual’s factor of proportionality   and also on the

rate of population growth.   This consumption function is used to derive

aggregate savings.

     Saving and investment are jointly determined, and for the world at

large, aggregate investment equals aggregate savings.    Investment is

allocated across countries to equalize risk-premia-adjusted   rates of

return.1   The output of each country is treated as a distinct product.

Given aggregate consumption and investment, the allocation of spending

across countries depends on relative prices.   These patterns of spending

determine bilateral imports and exports.

     In the standard version of MULTIMOD, total factor productivity     and the

labor force are exogenous.   Although in each country investment need not

equal savings (because the gap can be financed by international     capital

flows), the intertemporal budget constraints imply that the long-run growth

of the capital stock is determined by the growth of labor and the growth of

total factor productivity.   In the long run, the growth of output is also

determined by the same factors, and the capital output ratio is constant.

An implication of these relationships is that the long-run growth rate of

per capita output is entirely determined by the growth rate of total factor

productivity,   These features are familiar from the neoclassical   growth

models of Solow (1956) and Cass (1963).




  lIn the short run, investment deviates from this rule, as discussed in the
next section.
                                      -6-




     We augment the standard version of MULTIMOD with equations that relate

total factor productivity   to R&D investment and trade.     In doing so, total

factor productivity becomes endogenous, as suggested by the “new” growth

theory (see Romer (1990), Grossman and Helpman (1991), and Aghion and Hewitt

(1992)).    But we do not follow the new growth theory all the way, since we

do not endogenize R&D investment as a function of economic factors.      Rather,

we hold constant the ratio of R&D investment to GDP.       In tracing out the

effects of an increase in R&D investment we take account of the fact that,

by temporarily raising the marginal product of capital, improvements in

total factor productivity   induce capital accumulation, which continues until

the marginal product of capital falls to the level of the real long-run rate

of interest.    R&D investment thus affects output directly through total

factor productivity   and indirectly through induced capital accumulation.

The model enables us to evaluate each of these components.

     It is important to note that our model incorporates diminishing returns

to the reproducible factors of production (physical and Rm      capital) in

aggregate, 1   This implies that a permanent increase in R&D investment will

have a level effect on output, but will not permanently raise the rate of

growth.    As is apparent from our simulation results, however, it takes more

than 80 years to approach the new steady state, and hence the impacts on

growth are very long lived.

     The theoretical basis for our modelling of total factor productivity,

which uses a constant returns to scale aggregate Cobb-Douglas production




  lThat is to say, it is not an “AK” model; see, for example, Romer (1990).
                                             -7-




function such as (l), is provided by Grossman and Helpman       (1991, chapter 5).

For example, let the production function of final output be

        Y=   pL$D1-Q-7     O<a,   v,a+y<l,                                       (4)

where Ly is the amount of labor used directly in the manufacturing       of final

output and D is a symmetric CES index of intermediate inputs.        The parameter

A is constant.       We know that in this case D - nl/f~-lJL~in equilibrium, where

n represents the number of available intermediates, L~ the labor force

employed in the manufacturing      of intermediates (we assume for simplicity

that intermediates are manufactured only with labor), and c > 1 is the

elasticity of substitution between intermediate inputs.       Using the demand

functions for inputs that are implied by (4) and the pricing of

intermediates      (i.e. , a constant markup over marginal costs, with the

price/marginal-cost      ratio equal to l/(1-l/c)), it follows that the aggregate

production function for final output can be represented by (l).        In this

reduced form, L equals direct plus indirect labor (~LY+LD) while F can be

represented by
        F=   Bn(l-@-7)/(c-1)                                                     (5)

In (5) the constant B depends on the parameters of the production function

(4) .

        It is clear from (5) that in this model total factor productivity

depends on the available assortment of intermediate inputs (n): the more

intermediates are used in production, the higher is total factor

productivity.      On the other hand, intermediate inputs have to be developed.

As a result, the number of available intermediates is a function of past R&D

investment levels.       We therefore have a link between current productivity
                                       -8-




and cumulative R&D investment.     This type of link is central to our

specification presented    in the next section.

        But we do not wish to restrict our empirical specification   to a

narrowly defined structural link between R&D and total factor productivity

as described above.     Rather, we use this theory to guide our empirical

specification.     As pointed out by Grossman and Helpman   (1991), there are a

number of channels through which total factor productivity      of a country is

affected by the R&D investment of its trade partners in addition to its own

R&D investment level.     Foreign trade plays an important role in these

transmission mechanisms.     For example, foreign trade enables a country to

employ a larger variety of intermediate inputs, including capital goods, and

it stimulates learning from trade partners.       For these reasons we specify a

functional relationship between total factor productivity      and cumulative R&D

levels that is broader than (5), and which builds on previous empirical

work.     The precise specification of these links is described in the next

section.




                               III. EmDirical Model




        In the version of MULTIMOD used here, total factor productivity     is

endogenously determined by the stock of R&D capital, international R&D

spillovers, and trade.     Total factor productivity together with capital and

labor inputs then determine potential output.      This supply side is augmented

by short-run dynamics largely emanating from changes in aggregate demand

caused by the interaction between sticky prices and forward-looking
                                       -9-




expectations .    While changes in aggregate demand move actual output

temporarily away from its potential level, monetary policy is neutral in the

long run.     There is, however, a long-run impact from fiscal policy,

reflecting the wedge between the discount rate of individuals and of the

government caused by the probability of death.     MULTIMOD also incorporates

rational expectations in goods, financial, and labor markets.     The forward

looking aspect of the model means that changes in expectations of future

increases in productivity or wealth can have immediate effects on, for

exaple,     current consumption and investment.

     Our version of MULTIMOD consists of 12 linked econometric models: a

model for each of the G-7 countries (the United States, Japan, Germany,

France, Italy, the United Kingdom, and Canada), an aggregate model for the

other industrial countries, and 4 regional models for non-oil-exporting

developing countries.     The developing countries are disaggregated   into

regional models for Africa, the Western Hemisphere, the newly

industrializing economies of Asia (the NIEs consisting of Hong Kong, Korea,

Singapore, and Taiwan Province of China), and other non-oil-exporting

developing countries.1    Most parameters have been estimated with pooled

annual data.     The most important features of these models are summarized




  lThe main differences from the standard version of MULTIMOD are the
regional disaggregation of non-oil exporting developing countries and the
more sophisticated modeling of aggregate demand within these regions; see
Bayoumi, Hewitt, and Symansky (1995). There is also a very simple model for
the oil-exporting developing countries, but there is no model for the
economies in transition of central and east Europe and the former Soviet
Union.
                                         -1o-




below to help understand the simulation results presented       in the next

section.1

        Output is determined by aggregate demand in the short run and by the

underlying level of aggregate supply- -’’potential output’’--in the long run.

A Cobb-Douglas production      function such as (1) determines potential output

(YmT) .      In logarithmic form, and omitting country subscripts and time

subscripts from current period variables,

        logY~T - K + alogK + (1-a)logL + logF,

where    a   is capital’s share of national income and x is a country-specific

constant.      The real stock of capital is endogenous, as discussed below, and

labor supply is determined by the natural rate of unemployment       and

demographic factors, both of which are exogenous.

        We endogenize total factor productivity using the estimation results in

Coe and Helpman      (1995) for the industrial countries and in Coe, Helpman, and

Hoffmaister      (1996) for the developing countries.2   In both of these studies,

total factor productivity      is determined by the stock of R&D capital (S) and




  lComplete equation specification and parameter values for the industrial
countries are presented in Masson, Symansky, and Meredith (1990); and for
the developing countries in Bayoumi, Hewitt, and Symansky (1995).
  ‘Except for the finding that the elasticity of total factor productivity
with respect to domestic R&D capital is larger in the G-7 countries than in
the other industrial countries, the main empirical results in Coe and
Helpman have been confirmed by Keller (1995) based on sectoral data and by
Chen and Kao (1995) using different estimation techniques.  Eaton and Kortum
(1995) also find large and significant international technology spillovers
based on patent data,
                                      -11-




the share of imports of manufactures    in GDP (m).1   For the industrial

countries, which do virtually all of the R&D in the world economy, total

factor productivity   is determined by both domestic R&D capital (SD) and

foreign R&D capital (SF).     Trade is assumed to be the vehicle for R&D

spillovers and thus foreign R&D capital, which is defined below, affects

total factor productivity   through its interaction with the import share.

The equation determining total factor productivity      (F) for each of the G-7

countries is,

     logF = #l + 0.23410gSD + 0.294m*logSF)

where #l is a country-specific   constant.    For the small industrial countries

in aggregate, total factor productivity is determined in the same manner

except that domestic R&D capital has a smaller impact,

     logF - ~z + 0.07810gSD + 0.294mologSF.

The developing countries generally do little, if any, R&D.      Their domestic

R&D capital is assumed to be constant.       For these countries, trade has a

direct impact on total factor productivity in addition to its role as the

vehicle for R&D spillovers.     In each of the non-oil-developing   country




  lCoe and Helpman (1995) use total imports of goods and services instead of
imports of manufactures.   Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister (1996) report
results using imports from industrial countries of goods and services, of
manufactures , and of machinery and equipment.  Imports of manufactures from
all countries are used here since MULTIMOD does not distinguish between
imports from specific countries or regions. The relevant coefficients have
been adjusted to reflect different mean values for the import shares.
                                        -12-




regions and in the newly industrializing economies, total factor

productivity     is determined as,l

        logF = #3 + 0.608mologSF + 0.248m.

        The domestic R&D capital stocks of the G-7 industrial countries and the

small industrial countries in aggregate consist of their cumulative real

investment in R&D (R) , allowing for depreciation,

        SD = 0.95S~-l + R

where SD is beginning of period.      As noted above, real R&D expenditures     are

a constant share of the simulated level of potential GDP.       The foreign R&D

capital stock is defined in the same manner for all countries and groups of

countries.      For a specific country or country grouping j, the foreign R&D

capital stock (S!) is,




where   aji   are the elements of a 12 x 8 matrix of the manufactures   imports of

country j from industrial country j as a proportion of total manufactures

imports of country j from all industrial countries      (see appendix table),

        Investment in MULTIMOD is modeled as a gradual adjustment of the

capital stock towards its optimal level, which is determined by the gap

between the market value of the existing stock and its replacement cost,

following Tobin (1969).      The market value of the capital stock (Kw),



  lGiven an average value of m of about 0.2 for the industrial countries and
about 0.3 for the developing countries, the elasticity of total factor
productivity with respect to R&.D capital (both domestic and foreign) is
about 0.3 for the G-7, 0.15 for the small industrial, and 0.2 for the
developing countries.   In Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister (1996) total factor
productivity in the developing countries also depends on human capital,
proxied by secondary school enrollment ratios.
                                          -13-




defined as the discounted value of future after-tax income accruing to

owners of capital, is calculated using an iterative process in which today’s

market value reflects the present value of after-tax income for owners of

capital (PROFIT),



     KM   ==        e ‘i(T-L)PROFITTdr,
               rt

where i is the real interest rate (the model uses, however, a discrete time

formulation).       Future increases in profitability or total factor

productivity are translated into the current market value of the capital

stock and hence into increases in current investment.        Adjustment    of the

real capital stock (K) to changes in the market value of capital, however,

is gradual.     The adjustment equation is,

     AlogK = o.08(K~/&.1).

Investment is derived from the change in the real capital stock plus

depreciation.

     Private consumption is also dependent on future income through a

forward-looking      term in wealth, as discussed in the previous section.      Some

individuals are assumed to be liquidity constrained in the short run, so

that real consumption       (C) depends partly on changes in current real

disposable income (YD) and on real long-term interest rates (iL) in addition

to wealth (W),

    AlogC = 0.09510g(Wt-l/Ct-1) - 0.588iL + 0.348AIogYD.

In the long-run, consumption moves proportionately with wealth.           The

structure of the regional developing country models is similar except that

investment and consumption depend on imports as well as the factors
                                       -14-




discussed above.   These countries are also assumed to face external finance

constraints and greater domestic liquidity constraints.1

       Long-term interest rates are a moving average of current and expected

future short-term rates.   Financial assets of the industrial countries are

assumed to be perfect substitutes, and nominal exchange rates for the

industrial and newly industrializing economies are determined by open

interest parity.   Each regional developing “country” has a freely floating

exchange rate, with the market rate determined by the external financing

constraint rather than by international asset arbitrage.      Devaluations

always improve the current account, and appreciations    always worsen it, so

the system is stable, i.e., the Marshall-Lerner    conditions are satisfied.

     Exports and imports are mainly determined by relative prices and

activity in all of the models.     Export prices are assumed to move with the

domestic output price in the long run, but respond to price movements in

export markets in the short run.    Import prices are a weighted average of

the export prices of trade partners.     The industrial countries and the NIEs

produce manufactured goods, which are imperfect substitutes.     Each country’s

or region’s imports of manufactured goods are allocated as exports across

the other manufactures-producing   countries and regions through a trade

matrix, with the initial pattern based on historical    trading patterns.

Trade shares adjust to changes in relative prices.     Non-oil primary

commodities are produced by the developing countries, who also produce

manufactured goods.   The average price of non-oil primary commodities




  lSee Bayoumi, Hewitt, and Symansky (1995).
                                     -15-




adjusts in the short run to clear the market, with production    and supply

eventually responding to changes in relative prices.




                             IV. Simulation Results




     We focus on three types of simulations to illustrate the empirical

significance of international R~    spillovers: an increase in R&D

expenditures   in individual G-7 countries, a simultaneous increase in R&D

expenditures   in all industrial countries, and increased openness in the

developing countries.    In each case, we mainly focus on the long-run

effects.   The simulation results are largely independent of the baseline,

which is taken from the October 1995 World Economic Outlook projections to

the year 2000 extended such that each country slowly moves to a steady state

by the year 2075.1   In each simulation, tax rates adjust endogenously       to

achieve a pre-specified path for real government debt, and real government

spending is assumed to remain constant relative to potential GDP.       In

addition, the money supply is kept proportional to potential GDP, which

leaves the price level broadly unchanged.

     Before discussing the R&D simulations, we need to address the

accounting issue of where R&D expenditures fit into the model.       In the early

1990s, about 50 percent of business sector R&D expenditures were labor


  lThe simulated shocks are assumed to be expected, and variables
representing expectations are consistent with the model’s predictions.
Compared with the standard version of MULTIMOD, this version with endogenous
productivity is considerably more difficult to solve numerically using the
Fair-Taylor algorithm. The model was solved instead with the NEW STACK
option in portable TROLL; see Juillard and Laxton (1996) for a discussion of
this algorithm.
                                      -16-




Costs , 40 percent were other current expenditures, and 10 percent were

capital expenditures.1    In the simulations discussed below, the increases in

R&D expenditures are assumed to raise business consumption, a new element of

aggregate demand introduced into the model for these simulations.      The

allocation of the increase in GDP between profits and wages is determined by

the Cobb-Douglas factor shares in the production function.     The simulated

increases in R&D expenditures, which are sustained throughout the simulation

period, are assumed to be financed out of future business profits.      The

reduction in the discounted value of future profits lowers the market value

of the physical capital stock and hence physical investment.     In effect

enterprises must forego fixed investment in order to increase R&D

expenditures.

     The impact of an increase in U.S. R&D expenditures   is shown in Figure 1

and Table 1.    The exogenous sustained increase in R&D expenditures   is

equivalent to % of 1 percent of GDP, which represents an increase in the

level of real U.S. R&D expenditures of about 25 percent relative to

baseline.   While an increase of this size is large, it is not unprecedented

over a span of a few years.z   Higher R&D expenditures boost the future U.S.




  lThese estimates are from OECD (1995a) and refer to the average of the G-7
countries other than the United States (for which a breakdown is not
available) . Only R~ capital expenditures would be included directly as an
element of aggregate demand, although these represented less than 1 percent
of business fixed investment in the early 1990s in the G-7 countries other
than the United States (OECD (1995a)). Other R&D expenditures would affect
aggregate demand indirectly through their effects on incomes and production.
  ‘For example, real business sector R&D expenditures increased 27 percent
in the three years to 1984 in the United States, and single-year increases
of 10 percent or higher are not uncommon in other industrial countries (OECD
(1991, 1995b)). The model is broadly linear, so the simulated effects of a
different sized shock would be roughly proportional.
                                    -17-




R&D capital stock above its baseline level.    The bulk of the rise in the R&D

capital stock takes place early in the simulation period as a progressively

larger proportion of the higher R&D expenditures are needed to replace a

growing amount of obsolete R&D capital.    After 15 years, the R&D capital

stock has increased by about half its long-run value and by 2075 it has

risen by almost the full amount of its steady-state increase of about 40

percent.

     The higher R&D capital stock implies an increase in the future level of

total factor productivity, potential output, and profits.    This increase in

future profits, however, has to be weighed against the extra costs to firms

to finance the higher level of R&D spending.   In the first few years, the

increased cost of R&D expenditures dominates, and both the market value of

the capital stock and business fixed investment fall.1   The boost to

aggregate demand from higher R&D spending ad consumption also increases real

interest rates, which further reduces investment in the short run.      From

2003 onward, however, the discounted benefits from future profits cause both

the market value of the capital stock and investment to start to rise

sharply.   Physical investment increases relatively fast for the next 15-20

years and then begins to taper off as the actual capital stock slowly

adjusts to the higher level of its market value.   In contrast to investment,

real consumption rises steadily throughout the simulation as consumers react

to the expected increase in future wealth.




  lThis fall in investment reflects partly the assumption that the rise in
R&D occurs in a single year, rather than more gradually.
                                    -18-




     Cornpared with the baseline, the level of potential output in the United

States is about 4% percent higher in 2010 and 9 percent higher in 2075, with

the time pattern reflecting the simulated paths of the increases in the R&D

and physical capital stocks.   During the first 15 years, almost all of the

increase in potential output is due to higher total factor productivity, but

by 2075 the rise in the physical capital stock accounts for about one

quarter of the total increase in output.    The annual growth of real output

is more than 0,3 percentage point higher during the first 10 years of the

simulation compared with the baseline.     Growth remains stronger than in the

baseline, although by progressively smaller amounts, throughout the 80 years

of the simulation.   In the last 25 years, potential output growth is only

0.025 percentage points higher than in the baseline.     In the long run, the

rate of growth returns to the same level as in the baseline.1

     The rise in output in the United States relative to the rest of the

world requires a real devaluation of the U.S. dollar to create the needed

demand for higher U.S. exports.   This is a standard result from multicountry

models,z and represents one. channel through which other countries are

affected by the higher output in the United States.    In our model, R&l)

spillovers represent an additional channel of influence through which other

countries benefit from the increase in U.S. R&D expenditures.    The foreign

R&D capital stocks of U.S. industrial and developing country trade partners


  lIn simulations assuming a 15 percent depreciation rate for R&.D capital,
growth stabilizes at the baseline level by about 2050.
  ‘See, for example, Bryant et al. (1988). This result, which stems from
the absence of a distinction between traded and nontraded goods in the
model, takes no account of the Belassa-Samuelson effect in which differences
in productivity growth between traded and non-traded goods cause the
exchange rate to appreciate as countries become relatively more wealthy.
                                      -19-




increase 24 and 20 percent, respectively, by 2075 compared with the

baseline.   The increases in the foreign R&D capital stock in specific

countries and regions depend on the relative weight of U.S. imports compared

with imports from other industrial countries.

     Manufactures    imports are the vehicle for the R&D spillovers.   The

higher imports of U.S. industrial country trade partners stemming from the

depreciation of the dollar magnify the impact on growth from the rise in

their foreign R&D capital stocks.     In the United States, on the other hand,

manufactures   imports as a share of GDP decline somewhat with the

depreciation of the dollar, which reduces the spillover from foreign R&D

capital arising from R&D investment by U.S. trade partners.     The assumption

that developing countries other than the NIEs are finance constrained

implies that their manufactures    imports relative to GDP remain broadly

unchanged from baseline levels.     A simulation illustrating how increased

openness boosts R&D spillovers to the developing countries is discussed

below.

     The rise in foreign R&D capital interacted with the import share boosts

total factor productivity,    investment, and potential output in U.S. trade

partners in much the same way that the rise in domestic R&D did in the

United States.     Potential output increases gradually, again slowing after

15-20 years.     By 2075, potential output in other industrial countries is 3%

percent above its baseline level while potential output in the developing

countries is 4k percent higher.    On average, the developing countries

benefit more than the industrial countries, reflecting the greater scope for

catch up through R~    spillovers implied by the larger elasticities discussed
                                       -20-




in the previous section.     The long-run impacts of higher R&D expenditures in

the United States on potential output in individual countries and groups of

countries are shown in the first column of the top panel of Table 2.

Canada, the newly industrializing economies of Asia, and the developing

countries of the Western Hemisphere benefit most from higher R&D

expenditures in the United States, reflecting strong trade linkages.

     Changes in output are important summary measures of the overall

economic impact of R&D expenditures.     Economic welfare, however, largely

depends on real private consumption.     In the United States, private

consumption is 7 percent above baseline by 2075, a somewhat smaller rise

than the 9 percent increase in output.        The opposite occurs for the other

countries and regions, as shown in the first column of the lower panel of

Table 2.   By 2075, the average percentage increase of consumption         in other

industrial countries is one and a quarter times that of output.           The

increases for developing country regions tend to be slightly smaller,

reflecting the impact of the finance constraint (the particular       case of the

NIEs is discussed below)      This compression of the variability    of

consumption responses compared with those for output reflects the reduction

in the U.S. terms of trade caused by the need to find markets for new goods,

and constitutes an important channel though which the benefits of R&D in one

country are disseminated to its trading partners.

     The impact of higher R&D expenditures in the United States on

consumption in Canada and the developing countries of the Western

Hemisphere, both of which are close trading partners with the United States,

is particularly large.     Indeed, Canadian consumption increases by almost as
                                      -21-




much as in the United States.    The newly industrializing   economies is the

only region in which the long-run increase in consumption is smaller than

the increase in output.    This reflects, at least in part, their trilateral

trading arrangements as net importers from Japan and net exporters to the

United States.    Consumption is lowered by the negative terms of trade shock

in the NIEs caused by the depreciation of the dollar against the yen.

     Higher R&D expenditures in any of the other major industrial counties

have broadly similar effects as higher expenditures   in the United States.

Table 2 shows the long-run effects on potential output and consumption    in

simulations in which R&D expenditures are exogenously increased by an amount

equivalent to % of 1 percent of GDP in each G-7 country.     Compared with the

U.S. simulation, the main differences are that the domestic effects are

often larger while the international spillovers are smaller.     The larger

domestic effects reflect the smaller R&D capital stocks in these countries,

and hence the larger percentage increase from raising R&D by a uniform % of

1 percent of baseline GDP- -the long-run increase in R&D capital in Canada,

for example, is about 100 percent compared with 40 percent in the United

States .   The spillover effects from R&D in countries other than the United

States are smaller since the size of the simulated increase in R&D

expenditures are smaller (reflecting the lower level of GDP) and since the

United States typically accounts for the largest share of other countries’

foreign R&D capital stocks.   The regional distribution of the spillovers

also differs, reflecting different bilateral trade patterns.     Higher R&D

expenditures in Japan, for example, have a relatively larger impact on other
                                     -22-




countries in Asia, while increased R&D expenditures in France have a

relatively larger impact in other European countries and in Africa.

     Similar spillover patterns are apparent for consumption,   as shown in

the lower panel of Table 2.    Unlike the output responses, the domestic gains

to consumption from a rise in R&D are smaller for the more open European

countries than for the United States and Japan, reflecting the greater

potency of the terms of trade effect.    The importance of trade linkages in

determining the long-run rise in consumption can also be seen in the large

positive consumption spillovers that increases in R&D in European industrial

countries have on other countries in the region.    These spillovers also

depend on the magnitude of the trade elasticities for individual countries,

which partly determine the size of the required change in the terms of

trade.   This helps explain, for example, the larger consumption   spillovers

for Italy than for Germany.

     The impact of a simultaneous, exogenous increase in R&D expenditures in

all industrial countries equivalent to % of 1 percent of GDP is shown in

Figure 2 and Table 3.   Domestic and foreign R&D capital stocks increase

about 50 percent in all countries and groups of countries by 2075.

Potential output is 18% percent above baseline by 2075 in the industrial

countries as a group and 14 percent higher in developing countries.      In both

cases, higher total factor productivity accounts for roughly three quarters

of the increase in output.    Private consumption rises by an average of 17%

percent above baseline in the industrial countries, with the increase in

European countries being somewhat higher and in North America somewhat

lower.   Consumption in the developing country regions increase by 15%
                                         -23-




percent on average, with Africa gaining the most and the Western Hemisphere

the least.     This regional pattern, which is also reflected in output gains,

reflects the lower level of R&D capital in Europe compared with the United

States and Japan.

        Trade has played a relatively minor role in the simulations discussed

thus far,     This is mainly because the developing countries are generally

assumed to be financed constrained, implying that their current accounts can

not change very much from the baseline levels,          In the simulation reported

in Figure 3 and Table 4, the African, Western Hemisphere, and other

developing countries region are assmed          to adopt more outward oriented

development strategies that have proved so successful for the NIEs.             This is

implemented by exogenously increasing imports of manufactures         by 5

percentage points of baseline GDP.       To avoid violating the financing

constraint, exports of manufactures      are also exogenously    increased by the

same amount, so that the trade balance is largely unchanged from the

baseline level.

        Higher imports of manufactures   raises productivity    in developing

countries both directly and through the interaction between trade and the

stock of foreign R&D capital.     The direct effect falls slightly over time:

as output rises, the external finance constraint results in a real exchange

rate depreciation which causes the ratio of real imports to GDP to fall over

time.    The beneficial effects of foreign R&D capital, however, outweighs

this , and total factor productivity     for the region as a whole, which jmps

by 2% percent at the start of the simulation, increases steadily to 5%

percent above baseline by 2075.     As in the earlier simulations, higher
                                       -24-




investment further boosts potential output, which is 9 percent higher by

2075.     Consumption, however, only rises by 6 percent because of the adverse

impact of the deterioration in the terms of trade.




                                  V. Conclusions




        This paper has explored the quantitative implications of R&D spending,

technological advance, and trade in a world with endogenous growth.        This

was done through simulations on a special version of MULTIMOD      in which total

factor productivity    is endogenously determined by R~    spending, R~

spillovers, and trade.     To the best of our knowledge,   this paper is the

first to incorporate aspects of endogenous growth models into a multicountry

econometric model (Helliwell (1995)).

        The simulation results illustrate several features about the gains from

R&D .    Increases in R&D spending can significantly raise the level of

domestic output in an economy.     An increase in U.S. R&D investment

equivalent to % of 1 percent of GDP raises U.S. real output by about 9

percent in the long run, with about three quarters of this gain coming

though increases in productivity and the remainder from higher investment.

Half of these output gains occur during the first fifteen years.        Over a

period of a decade or two, therefore, sustained increases in R&D generate a

significant boost to the rate of growth of the economy.

        Domestic R&D spending can also generate significant spillovers to

output in other countries,    When all industrial countries raise R&D spending

by an amount equivalent to % of 1 percent of GDP, the long-run U.S. output
                                      -25-




gain is 70 percent higher than in the case when only U.S. R&D spending

rises .   As the size of output spillovers between industrial countries

depends largely on trade linkages between countries, they tend to be

particularly    large between European countries and between the United States

and Canada,     Output spillovers to developing countries tend to be larger

than to industrial countries, reflecting their greater technology gap.

     Real consumption rises by less than output in the country carrying out

the R&D, while it rises by more than output in other countries.      This is

because the country with higher R&D experiences a deterioration     in its terms

of trade, which represents an important mechanism through which the benefits

of higher domestic R&D spending are disseminated abroad.      As a result, the

long-run gain to U.S. consumption from an increase in R&D equivalent to % of

1 percent of GDP in all industrial countries is more than double that when

only U.S. R&.D is increased (16 percent versus 7 percent).     The size of these

consumption spillovers increases with the openness of the economy, and

particularly benefits close trading partners.    (The spillovers also decline

as trade volumes become more responsive to changes in the real exchange

rate. )

     Finally, open trading policies of the type followed by the NIEs can

benefit developing nations through facilitating technology transfer from

industrial countries.    Expanding imports of manufactures   in developing

countries other than the NIEs by 5 percentage points of GDP--roughly

equivalent to the increase that has occurred in these regions between 1992

and 1995--raises output by about 9 percent in the long run, and consumption

by 6 percent.    These results indicate that part of the success of the NIEs
                                       -26-




over the last 20 years can be attributed      to productivity   improvements

stemming from foreign R&D spillovers through trade.       Other factors that have

boosted growth in these countries include rapid increases in labor and

capital input (Young (1995)).

     As with any set of simulations,    these results reflect the specific

parameters chosen for the model and should be taken as illustrative rather

than definitive.   What they do demonstrate,    however, is that, using

reasonable parameter estimates, R&D linkages can have important effects on

the evolution of the world economy over time.
                                    -27-




                                  References


Aghion, Philippe, and Peter Hewitt, “A Model of Growth Through Creative
     Destruction,” Econometrics, Vol. 60 (1992), pp. 323-51.

Bayoumi, Tamin, Daniel Hewitt, and Steven Symansky, “MIJLTIMOD Simulations of
     the Effect on Developing Countries of Decreasing Military Spending,” in
     David Currie and David Vines, eds., North-South Linkages and
     International Macroeconomic Policy (Cambridge: Cambridge University
     Press, 1995).

Blanchard, Olivier J., “Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons,” Journal of
     Political Economy, Vol. 93 (April 1985), pp. 223-47.

Bryant, Ralph C., Dale W. Henderson, Gerald Holtham, Peter Hooper, and
     Steven Symansky, eds., Empirical Macroeconomics for Interdependent
     Economies (Brookings Institution: Washington, D.C., 1988).

Cass, David, “Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital
     Accumulation ,“ Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 32 (July 1965), pp.
     233-40.

Coe, David T, , and Elhanan Helpman, “International R&D Spillovers, ” European
     Economic Review, Vol. 39 (May 1995), pp. 859-87.

Coe, David T., Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander W. Hoffmaister, “North-South
     R&D Spillovers,” NBER Working Paper No. 5048 (March 1995), CEPR Working
     Paper No, 1133 (February 1995), and IMF Working Paper No. 94/144
     (December 1994), revised May 1996.

Chen, Bangtian, and Chiwha Kao, “International R&D Spillovers Revisited: An
     Application of Panel Data with Cointegration, ” paper presented to the
     AEA meetings in San Francisco (January 1996), Syracuse University mimeo
     (December 1995).

Eaton, Jonathan, and Samuel Kortum, “Trade in Ideas: Patenting and
     Productivity in the OECD,” NBER Working Paper No. 5049 (March 1995).

Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpmanp Innovation and Growth in the Global
     Economy (Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: MIT Press, 1991).

Helliwell, John F., “Modelling the Supply Side: What are the Lessons From
     Recent Research on Growth and Globalization?” paper presented to the
     meeting of Project Link (September 1995).

Juillard, Michel, and Douglas Laxton, “A Robust and Efficient Method for
     Solving Nonlinear Multicountry Rational Expectations Models,” paper
     prepared for the Second International Conference on Computing in
     Economics and Finance (Geneva, Switzerland: June 26-28, 1996).
                                    -28-




Kellerj Wolfgang, “Trade and the Transmission of Technology,” University of
     Wisconsin mimeo (November 1995).

Masson, Paul, Steven Symansky, and Guy Meredith, MZJLTIMOD Mark 11: A Revised
     and Extended Model, IMF Occasional Paper 71 (July 1990).

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Basic Science and
     Technology Statistics (Paris: OECD, 1991, 1995a).

—    J Main Science and Technology Indicators   (Paris: OECD, 1995b).

Romer, Paul M., “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political
     Economy, Vol. 98 (1990), pp. S71-S102.

Solow, Robert M., “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth, ”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 70 (February 1956), pp. 65-94.

Tobin, James, “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory,” Journal
     of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 1 (February 1989), pp. 15-29.

Young, Alwyn, “The Tyranny of Numbers: Confronting the Statistical Realities
     of the East Asian Growth Experience,” The Quarterly Journal of
     Economics, Vol. 11O (August 1995), pp. 641-80.
             Table 1.   Increased R&D Expenditures in the United States
                        (deviations from baseline, in percent)

                                  1996    2000    2010    2030    2050    2075

United States

Potential output                  .-       1.6     4.2     7,1     8.4     9.0
Total factor productivity         . .      1.7     4.1     5.9     6.5     6.7
    from domestic R&D             -.       1.7     4.2     6.3     7.1     7.5
    from foreign R&D              .-      -.      -0.2    -0.4    -0.6    -0.7
Capital                           --      -0.4     0.3     3,4     5.6     6.8
Investment                        -0.4    -1,0     1.8     5.0     6.4     7.2
Consumption                        0.1     1.3     3.3     5.2     6.3     6.9
R&D spending/GDPl                  0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5
Domestic R&D stock                .-       7.4    19.7    31.0    35.2    37.2
Foreign R&D stock                 ..      ..       0.3     1.1     2.0     2.9
Manufactures imports/GDPl         -.      -0.1    -0,5    -0.9    -1.0    -1.0

Other
Industrial countries

Potential output                  . .      0.2     0,8     1.7     2.6     3.3
Total factor productivity         -.       0.3     0.9     1.7     2.1     2.4
    from domestic R&D             . .     ..       0.1     0.3     0.4     0.6
    from foreign R&D              -.       0.3     0.9     1.4     1.6     1.8
Capital                           -.      -0.1    --       1.1     2.3     3.4
Investment                        . .     -0.4     0.4     2.0     3.1     4.0
Consumption                       -.       0.5     1.3     2.4     3.3     3.8
R&D spending/GDPl                 .-      .-      --      --      .-      --
Domestic R&D stock                -.      --       0.3     1.1     1,9     2.8
Foreign R&D stock                 . .      4.7    12.5    19.6    22.5    24.0
Manufactures imports/GDPl         . .      0.1     0.3     0.5     0.4     0.4

DeVelODinE    countries

Potential output                   0.1     0,5     1.6     3.0     3.7     4.3
Total factor productivity          0.1     0.6     1.7     2.6     3.0     3.4
    from foreign R&.D              0.1     0.6     1.7     2.6     3.0     3.3
    from trade                    .-      ..      -.      .-      --       0.1
Capital                           -.      -0.1     0.5     2.8     4.0     5.0
Investment                         0.1    -0.4     1.7     3.8     4.5     5.4
Consumption                        0.1     0.4     1.4     3.0     3.8     4.4
Foreign R&D stock                 --       4.0    10.4    16.2    18.7    20.1
Manufactures imports/GDPl          0,2    -0.1     0.1     0.2     0.2     0.2




   lIn percentage points.
                 Table 2. Long-Run International Spillovers
                  from Increased R&D in Industrial Countries
                (deviations from baseline in 2075, in percent)


                     United                                      United
                     States   Japan   Germany   France   Italv   KinEdom   Canada

Potential output

United States          9.0     2.7      0.5      0.4      0.7      0.4      1.1
Japan                  3.2    10.5      0.3      0.2      0.5      0.2      0.2
Germany                3.2     2.1      6.5      1.3      1,7      0.7      0.2
France                 2.7     1.4      1.4      9.7      1.7      0.6      0.2
Italy                  2.8     1.3      1.6      1.4     13.5      0.5      0.2
United Kingdom         3.5     1.8      1.3      1.0      1.4      9.5      0.3
Canada                 6.8     1.7      0.3      0.3      0.8      0.3     16.9
Smaller industrial
 countries             3.0     1.7      1.5      0.9     1.0       0.6      0.2

All developing
 countries            4.3     3.7      1.0       0.9     1.2      0.7       0.4
Africa                3.3     2.3      1.5       2.4     1.8      1.2       0.3
NIEs                  6,1     8.0      0.8       0.8     1.3      0.7       0.4
Western Hemisphere    4.7     1.5      0.6       0.5     0.8      0.4       0.4
Other developing
 countries            3,9     3.9      1.0       0.8     1.2      0.7       0.3

Consumption

United States         6.9     3.3      0.9       0.9     1.2      0.8       1.6
Japan                 3.9     7.4      0.4       0.4     0.8      0.3       0.4
Germany               3.4     2.5      2.7       1.4     2.3      0.8       0.4
France                3.3     2.0      1.6       3.9     2.6      0.9       0.4
Italy                 3.9     2.2      1.7       1.9     2.5      0.9       0.4
United Kingdom        3.8     2.4      1.4       1.3     2.0      2.8       0.4
Canada                6.8     2.3      0.3       0.5     1.2      0.5       7.0
Smaller industrial
 countries            3.4     2.2      1.7       1.2     1.6      0.9       0.3

All developing
 countries            4.4     3.3      1.1       1.1     1.5      0.9       0.5
Africa                3.6     2.3      1.7       2.6     2.2      1.4       0,5
NIEs                  4.1     5.8      0.9       0.9     1.6      0.9       0.5
Western Hemisphere    5.3     1.7      0.8       0.7     1.1      0,5       0.5
Other developing
 countries            4.1     3,8      1.2       1.0     1.5      0.9       0.5



This table reports the results of seven independent simulations where R&D
expenditures are exogenously increased by an amount equivalent to % of 1
percent of GDP in each G-7 country, with the R&D/GDP ratios maintained
constant thereafter.
             Table 3. Increased R&D in all Industrial Countries
                    (deviations from baseline, in percent)

                               1996    2000    2010    2030    2050    2075

Industrial countries

Potential output               .-       2.6     7.1    12.9    16.4    18.7
Total factor productivity      . .      2,7     7.0    10.9    12.7    13.8
    from domestic R&D          --       2.2     5.5     8.6    10.0    10.9
    from foreign R&D           --       0.6     1,5     2.3     2.7     2.9
Capital                        . .     -0.4     0.7     6.9    12.2    16.0
Investment                     -0.2    -1.5     3.7    11.1    15.0    17.2
Consumption                     0.2     2.8     6.9    11.9    15.1    17.3
R&D spending/GDPl               0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5     0.5
Domestic R6tLlstock            .-       9.3    24.2    38.1    44.6    48.8
Foreign R&D stock              -.       9.3    24.3    38.2    44.6    48.6
Manufactures imports/GDPl       0.2     0.3     0.4     0.4     0.4     0.3

Develo~in~ countries

Potential output                0.2     1.6     4.6     9.1    11.9    14.1
Total factor productivity       0.2     1.6     4,4     7.3     8.9    10,3
    from foreign R&D            0.1     1.5     4.1     6.9     8.4     9.8
    from trade                  0.1     0.1     0.3     0.4     0.4     0.5
Capital                         0.1     0.1     1.9     8.5    13.0    16.2
Investment                      0.7    -0.1     5.0    11.7    14.9    17.2
Consumption                     0.5     1.9     5.1    10.1    13.2    15.5
Foreign R~ stock               ..       8.5    21.8    34.4    40.4    44.4
Manufactures imports/GDP1       0.4     0.4     1.1     1.6     1.7     1.8



R&D expenditures are exogenously and simultaneously increased by an amount
equivalent to % of 1 percent of the baseline level of GDP in each industrial
country; R&D expenditures endogenously increase further to remain stable as
a proportion of the simulated level of GDP.

  lIn percentage points.
                 Table 4, Increased Trade in Developing Countries
                      (deviations from baseline, in percent)

                                 1996    2000    2010     2030      2050   2075

Develovin~ countries exceDt NIEs

Potential output                   2.8    3.5     4.7     6.4        7.6    9.0
Total factor productivity          2.6    2.9     3.4     4.2        5.0    5.8
    from foreign R@                1.4    1.7    .2,3     3,3        4.1    5.0
    from trade                     1.2    1.2     1.1     1.0        0.9    0.8
Capital                            0.4    1.8     4.3     7.0        8.4    9.8
Investment                         5.2    5.0     6.6     8.0        9.0   10.5
Conswption                         2.9    2.7     3.0     4.3        5.2    6.0
Manufactures imports/GDPl          4.9    4.7     4.3     3.8        3.6    3.3

Africa

Potential output                  2.3     3.2     4.7     6.7        8,0    9.3
Total factor productivity         2.2     2.8     3.6     4.3        5.1    6.0
Capital                           0.4     1.1     3.9     7.9        9.4   10.8
Investment                        5.2     3.2     7.3     9,1       10.0   11,5
Consumption                       4.0     2.7     2.6     4.5        5.3    6.1
Manufactures imports/GDPl         4.2     4.6     4.5     4.0        3.7    3.4

~

Potential output                  3.4     4.1     5.3     7.1        8.5   10.2
Total factor productivity         3.2     3.2     3.6     4.6        5.6    6.6
Capital                           0.6     3.0     5.9     8.1        9.5   11.4
Investment                        8.2     8.8     7.9     8.9       10.3   12.3
Consumption                       3.6     3.9     4.7     6.0        7.0    8.1
Manufactures imports/GDPl         6.2     5.4     4.7     4.4        4.1    3.9

Other develoDin~ countries

Potential output                  2.6     3.2     4.4     6.0       7.1    8.2
Total factor productivity         2.5     2.8     3.4     4.1       4.8    5.5
Capital                           0.4     1.4     3.5     6.3       7.5    8.7
Investment                        3.8     3.6     5.7     7.2       8.0    9.2
Consumption                       2.3     2.0     2.1     3.3       4.1    4.8
Manufactures imports/GDPl         4.3     4.3     4.0     3.5       3.3    3.0



Imports and exports of manufactures are exogenously increased by an amount
equivalent to 5 percent of the baseline level of GDP in each developing
country region except for the NIEs.

    lIn percentage points.
                   Appendix Table.   Bilateral Import Shares for Manufactures
                                        (average, 1970-90)


                                                       Imports from:

                               us       JA     GR      FR      IT       UK      CA     S1


Imports of:


United States                  .-       .32    .09     .05     ,04      .06     .30    .14

Japan                          .46      --     .08     ,05     .04      .04     .08    .25

Germany                        .09      .08    --      ,15     .11      ,09     .01    .47

France                         .10      .05    .24     --      .14      .09     .01    .37

Italy                          .07      .03    .28     .20     --       .06     .01    .35

United Kingdom                 .13      .07    .19     .11     .07      --      .02    .41

Canada                         .76      .08    .03     ,02     .02      .04     .-     .05

Smaller Industrial
  Countries                    .12      .09    .23     .10     .08      .09     .01    .28

Africa                         .09      .11    .15     .29     .09      .14     .01    .14

NIEs                           .28      .51    ,07     .03     .02      .04     .01,   ,06

Western Hemisphere             .48      .13    .12     .06     .05      .04     .02    ,10

Other Developing
  Countries                    .18      .35    .16     .07     .05      .09     .01    .10


Imports of manufactures of each row country from each of the seven colmn countries and
the small industrial countries as a group as a share of total imports of manufactures
from these countries.  Each row sums to 1.0.
                                          Figurel.           increased R&Din     the United States
                                                            (Dtivlationsfrom
                                                                          baseline,
                                                                                 inpercent)


                                  unitedstates                                                                           UnitedStates
                Output and Total Factor             Productivity                    Consumption, Investment, and Capital Stock
10                                                                            10
         _Po@ntid        CiDP ... Tohl Facmr Productivi~                              _       Consumption --- Invesbnent                      Clpihl stack


 8                                                                              a
                                                                                                                                                                      -—-
                                                             --    —--
                                           ----—-
 6                                                                              6


 4                                                                             4


 2                                                                             2

                                                                                            / ..-
 0                                                                             0     .- .(..-”
                                                                                          f

-2       .                                                                     -2
         20CKI 2010        2020    2030    2040     2050    2060    2070              !000       2010             2020    2030         2040          2050    2060        2070




                  Other Industrial Countri~                                                Other Industrial Countries
             Output and Total Factor Productivity                                   Consumption, Investment, and Capital Stock
10                                                                            10
         —      PO@tti   GDP --- Totil Futor Rtitivity                               _        Cowption              --- Invesbnent         C,pital tilt


 8 r                                                                           8


                                                                               6


 4                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                              ----              ------

                                                                               2




     I
                                                                              -2.’’’’’’’’’                   ”’’’’’’       s’’’’’’”              “’’’’’’’’’’’”
         2000     2010     2020    2030    2040     2050    2060    2070             2000        2010           2020      2030      2040          2050         2060      2070




                    Developing Countries                                                      Developing Countries
             Output and Total Factor Roductivity                                    Consumption, Investment and Capital Stock
10                                                                            10
         —      Pntential GDP --- Total FXW   Prndwiivity                            _        Cnwption              --- Investment        Capitil Stik


 8


6
                                                                                                                                                           ---:-:
                                                                                                                                               -------------
4                                                                              4                                               -----                 ----
                                                                                                                   .’
                                                                                                              /
                                                                                                         /
2                                                                              2                     /
                                                                                                 /


0

-2
         2000     2010     2020    2030    2040     2050    2060   2070
                                                                              -2~ti.
                                                                                     2000        2010          2020
                                                                                                                         j..
                                                                                                                          2030
                                                                                                                                 c.....
                                                                                                                                   2040
                                                                                                                                        Lk
                                                                                                                                         2050               2060         2070
                                Figure 2. increased R&D in all Industrial Countries
                                                          bmeline,in percent)
                                            (Deviationsfrom


                               UnitedStates                                                             United States
              Output and Total Factor Productivity                                        Consumption, Inves~ent, and Capital Stock
25                                                                                   25
        _     Polentid (3DP    Tohl F~cbr Productivity                                      _            Consumption --- Investment                 Cmpimlstock


20                                                                                   20


15                                                                                   15

                                                                     ----
10
                                                 ----         -                      10                                                 /0              ----

                                                                                                                           ,          ---
 5                                                                                    5


 0                                                                                    0     ,-   ..7.-




-5                                                                                   -5
        1000     2010   2020     2030   2W          2050     2060         2070              2000            2010    2020       2030          2M0        2050      2060     207




                 Other Industrial Countries                                                      Other Industrial Counties
            Output and Total Factor Productivity                                          Consumption, InveshnenL and Capital Stock
25                                                                                   25-
       —       Potentinl
                    GDP --- Total Fxtir      Prodwtivity                                    _            Comption     --- Investment                C~pital tik


20                                                                                   20


15                                                                 ----              15
                                                 ----         -


10                                                                                   10


                                                                                      5


 0


-5 ~ilt’’’c8Lc’nss3,,,,,,,                           ,ss,   ,<3,’,         $         -5 ~L i’’’’””’’’’’’’’’’’’’””                                         “’’’’’’’’”
    2000      2010      2020    2030    2040        2050     2060         2070           2CQ0 2010              2020           2030          2040      2050        2060    2070




                   Developing Countri~                                                              Developing Countries
            Output and Total Factor Productivity                                          Consumption, Investment, and Capital Stock
25                                                                                   25 _                Consumption --- Invmunent                  C~pibl Stock
       —      Potentiti GDP --- Tobl Fxtor Prodwtiviy


20                                                                                   20 ,


15


10
                                          ----

 5




.5 L                                                                             I   -51,’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’’”                                        “’’’’’’’’’’’”J
       2000      2010   2020    2030    2040       2050     2060          2070             2000          2010       2020       2030         2M0         2050        2060   2070
                                   Flgure         3.       Increased Trade in Developing        Countries
                                                            (Deviationsfiom bmeline, inpercent)


                       Developing Countries                                                     Developing Countries
                Output and Total Factor Productivity                                  Consumption, Investment, and Capital Stock

12              PoEnliti GDP --- Tobl Fxtor Rodwtiviw                            ]2         —        COtISWllptiOO
                                                                                                                 --- Invesbnent                                    Clpihl Stock
                                                                                                                                                                                                        _-
10                                                                               10                                                                                                            ------    . . .
                                                                                                                                                                                ---
                                                                                                                                                         __      --:-       ---------
    8                                                                             8 .                                                          -—
                                                                                                                              -----                   .----”
    6                                                                             6                  ,.y                          --------
                                                                                        --                                >.-
    4.                                                                            4                                 ..
                                                                                                           .,
      k
    2 ‘                                                                           2 ..”       -
                                                                                      .’
    o-                                                                            O~,LIIL~II,I,II,,LI,,I,                                                       II,I,,L,,,,,,I,,,J
         2000      2010    2020    2030    2040     2050     2060    2070             2000       2010                                 2020      2030        2040         2050           2060        2070




                           Africa                                                                                                                    Africa
             Output and Total Factor Productivity                                     Consumption, Investment, and Capital Stock

12       —      pomntid GDP --- Totil Fmbr mtiity                                12   -           COWPtiOn                              --- hvslment            ,.. C~pihl Stock
                                                                            1                                                                                                                   ---- ----
                                                                                                                                                                                 ------
                                                                                 10 ~                                                                     ---         -:.         . ----
                                                                                                                                  ~---                -.           ----
                                                                                                                                                       -----
                                                                                  8 .                                    ./                   ----
                                                                                                                /                      ----
                                                                                  6                     /                        ,,




                                                                                      ~-                                                                                                                    J
                                                                                 0
         2000      2010   2020    2030    2040      2050    2060    2070                   2000             2010                  2020         2030        2040         2050            2060       2070




                    Western Hemisphere                                                         Western Hemisphere
             Output and Total Factor Productivity                                     Comumption, Investment and Capital Stock

12       —      Pobntial GDP --- Tohl FKtor -tii~

10

 8

6

4

2                                                                                2          “
                                                                                       ,’
0                                                                           d    o’                                                                                                                         J
         2000     2010    2020    2030    2040      2050    2060    2070                2000                2010                 2020          2030        2W0          2050            2060       2070




                 Other Developing Countrim                                                 Other Developing Countries
             Output and Total Factor Productivity                                    Consumption, InveslmenL and Capital Stock

                                                                                        _        Consumption --- Invmtment . C~pitil Stock



                                                                                                                                                              _-        _ - -- .-... . -----
                                                                                                                                              ---:          . . ..- . . . . --
                                                                                                         -----------
                                                                                                      / , .-” ---
                                                                                      .=
                                                                                                 /          ~---
                                                                                                  ..’
                                                                                            ~,
0    L————~
      2000 2010 2020              2030    2040    2050      2060    2070
                                                                                      ,,
                                                                                      2000                 2010                  2020         2030         2M0          2050        2060          2070
