                             NBER WOR~G          PAPER SERIES




                         IS THE TIME-SERIES EVIDENCE ON
                             MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS
                       CONTAMINATED BY PUBLICATION BIAS?




                                      David Neumark
                                      William Wascher




                                     Working Paper 5631




                    NATIONAL     BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         June 1996


The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve
Board or its staff. We thank Jeff Biddle, Harry Holzer, Alan Krueger, Robert Lalonde, Kevin
Lang, Peter Schmidt, John Strauss, Jeff Wooldridge, and seminar participants at Michigan State,
the Milken Institute, UCSD, and the University of Washington for helpful comments, David Card
and Alan Krueger for making their data available, and Daniel Hansen for research assistance.
This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are
those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by David Neumark and William Wascher. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                              NBER Working Paper 5631
                                                                                            June 1996


                              IS THE TIME-SERIES EVIDENCE ON
                                  MINIMUM WAGE EFFECTS
                            CONTAMINATED BY PUBLICATION BIAS?


                                                    ABSTRACT



        Publication     bias in economics may lead to selective specification          searches that result in

overreporting    in the published      literature    of results consistent   with economists’     priors.   In

reassessing the published time-series studies on the employment effects of minimum wages, some

recent research has reported evidence consistent with publication             bias, and concluded     that the

most plausible     explanation    of this evidence is “editors’ and authors’ tendencies          to look for

negative and statistically significant estimates of the employment effect of the minimum wage,”

(Card and Krueger, 1995a, p. 242).

        We present results indicating that the evidence is more consistent with a change in the

estimated     minimum    wage effect over time than with publication           bias.    More generally,     we

demonstrate     that existing    approaches   to testing for publication      bias may generate      spurious

evidence of such bias when there are structural changes in some parameters.                 We then suggest

an alternative strategy for testing for publication bias that is more immune to structural change.

Although changing parameters may be uncommon in clinical trials on which most of the existing

literature on publication    bias is based, they are much more plausible in economics.


David Neumark                                                        William Wascher
Department of Economics                                              Board of Governors of the
Michigan State University                                             Federal Reserve System
East Lansing, MI 48824                                               20th and Constitution Avenue, NW
and NBER                                                             Washington, DC 20052
I. Introduction

        In recent years, some economists have expressed concern that the journal review process has

had the unintended effect of biasing published empirical results towards the rejection of economic

null hypotheses,     In other disciplines, meta-analyses of published papers--generally   focusing on

clinical trials--provide   some evidence consistent with a bias towards publication of significant

results (see, for example, Berlin, et al., 1989), under the (reasonable) presumption that the parameter

being estimated across studies, such as the effect of a drug, is constant.    In economics, however, it is

considered more likely that parameters may vary across samples--especially        when the samples cover

different time periods--either   because of changed behavior (e.g., Lucas, 1976) or model

misspecification.     The possibility that parameters change makes it difficult to apply standard meta-

analysis techniques to the economics literature, because these techniques draw inferences regarding

publication bias fi-om changes in estimates across samples. 1

        This problem is illustrated by revisiting recent work by David Card and Alan Krueger,

published in the American Economic Review Pa~ers and Proceedings, and in their book Mvth and

Measurement       (1995a, 1995b). They apply standard meta-analysis techniques to the time-series

literature on the employment effects of minimum wage laws, and show that estimated t-statistics

have fallen rather than risen with sample sizes, and that t-statistics tend to be clustered around two.

Based on this evidence, Card and Krueger conclude that “the studies in the literature have been

affected by specification searching and publication biases, induced by editors’ and authors’



         lIn the clinical trial literature--where there is little room for manipulating specifications--
the typical assertion is that it is difficult to publish insignificant results (the “file-drawer”
problem). If a similar problem exists in empirical economics, one response by researchers could
be specification search to look for significant or “expected” results (e.g., Learner, 1978). For
ease of exposition, in this paper we use the term publication bias to refer to the file-drawer
problem as well as the selective specification search that publication bias may induce, although
the latter is the issue with which we are most concerned.

                                                      1
tendencies to look for negative and statistically significant estimates of the employment   effect of the

minimum wage” (1995a, p. 242), implying that earlier time-series studies of the employment         effects

of minimum wages should be discounted in assessing the overall evidence.z

       In this paper, we show that this conclusion suffers from an incomplete application of meta-

analysis techniques to economic studies. In particular, the linear reduced-form employment

equations that were typically estimated in the time-series minimum wage literature apparently did

not capture changes over time in the econometric relationship between minimum wages and

employment.    Although the patterns of coefficient estimates and t-statistics in published minimum

wage studies are consistent with what would be expected in the event of publication bias, similar

patterns are also evident in regression estimates generated from performing rolling regressions on a

consensus time-series specification that emerged subsequent to most of the published studies, and

on specifications that Card and Krueger advocate.

       In addition to presenting this qualitative evidence, we suggest a method of testing the null

hypothesis of no publication bias when parameters are changing.     If there is a specification that is

plausibly free of selective specification search, then that specification can be used as a benchmark

with which to compare changes in estimates in the published studies. We suggest a statistical test

for whether the changes in estimates in the published studies are significantly different from those

for the benchmark specification estimated over successively longer sample periods.      Both the

qualitative evidence and our formal statistical test indicate that the time-series evidence on the

employment effects of minimum wages is ~        contaminated by publication bias.



         2As Card and Krueger note, De Long and Lang (1992) have extended the meta-analysis
approach to study publications in economics more generally. However, De Long and Lang find
evidence of a “reverse” form of publication bias, namely that “journals tend to publish papers
that fail to reject their null hypotheses only when the null hypotheses are likely to be false” (p.
1257).

                                                    2
II. Evidence of Publication Bias

        The approach used by Card and Krueger to test for publication bias in the minimum wage

literature is relatively straightforward.   First, in the absence of publication bias and if parameters are

stable, then estimated t-statistics for employment effects of minimum wages should rise as the

sample period is extended; more precisely, the log of the absolute t-ratios should rise one-for-one

with the log of the square root of the degrees of freedom. This is closely related to the approach of

Berlin, et al. (1989), who test for publication bias in research from clinical trials by asking whether

the estimated magnitude of the effects in published studies is negatively related to the sample size.

The intuition is that if only significant results get published, the estimated effect will be bigger when

it is based on a smaller sample. Second, a tendency for published t-statistics for employment        effects

to be clustered around two can be interpreted as an indication of publication bias.

        The evidence that Card and Krueger report from their meta-analysis       of the minimum wage

literature is consistent with publication bias. Focusing on the existing time-series studies that use

quarterly data, they first report that a regression of the log of the absolute t-statistics from these

studies on the log of the square root of the degrees of freedom yields a negative coefficient estimate,

rather than the positive coefficient (of one) implied by the null hypothesis of no publication bias.

Second, they provide a graph suggesting that the published absolute t-statistics are clustered around

two; more precisely, the graph shows that a scatterplot of estimated elasticities and standard errors

of these estimates fits a line with slope two quite well.

        Alternatively,   such evidence could be interpreted as indicating structural change over time,

perhaps associated with model misspecification.       If, for example, the absolute size of the minimum

wage coefficient in the time-series employment equations has been declining over time, the absolute

t-statistic may have fallen as more years were added to the time-series regressions, even though the



                                                      3
standard errors were also falling; a declining coefficient would also explain why, as shown below,

the Berlin, et al. (1989) test generates evidence consistent with publication bias. Nevertheless,      for

reasons that are not explicitly stated, Card and Krueger conclude that publication bias is the more

“likely” or “plausible” explanation (1995a, p. 242; 1995b, p. 192).3

III. Assessing the Evidence

        Is publication bias the most likely explanation of this evidence?    To examine this question,

we attempt to mimic the following historical “experiment.”      Suppose researchers at different times

in the past had approached the time-series data with a regression specification that was not

influenced by selective specification search aimed at producing significant negative effects of

minimum wages. Would the coefficients fi-om this “benchmark” specification, estimated over

varying numbers of years, have been different from those reported in the literature?      A positive

conclusion--in   particular, if the findings of these hypothetical researchers would have generated

stable estimates of minimum wage effects (and rising absolute t-statistics) --would support the

publication bias explanation.   A negative answer, in contrast, would point to changing parameters

rather than publication bias as the explanation for the observed pattern oft-statistics   and coefficient

estimates in the literature.

        This approach is related to the so-called “gold standard” approach in the medical literature:

using a high-quality,   large study with which to compare other published studies (Chalmers, et al.,




         3Their conclusion maybe based in part on their interpretation of the exchange between
Welch (1974, 1976, and 1977) and Siskind (1977)--discussed in Chapter 6 of Myth and
Measurement--as providing an example of publication bias. We leave it to the reader to examine
the original articles and assess this interpretation. However, even if one accepts Card and
Krueger’s interpretation of this exchange, this anecdotal evidence provides no basis for
interpreting other studies similarly. Regardless of whether or not one interprets their conclusions
as coming down firmly on the side of publication bias, the contribution of our paper is to
distinguish between publication bias and structural change.

                                                     4
1987). Of course, the existence of such a study--or a “benchmark” specification in our case--is not

always a given, and the selection of such a study or specification from a set of alternatives is a

subjective matter. Consequently,   the approach we pursue in this particular context may not always

be applicable and maybe influenced by the subjective decisions of the researcher.      In the present

case, however, we believe that a good set of plausible benchmark specifications     is available.

        The first benchmark specification we consider is one suggested by Solon (1985), which Card

and Krueger use in their book to update the existing time-series evidence.    In this specification, the

log of the teen employment rate is regressed on the log of the Kaitz index (an industry-coverage-

weighted average of the minimum wage relative to the average industry wage), the log of the

unemployment    rate of adult males, the fraction of 16-19 year-olds who are 16-17, the fraction of 16-

19 year-olds in the armed forces, the log of the fraction of 16-19 year-olds in the population,

quarterly seasonal dummies (since the data used are not seasonally adjusted), a time trend and its

square, and interactions of the time trend and its square with each of the quarter dummies.       We use

the same data as Card and Krueger, which they have made available via the Internet,

       This “consensus” specification reflects some features that are relatively common across the

entire array of time-series minimum wage studies, such as the Kaitz index specification, the

inclusion of an aggregate demand indicator, and the inclusion of some supply indicators.       However,

it excludes the school enrollment rate, which was included in some earlier studies but has been

criticized as endogenous.   It also excludes lagged values of the Kaitz index, which were also

included in some early studies, and which appear to yield slightly larger disemployment      effects

(Hamermesh,    1981). In addition, this specification includes some features that were only adopted in

work that followed most of the earlier time-series studies. For example, although Brown, et al.

(1983) note that correction for serial correlation was rare in the work they review, later research



                                                   5
corrected for first-order serial correlation with the Cochrane-Orcutt   method.   Similarly, Solon

(1985) notes that seasonal effects are not constant over time, necessitating the inclusion of the time-

quarter interactions (in part, to get to a model consistent with an AR(1) specification).    Because this

specification reflects current “wisdom” regarding the correct time-series specification, while

excluding variables (such as the inclusion of enrollment rates or lagged minimum wage effects) that

are contentious, it seems a potentially useful one with which to carry out our historical experiment.

        The first panel of Figure 1 reports the estimated elasticities of teen employment with respect

to the minimum wage that we obtain when we repeatedly reestimated this specification after adding

an additional quarter of data (“rolling regressions”).   We begin with a sample period ending in 1968,

the earliest ending year of the sample periods in the time-series studies that Card and Krueger

consider.   We continue through 1988--the last year of data in the published studies that they cover.

We also show the upper end of the 95-percent confidence interval, so that the reader can see which

estimates are significantly different from zero. The graph shows that, in fact, the estimated elasticity

has generally fallen in absolute value over time.

        Next, we regressed the log of the absolute t-statistics generated by this procedure against the

log of the square root of the degrees of freedom; OLS estimates of this meta-analysis       regression are

reported in column (1) in panel A of Table 1. The estimated coefficient is negative (-.41) and

significant.4 Also reported in Table 1 is the regression of the absolute value of the estimated

coefficient on the square root of the degrees of freedom (the test proposed by Berlin, et al., 1989).

This estimated slope is also negative (-.004) and significant (see column(1),     panel B). Finally, the

second panel of Figure 1 shows that the absolute t-statistics from the rolling regressions are




       4As Card and Krueger(1995b) note, these standard errors cannot be taken literally, since
the samples on which the estimates are based overlap substantially.

                                                     6
clustered around two.

       What are the implications of these results? Card and Krueger interpreted similar results for

published studies as evidence of publication bias. However, the results in Figure 1 and in column

(1) of Table 1 suggest that studies done by unbiased researchers at different points in time,

approaching the data with a pre-specified or benchmark regression equation (in this case, an

equation that evolved after much of the published work), would also have generated evidence

consistent with publication bias. That is, the findings from the published studies may reflect

nothing but objective researchers estimating a relationship that was, in fact, changing over time.5

       To differentiate between publication bias and structural change, we need to test whether the

estimated coefficients from the meta-analysis regressions based on the published studies are

significantly different from those based on the estimates from the rolling regressions.    One approach

to assessing the significance of the differences in the meta-analysis results is to use the Hausman

test framework.   In particular, under the null of no publication bias, there are two consistent

estimates of changes in the minimum wage effect over time: the estimate in Table 1, based on the

benchmark specification (b~); and the estimate based on the published studies (bP).b Under the



         5There is no obvious reason why the t-statistics from the rolling regressions should be
clustered around two. However, if the t-statistics for the shorter samples tended to be near two
and the estimated coefficients fell over time, then such clustering might occur.

        bThat is, we are thinking of b~ and bP as alternative estimates of the parameter ~ in either
of the two meta-analysis regressions that we consider:


                                     in(t) = a + ~ln(N 1’2) + E


or
alternative hypothesis of publication bias, only b~ is consistent.    Thus, a test of the statistical

significance of the difference between bP and b~ provides a test for publication bias. More

specifically, as long as the estimate b~ from the benchmark specification is efficient, then the results

in Hausman (1978) imply that under the null hypothesis of no publication bias, the statistic


                                                 (bp - bB)2

                                             Var(bp)   - Var(bB)




is distributed as X2(1), and the null hypothesis is rejected at the a-percent level if this statistic

exceeds the a-percent critical value; the efficiency of b~ eliminates the covariance between the two

estimates from the test statistic,7

        Card and Krueger report the estimated coefficient from a regression of the log absolute

values of the t-statistics from the published studies on the log square root of the degrees of freedom.

This estimate, which corresponds to the regression in panel A of Table 1, is -.81, with a standard

error of. 70. As noted above, implementation      of the above test statistic also requires an

asymptotically   efficient estimate (under the null) of the corresponding    coefficient from the time-



where t and g are the time series oft-statistics or estimated minimum wage effects from the
published studies (in which case the estimates of ~ are denoted bP) or the rolling regressions (in
which case they are denoted by b~).

         7We are grateful to Kevin Lang for suggesting this framework for evaluating the
significance of the difference between the estimates from the rolling regressions and those from
the published studies. Note that this case differs slightly from the application of Hausman tests
to model specification. In specification tests, the estimate that is efficient under the null is
inconsistent under the alternative (which is the reason the specification testis of interest).
However, the distributional results in Hausman (1978) for the statistic in the text do not require
this restriction, and as we know bP is inefficient under the null hypothesis (both because it is
based on a limited number of possible sample periods and because it is subject to random
variation in specifications across published studies), the application of the test to the question of
publication bias instead requires the estimate from the benchmark specification (b~) to be
efficient under the null.

                                                       8
series of estimated minimum wage effects from the benchmark specification (b~). LM tests

indicated significant evidence of first-order serial correlation (but no higher-order serial correlation),

as well as heteroscedasticity    corresponding to increased precision of the estimates with more

degrees of freedom.    We therefore reestimated the meta-analysis regression correcting for first-order

serial correlation and for heteroscedasticity    of this form.g

        The corresponding       estimate is reported in column (1) of panel A of Table 2. The efficient

estimate of the coefficient from the t-statistic regression is -,39, with a standard error of .44. As the

second-to-last   row of panel A reports, the p-value from the Hausman test of the null hypothesis of

no publication bias is .44, indicating no evidence against this null hypothesis.9    This implies that the

deviations of the elasticities in the published studies from the regression line produced by the rolling

regression, although in the direction of publication bias, could easily have been produced by

chance. ]0 A similar analysis in Panel B, based on our estimates of the regression of the absolute


        ‘Because of the overlapping samples, one could in principle solve for the error structure
in the meta-analysis regressions using the rolling regression estimates, with some assumptions.
However, the first-order serial correlation structure fits the residuals very well, and therefore
seems a good approximation to the true process.

         9The standard error of the Card and Krueger estimate is undoubtedly biased downward
because of overlapping samples, but a larger standard error would only strengthen our failure to
reject the null, since the denominator of the test statistic would be larger.

         ‘“The estimates of p near unity in panel A suggest that the residual may be nearly 1(1),
which might argue for using a first-difference estimator instead of the AR correction used in
Table 1. However, in a closely-related estimation problem (with unknown p), Canjels and
Watson (1994) show that the Prais-Winsten estimator is the preferred estimator when p is likely
to be near one, but may not be exactly one. (In particular, this estimator is more robust to
variation in p than is the first-difference estimator.) Using our data, the Prais-Winsten estimates
were very similar to the maximum likelihood estimates in Table 2. For example, the estimated
coefficient (standard error) of the log square root of degrees of freedom corresponding to column
(1) of Table 2 was -.47 (.32). The Prais-Winsten estimates were also similar to the maximum
likelihood estimates in the other columns of this panel, discussed below. Straight first-difference
estimates (correcting the difference regression for heteroscedasticity) also were negative, with
larger absolute values than the estimates from the published studies reported by Card and
Krueger (which is inconsistent with publication bias); however, the first-difference estimates

                                                       9
coefficient estimates on the square root of the degrees of freedom, leads to the same conclusion.

Indeed, in this case the p-value is .99, as the estimated change in the minimum wage effect from the

rolling regressions is almost identical to that from the published studies.

        Our analysis to this point hinges on accepting Solon’s specification as free of publication

bias, and hence as a valid benchmark specification.      If the benchmark specification itself reflects

publication bias, then a comparison of estimates from the benchmark specification with those from

published studies does not provide a valid test for publication bias. To see this, suppose that

researchers (Solon included) tended to select specifications by looking for negative effects of

minimum wages. They would tend to report those specifications with relatively large negative

effects, for the sample period they were using. However, because the estimated effects are partly

random, we would expect the estimated minimum wage effect to be attenuated as the sample period

is extended, reflecting regression to the mean in the estimated minimum wage effect. 11 In other

words, rolling regression estimates of a specification that itself reflects publication bias might

generate the same qualitative patterns in the estimated coefficients or t-statistics that publication

bias generates in a sequence of published studies, hence biasing our test towards finding no

evidence of publication bias.

        We address this concern in two ways, First, we repeat the previous analysis for two

alternative benchmarks based on specifications advocated by Card and Krueger ( 1995b), who we

assume did not engage in selective specification search to find negative minimum wage effects. 12




were quite imprecise.

        ‘lThis is a potential issue because Solon’s paper used data only through 1979.

        12Given the large body of research by these authors indicating either no employment
effects or positive employment effects of minimum wages, their preferred specifications should
provide valid benchmarks.

                                                    10
The first adds the log of the adult male employment-to-population      ratio as an independent variable.

The second, for which they offer a priori theoretical arguments, also adds the log of the average real

manufacturing     wage, If these specifications were not considered by earlier researchers, or were

discarded as part of their selective specification search, then the estimated minimum wage effects

from these specifications   should not show the same attenuation that earlier published specifications

would show if they had been chosen with the goal of generating negative minimum wage effects for

the sample periods under study.

        The results are reported in columns (2) and (3) of Tables 1 and 2, and in Figure 2. For both

specifications,   the estimated minimum wage effects decline over time and the absolute values of the

t-statistics are clustered around two. This is evidence that--were it to come from published studies--

would point to publication bias. Moreover, this spurious evidence of publication bias is even

stronger for these specifications than for the Solon specification, as the absolute values of the

estimated slope coefficients in both tables are larger for these specifications.   In fact, in panel B the

evidence is not even in the direction of publication bias, as the estimated coefficients from the

rolling regression estimates are more negative than that from the published studies (reported in the

note to Table 2).

        We also re-computed the tests for publication bias using data through 1993, although it

seems to us that these additional observations are less relevant to the question of publication bias.

Including the more recent data may provide a more efficient estimate of the change in the minimum

wage effect over time, but it seems more appropriate to base our conclusions on a comparison

between the published studies and what these studies would have been obtained had they used the

benchmark specification.     Regardless, the qualitative conclusions, as reported in the last row in




                                                    11
each panel of Table 2, are unchanged; there is still no significant evidence of publication bias. 13

        The second way we address the concern that the consensus specification used as a

benchmark (in Figure 1) reflects publication bias is to calculate these various tests using only the

estimates for samples that included observations for the years after 1979, the last year used in the

literature employing the consensus specification.    In particular, if that specification itself is

contaminated   by publication bias, we might expect the attenuation of the estimated minimum wage

effect to emerge only in subsequent years. As shown in Table 3, the estimated minimum wage

effects using this more limited sample of estimates do decline faster than in the longer sample.

However, the same is true for the two specifications advocated by Card and Krueger, for which the

estimated relationships   are at least as strongly negative, suggesting that the sharper decline in

estimated minimum wage effects in this latter period using the Solon specification reflects

parameter changes, rather than publication bias in that specification.

        Finally, while the formal test for publication bias hinges on a number of statistical

assumptions,   we regard this test as a useful heuristic device for assessing the statistical strength of

the evidence suggesting that Card and Krueger’s results from the published studies do not, in fact,

reflect publication bias. In our view, however, the key result in this paper is that we replicate the

qualitative results in Card and Krueger’s work--which they interpret as consistent with publication

bias--using benchmark specifications that are presumably free of publication bias.

IV. Why Did Minimum Wage Effects Decline?

        A natural question that arises fi-om our analysis is why “objective” estimates of minimum

wage effects apparently declined as later years were added to the samples.       While it is not the focus



         13The differences in p-values indicate that the evidence is a bit more in the direction of
publication bias in the t-statistic regressions when data through 1993 are included, and a bit less
so in the regressions for the absolute value of the estimated coefficient.

                                                     12
of this paper, our case against publication bias in this particular context would be bolstered if these

parameter changes could be explained.       We can think of three possible sources of parameter change,

all of which are in part related to a misspecification    of the basic model. 14

           First, the Kaitz index fell over much of the 1980s, implying that the percentage of teens

bound by the minimum wage may have fallen. Because the time-series estimate of the minimum

wage effect in the simple linear employment equation can be viewed roughly as an average of the

minimum wage effect prevailing in each year, a nonlinearity in the true relationship between

employment      and the Kaitz index could produce changes over time in the estimated coefficient in the

misspecified    linear model. 15 In particular, a positive relationship between the absolute size of the

minimum wage effect and the level of the Kaitz index could explain the declining minimum wage

effect found when data from the 1980s were added to the sample. As it turns out, however, the data

are inconsistent with this explanation.    Because the value of the Kaitz index in the 1980s was still

well above that experienced in the 1950s or 1960s, the sample average of the Kaitz index continues

to rise as observations from the 1980s are added, This suggests that a nonlinearity of the type that

could have produced an increase in the estimated minimum wage coefficient in the 1970s also

would have produced a firther increase as the 1980s data were included, rather than the decline we

observe.

           Second, early increases in the Kaitz index partly reflected changes in coverage by minimum

wage laws, whereas later changes were generated mainly from changes in minimum wage levels or




         “Williams and Mills (1995) offer an alternative explanation associated with the time-
series properties of teenage employment rates and the Kaitz index. In particular, they claim that
the decline in the minimum wage coefficient in standard regressions occurs because these two
variables are integrated of different orders.

           15Such a nonlinearity could arise for reasons discussed in Neumark and Wascher (1994).

                                                     13
average wages. If the effects of coverage changes are larger than are the effects of changes in the

relative minimum wage, the effective absence of firther increases in coverage afier the early 1970s

could generate a declining employment effect.

       Finally, if the workers for whom minimum wage workers are most substitutable        are not

those earning the average wage, but those earning a wage lower in the distribution (such as the 25th

centile), then the well-documented   rise in wage dispersion over the 1980s suggests that a Kaitz

index measured using the average wage would overstate movements in a Kaitz index measured

using the 25th centile wage. The use of this “incorrect” Kaitz index then produces an underestimate

of the absolute minimum wage elasticity.    A complete assessment of this hypothesis entails a major

undertaking, because it requires micro-data on wage distributions over a long period. Nonetheless,

given evidence that minimum wage effects declined more sharply in the 1980s, we think this is the

most plausible of the three explanations that we have offered. 16

       Given our findings that declines in minimum wage effects in published studies estimated

over longer sample periods do not stem from publication bias, but from one of these sources of

parameter change (or perhaps some other explanation), we would advise researchers not to view the

earlier time-series evidence as biased. Rather, the accumulated evidence should be interpreted as

showing that time-series estimates of minimum wage effects are negative and significant for some

sample periods, but also that these effects fall with the addition of data from the 1980s (and early

1990s). Studying why these effects vary over alternative sample periods is likely to enhance our

understanding   of the employment effects of minimum wages. In addition, our perspective on the

accumulated evidence leaves open the possibility that time-series regressions some years hence will



       ‘bThis explanation was suggested by Lawrence Katz at an AEI conference on minimum
wages, and is supported in recent unpublished empirical evidence reported by Donald Deere,
Kevin Murphy, and Finis Welch.

                                                   14
again reveal a stronger negative effect of minimum wages on teen employment.

V. Conclusion

           This paper presents an approach to testing for publication bias in the economics literature,

where it may be difficult to distinguish the effects of publication bias from the effects of changes in

parameters.     The basic approach is to identi@ a benchmark specification that is unlikely to have

been influenced by selective specification search, and to compare changes in the estimate of interest

across published studies using different sample periods to changes in estimates from the benchmark

specification estimated over similar periods.      This approach contrasts with the clinical trial

literature, in which the null hypothesis of no publication bias is based on a comparison of estimates

across published studies using different sample sizes with a parameter assumed to be constant. 17

        We apply this approach to evaluate the claims by Card and Krueger (1995a, 1995b) that the

time-series evidence on minimum wage effects reflects selective specification search motivated by

authors’ and editors’ predisposition     toward finding and publishing results that conform to

conventional economic theory. It is true that the absolute magnitude of estimated minimum wage

effects in published studies fell as the time series were extended, consistent with publication bias.

However, it is also true that the absolute magnitude of the estimated effects falls over time for

specifications that emerged in the literature subsequent to all or most of the published work that

Card and Kraeger criticize, including specifications that they advocate on a priori theoretical

grounds.     In addition, a statistical test indicates that the reduction over time in the estimated



         ’71nthis paper we discuss the approach as applied to time-series studies. In principle, a
similar approach could be applied to cross-sectional studies, where true parameters may vary by
location, demographic group, etc., perhaps leading to corresponding variation in parameter
estimates across published studies. However, because we would not necessarily expect variation
in sample size to be correlated with variation in the representation of different locations or
demographic groups in the data, such parameter variation is less likely to point to publication
bias when meta-analysis methods from the clinical trial literature are used.

                                                       15
minimum wage effect in the published studies is not significantly different from the reduction in the

estimates from the benchmark specifications using successively longer sample periods.

          Thus, we conclude that the reduction in estimated minimum wage effects in published

studies using more recent data is due to structural change or misspecification    of the employment

equation, rather than to publication bias. While we do not make any claim that these findings

generalize to other areas of empirical research in economics, provisionally,     at least, our evidence

should make researchers less skeptical of published evidence that is consistent with widely-held

priors.




                                                   16
                                             References




Berlin, Jesse A., Colin B. Begg, and Thomas A. Louis.” 1989. “An Assessment of Publication Bias
Using a Sample of Published Clinical Trials.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 84,
381-92.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. 1983. “Time-Series Evidence on the Effect of
the Minimum Wage on Youth Employment and Unemployment.” Journal of Human Resources,
18(1), 3-31.

Canjels, Eugene, and Mark W. Watson. 1994. “Estimating Deterministic      Trends in the Presence of
Serially Correlated Errors.” Mimeograph, Northwestern University.

Card, David, and Alan B. Krueger. 1995a. “Time-Series Minimum-Wage         Studies: A Meta-
Analysis.” American Economic Review, 85(2), 238-43.

           . 1995b. Myth and Measurement:   The New Economics of the Minimum Wage (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press).

Chalmers, T. C., H. Levin, H.S. Sacks, D. Reitman, J. Berrier, and R. Nagalingam. 1987. “Meta-
analysis of Clinical Trials as a Scientific Discipline, I: Control of Bias and Comparison With Large
Cooperative Trials.” Statistics in Medicine, 6, 315-325.

De Long, J. Bradford, and Kevin Lang. 1992. “Are All Economic Hypotheses False?” Journal of
Political Economy, 100(6), 1257-72.

Hamerrnesh, Daniel S. 1981. “Minimum Wages and the Demand for Labor.” NBER Working Paper
No. 656.

Hausman, Jen-y. 1975. “Specification Tests in Econometrics.”   Econometrics,   46, 1251-71.

Learner, Edward P. 1978. S~ecification Searches: Ad Hoc Inference with Nonexperimental        Data
(New York: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.).

Lucas, Robert E. Jr. 1976. “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique.” In Brunner and Meltzer,
eds., The Phillips Curve and Labor Markets (Amsterdam: North Holland).

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. 1994. “Minimum Wage Effects and Low-Wage Labor
Markets: A Disequilibrium Approach.” NBER Working Paper No. 4617.

Siskind, Frederic. 1977. “Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States: Comment.” Economic
-,      135-38.

Solon, Gary, 1985, “The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment: A Reanalysis with Attention to
Serial Correlation and Seasonality.” Journal of Human Resources, 20(2), 292-7.
Welch, Finis. 1974. “Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States. ” Economic Inauirv, 12,285-
318.

— . 1976. “Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States.” In Orley Ashenfelter and James
Blum, eds., Evaluating the Labor Market Effects of Social Pro~rams (Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press).

—     , 1977, “Minimum Wage Legislation in the United States: Reply.” Economic Inauirv, 15, 139-
42.

Williams, Nicolas, and Jeffrey A, Mills. 1995. “The Minimum Wage and Teenage Employment:       Is
There a Relationship?” Manuscript, University of Cincinnati.
                      m
                      al
                      o-l


                      m




1     1   1   1   I

r.                0
u-l
m
m
m
m
                                                                    n
                                                               .:




1            I   1        1   1        1       1   1   1   1
m                             0                            0
m                                      :                            :   -d
m                                      m
0                                      m
m                                      m
m                                      m



    ——

                                           —
                                           —

    —                                      —

    -.
    ——




         0                        m
                     1’           1’
           Table 1: Mets-Analysis OLS Regressions for Time-Series Estimates of
           Employment Effects of Minimum Wages, Quarterly Data, 1968-1988


                 A. Regressions of Log A bsolute Values of T-Statistics on
                         Log Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

                         Consensus         Incl. Adult      Also Incl. Log Real
                        Specification    Male Emul./Po~.       Manu. Wa~e
                             (1)                (2)                  (3)
Constant                   1.69               2.18                2.31
                           (.25)              (.27)                (.23)

Log square root of          -.41              -.66                 -.73
degrees of freedom          (.12)             (.12)                (.11)

R2                           .13               .26                  .36



                   B, Regressions of Absolute Coefficient Estimates on
                           Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

Constant                     .13               .16                   .16
                            (.005)            (.005)               (.005)

Square root of              -.004             -.008                -.008
degrees of freedom          (.0006)           (.0006)              (.0005)

R2                           .38               .67                  .75

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. There are 84 observations used in each
column. Minimum wage employment equations from which the coefficients and t-
statistics are obtained are described in the text.
             Table 2: Mets-Analysis Regressions for Time-Series Estimates of
           Employment Effects of Minimum Wages, Quarterly Data, 1968-1988,
                      AR(1), Heteroscedasticity-Corrected Estimates



                  A. Regressions of Log A bsolute Values of T-Statistics on
                          Log Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

                          Consensus         Incl. Adult      Also Incl. Log Real
                         Specification    Male EmDj./pOD.       Manu. Wage
                              (1)                (2)                  (3)
Constant                    1.57               2.02                2.06
                           (1.00)             (1.12)                (.94)

Log square root of           -.39               -.64                -.65
degrees of freedom           (.44)              (.49)               (,41)

P                             .94                .95                 .94
                             (.04)              (.03)               (.03)

P-value, ~:
no publication   bias         .44                .74                 .77

    Data through 1993         .24                .56                 .61

                    B. Regressions of Absolute Coe~cient Estimates on
                            Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

Constant                      .15                .17                 .17
                             (.01)              (.01)               (.01)

Square root of               -.006              -,009               -.009
degrees of freedom           (.001)             (.001)              (.001)

P                             .74                .65                 .69
                             (.08)              (.09)               (.08)

P-value, HO:
no publication   bias         .99                .80                 .78

    Data through 1993         .79                .98                 .96

Standard errors are reported in parentheses. There are 84 observations used in each
column. Minimum wage employment equations from which the coefficients and t-
statistics are obtained are described in the text. The heteroscedasticity correction is based
on a regression of the squared residuals on the log of the degrees of freedom in Panel A,
and the degrees of freedom in Panel B. Afier transforming the data to obtain
homoscedastic errors, maximum likelihood was used to estimate the AR(1) model. The
test for publication bias is based on a Hausman test of the significance of the difference
between the estimated coefficient from these regressions and the estimate from the
published studies. For Panel A, the estimate from the published studies, reported by Card
and Krueger, is -.81 (with a standard error of .70). For Panel B, the estimate (computed
from the estimates in Table 6.1 of MWh and Measurement, and degrees of freedom
supplied by Alan Krueger) is -.006 (with a standard error of.0 12).
             Table 3: Mets-Analysis Regressions for Time-Series Estimates of
           Employment Effects of Minimum Wages, Quarterly Data, 1980-1988,
                      AR(1), Heteroscedasticity-Corrected Estimates



                 A. Regressions of Log Absolute Values of T-Statistics on
                         Log Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

                          Consensus         Incl. Adult      Also Incl. Log Real
                         Specification    Male Em~l./Po~.       Manu. Wage
                              (1)                (2)                  (3)
Constant                    3.63               3.89                 3.96
                            (.67)              (.75)                (.77)

Log square root of         -1.28               -1.44               -1.47
degrees of freedom          (.28)               (.32)               (.33)

P                             .69                .70                  .72
                             (.12)              (.12)                (.12)

                   B. Regressions of Absolute Coe@cient Estimates on
                           Square Root of Degrees of Freedom

Constant                       .16               .17                  .17
                             (.02)              (.02)                (.02)

Square root of               -.007              -.009                -.009
degrees of freedom           (.002)             (.002)               (.002)

P                             .47                .59                  .61
                             (.15)              (.14)                (.13)

Standard errors are reported in parentheses.   There are 36 observations     used in each
column. See notes to Table 2 for details.
