NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE AND WAGES: INSIGHTS FROM
THE CRYSTAL BALL

Robert Z. Lawrence
Carolyn L. Evans

Working Paper 5633

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

We thank participants in seminars at Harvard University, the University of Michigan and the
OECD for comments and suggestions and Howard Shatz for providing us with data. Robert
Lawrence acknowledges support from NASDAQ, the OECD Development Center and the US
Department of Labor/ILAB, Much of this paper reflects work done for the study Single World,
Divided Nations? to be published by the Brookings Institution for the OECD Development
Center. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in International Trade and Investment.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Robert Z. Lawrence and Carolyn L. Evans. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5633
June 1996

TRADE AND WAGES : INSIGHTS FROM
THE CRYSTAL BALL

ABSTRACT

This study uses both a net factor content analysis and a small simulation model to explore
the impact on the U.S. labor market of a fivefold increase in imports of manufactured goods from
developing countries.

The simulation, which is parameterized by the US economy in 1990,

involves a balanced trade expansion which displaces almost half of US manufacturing workers
who are reemployed in the remaining manufacturing and non-trade sectors. The results show that
relative wages of workers with a high school education or less would be depressed, while those
with some college education would rise. However, despite the magnitude of the shock, the
effects are surprisingly small. Once account is taken of productivity increases, labor force growth
and export sector wage premiums, given unitary elasticities of demand and of substitution
between workers with different levels of education, relative wages of workers with some college
education rise by 3.5 percent, while the real wages of workers with a high school education or
less decline by 1.3 percent. The impact of a variety of parameter assumptions is also explored.

Robert Z. Lawrence
Center for Business and Government
John F, Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

Carolyn L. Evans
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Trade and Wages: Insighb from the Crystal Ball.’
Harvard University and

Robert Z. Lawrence,

Carolyn L. Evans, Department of Economics, Harvard University.

June 1996.

Part I: Introduction

Sinu the late 1970s, the United States labor market has experienced a slow rise in average
compensation and growing inequality along lines of skill, education, and occupation.

Between

1979 and 1990, for example, the weekly earnings for full-time workers with some college

education increased 17% more rapidly than the earnings of workers with a high-school
education or less. As measured by the employment cost index, between 1981 and 1991 the
relative mmpensation of blue-collar workers compared with white-collar workers outside of
sales dmlined by 12 percent. While there is evidence that in the 1990s the trends towards
increased inequality has slowed (Bound and Johnson (1995)) or even -cd,

(See Figure 1)

the debate over the sources of inequality mntinues to rage.z

1We thank participants in seminars at Harvard University, the University of Michigan and the
OECD for comments and suggestions and Howard Shatz for providing us with data. Robert
Lawrence acknowledges support from NASDAQ, the OECD Development Center and the US
Department of Labor/ILAB. Much of this paper reflects work done for the study Single Worl&
. .
Plvlded Natlu ? ~ be publishd by the Brookings Institution for the OECD Development Cenm.
2 S= for example, Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1992), Lawrence and Slaughter (1993), Sachs
and Shatz (1994), Wood (1994), Baldwin and Cain (1994), Cooper (1994), Krueger (1995), and
Learner (1995).
1

Most recent studies of the links between trade and wages have looked backwards,
considering the impact of trade on the labor market over the past two decades. But the rapid
increase in US trade with developing countries over this period can be expected to continue
into the future. Indeed, the pace and volume could grow dramaticallyy if India joins China and
other Asian countries in successful export-led growth. It is this specter of billions of new lowwage workers being drawn into the labor market, which has led many in the popu Iar press to
predict a bleak future for low-wage workers in the developed countries. (Goldsmith 1993) In
this paper, we therefore construct a scenario which allows us to study the impact of a very
large increase in such trade.
We will present evidence which suggests that while growing international trade between the
United States and developing countries could lead to lower relative and real wages for
unskilled workers, the fears of large absolute and relative wage losses for less-skilled workers
appear misplaced. If sustained over the next fifteen years, an expansion in trade between the
US and the developing countries at the double-digit pau of the past decade would bring about
a major change in the structure of US manufacturing production.

In particular, the US could

see a decline in large segments of its basic industrial activities as these are replaced by imports
from emerging markets. However, matching this decline will bean expansion of skill
intensive activities that will provide an offsetting source of growth.
We find that while trade could effect major shifts in the structure of US production, i~

impact on the wage structure is unlikely to be large. 3 The basic reason for this small impact is

3 This analysis draws on Lawrence (1996).
2

that manufacturing in general, and those sectors potential y vulnerable to developing country
competition in particular, comprise a relatively small share of total employment.

Once the US

economy is driven to specialize fully in skill-intensive products, trade no longer widens the
relative wage gap.
The factor price equalization theorem leads some to predict”that fr~ trade with developing
countries will drive the wages of unskilled US workers down to Chinese or Indian levels. But
the theorem only holds under conditions of incomplete specialization.
fully s~ialimd,

Once countries become

the strong links between international wages and product prices break down.

For example, if a country has no domestic production of clothing, imports of clothing will no
longer directly affect wages. One way for firms in developed economies to avoid head-to-head
competition with develop ing countries, therefore, is to specialize in producing products which
are not imported from developing countries. Under these conditions, wages and other factor
prices in the developed countries will be determined only by the goods and services that they
actually produce: namely, those that are exported and those that are not traded. Put more
simply, the floor on the wages of unskilled workers in the developed countries is not what
workers earn in the textile industries of Chim and India, but what they can earn if they are
employed in export and domestic industries. It is this floor which we seek to estimate.

Part II: The Experiment

The type of shock we are considering can be illustrated in Figure 2 which illustrates the
production possibilities frontier of the traded goods sector. The US star~ from a position of

autarky;4 trade with developing countries then expands until the economy becomes fully
specialized, moving outside the zone of diversification to a corner solution in which only
exportable are produced.

Note that our shock arises purely from “trade”, i.e. it represents

changes in the trading opportunities presented to us by the rest of the world. Technology,
tastes, and factor supplies, all of which potentially influence trade volumes, are held constant
throughout.

me Net Futor Content Approach
Since some economists have been extremely critical of the net-factor content approach on
which we will partly rely it is important that we explain our methodological choice. In
particular,

Bhagwati and Dehejia (1994), hwrence

and Slaughter (1993), and Learner (1995)

have all emphasized that trade volumes might not be good indicators of trade pressures.
Indeed, one can thiti of examples in which just the threat of increased imports could drive
domestic wages down without leading to increased trade flows. These authors therefore prefer
paying attention to price evidence. If trade lowered the relative wages of unskilled workers,
we would also expect to see a decline in the relative prices of goods which are produced using
unskilled labor relatively intensively.
But as pointed out by Deardorff and Staiger (1988) and more recently by Krugman (1995)
and Learner (1996), the net factor content approach is useful and not inconsistent with a
consideration of prices provided the investigation is considering a fairly precise question. In

4 The initial autarkic point is used to provide benchmark prices at which the economy
initially trades.
4

particular, the approach can be used to study the impact on relative factor prices of a particular
change in trading opportunities, for example, the impact of imposing prohibitive trade
barriers. s Moreover, in a log-linear economy, with Cobb-Douglas utility and production
functions, the net factor content calculations have an appealing feature because changes in the
net factor content of trade as a proportion of total factor supplies give rise to proportional
changes in relative factor prices.
The major problem in applying this approach empirically to explain historical episodes is
that it requires assuming that the trade flows actual] y observed were caused only by the change
in the trading opportunities available and not by other changes such as technology, tastes and
relative factor supplies, which might also be expected to influence such flows. In practice,
this assumption will not hold, and it is not easy to identify these effects separately because they
are interactive. Changes in demand, factor supplies, technology, and opportunities to trade
internationally could all affect the composition of trade, ou~ut, and relative product and factor
prices. In particular, as Deardorff and Hakura (1994) have emphasized, the volume of trade is
an endogenous variable which is simultaneously determined with wages. If trade is generated
by a decline in trade barriers at home or abroad the impacts on wages could be very different
than if trade is generated by changes in tastes or technology.
The studies of trade in the past all suffer from the problem of isolating the effects of trade
precisely. In a runt

article, Learner (1996) claims that because of the problems we have just

5 The rwon, as Deardorff and Staiger (1988) show, is that any given trade equilibrium can
be msociated with an equivalent autarky equilibrium in which factor endowments are changed
by the amounts of the factor content of trade. “Since factor prims in autarky are related to
factor endowments, it follows that factor prices with trade are related to its factor content. ”
5

discussd thenetfactor

content approach isofextremely

limited use.b Learner emphasizes that

the net factor content approach can (only) be used to compare two equilibria that have the
same tastes, technologies, and factor supplies and that differ only in terms of external trading
opportunities.

But accepting these restrictions, the net factor content approach is actually a

useful starting point for studying the shock we are interested in’this paper, namely a dramatic
future expansion in America’s opportunities to trade. Moreover, because we can set up a
precise experiment, we can actually learn about the past by looking at the future.

fie fiperiment
bt

us explore the implications of a very large expansion in U.S. manufactured goods trade

using data on the US economy in 1990. We obtain an upper bound impact on the US labor
market by resuming that industries which compete with manufactured imports from developing
countries are totally eliminated. The US shifts into non-competing industries, and workers
find jobs in sectors producing exports or non-traded goods and services.
Which industries are potentially most vulnerable to
competition from developing countries? Table 1 lists US industries ranked according to the
share of full time workers with a high school education or less-- “high-school workers” -- in
the labor form in 1990.7 The industries range from Tobacco, in which high school workers
accounted for just 43 percent of employment, to Apparel in which they constituted 85 percent.

s The analysis using prices encounters the same problems.
7 Industry SIC 29, petroleum refining, has been excluded.
6

The industries seem to fall into two distinct groups. There is one group of seven industries in
which high-school employment shares range from 43 to 53 percent and a second group with
shares ranging betwwn 65 and 85 percent, There are no two digit industries between 53 and
65 percent. This suggests a natural division. The first group, we define as “high-skill”
industries. It includes printing and tobacco plus the industries hat are usually classified as
“high-tech” namely chemicals, machinery and instruments. The second group, which we
define as “basic, “ includes all other manufacturing industries.
Clearly, given the level of aggregation, this is a fairly crude approximation, but it does
have quite strong predictive value with respect to trade with developing countries. The highskill industries accounted for about three quarters of all US manufactured exports to
developing countries, while the basic industries accounted for almost sixty percent of US
manufactured imports from developing countries. Mormver, exports to developing countries
munt for much higher shares of value added in the high-skill industries (11 percent) than in the
basic industries (5 percent). On the other hand, the ratio of manufactured imports to domestic
value-added is much higher for low skill (15 permnt) than for high-skill (8 percent).
~.

This classification of US industries suggests an extreme scenario in which the US

becomes fully specialized in high-skill products. In this scenario, as reported in Table 2, the
US completely replaces the 1990 domestic value-added of $552 billion which was produd

in

these bmic industries with imports from developing countries. In turn, exports (and
production) of the high-skill industries expand by an additional $552 billion in proportion to
their 1990 output shares. This is clearly a very dramatic scenario. In 1990, US impo~ from
developing countries of manufactured goods amounted to $140 billion. In the alternative
7

scenario they are assumed to increase to $690 billion -- in other words, there is a five-fold
increase. If this increase took place over a fifteen year period it would correspond to an
annual growth rate of 11.3 percent. These effects would build up over time and become larger
in later years when trade volumes are larger. After 10 years, only about half of the effects
would be felt.
As reported in Table 2, given constant ratios of inputs to outputs, this switch eliminates the
demand for the 8.7 million workers employed in basic industries (6.4 million high-school
workers and 2.3 million college workers. ) On the other hand, the increase in value-added of
the high-skill manufacturing sector by $552 billion raises demand for 7.6 million workers split
evenly between high-school and college workers.

All told therefore, this substitution results

in an excess supply of 2.6 million high school workers and an excess demand for 1.5 million
college workers. Given this alternative production structure for manufacturing, with no
change in relative wages, the demanded mnomy-wide

employment ratio of high-school to

mllege workers is 88.2 percent. In fact, in 1990, the supply ratio of these workers was 95.4
percent. ~us as compared to 1990, the relative demund for high school workers would
decline by 7.5 percent.

To clear the labor market, therefore, the relative wage of high-school

workers would have to fall to encourage firms in both high-skill manufacturing and the nonmanufacturing economy to hire more high-school and fewer college workers. A key question,
therefore, is the sensitivity of the relative demand for different types of workers to relative
wages -- the elasticity of substitution. The literature provides a wide range of estimates. 8 If

BFor a survey see Hamermesh (1986).
8

we assume this elasticity is unity, we obtain a proportional decline in the relative wages of
high-school workers i.e. 7.5 percent. 9
Product Pr ice and Real Wa?e Cm.

Thus far the analysis has estimated the impact of

trade on relative wages. We know however, from trade theory, that in this scenario the real
wage of skilled workers will rise and the real wage of unskilled workers will fall. To obtain
explicit relative price and real wage effects associated with this scenario, we now simulate the
scenario with a general equilibrium, two-factor, three sector model calibrated on 1990 US
data. Appendix I contains a more detailed description of the model.
Description of Model. The model has a non-traded goods sector which accounts for 83
percent of mnsumption and high-skill and basic manufacturing industries which acmunt for 10
and 7 percent respectively. The sectors turn out to be roughly mirror images. In basic
manufacturing, unskilled labor receives 62 percent of income, whereas in high-skill
manufacturing its share is 37 percent. Initially, the model has Cobb-Douglas production and
consumption functions and is parametrized

using the data in Table 1. The parametrization

very close to, but not precisely the same as the net factor content scenario for wmputational
reasons.
Tables 3 to 5 describe some important parameters of the model and the simulation results.
The first striking feature of the model is the flatness of the production function, confirming a
result noted by Johnson (1966) many years ago. A decline in the relative price of basic

9 Deardorff and Staiger (1988) show that if product expenditures and factor shares remain
constant shares of income, the change in relative wages will be proportional to the changes in
total relative factor supplies represented by changes in the net factor content of trade.
9

is

manufactures of just 1.8 percent suffices to drive the economy to complete specialization.
(See Table 3) This reemphasizes the importanw of the magnification effect -- i.e. that
relatively small changes in prices can have fairly large effects on relative wages. The real
wages of high-school workers fall by 4.4 percent, while the real wages of college workers rise
by 2.9 percent, leading to about the same relative wage shift as obtained in the net factor
content calculations.
It is noteworthy that while the effects of trade on the distribution of income are substantial,
the impact on real income is small -- this might be expected given the 7% share of basic
manufactures in consumption and the decline in relative import prices under two percent.
Indeed, overall real income in the economy rises by just one twentieth of one percent.

Qual@catiom
eters. In Table 3, we also explore the sensitivity of our results to
alternative estimates. 10 As reported, a lower elasticity of substitution in consumption (of 0.5)
does not lead to major changes in the results. This gives rise to a slightly larger relative price
effect (-2, Opercent) and a fall in relative unskilled wages by 7.6 percent, divided between a
decline in real high-school wages of 4.7 percent and an increase in college wages of 3.2
percent. By contrast, lowering the elasticity of substitution in production to 0.5 does have a
considerable impact, leading to changes in relative prices of 4.1 percent and relative wages of
14.9 percent split between a decline in real wages of high-school workers by 9.1 percent and

10Note that these simulations use CES production and utility functions.
10

an increase in real college wages by 6.9 permnt.
The literature is divided on which parameter is appropriate.

Katz and Murphy (1992) in

a aggregative estimate obtain an elasticity of 1.41. Sachs and Shatz (1995) by contrast argue
for parameters of between 0.3 and 0.5. 11In his survey Hamermesh (1986) gives a wide range
of estimates. When these are estimated using cost functions they range betwmn zero and 3.7
with a mean of about unity. As Adrian Wood pointi out econometric estimates of the
elasticity of substitution probably capture not only the pure factor substitution effect in
producing a given product but also the effects induced by different factor prices on product
mix and quality. 12 Wood argues this is a problem for the simulation he wishes to perform and
therefore uses lower estimates to capture only the substitution possibilities in producing a
specific bundle of goods. However, for our purposes, the induced effects are also relevant
since they would come into play in response to changes in relative factor prices in response to
trade and thus moderate the impact of trade on factor prices, This leads us to conclude that
estimates of the elasticity in the range of unity appear reasonable, indeed could be
mnsemative.
-.

By using data from 1990 we ignored two important considerations that lead to an

overstatement of these effects. First, we overlooked that over a fifteen year period, there will
be productivity improvements.

Indeed, over a fifteen year period, with output per worker in

11Note if the elasticity of substitution is low it implies that the impact of W trade and skillbtechnical change will be larger for any given displawment of labor. For a more complete
exploration see Lawrence and Evans (1996).
‘2For more discussion see Wood (1994), pp. 132-134.
11

manufacturing increasing at the 2.5 percent annual rate it averaged between 1979 and 1994,
for example, the employment impact of these shifts would be reduced by 44 percent.
(Alternatively, we could think of these as scenarios in which developing country trade volumes
could be larger by 44 percent to have the estimated effects.) Taking productivity growth into
acmunt, therefore, suggests that an 11.3 percent annual growth rate over fifteen years in
imports from developing countries would reduce the relative demand for high school workers
by O. 56 * 7.5 = 4.1 percent in the case of a unitary elasticity of substitution and by 9.2
percent with an elasticity of substitution equal to 0.5.

This would imply declines in real high-

school wages of between 2.5 and 6.2 percent. This is therefore a more realistic estimate of the
displacement effects of the volume effects in the scenario.
Second, the US labor force is like]y to grow over this period at an annual rate of around
one percent. This implies that the employment shifts represented by these trade flows will
represent relatively smaller shares of the labor force. Assuming a proportional increase in the
ratio of high-school to college workers, this would reduce the estimates of relative wage
changes implied by these trade volumes of an additional fifteen percent, i.e. to .85 * 4.1 =
3.5 percent with an elasticity of substitution equal to unity and 7.82 percent with an elasticity
of substitution of .5, yielding real wage declines for unskilled workers of between 2.1 and 5.3
percent, when we account for both growth and productivity changes. Actually since the supply
of more ducated workers will rise relatively rapidly these effects are likely to be even
smaller.
w.

The simulations have assumed that average wages earned by high-school and college

workers are the same throughout the economy. But in fact, there are differences. Katz and
12

Summers (1989) estimate these wage premiums for two-digit manufacturing for managers and
laborers. Ascribing their estimates of rents for managers to mllege workers and for laborers to
high-school workers suggests that on average the rents of managers and workers in basic
industries are 6 and 2 percent respectively, while for college and high-school workers in high
skill industries on average they are 15 and 13 percent Thus, given these rents, the shift in
employment from the basic to the high skill sector would increase average rents for both types
of workers. This would be the source of additional gains from trade. 13 On average, for
employment shifts laid out in the net factor content scenario described above, average
mnomy-wide

rents earned by high-school and college workers would rise by 0.7 and 0.8 of

one percent respective y. Taking these into account therefore leaves the impact of trade on
relative wages unchanged, but using the estimates which account for both productivity and
labor force growth imply real wages declines of unskilled workers of 1.3 and 4.5 percent for
elasticities of substitution of 1 and 0.5 respectively.
~.

We have taken the relative supplies and demands for these

factors as given, But there are likely to be responses in both demand and supply which will
reduce this effwt,

On the demand side, technological innovation could occur which saves on

the use of college workers and makes more intensive use of high-school workers. On the
supply side, the lower relative wage of high-school workers imp]ies an increase in the return to
education. If it induces workers and new labor force entrants to invest more in education, this
will reduce the relative supply of high-school workers and bolster their relative wages.

13Indeed Katz and Summers (1989) find that US export industries provide higher wage
premiums tha; those mmpeting with imports.
13

Services Trti.

This scenario should not be taken as an accurate forecast of the specific

sectors that are likely to be affected by trade with manufacturing.

Indeed it is likely that even

in the face of increased imports of the size we have considered many of the basic industries
will suwive and some of the high-skill will not. However, the exercise should be seen as a
parable which indicates orders of magnitude when unskill-- intensive sectors are displaced.
Thus some of these could be in the servius sector rather than manufacturing.

There is,

however, an important question of whether even these orders of magnitude are too small
because improvements in communications could dramatically increased the scope of what may
be traded. In particular, as an example in the low skill area, data processing activities once
performed domestically in OECD countries are increasing y undertaken abroad. On the other
hand, even high-skill firms are finding it feasible to use software and other talented engineers
in developing countries.

Nonetheless, if the experience in goods trade is indicative, it remains

likely that services trade between OECD and developing countries will occur mainly along
skill lines, with the OECD exporting skill-intensive services and importing unskilled-intensive
services. The literature on the potential for providing long distance services has been surveyed
by the World Bank (1995).14 It reports studies showing that an estimated 12 to 16 percent of
employment in services in the G7 engage in services that could technically be provided at long
distance. However, there are many activities that for strategic rwons,

such as preserving

proprietary information, companies are reluctant to outsource, particularly internationally. The
Bank therefore estimates that between 1 and 5 percent of the total employment in services in

14World Bank (1995), Chapter 3.
14

the G-7 anomies

are contestable internationally. This suggests a potential market for such

exports in the US in 1990 dollars of between $14.4 and $43.1 billion, and in the G7 of
between $40.3 and $121 billion. While the high estimate of $43.1 billion represents about
thirty percent of the value of US manufactured imports in 1990, if the internationally
contestable share remained a similar proportion of employment over the next fifteen yeas, it
would be too small to have a major impact on the calculations in this scenario. $43.1 billion
would represent an addition of only 7.8 permnt to the volume of imports contemplated here.
Apptiently, therefore, the overwhelming majority of output outside of manufacturing will
remain non-traded.
If the manufacturing sector was disaggregated further than we have done
here, it is likely that somewhat larger estimates could be obtained since a finer division might
lead to somewhat higher high-school to college ratios for those workers who are displaced and
somewhat lower ratios for the jobs that are added in export industries. Stacking the industries
using a three digit level of disaggregation we obtained estimates which led to impacts
approximately 1.5 times m large as those obtained at the two-digit level. Similarly, the effects
could be larger if we had disaggregated workers into more education categories. In particular,
Borjm, Freeman and Katz (1992) find more powerful effects of immigration on the relative
wages of workers with less than high-school education.
-.

In the United States, as we have seen, manufactured trade is highly differentiated

along the lines of skill that is captured by measures of education. Manufactured exports are
mncentrated in high-technology products with high ratios of college to high-school graduates,
while imports, particular y those from developing countries, are concentrated in more basic
15

industries in which skill ratios are low. Judged by educational attainment, Japan’s patterns of
industrial production and international specialization are much less distinctive than the US.
The share of the labor force with a high-school education or less is much higher in Japan than
in the US and the range of the ratios of high-school to college graduates across industries is
much narrower. One reason could be a greater reliance on on-the-job training for skills
development, but this is not the only reason. As estimated by Kosai in Thygesen, Kosai and
Lawrence (1996), for example, the 78.1 percent share of high school workers in high-skill
Japanese industries, which account for 82.3 percent of all Japanese manufactured goods to
developing countries, is not very different from the 88.0 percent share in basic industries,
which account for just 18 percent of such exports. Moreover manufactured imports from
developing countries are split evenly between these two categories.
The result is that net factor content analysis shows balanced expansions of trade having
much smaller effects on the relative demand for workers with different education levels.
Indeed, eliminating all basic industries displaces 4.17 million high-school workers and 0.57
college workers, while replacing their value-added with output from the high-skill industries
results in a demand for 3.39 high-school and 0.95 mllege. Overall, the economy wide ratio in
the demand for high-school to college workers falls by just 2.03 percent -- an impact of less a
third than in the US. This analysis helps explain why Japanese concerns are more focused on
hollowing out than growing wage inequality. These concerns reflect the perception that
imports from developing countries are

Ch

a 11 eng ing

sophisticated skill levels.

16

Japanese firms with fairly

Part III: Conclusions
This exercise suggests that over a fifteen year period, rapid increases in US trade with

developing countries could depress the relative and absolute wages of unskilled US workers.
Given an increase in productivity and growth in the labor force, the decline in real wages
would be about 2.5 percent. This effect would be mitigated by an additional 0.8 percent boost
b=use

of wage premiums in the export sector.

In an economy in which average real wage growth was fairly strong, this type of change,

of between a sixth and a third of a percent a year, would not be a major issue -- particularly if
there were other positive effects on the less skilled because of other changes in the labor
market. If average real wages in the US were to rise by one percent per year due to higher
domestic productivity, workers could absorb the change due to trade and still experience real
earnings growth of between 0.84 and 0.67 percent annually.
It should be emphasized, moreover, that this is an upper bound impact. It ignores the fact
that trade may bring benefits by increasing scale mnomies,

enhancing competition,

transferring technology and increasing product diversity -- all of which could -

wages of

boti high-school and college graduates. It also ignores the fact that poorer workers are more
likely to consume the price-sensitive basic goods whose prices will fall a result of trade.
Moreover, once the eeonomy eliminates domestic production of the basic industries in
which the developing countries special izes, additional increases in world supplies of these
products would increase the real wages of all American workers by providing them with

17

cheaper imports. 15Additional trade with developing countries would then not necessarily affect
wage inequality in the USA, although given the relatively small overall shares of imported
goods in mnsumption this effect should not be exaggerated.
Finally, this simulation about the future also contains an implicit, but very important
lesson about the past. If the impact of very large shifts in trade in the future is likely to be
relatively small, it suggests that the much smaller growth in trade with developing countries
over the past fifteen yms is unlikely to have had the major impact on labor markets in the
OECD which many claim it has,

15 If the developing muntries shift into high-skill products, on the other hand, the US terms
of trade could decline and wages in the US would become more equal.
18

References.

Baldti, R and Cain, G. 1994. ‘Trade and US Wages: Some Preliminary Results. ” NBER
Working Paper.
Berc~ Peter and Syds-er, Knut. 1993. Economists Mathematical Manual, Second Edition.
Berh: Springer-Verlag.
BeE~ Bound, John, and Griliches, Zvi. 1993. Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor
within U.S. Manufacturing Indutries: Evidence from the Annua! Survey of Manufacturing.
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 4255. Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
EL Bound, John, and Griliches, Zvi. 1994. “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor
within U.S. Manufacturing hdustries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 109(May): 367-97.
Be-

Bhagwati, J. and Dehejia, V. 1994. “Trade and the Wages of the Unskilled: Is Marx Striking
Again?” in J. Bhagwati and M. Kosters, eds. Trade and Wages: Levelling Wages Down?
Wmhington: American Enterprise Institute.
130rjas, G., Freeman, R., and Katz, L. 1992. “On the Labor Market Effects of Immigration
and Trade. ” in J. Bhagwati and M. Kosters, eds. Trade and Wages: Levelling Wages Down?
Washington: Ameriean Enterprise Institute.
Borj~, George J. and Valerie A. Ramey. 1993. Foreign Competition, Market Power and
Wage ~nequali~:~eory and Evidence. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
4556. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of hnomic
Research.
Bound, John and George Johnson. 1992. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. “ American Economic Review. 82 (June): 371-92.
Bound, John and Johnson, George. 1995. ‘mat Are the Causes of Rising Wage Inequality in
1
the United States?” Federal-Resewe-Bank-o f-Nw-York-Economic-Policy-Revi~.
(January):9-17.
C&g,

Alpha C. 1984. Fu&mental

Meth&

of Mathematical Economics, ~irdEdition.

New York: McGraw Hill.
Cooper, Richard N. 1994. Foreign Trade, Wages and Unemphyment. Harvard University
Department of Economics, Working Paper.
Deardofi A. and Hakura, D. 1994 ‘Trade and wages -- what are the questions?” m J. Bhagwati
and M, Kosters, eds, Trade ati Wages: Levelling Wages Down? Washington: American
Enterprise Institute.

Deardorff, Alan and Staiger, Robert. 1988. “An Interpretation of the Factor Content of
Trade. ” Journal of International Economics. 24 (February): 93-107.
GandoMo, Gimcarlo, 1987. International Economics I: Z?zePure l?zeory of International
Trade. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

Goldsmith, James. The TrW. New York: Carroll & Graf, 1993.
Hamermesh, Daniel. 1986. ‘The Demand for Labor in the bng Run. ” in Orly Ashenfelter
and Richard Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor Economics. 429-471. Amsterdam: Elsevier
Science Publishers.
Johnson, George E. and Frank P. Stafford. “International Competition and Real Wages. ” in
Amrican Economic Association Meetings in Year.
Johnson, Harry G. ‘Factor Market Distortions and the Shape of the Transformation Curve. ”
~
34 (1966): 686-698.
Juhn, Chinui, Murphy, Kevin M., and Pierce, Brooks. 1993. “Wage Inequality and the Rise
in the Returns to Skill. ” Journal of Political Economy. 101(3): 410-42.
Juhn, Chinhui and Murphy, Kevin M. 1995. ‘Inequality in Labor Market Outcomes:
Contrasting the 1980s and Earlier Decades. ” Federal Reserve Bank of New York: Economic
Policy Review. 1:26-32.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin Murphy. 1992. “Changes in Relative Wages in the United
States, 1963-87: Supply and Demand Factors. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics. 107
(February): 35-78.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers. 1989. ‘Industry Rents: Evidence and
Implications. ” Brookings Papers on Macroeconomic Activity. 209-291.
Krueger, Alan B. 1995. Lubor Market Shlfis and the Pn”cePuzle Revisited. Princeton
University. Mimeo
Krugman, Paul, 1995a. Technology, Trade and Fmtor Prices. Stanford University. Mimeo.
Krugman, Paul R. 1995b. “Growing World Trade: Causes and Consequences. ” Brookings
Papers on Macroeconomic Activi~. 1..
Lawrence, Robert Z. 1996. Single World: Divided Nations? me Impact of Trade on OECD
Labor Markets. Paris: OECD Development Centre (forthcoming).

bwrence,

Robert and Evans, Carolyn.

1996. Insights from the Black Box. mimeo,

Lawrence, Robert Z. and Slaughter, Matthew. 1993. “Trade and US Wages in the 1980s:
Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~:
Macroeconomics. 2:161-226.
Learner, Edward. 1995. “A Trade Economist’s View of U. S. Wages and Global imtion. ” in
Susan Collins, ed. Impotis, fipotis and the American Worker. Washington DC: Brookings
Institution.
Learner, Edward. 1996. “What’s the Use of Factor Contents?” Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 5448 (February), Cambridge, MA: National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Noguc~ Ah
1991. “The Two-Sector GeneralEquilibriumModel: Numerical and Graphical
Representations of an Economy.” ~e Mathematical Journal. 1(3): 96-103.
Noguc@ Asahi. 1993. “GeneralEquilibriumModels.” in Hal Varian, ed. Economic ad

Financial M&eling with Mathematical. New York: Springer-Verlag,
Sachs, Jefiey and Shat~ Howard. 1994. “Trade and Jobs in US Manficturing,” Brookings
Pqers on Economic Activity. 1:1994.
Sachs Jefiey and Schatq Howard. 1995. ‘titemational Trade and Wage Inequalitym the
United States: Some New Results.” In Susan Collins, ed. Imports, @orts, and the American
Worhr. WaahingtoL D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Slaughter, Matthew J. 1994. “The Impact of Internationalization on U.S. Inmme
Distribution. “ in Richard O’Brien, ed. Fi~nce and the Internutioml Economy 8: l?ze Amex
Bank Reivew Ptize Essays, 143-158. New York: Oxford University Press.
Thygesen, Niels, Kosai, Yukata, and Lawrence, Robert Z. Glob~,ation
U
A Draft Report to the Trilateral Commission, April 1996.
Welc& Finis. 1970. “Education m Production.” Jour~l

and Trilateral J.abor

of Political Economy. 78.

Stephen. 1991. Mathematical: A System for Doing Mathematics by Computer, Second
Edition. Redwood City, CA: The Advanced Book Rogra~ Addison-Wesley PublishingCo.
WoMa~

Global Economic Prospects and the Devehping Countries. The World
Bank: Washington, D.C.
World Bank. 1995.

Woo& Adrian. 1994. North-South Trade, Employment, and Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon.

~1

Blue& White Collar (nonsales)
Compensation (1981 =100)

118
11611411211o108-

106104102I

100’

I

I

1983

1981

1982

I

[

white/cpl

I

1987

1985
1984

~

I

1986
~

I

I

1991

1989
1988
Blue/cpl

I

I

1990
~

I

I

1993
1992

White/Blue

I

1995
1994

Figure 2
LrnportableGood

Exportable Good

88~z=R$
O“O-

00000

Table 2.
Future Scenario

1990 Actual

High Skill

(2)
(3)

Value Added (billions)
Employ ment(millions)
Value Add/Emp(thous

742.05
10.18
72,89

(4)
(5)

High Stool Emp(mill)
College Emp(mill)

(6)
(7)

share hs/emp(4/2)
ratio hs/col (4)/(5)

5.08
5.10
0,50

(1)

1,00

Basic

Manufactu

non-man

US Economy

552.45
8.68
63.65
6,36
2.32
0.73
2,74

1294,5

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1294,50
17,76
8.86
8,90
1,00

39,85
46,32
0,86

55.22
0.88

-8.68
-6.36
-2.32

-1.10
-2,58

0,00

-2.58

0,00

1.48
-0.072

18.86
68.64

86.17

105.03

11.44
7.42
0.61
1.54

39.85
46,32

51.29
53.74
0.49
0.95

0,46
0.86

Hypothetical

(8)
(9)
(1o)
(11)
(12)

Value Added
Employ ment(8/3)
High School(6)*(9)
College
ratio hs/col (10)/(1 1)

Hypothetical

1294.50
17.76
8.86
8.90
1.00

48.71

- Actual

(13)
(14)

employment
high school

7.58
3.78

(15)
(16)

college
ratio hs/col

380
0.00

1.48
-0.55

Future

Scenario

Simulations:

Table 4
Parameters

of the Production

Sector 1
Form of
production
function

Elasticity of
substitution
in production

Elasticity of
substiwtion in
consumption

CobbDouglas

1.00

I .00

.62190

.37810

CES

.50

.50

.81848

.18152

CES

.50

.99

.62427

.37573

CES

.99

I

.99

I .81848

CES

.99

I

.50

I .62427

Future

Unskilled
Labor

I
Form of

Sector 2

Sector 3

Skilled
Labor

.37408

,62592

.37408

.62592

.18152

.37316

I .62684

I .37316

[ .62684

[

.37573

.37407

I .62593

I .37407

I .62593

I

Table 5
Simulations: Parameters

Scenario

Functions

Sector 1

of the Utility
I

Sector 2

Function

I

Sector 3

Elasticity of
substitution in
production

Elastici~ of
substitution in
consumption

Distribution
Parameter

Distribution
Parameter

Distribution
Parameter

CobbDouglas

I .00

I .00

.07

.10

.83

CE5

.50

.50

.01

.02

.97

CES

.50

.99

.08

.10

.82

CES

.99

.99

.08

.io

.83

CES

.99

.50

.0 i

.02

.98

utility

function

1

1

1

1

I

Appendix I
The General Equilibrium Model
The model is a three-sector, twefactor general equilibrium emomy.

The two factors are skilled and

unskilled labor. We assume that the proportion of capital used in production is constant tioughout the
period and thus do not incorporate it in the simulations. Two of the goods are traded goods, and one is a
nontradedgood, Gfthe(SVO
tradedgoods,thegoodproducedin Sectori is moreunski~ed-labor
intensive
thanthegoodprodud in Swtor2. Good1 is the importable and is not produced domestically. Thus, we
use a model of complete specialization in production.
For most of the simulations, the production and uhhty functions are of the CES form. Gne advantage of
this f-is

that we are able to incorporate a range of elasticities of substitution between factors of production

or between goods, while still having a fictional

form that is manipulwd fairly easily. To the greatest

degree possible, we have chosen the parameters for these fimctions in accordance with a quantity obsemable
in the ~

in ways that are described in the body of the paper. The parameter values for the prduction and

utility fimctions are as in Table ??.

The specific knctional forms in the model areas follows:
1. Roductim
The production functions are of the CES fm.

Qi

=

~i(~(~L,~i)-p
+ ~(~Hi~i)-p)[-l/PJ

where L, is unskilled labor used in the production of Good I, and ~ is skilled labor used in production of
Good I.
2.

cons umDtion

We also assume a CES form for the utility finction:

U = [Kcl-t

+ (1

‘K

- 6)C2-C

+ 5C3-T)](-1’TJ

Which implies demand of the foUowingf-:

c, =

~(~~) * y

P:-l

p: K(d’)+ P2’(1-K - ~)(d’)+ P3’~(’1’)

where Y is total income, Pi is the price of Good ~ and ~ = ~/(T+l).
3.

W~eS

Wages are set so as to equal the marginal product of the factor in Good I times the price of Good I. Wages
fm a certain type of worker are uniform across the economy.

WL = Pig

U“H= Pi:

i
1

4.

Bmglo.we n t

The

endowment of the two types of workers is assumed to be fixed or to exhibit a discrete change once

between 1979 and 1990. Wages are set so as to achieve full employment of all workers, which implies:

~1+L2+L3=~
Hl+Hz+H3=~
5.

Solution of the Mode1
We examine an wonomy in complete specialization facing instant

terms of trade. The methods of

solution for equilibrium in these three cases differ and are not described in detail here. Note that for all the
trading equilibri~ the prices of the two traded goods are taken as exogenous.

2

