NBER WORKING

PAPER SERIES

REVENUE-RAISING
VS. OTHER
APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION: THE CRITICAL
SIGNIFICANCE OF PRE-EXISTING
TAX DISTORTIONS

Lawrence H. Goulder
Ian W. H. Parry
Dallas Burtraw

Working Paper 5641

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful comments and suggestions of Gary Becker, Sjak
Smulders, David Starrett, George Tolley, and seminar participants at Harvard University, the
University of Chicago, the University of California at Berkeley and the University of California
at Santa Barbara. We also thank Koshy Mathai, Akila Weerapana and Roberton Williams for
outstanding research assistance, and the National Science Foundation (Grant 9310362) and IBM
Corporation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Public
Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Lawrence H. Goulder, Ian W. H. Parry and Dallas Burtraw. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5641
June 1996

REVENUE-RAISING
VS , OTHER
APPROACHES TO ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION: THE CRITICAL
SIGN~CANCE
OF PRE-EXISTING
TAX DISTORTIONS

ABSTRACT

This paper examines the choice between revenue-raising
and non-revenue-raising
instruments for environmental protection in a second-best setting with pre-existing factor taxes.
We find that interactions with pre-existing taxes fundamentally influence the costs of regulation
and seriously militate against pollution abatement policies that do not raise revenue. Indeed, if
the marginal environmental benefits from pollution reductions are below a certain threshold value,
then any amount of pollution abatement through non-revenue-raising
(NRR) policies like
emissions quotas is efficiency-reducing.
Under conditions roughly approximating S02 emissions
from electric power plants in the U. S,, efficiency gains vanish if marginal environmental benefits
are below $109 per ton and an NRR policy is employed. Moreover, imposing the “Pigouvian”
(rather than second-best optimal) level of quotas can reduce welfare, even when environmental
benefits are as high as $220 per ton. These results are largely independent of the size of the
regulated sector relative to the overall economy,
These findings stem from two underlying effects. The tax-interaction eflect is the adverse
impact in factor markets arising from reductions in after-tax returns to factors associated with the
higher production costs caused by environmental regulation. This effect leads to significantly
higher efficiency costs than what would apply in a first-best world with no pre-existing taxes.
Revenue-raising regulations (taxes) enjoy a revenue-recycling efecf that offsets much of the taxinteraction
effect, but non-revenue-raising
regulations
(quotas) enjoy no such offset.
Consequently, for any given target level of emissions reduction, the gross efficiency costs of nonrevenue-raising policies are higher than those of revenue-raising policies.
These general equilibrium results are relevant to government regulation outside the
environmental
area.
To the extent that government regulations of international trade or
agricultural production raise the costs of output and thereby reduce real factor returns, they can
generate much higher social costs than would be indicated by partial equilibrium analyses.

Lawrence H. Goulder
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER

Ian W. H. Parry
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036

Dallas Burtraw
Resources for the Future
1616 P Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036

1, Introduction

In choosing among alternative instruments for achieving environmental improvement, an important
consideration is whether the instnunent in question raises revenue, Revenue-raising (RR) instruments include
taxes on emissions of pollution (e.g, releases of chlorofluoroearbons), or on inputs, goods or services closely
associated with pollution (e.g., gasoline). They also include tradeable emissions permits in cases where the
permits are sold or auctioned by the regulato~ agency when they are f~st made available. Non-revenueraising @RR) instruments include mandated technologies, performance standard, and tradeable permits
when emissions permits are initially given out free (or grandfathered),’
-g
instients

the past deeade, a number of economists have pointed out an important attraction of RR
over NRR instruments, Oates and Schwab (1988), Pot.erba( 1993), Repetto et al. (1992) and

others have emphasized that RR instruments enable the public seetor to finance cuts in existing, distortion~
taxes, thereby avoiding some of the deadweight cost associated with these taxes. The efficiency benefit from
using revenues to finance cuts in the marginal rates of existing taxes (relative to when they are returned lump
sum) has been &rmed the revenue-recycling effect (Godder [1995]). Numerical investigations by Terkla
(1984) and Ballard and Medema (1993), along with those reported in Repetto et al. (1992) and Shackleton er
al. (1995), indicate that such revenue-reeycling can substantially lower the aggregate social cost of
environmental regulation relative to the case where no revenues are raised or, equivalently, where revenues
are not used to cut marginal tax rates.
Recent explorations in second-best environmental taxation suggest, however, that there maybe much
more at stake in the choice between RR and NRR instruments than previously thought. Beyond suggesting
that NRR policies are at a disadvantage relative to RR policies, this work calls in question the ability of NRR
policies to yield efficiency gains, Anal~cal work by Bovenberg and de Mooij (1994), Bovenberg and van
derPloeg(1994), and Parry (1995) has shown that, by driving up the price of (polluting) goods relative to
leisure, environmental taxes tend to compound the distortions caused by taxes in labor markets. In general,
the negative welfare impact associated with this rm-interaction eflect dominates the positive influence of the

‘Besidesreducingpollution,thechoicebetweenRR andNRRpoliciesappliesto a wide range of other public
policy objectives, including reducing trfic congestion, drug use, smohg, household garbage generation, depletion of
fish stocks and destruction of natural habitats,
1

revenue-recycling effect and implies that, overall, environmental re@ations are more costly in a second-best
setting with pre-existing distortionary taxes than in a f~st-best situation where no other taxes are present.z
Moreover, this research indicates that environmental taxes which fail to exploit the revenue-recycling effect --

as in the case where revenues are returned to the economy through lump-sum tax cuts rather than through cuts
in marginal tax rates -- may be unable to generate an efficiency improvement no matter what level of
pollution reduction is attempted! In this connection, numerical simulations by Bovenberg and Godder
(1996) indicate that a carbon tax whose revenues are returned lump-sum cannot improve economic eticiency
(regardless of the si~ of the carbon tax) if the marginal environmental benefits from carbon abatement are
less than $50 per ton.
Like environmental tax policies in which revenues are returned lump sum, NRR policies fail to
exploit the revenue-recycling effect, Yet, as discussed below, they produce a (costly) tax-interaction effect
similar to that of environmental taxes. This suggests that, in a second-best setting, the serious limitations to
efficiency that apply to environmental tax policies in which revenues are returned lump-sum may apply
equally to NRR policies. The disadvantage of NRR instruments may be large enough to make efficiency
improvements impossible with these instruments no matter what the level of pollution reduction. In other
words, the revenue-recycling effect might not ordy influence the relative impacts of NRR and RR policies but
also dictate whether the welfare impact under NRR policies is positive.4
This paper examines the choice between RR and NRR instruments in a second-best setting where
distortionary taxes are present. We analyze how the magnitude of existing taxes alters both the relative
efficiency effects of these two types of instruments and the absolute efficiency effects -- in ptiicular, the
prospects for positive efficiency impacts. We begin with a simple model that yields analytical results and

‘This implies that the optimal pollution tax in a second-best setting is usually lower than the “Pigouvian” tax
rate or marginal environmental damage. Bovenberg and Ooulder (1996) and Parry (1995) find the optimal tax to be
about 30 percent below the Pigouvian rate under plausible values for parameters and pre-existing tax rates. These
results are consistent with earlier theoretical contributions in the optimal tax literature. See, for example, Sandrno
(1975), Ng (1980), and the discussion in Auerbach (1985).
3By“efficiency improvement” we mean a positive aggregate net benefit from the environmental policy, where
the net benefit is the gross social benefit stemming from the reduction in pollution minus the social cost of pollution
abatement.
‘Of course there are other important considerations in instrument choice, including administrative ease,
monitoring and enforcement costs, the probability distribution of policy errors in the presence of uncertainty, effects on
the distribution of economic rents, and political feasibility, (There is a very large literature on how these other
considerations might influence instrument choice. See, for example, Hahn [1986], Nichols [1984], Stavins [1991], and
Weitz,rnan[1974]), To the extent that NRR instruments are revealed to be at a serious disadvantage along the efficiency
dimensions we discuss, tie larger the advantages along these other dimensions must be to justify their adoption.

2

then extend the model gradually to gain greater realism. As we extend the original model, we give up the
opportunity to obtain analytical solutions and must solve through numerical simulation. For concreteness we
gauge model parameters and industry definitions to approximate circumstances faced by U.S. policy makers
in the drafting of provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments applying to sdfur dioxide emissions
from coal-fwed electric power plants. But the insights apply to other settings, including the abatiment of
carbon emissions on the national or international level through taxes or tradeable pdts.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II lays out the central theoretical issues and obtains initial
resdts using a simple analytical model. This model has a similar fwus to the graphical analysis in Parry
(1996) -- the ordy previous paper we know of on this topic -- but differs horn that paper in providing an
explicit utili~-maximizing basis for the welfare results, Section III extends the original model, where the
extensions include attention to intermediate inputs and a broader set of options for pollution abatement. The
extended model is applied numerically in Section IV. This section explores ti.rrtherhow tax interactions
affect the net welfare gains from pollution-abatement policies, and examines when these interactions can
offset the entire “Pigouvian” welfare gain from pollution abatement. Section V analyzes further the
sensitivity of the resdts to parameters and model specifications. Section VI offers conclusions.

II. Analytical Foundations and Results

A. The Basic Models
A representative agent model is assumed in which household utility is
(II. 1)

[J(u(x, Y, f), Q)

where U(.) and the subtility fiction

u() satis@ the usual properties of continuity and local qu~i-

concavi~. X and Yare market goods, 1is leisure or non-market time, and Q is the quality of the
environment. Weak separability betwmn envirorunental and non-environmental goods implies that the
demand fictions

for X, Yand 1are independent of Q.b

5This sectionadopts an approach similar to that taken in recent unpublishednotes by David Starrett.
bThis is a common simpl@ng assumption. Using a more general utility function would not affect the key
result in this section, which compares pollution taxes and quow at a ~ven level of environmental quali~.

3

X and Yare produced by competitive firms using labor as the only input. The marginal product of
labor in both industries is constant, and unaffected by environmental quality Normalizing umts to imply
transformation
(11.2)

rates of unity, we can write the economy’s resource constraint as:

T= X+Y+l

where T is the household time endowment ( T – 1 is labor supply).

The production of X causes waste emissions that harm the environment; that is:
(11,3)

Q = Q(X)

where Q,r <0.7 From (II. 1) and (11,3),we can define marginal environmental damages from production of

X in dollars by
(11.4)

D(~ = -;

UQQX

where 2 is the marginal utility of income. We make the usual assumption that D’(X) 20,

In the absence

of policy intervention. there is assumed to be no internalization of environmental damages by firms or
households.
Finally, the government has an exogenous total revenue requirement TR, levies a proportional tax
of ~Lon labor income, and regulates X. For our purposes it does not matter what TR is used for; we assume
it is returned to households as a lump sum transfer. E

B. Pollution Taxes (Revenue-Raising

Instruments)

Suppose a tax of TX per unit is imposed on X. Normalizing the gross wage to unity, we can
express the household budget constraint as:
(11,5)

(l+r,)X+

Y=(l-r

L)(T-l)+TR

As usual, households are assumed to maximize utility (II. 1) subject to their budget constraint (11.5), taking
environmental quality as given. This yields the first order conditions

(11,6)

(Jx =(1+7X

)1;

Uy =2;

~ =(1 -T, )A

From (II,5) and (11.6)we can implicitly derive the (uncompensated) demand functions

‘Therefore, reducing waste emissions requires reducing output, More generally, this can also be achieved
by substituting waste emissions for other inputs in production, However, as we demonstrate below in the numerical
model, substitution in production does not substantially reduce the relative size of interactions with the tax system.
SAn alternative spec~lcation would incorporate TR as a public good in the household utility function
This produces the same resdts as in our model, since TR is held constant.

4

(11.7) X(7X , r~ );

Y(rx ,~~ );

Z(7X, ~, )

Government revenues are the sum of labor and pollution tax revenues. Therefore government
budget balance requires
(11,8)

TR= r, (T-~+rx

X

We now consider a revenue-neutral policy involving an increase in
(11.7) in (11,8)and totally differentiating while holding TR constit

7X

and reduction in~L. Substituting

gives

(11.9)

This equation is the reduction in labor tax that can be fianced
tax, while maintaining budget balance. Differentiating
condition for the aggregate quatity

by a marginal increase in the environmental

the resource constraint (11.2) yields the following

effects of the policy change:

Using (II. 1), (11,3)and (11.7)the welfare effect from a marginal change in z-r, allowing for
changes in household demands and in the value of r~, is

Substituting the expressions for marginal environmental damages (11.4), marginal utility from consumption

(11.6),ad the aggregation property (II. 10), gives
1 —.-(D-~x):-r’#
dU
~ drx

x

x

Substituting from (11.9)and collecting terms gives

Finally, this can be expressed as

dl

(D-rx):+rL—
[

L

&L

drL
—
1 drx

(11,12)

The numerator in (II. 12) is the welfare loss from a marginal increase in the labor tax. This consists of (i)

the increase in leisure multiplied by z,, the wedge between the gross and net wage; less (ii) the reduction in
X multiplied by the gap between marginal social cost ( l+D) and the demand price (1+ ~,V) in the X market
(assuming X and leisure are substitutes). The denominator is the overall increase in government revenues
from a marginal increase in the labor tax (from differentiating (11.8)with respect to rL ). Therefore, M is
the efficiency cost of raising an additional dollar of revenue by increming the labor tax, or margjnal
we~farecost of labor taxah”on.
Equation (II. 11) decomposes the welfare impact of the policy change into three components. The
first is the Pigouvian (or partial equilibrium) effect Wp

This is the reduction in X from a marginal

increase in the environmental AK, multiplied by the wedge between marginal social cost and the demand
price. or marginal social benefit. The second is the gain from the (marginal) revenue-recycling

g[ficl,

This is the product of the efficiency value per dollar of tax revenue (the marginal welfare cost of

W’.

taxation) and the incremental pollution tax revenue. The third is the (marginal) tax-~n[erac~on effecf,
When X and leisure are substitutes, an increase in the demand price ofX increases leisure, which

WI,

81

exacerbates the welfare cost of the labor tax by ~L —
&x
81

—
“ h’,

This also reduces labor tax revenues by

The tax-interaction effect is the welfare loss from these two impacts.
We now compare the revenue-recycling and m-interaction effects. W’

give the following approximation (see Appendix A)

6

can be stipulated

to

where qfi and q;, are the compensated elwicity

of demand for X and Ywith respect to the price of

leisure. and q., is the income elastici~ of labor supply. +x is a measure of the degree of substitution
between X and leisure relative to that between aggregate consumption and leisure. #x equals
and Yare equal substitutes for leisure ( q> equals qj, ) and is greater (less) h

~V

unity

when

X

when ~ is a

relatively strong (weak) substitute for leisure (that is, q% is greater (less) than q;,). Comparing (II. 13)

with flR

in (II. 11), we see that the (marginal) revenue-recycling effect equals the tax-interaction effect

when r ,V= 0, but dofiates

it for Zx > (), if X and ~ are equalsubstitutes
for leisure. ~erefore, the net

effect from interactions with the tax system is generally negative. urdess X is a sufficiently weak substitute
for leisure (+x is sufficiently below unity).’

C. Pollution Quotas (Non-Revenue-Raising

Instruments)

Now comider, in contrast tith the pollution tax case, the situation where a binding, non-auctioned

quota is imposed so that
(11.14) x=x
We denote the post-regulation demand price of Xby p(~).

The quota creates rents of z = (p(~) - 1)~,

which are returned to households (who own firms). The numerical model incorporates the taxation of these
profits. but for the moment we sirnpli~ by ignoring this possibility. Therefore z appears as an exogenous
lump sum component of income in the household budget constraint, The household demand fictions

can

now be summarized by

and since the constraint on X is binding,
(11.15) ;=O
L

The key difference compared with the previous case is that the quota policy generates no revenue
Therefore the government budget constraint is

(11.8’) TR= T,(T - 1)

9 The predominance of the tax-interaction effect has recently been discussedby Parry (1995). The result
has long been implicit in optimal tax models (for example Sandrno (1975)), which do not decompose the revenuerecycling and bx-interaction effects.

7

Differentiating (11.8’),and using (11.7’),gives

(11,9’)

Also. differentiating (11.2)and using (II. 15) gives the following aggregation prope~

Differentiating utility with respect to ~ and r,, and performing the analogous substitutions to
before gives
(1111’) +%=

{(P(Y)

-l)-

D}-(l+M’)TL

+

where

(11.12’) A4’=

“

h’

T-l-rL—

31
a,

A4’, the marginal welfare cost of labor taxation, is more simple than before, since (from (II. 15)), there is

z

no effect in the X market from increasing r~ Multiplying (II. 11’)through by —

and substituting

ax

which shows the effect of a quota that hw the same effect on the output of X as a change in r,Y

Comparing (II. 1l“) with (II. 11), the Pigouvian and tax-interaction effects from regulation are analogous to
before. However, in the quota case there is no revenue-recycling effect, ~erefore so long as marginal
pollution tax revenue is positive. the marginal welfare effect of the tax exceeds that for the quota.

Increasing the abatement level reduces the pollution tax base (~ and increases the revenue loss
( – TX(~X/~x

) ) from incremental reductions in X, that is the marginal revenue-recycling effect is

declining. This implies that the discrepancy between the marginal costs of the tax and quota becomes
smaller with the extent of abatement, so long as M is not falling tith the amount of abatement.

D. Welfare Implications of Instrument Choice
The traditional Pigouvian analysis implies that environmental regulation can increase welfare so

long as marginal environmental damages are positive. This is true for the pollution tax in the above model,
when X and Yare equal substitutes for leisure (@x = 1), However in the pollution quota cme, where there
is no revenue-recycling effecL the incremental welfare change from regulation is positive at 7X = Owhen
=P

> ~’,

or using (II. 11”) and (II. 13)

dxl.

where q ,W = –——
h-y x

ISthe (magnitude of the) own price elasticity of demand for X and ~ is marginal

environmental damages expressed relative to marginal production cosfi.
Some quick calculations show that this can be crucial to welfare impacts, The marginal welfare
cost of labor taxation generated by the numerical model is (approximately) 0.3 (see below). Using this
value. lfthe elastic:p Of demand for the polluting good is 0.5, 1 or 2, then marginal environmental
damacgesmust exceed 60%, 30% or 15% respectively of marginal production costs, or else any level of
quo(a necessarily reduces we~are (when X and Y are equal substitutes for leisure). 10
Hence this simple analytical model indicates that the magnitude and even the sign of the welfare
effects can hinge critically on whether a revenue-raising or non-revenue-raising
we examine these issues fifier

instrument is used. Below.

using a numerical model that enables us to avoid some of the sirnpli~g

assumptions of the present model.

111. A Numerical Model

The analytical results above indicate the NRR inshuments can face a sigrdficant disadvantage
relative to RR instruments, especially when marginal environmental benefits of pollution reduction are “low”

‘“Whendemand curves are linear, this condition implies that a quota carIincrease welfare if environmental
benefits are large enough to imply a Pigouvian (first best) output reduction in excess of 30 percent (Pany [1996]).
9

relative to production cost. To explore this issue further, we now extend the model to incorporate
intermediate inputs (in addition to consumer goods) and to rmognize firms’ abilities to reduce emissions
through abatement expenditure (which reduces the intensi~ of emissions per unit of output). The extended
model does not afford analytical results; hence we obtain solutions numerically. However, the model enables
us to consider impacts of large (as opposed to incremental) policy changes, and facilitates sensitivity analysis.
In spmial cases the numerical model reduces to the same structure as the analytical model; this makes it
possible to identifi (in Section V) the significance of the new features in the numerical model.
The extended model has the following elements. There are two intermediate goods, electricity (~
and a “general intermediate good” (G). In addition, there are two consumer goods: an electricity-intensive
good (Cl) and a non-electricity-intensive good (CN). There is one prim~

factor of production, labor time,

which is allocated to production of E, G, CI, and C~ and to leisure (1). Labor applied to production again
faces the marginal tax rate, r~. Electricity production entails emissions of sulfur dioxide (SOZ). Government
policy options include taxes and fixed quantity restrictions on emissions of SOZ. Government tax revenues
finance transfers to households: as in the original model, there is no consumptive government expenditure.
The types of inputs in the model, and the uses to which they are put, are indicated in Figure 1. In the
figure and in the text below, Xtidenotes the use of good i by industryj. Thus, electricity and the general
intermediate good areused as an input into the production of electricity, the general intermediate good, and
the two consumer goods. Labor time is allocati to production of the four goods and to leisme. ~ the figure,
emissions of SOj are represented as an “input” to the production of electricity This indicates that these
emissions can be substituted for other inputs to electricity production: that is, if emissions of SOJ are reduced,
.
the use of ordinary inputs by the elec~clty sector (xU, x~~,x~~) must increase to maintain the same electricity
output.
The fdl set of equations of the model is provided in Appendix B. Here we present the behavioral
specifications governing producer and household behavior, along with the equilibrium conditions.

A. Production Technologies

We assume competitive, price-tig

f-

and a constant-elasticity-of-substitution (CES)

production technology in all industries. Production follows:
1

i = G, E, C,, CN

(III.1) Xi = (u~,L,fl + UF,E,P’+ a~iG,fi )Z,

10

where pi and the aj ,’s are parameters. p is related to U, the elasticity of substitution: p = (a -l)/u.”
Producers make input decisions in accordance with profit-maximization, For producers in industries
other than electricity, profit is the value of output minus expenditure on labor, energy, and materials (see
appendix B). In the electricity industxy, the expression for profit is slightly more complex to accomt for
pollution charges and abatement expenditure. In this industry profit (n) is given by:

wherepL, pE, and pG represent the prices of inputs of labor, electricity, and the general intermediate input,
respectively. Z and S represent abatement services and sdfur dioxide emissions, respectively; pz is the unit
price of abatement services (assumed to be equal to the price of labor) and r~is the tax rate applied to S02
emissions. In contrast with the original model of Section II, where the emissions-output ratio was fixed, in
this model fms can reduce the ratio of S02 emissions to output by purchasing abatement equipment or
services. The relationship between electricity output, pollution emissions, and abatement services is:

(111.3) Sj/<

= us - az(;/;.)~

where as, az, and ~ are parameters. This forrmdation asserts that, in the absence of expenditure on
abatement services or equipment (that is, when Z is zero), the ratio of SOZemissions to electricity output is
as.‘2 To the extent that the fm devotes resources to abatement, this ratio falls. Our data on abatement costs
for U.S. electricity producers (see below) indicates that ~ is less than unity: there are increasing marginal
costs to SOz reduction.’3

“We abstract horn the heterogeneity among fms in given industries and, in particular, the considerable
heterogeneity among electric power producers. Considerations of heterogeneity can importantly influence the choice
among policy instruments -- for example, the choice between a program of fixed emissions quotas versus a program of
tradeable emissions permits. However, these considerations cm be separated from the issue, emphasized here, of the
si~~lcance of whether a given policy raises revenue. For example, the relative efficiency impacts of a system of
auctioned tradeable pem3its (which raises revenue) and a system of grandfathered permits (which does not raise
revenue) are largely independent of the extent of heterogeneity across polluters.

“With greater industry disaggregation, one codd link emissions to the use of specific fiels by the electricity
industry, In Section V we apply an extended model which distinguishes coal and other fuel inputs to electricity, and
connects sulfur dioxide emissions to the use of the coal input.
13Weconsidered modeling abatement costs by including S directly in the CES production function for
electricity. However, this has the unfortunate property that if the “price” of the use of S is zero (as is the case in the
absence of regulation), fm will use tite
quantities of S (that is, sulfur dioxide emissions will be tilnite).

11

We consider two ~es

of pollution regulation: a tax r, on sulfur dioxide emissions and fixed

quotas on such emissions, In the tax case, firms choose the level of abatement such that, at the margin, the
costs of abatement are equal to the avoided charges on pollution (see Appendix B). In the quota case, each
fm]

matizes

profits subject to the constraint that ~ = ~.14 As shown in Appendix B, in this case the

fro’s behavior -- and in particdar the quantity of abatement equipment purchased (Z) -- is identical to that
which the fm would choose if pollution level Shad been enforced through a pollution tax. This means we
can model the pollution quota case as a tax on emissions, with the “revenues” (quota rents) returned in lurnpsum fashion to owners of electricity firms (households). The crucial difference between the case of an actual
emissions tax and that of an emissions quota (or virtual emission tax) is that significant’5government
revenues are earned only in the former case; thus the revenue-recycling effect is enjoyed only in that case.

B. Household Behavior
In its treahnent of household behavior, the extended model differs horn the earlier model in

distinguishing the goods that directly confm utility (the consumption goods) from other (intermediate) goods.
The electricity-intensive consumption good comesponds to direct household use of electricity, with the other
consumption good representing all other goods and services consumption. As before, household behavior
reflects utility-maximizing decisions of a representative household that allocates labor time betwmn work and
leisure and allocates income between consumption of the two consumer goods. Income is net of tax wage
income plus -- in the case of an emissions quota policy -- net of tax rents, The utility fi.mctionis:

where

141nkeeping with the assumption of homogeneous producers, we assume that the aggregate emissions reduction
is achieved by equal reductions by all producers.
“In fact the quota policy has a slight revenue impact, as discussed in Section IV.

12

The parameter pu is related to Uu, the elasticity of substitution between leisure and overall consumption, C:

PV = (au-1

)1OU

~ is a CES

composite

of tie

two

consumption goods, with the substitution between them

controlled by p~. Utility depends on SOZemissions (S) as well as ordinary goods and leisure, The
household regards S as exogenous, The impact of S on utility is represented by the fuction V,which here is
separable from the effects of goods and leisure.

C. The Government’s

Budget Constraint

As in the analytical model, all policies we consider are revenue-neutral: the government must obtain
enough revenue to maintain fixed real transfers to households. To the extent that any policy change (e.g., the
introduction of a tax on sulfm dioxide emissions) wotid cause revenues to depart from this required revenue
level, such revenue impacts are offset through adjustments to the marginal tax rate on labor income. The
government’s budget constraint is:

(111.6) TR = rL(T - !) + ~~m

+ ~~S

RENT denotes the total rent generated by government policy; these are positive in the case of emissions
quotas, For simplicity we usually assume that rR,the tax rate on rents, has the same value as r~,the tax rate
applying to labor income. (Section V considers an alternative assumption). It shodd be noted that in the
case of the pollution quota, r~is zero in (111.6).Although we employ a virtual tax to simulate the quota
policy, the revenues earned by this “tax” go directly to households as quota rents.’b The quota policy affects
the government’s budget ordy indirectly: by producing taxable quota rents and by affecting the real wage and
labor supply (which alters labor tax revenues).

D. Equilibrium Conditions
The production and household specifications above give rise to a set of supply and demand functions
of producers and the household (see Appendix B), The requirements of a general equilibrium are that the
demands and supplies of all goods be equal, and that government revenues be equal to the required level of

government transfms to households. In addition, each policy involves meeting a given emissions target
through either an emissions tax (explicit emissions tax) or an emissions quota (virtual emissions tax). The

‘s~s virtual taxis malogous to the use of “adders” in electric utility resource planning, which serve as
shadow prices tiecting decisions. See Burtraw et al, (1995).
13

requirement that SOZemissions match this target constitutes another equilibrium condition (see Appendix B),
Exploiting the constant-returns-to-scale nature of production, we reduce the number of equilibrium conditions
to: (1) aggregate labor demand equals aggregate supply, (2) government revenue equals transfers to

households, and (3) aggregate emissions equal S. Solving the model involves finding the vector of
“primary” prices satis~g

these conditions. These prices tiquely determine all other prices and thus

determine all demands and supplies. The primary prices arepL (the price of labor), Ar~(the adjustment to the
labor tax rate necessary to match revenues tith the required level of household transfers) and r~,the tax rate
on emissions.”

E, Data
The benchmark data set for the model is intended to represent roughly the situation in the U.S, in the
year 2000. We develop this data set by scaling observed 1990 data on input uses, output levels, and

consumption patterns to the year 2000, assuming a real growth rate of 2,6 percent for all flows.’a Elasticities
of substitution in the production functions and utility fiction are taken from the disaggregatcd general
equilibrium data set developed by Cruz and Godder ( 1992), The remaining parameters of the model -- the a
distribution parameters -- are calibrated by using the identifying restriction that, under benchmark policy
conditions, the model replicate the projected benchmark data.’9 Table 1 displays benchmark data flows, data
sources, and parameter values.
The baseline situation against which policy outcomes are wmpared assumes no abatement of SOZ;in
other words, there is no (explicit or virtual) tax on SOZemissions in the baseline. The baseline equilibrium
obviously differs from actual circumstances, but using this baseline pemits the clearest assessments of
impacts of alternative regulations. Developing baseline values of SO1emissions is a bit tric~ because
re~atory

constraints on such emissions were introduced mder the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments and in

fact have been in place for some “new sources” of electric power since 1971, FollowingNAPAP(1991), we
assume that aggregate SOZemissions in the year 2000 wodd be 20 million tons in the absence of regulation,

ITBYw~u,s

Law one ofthe excessdemandconditionsis redundant. To obtain the general equilibriu

solution, we fix one of the prirn~ prices (tie nominal price of labor is set to one) and solve for values of the remaining
primary prices that satistj’ conditions (2) and (3). As a check on the model’s program,we ve~ that the redundant
excess demand condition is satisfied as well.
“This is the average real growth for the U.S. over the period 1985-1994, as reported in Table 699 of the 1985
Statistical

Abstract

of the U.S.

‘Tor a discussion of calibration methods for general equilibrium models, see Shoven and Whalley (1992).
14

that is, in the baseline scenario,20 In actuality, the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments will limit emissions in
the year 2000 to 10 million tons.
We consider a range of values for the abatement cost parameter, az, For a central value, we
calibrate this parameter so that electricity producers’ marginal costs of S02 abatement are $300 per ton in
1990 dollars when aggregate abatement is 10 million tons (from an unconstrained level of emissions of 20
million tons).z’
h

important parameter is Uu, the elasticity of substitution between leisure and composite

consumption in the utility fiction,

Different values of this parameter imply different values for the elasticity

of labor supply and for the marginal welfare cost of taxation. As indicated in Section II, the size of the taxinteraction effect is directly related to these values. We employ several values for Uu;ou central value is
0.79, selected because it implies an uncompensated labor supply elasticity of 0,15 and a marginal welfare
cost of taxation of 0.31 in the baseline or status quo ante situation.zz

IV. Results from the Numerical Model: Emissions T-es

vs. Quotas

Here we contrast the costs of a (revenue-raising) emissions tax with a (non-revenue-raising)
emissions quota, For these fwst experiments we calcdate a series of equilibria corresponding to policies
achieving S02 reductions ranging from 0.1 million tons to 10 million tons, at increments of 0.1 million tons.
In simulating the emissions tax policy, we solve for the value of r~ that achieves the desired amout of S02
abatement (or, equivalently, the desired level of emissions, ~). Revenues horn the emissions tax finance
proportional cuts in the marginal tax rate r~. As discussed in Section III, the quota policy is modeled byway
of a virtual tax r~that has no direct impact on government revenue but instead yields quota rents that
dtimately accrue to households (owners of electrici~ fins).

The emissions tax exploits the revenue-

recycling effect because it finances cuts in the marginal tax rate, r~; in contrast, the quota policy has an

zone NApAp “basel~e” estfiate m~es no enachent of the 1990 Clean Air Act amendments and no
subsequent regulatio~ but allows for (minor) emissions impacts from prior regulations.
“This is within the range of estimates from various studies. RDI(l 995), USEPA( 1995a), and EPRI( 1995)
respectively estimate marginal abatement costs to be $195, $462, and $339-493 (1990 dollars) by the year 2010, when
the full, 10 million ton abatement requirement is in force. Emissions allowance prices today are lower than these values,
in part because these future costs are discounted to the present.
“These are cenhal values from the literature. See in partictiar Ballard ef af, ( 1985) and Browning (1987).

15

insignificant gross revenue impact.23

A. Relative Costs of RR and NRR Policies: Crucial Determinants

1. Relative Costs and Pre-Existing Tax Rates

Figures 2a and 2b contrast the effects of these policies. h each figure, the horizontal axis is the
reduction in aggregate S02 emissions, in millions of tons, The vertical axis is the marginal welfare cost of
obtaining these emissions reductions, expressed in 1990 dollars per ton.24 Each figure shows the relationship
between marginal welfare cost and S02 reduction under four different assumed values --0.0,0 .2,0.4 (our
preferred estimate25),and 0,6-- for the pre-existing marginal tax rate, r~. It shotid be noted that the
marginal welfare cost reflects changes in the non-environment-related component of the utility fmction (the
first term in equation [111,4]):we do not yet consider welfare effects associated with changes in environmental
quali~, which fall on the benefit side of the ledger.
Several key findings emerge from these figures, First, for any given type of policy (RR or NRR), the
economy’s marginal costs are an increasing fimction of the extent of abatement. This reflects rising marginal
costs of abatement at the fm level (equation [111.3]).Second, for either type of policy, marginal wsts are
increasing fmctions of r~O, the value of the initial labor tax rate. This was predicted by the analytical model.
The larger the pre-existing tax rate, the larger the marginal tax-interaction effect for any given amount of

ZJBycreat~g taxablequotarents,it bringsin revenue; by erodingthe labortaxbase, it losesrevmue- Thenet
effectis quitesmall. For example,a quotathat reducesaggregateSOZemissionsby 5 milliontonshas a grossrevenue
impact(beforeoffsettingadjustmentsin r~)of-$69.5 million,whichdividesinto a revenuegainof $886,3millionin
taxeshorn quotarents anda reductionof $955,8millionin labortax revenues, In contrast,a pollutiontaxthat achieves
the sameabatementhas a grossrevenueimpactof $1260,0million,whichdividesinto$2215,8millionin pollutiontax
revenueand a reductionof $955.8millionin labortaxrevenue.
24We calculate the marginal welfare cost using the equivalent variation measure. Let EV[S(A),s@)] denote the
equivalent variation associated with a change from state s(A) to states fB), where each state is defined by the set of prices
and policy parameters (taxes) faced by the household, The EV is the exogenous increment to the household’s income in
state s(A) that would enable the household to achieve the same level of utility as it enjoys in state s(B). A positive EV
represents a welfare improvement; thus, wetiare cost is the negative of the EV. Themarginalwelfarecost associated
with the level sulfur reduction R (= SO- S) is (EV[s(0),s@)] - EV[s(0),sfR+ ~])/ c, that is, the change in the equivalent
variation associated with the incremental change in etissions reduction from R to R + ~, divided by ~ where Eis
arbitrarily small. In our experiments, ● is 0,1 million tons, Thus, for example, the marginal welfare cost associated with
emissions reductions of 5 million tons is the change in the equivalent variation associated with augmenting the required
abatement of emissions from 5.0 to 5.1 million tons, divided by 0.1 million tons.

‘sTaxeson labor include Federal and state income taxes and social security (payroll) taxes. Browning (1987,
1994) uses a value of 0.43.
16

abatement. The effect of the pre-existing tax on marginal costs (for either type of policy) is nodinear, This
squares with the fact that the tax-interaction effect rises in proportion to the marginal welfare cost of taxation,
which rises approximately with the square of the initial tax rate.
Third, and perhaps most important, the marginal cost curve for the NRR policy has a positive
intercept (except when the pre-existing tax rate is zero), while the curve for the RR policy has a zero
intercept, Under RR policies, for an initial, incremental amount of pollution abatement, the tax-interaction
effect is exactly offset by the revenue-recycling effect; hence the zero intercept.26In contrast, mder NRR
policies, there is no offsetting revenue-recycling effat, and thus the intercept is positive,
The positive intercept carries some strong implications for policy, The intercept of the marginal cost
curve represents a critical threshold value for the marginal environmental benefits (assuming such marginal
benefits are constant or decreasing with the amount of sdti

dioxide abatement). If marginal environmental

benefits are below this critical value, then no amount of emissions abatement through the NR.Rpolicy can
be eficiency-improvingl For example, according to Figure 2b if the pre-existing labor taxis 0,4 the
marginal benefits horn SOZabatement must be at least $109 per ton to enable any quota policy to achieve an
overall welfare gain. (Subsection IV.C below compares this threshold with a plausible range of estimates of
marginal benefits from SOZabatement.)
Within the range of emissions abatement shown in Figure 2, the marginal cost curves of NRR
policies lie above the corresponding curves of RR policies, implying that NRR policies are more costly and
generate smaller net benefits. Below we consider whether this applies over the entire possible range (from O
to 100 percent) of emissions abatement,

2. Significance of the Labor Supply Elasticity
Figures 3a and 3b show that the costs of the RR and NRR policies are somewhat sensitive to the
labor supply elasticity. These experiments assume a value of 0.4 for the pre-existing tax rate on labor.
(Unless indicated otherwise, all sirmdations employ this “central case” value.) A higher labor supply
elasticity implies more substitution with leisure, and hence a larger tax-interaction effect from emissionsabatement policies. The welfare gain from the revenue-recycling effect is also larger. Therefore, a higher

lGThenumerical model’s nested utility fiction implicitly assumes that the consumption goods are equal
substitutes for leisure, K this were not the case, the tax-interaction and revenue-recycling effects would not necessarily
be equal at the initial incremental amount of abatement, and thw the intercept under the RR policy could be non-zero.
These considerations do not atTectthe relative impacts of RR and NRR policies.

17

labor supply elasticity raises costs by a greater amount under the NRR policy than under the RR policy,”

3. Must the Polluting Sector Be “Large” for Second-Best Interactions to Be Significant?
An important issue is the extent to which the relative costs of RR and NRR policies depend on the

size of the polluting industry compared with the overall economy. To explore this issue, we run the numerical
model under alternative, counterfactual assumptions about electricity’s share of overall economic output, 2* In
particular, we consider counterfactual cases where electricity’s output share is 0,5, 2.0 and 4.0 times its actual
share in the U.S. economy.29 Resdts under these cor.mterfactualcases are displayed in Figure 4. The size of
the polluting sector makes very little difference to the results: the relative disadvantage of NRR policies (for a
given relative amount of pollution abatement) applies independently of the size of the polluting sector. Even
if the polluting sector’s use of labor is a very small share of the economy’s overall labor use, the interactions
between environmental re@ation and the labor market importantly tiect the relative costs of RR and NRR
policies. This is the case because the relative costs depend ordy on the relative magnitudes of the t~xinteraction and revenue-recycling effects, not on their absolute magnitudes.30 Each of these effects increases
roughly in proportion to the size of the polluting sector, Hence, the second-best issues we examine here seem
important even in cases where the polluting industry is quite small relative to the rest of the economy.

B. Relative Costs over the Entire Possible Range of Pollution Abatement
In Figr.ue5 we display the relative costs of RR and NRR policies over the range horn Opercent to

“The explanation is the same as that for the impact of the pre-existing tax rate. The tax-interaction effect
increases more than proportionally with the mru~al welfare cost of taxation, which is proportional to the elasticity of
labor supply.
“In our baseline data set, the ratio of electricity gross output to economy-wide value added is approximately
0.04, as indicated in Table 1,
29To do this, alter the benchmark data as follows, (In the benchmark, units are defined such that prices are
one,) First, we multiply tie elements E~,Eo, EC1and Em by a constant factor, and the elements GEGo, GC1,and Gm, by
another constant factor, choosing the two factors so that net output (GDP) remains unchanged and electricity’s share of
net output ((E~+Eo+Ea+Em) / GDP) changes in the desired proportion. (GDP remains unchanged so long as the sum of
the changed final demand amponents, En + Em + GCI+ Gm, is unchanged.) In addition, we reallocate value added
(labor) across the E and G industries so that total receipts continue to equal total expenditures in these two industries.
Total value added -- L~+ L~ -- is unchanged. Thus, our procedure does not change GDP, whether measured as total
final demand or total value added.
‘“This result may depend on the specification of demand and supply elasticities. In our model, these elasticities
are constant over a wide range, This contributes to fairly constant relative magnitudes of the tax-interaction and
revenue-recycling effects.

18

100 percent abatement (20 million tons) of S02 emissions. Figure 5a shows that marginal abatement costs
rise faster for the RR policies. Eventually -- when the extent of abatement is substantial -- marginal costs

under RR policies exceed those of NRR. Why is this so? Consider the RR policy. Because of this policy’s
negative impact on labor supply and on emissions, marginal tax revenue declines as the emissions tax rate
rises. This means that, with greater abatement, the ability to exploit the revenue-recycling effect diminishes.
Eventually, one reaches a point where, at the margin, additional abatement (via an incrementally higher
pollution tax) raises no more revenue than is raised mder the NRR policy.
That is the point where the RR and NRR cu3vescross.31 To the right of that point, at (he margin RR
policies are more costly than NRR policies, because at the margin they have a negative revenue-recycling
effect (as compared with the negligible revenue-recycling effect of the NRR policy). hdeed, if one pursues
emissions reductions to the point of 100 percent abatement, the total costs of the two types of policies are
identical, This makes sense, since at 100 percent abatement neither policy earns any revenue, and thus there
is no effective difference between an RR and NRR policy. Thus the areas mder the marginal cost ewes
from Oto 100 percent abatement are the same for both policies.32
These resdts demonstrate that the relative superiority (in terms of lower cost) of RR policies
diminishes with the extent of abatement. At low levels of abatement (as wodd be appropriate if marginal
enviromnental benefits are low), RR policies have a considerable cost advantage. But at high levels of
abatement (as would be justified when marginal environmental benefits are high) the advantage of RR
policies is much smaller. In the limiting case of 100 percent abatement, RR policies have no mst advantage.
These ideas are borne out by Figure 5b, which presents the ratio of totaf costs at different levels of emissions
abatement. This ratio starts at tini~,

but declines to 1 at 100 percent abatement.

In this connection it is noteworthy that the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments call for a 10-rnillion-ton
reduction in SOz emissions. These re~ations

fall in the NR.Rcategory, because emissions allowances are

given out at no charge (gandfathered) rather than auctioned. There maybe significant distributional or

political objectives that are served by grandfathering, but, as indicated by Figure 5b, they come at a high price
in terms of cost. At 10 million tons of abatement, total costs under the NRR approach are 38 percent higher

“If the marginal revenue from tie NRR policy were always zero, then the curves wodd cross where the RR
policy’s marginal revenue is zero as well. This zero-marginal-revenue point is the peak of the RR policy’s LaiTercurve.
However, the NRR policy has some revenue impact, as discussed earlier, because of effecb on the labor tax base and
because it generates taxable rents. IrIFigure 5, the RR and NRR curves actually cross at a point where marginal revenue
is slightly negative.
32Wehave experimented with other specifications for the abatement cost function, and we fmd this result holds
in all cases.

19

than they wodd be under an RR policy The difference in costs is $560.5 million.33

C. Net Benefits from RR and NRR Policies

We now consider environmental benefits in addition to tie costs of regulation. Our purpose here is
to illustrate differences in net benefits from RR and NRR policies. As indicated above, the differences
depend on the magnitudes of environmental benefits from emissions reductions, These marginal benefits are
highly uncertain. For purposes of illustration, in calcdating the net benefits we consider a wide range of
values for the marginal benefits from emissions reductions: $100, $250, and $1000 per ton. These values are
consistat with the range of estimates reported in recent years.34
Table 2 indicates results under these alternative values. The fust set of rows shows, for the RR
policy, the optimal level of abatement conesponding to the different marginal benefit assumptions, along
with the comesponding total abatement cost and net welfare gain (total environmental benefit minus total

abatement cost). The second set of rows provides this same information for the NRR policy. Except when
100 percent abatement is justified, welfare gains are smaller under the NRR policy, For the low ($ 100 per
ton) value of marginal benefits, the net benefit or welfare gain under the NRR policy is zero, since optimal
abatement is zero. h this case, any abatement through an NRR policy wodd be eficiency-reducing, since the
marginal benefit is less than the intercept ($109 per ton) of the marginal cost function, With the intermediate
value for the marginal envirorunental benefit, the optimal level of abatement under the NW policy is again
below that under the RR policy (since marginal abatement costs are higher under the NRR policy), and net
benefits under the NRR policy are only about half of those under the RR policy. If marginal benefits are high
($1000 per ton), under both policies 100 percent abatement is optimal and (since the pollution tax in this case
collects no revenue) total abatement costs are the same,
An important issue is the extent to which optimal abatement in a second-best setting differs from the

“The costs of a 10-million-ton reduction are $2052,7 and $1492,2 million under the gandfathtig
(NRR) and
auctioning (RR) of emissions allowances, respectively. Althou@ this paper points out the efficiency drawbacks of the
NRR element of SOZemissions regulation under the 1990 Clean W Act Amendments, it is not intended to be a
wholesale critique of this legislation. We would note that the 1990 legislation achieved major reforms in environmental
regulation by introducing a flexible, incentive-based approach to regulation in the fom of emissions allowance tiading.
This approach has a number of theoretical advantages over the traditional, less flexible methods (see, for example,
Tietenberg [1985]), and empirical studies already indicate that this approach will yield a dramatic reduction in overall
compliance wsts, compared to conventional approaches (see, for example, Burtraw [1996], and Ellerman and Montero
[1996]).
34The range is approximately that implied in the overview by Portney ( 1990), Some more recent estimates
exceed $1000 per ton, due to greater predicted health benefits and an improved characterization of visibility benefits,
See USEPA(1995b) and Chestnut ef al. (1994),
20

first-best level. To examine this issue, we consider the level of abatement which woldd take place if, in
determining the optimal level of abatement, regulators incorrectly identified fins’ private mtiginal
abatement costs with the social marginal costs of abatement. The level of abatement that results in this case
is the same as the “Pigouvian” level -- that which equates firms’ private marginal costs of abatement with the
marginal benefits from emissions reduction. In a second-best setting with pre-existing taxes, the Pigouvian
level of abatement is suboptimal because fins’ private marginal costs of abatement do not correspond to the
social marginal cost of abatement. The third set of rows gives the level of abatement that regulators would
pursue if they ignored tax interactions and adopted a Pigouvian approach. That approach, by leading to
excessive abatement, significantly reduces the welfare gains from regulation, Indeed, when marginal
environmental benefits are low or moderate, regulations based on the Pigouvian approach, by disregarding the
tax-interaction effect, can reduce welfare relative to the no-regulation status quo! The fourth panel of the
table indicates, for example, that when (gross) marginal benefits of emissions reductions are $100 per ton,
introducing an emissions quota and setting the quota at the Pigouvian level generates a net welfare loss of
$315.5 billion, as opposed to a net gain of $169.8 billion under the second-best optimal pollution tax policy.
When marginal benefits are $221 or below, excessive abatement under the Pigouvian approach leads to net
welfare losses mder the quota policy. When (gross) marginal benefits are $250 per ton, the net welfare gain
from the quota is ordy about 18 percent of the gain from the second-best optimal pollution tm.
Table 2 thus indicates the potential importance of interactions between environmental policies and
other taxes.35 The welfare cost from failing to offset the tax-interaction effect through revenue-recycling can
be substantial (panel 2 versus panel 1), In addition, there can be large costs from the excessive abatement
that stems from adopting a fust-best policy rule in a second-best setting (panels 3 or 4 versus panel 1).

V. Further Sensitivity Analysis

We have considered how pre-existing tax rates, labor supply elasticities, the size of the polluting
sector, and the magnitude of marginal environmental benefits affect the relative costs and welfare gains of
NRR and RR policies. In Table 3 we expand the sensitivity analysis to consider how other production and

“For further discussion of this issue see Parry (1996) and Oates (1995). A parallel res.dt has recently emerged
in the context of monopoly pricing: Brotig
( 1995) estimates that the welfare loss from monopoly pricing in the U.S
economy is several orders of magnitude greater, once allowance is made for the effect of compounding tax distortions in
the labor market.

21

preference parameters, as well as alternative model specifications, might affect the relative costs of these two
policies,
Higher elasticities of substitution in production mean that electricity (and associated SOZemissions)
can more easily be substituted for other intermediate inputs. Hence, marginal abatement costs fall with
higher values for these parameters. The parameter UCis the elasticity of substitution between the electricityintertsive and non-electrici&-intensive consumer goods. A higher value for this elasticity also implies lower
social cost of avoiding electricity use; hence the social cost of avoiding SOZemissions is lower as well.
The sirmdations reported thus far have assumed that quota-induced rents are taxed at the same rate
as labor. The taxation of rents pmtly offsets the adverse revenue impact associated with the quota’s negative
impact on the labor tax base, Row 4 of the table presents resdts from sirndations where quota rents are not
taxed. In this circumstance there is no revenue offset, and the economy’s marginal costs are higher at each
level of abatement.
Rows 5a and 5b examine impacts of alternative values for the parameter az in the S02 abatement
function, A lower value for az means that a given amount of abatement equipment has a smaller effect on
the emissions-output ratio, implying higher fro-level marginal abatement costs. Smaller values of az thus
erdarge the tax-interaction effect and widen the differences in costs between RR and NRR policies, especially
at lower levels of abatement.
Rows 6a and 6b consider alternative model specifications. Resdts in row 6a are from a “collapsed’
version of the numerical model that matches the analytical model. This version has no intermediate inputs
and no separate abatement fiction. 36 The marginal costs from this collapsed version correspond to the
marginal costs predicted by equation (II.11”) of the analytical model.37By comparing resdts in rows 6a with

thi5 version of thenmticd model, we treat E and G as COnSW~ goods that are produc~ w’i~ de same
production parameters as those for C, and C~ in the original numerical model. Baseline Soz emissions and conswption
of E and G are the same as the original model’s baseline levels for S02, C, and C~, respectively, We calibrate the utility
fiction parameter u= so that marginal abatement CO* at 10 million tons of abatement me $300 Per tom ss in the
original model.
36~

“For theNRR policy, we tie results in Table 3 with the marginal costs predicted by a mtiled version of
equation (II, 1I “). Dividing this equation by ~tfix
gives the marginal pigouvi~ ~d t~-~teraction effects. Adding
D to the resulting expression eliminat= the marginal environmental benefit component of overall welfare impact,
yielding the residual, Tx - (I+M) r, (d~ifl), which stands for marginal cost. The f~ term (7X)is the fro-level
marginal cost of abatement; the second t- is the marginal tax-interaction effect. With the numerical model, we obtain
each element in this formula, and then apply the formula to calculate predicted marginal costs. Doing so gives marginal
costs of $138.6, $222.6, and $339.4 million, at O, 5, and 10 million tons of abatement, respectively, These predicted
marginal costs are within one percent of Table 3‘s marginal costs, which were obtained directly from the equivalent
variation measure of the changes in household utility associated with incremental changes in abatement.
22

those in row 1 for the RR policy and row 4 for the NRR policy,3swe can observe the importance of
intermediate inputs and a separate abatement fiction,

For both types of policies, marginal costs (and the

tax-interaction effect) are lower in the original model than in the scaled-down model. Intermediate inputs and
a separate abatement function expand the opportunities for emissions abatement and lower the costs of
achieving given emissions reductions.
Row 6b presents resdts from a more disaggregate version of the numerical model that contains coal
and “other fiels” as intermediate inputs, in addition to G and E. In the originalnumerical model the
abatement fiction linked SOZemissions with electricity output (as well as abatement expenditure); the
expanded model’s greater disaggregation enables us to use a more realistic abatement function relating
emissions to the level of coal input in the electricity industry.39 This model specification leads to somewhat
lower mar~rd costs than in the original specification, in keeping with the widened opportunities for input
substitution.
A further potintial area for sensitivity analysis desemes mention. We have assumed that emissions
(or environmental quality) are separable from consumption or leisure in utility. Relaxing this assumption
would affect the resdts. If environmental quali~ and leisure are gross complements, then regulations
improving the environment will generate a larger tax-interaction effect, other things equal, because policies’
adverse impacts on labor supply will be magnified, The reverse is true if leisure and environmental quality
are gross substitutes. The case of gross complements seems more likely, since a cleaner environment can
make leisure or recreational activities more attractive. Further empirical work that helps identify these
relationships wodd be of considerable value to policy makers.

W, Conclusions

Using analytical and numerical general equilibrium models, this paper indicates that the taxinteraction effect -- the factor market impact of environmental re~ations
goods -- may titically tiuence

imposed in markets for produced

the efficiency consequences of environmental re@ations. In a world with

‘Row 4 is the appropriate row to consider for the quota policy since the analytical model’s formdas assume no
taxes on quota rents.

391nthe expauded versiou X=(electricity output) in the abatement cost function is replaced by xCa,,X,the use of
wal by the electricity industry, We calibrate as to yield the same baseline emissions as in the original model, and
calibrate az yield marginal abatement wsts of $300 per ton at 10 million tons of SOZemissions.

23

prior taxes on factors, the tax-interaction effect implies significantly higher costs of re~ation relative to
what wodd apply in a f~st-best world with no pre-existing taxes. Revenue-raising regulations enjoy a
revenue-recycling effmt that offsets much of the tax-interaction effect, Non-revenue-raising regulations, in
contrast, enjoy no such offset. As a result, for any given target level of emissions reductio~ the gross
efficiency costs of non-revenue-raising policies are higher than those of revenue-raising policies. The
differences in gross efficiency costs are not tivial. U.S. environmental re@ations etiorce reductions of
about ten million tons in SOZemissions from coal-fied electric power plants. Our calctiations suggest that
because these re~ations
of these re~ations

do not raise revenue (emissions allowances are grandfathered) the gross social costs

are approximately 38 percent higher than they wodd be if emissions allowmces were

auctioned.
In fact, the si~ of the welfare impact of environmental re~ations

can depend on whether policies

raise revenue. If marginal environmental benefits fail to exceed a critical threshold value, any pollution
abatement through an NRR policy is efficiency-reducing. In the context of SOa emissions re@ation in the
U.S., we fmd that mder an NRR policy (as with grandfathered emissions allowances) the efficiency gains
disappear entirely if marginal environmatal benefits are below $109 per ton. In addition, we show that
adopting a “Pigouvian” or f~st-best approach to environmental re~ation can lead to welfare-reducing
policies, even when environmental benefits are as high as $221 per ton. The disadvantage of NRR policies
relative to RR policies shrinks the larger the marginal environmental benefits and the larger the optimal
amount of abatement. In the limiting case where environmental benefits justifi 100 percent abatement, there
is no difference in welfare impacts of NRR and RR policies. All of these results are largely independent of
the size of the polluting or re~ated

sector relative to the overall economy.

These insights have very general applicability. They suggest that tiost

any government regulation

that lowers real factor returns (by raising the price of consumer goods) might have considerably higher
aggregate cost than wotid be implied by a partial equilibrium analysis. Existing studies in industial
organization%agricultural aonornics, labor economics and international trade codd be highly misleading to
the extent that they evaluate re~atory policies using models that disregard pre-existing tax distortions.

24

References

Auerbach, A.J., 1985, The theory of excess burden and optimal taxation, in A.J. Auerbach and M.S. Feldstein
(eds.), Handbook ojPublic Economics, Vol. 1, North-Holland, Amsterdam.
Ballmd, Charles, L,, John B. Shoven, and John Whalley, 1985. “General Equilibrium Computations of the
Marginal Welfare Costs of Taxes in the U.S.” American Economic Review 75(l): 128-38.
Ballard, Charles L., and Steven G. Medema, 1993. “Distortionary Taxes and the Provision of Public
Goods.” Journal of Public Economics 52:199-216.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Ruud A. de Mooij, 1994. “Environmental Levies and Distortionary Taxation.”
American Economic Review 84(4):1085-9.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and Lamence H. Godder, 1996, “Optimal Environmental Taxation in the Presence of
Other Taxes: General Equilibrium Analyses,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
Bovenberg, A. Lans, and F. van der Ploeg, 1994.. “Environmental Policy, Public Finance and the Labour
Market in a Seeond-Best World.” Journal ofPublic Economics 55:349-90.
Browning, E. K., 1994. “The Non-Tax Wedge,” Journal of Public Economics 53:419-433.
Brow=ning,E. K., 1995. “The Welfare Cost of Monopoly and Other Output Distortions.” Working Paper,
Department of Economics, Texas A&M University.
Browning, E. K., 1987. “On the Marginal Welfare Cost of Taxation.” American Economic Review 77:1123.
Burtraw, Dallas, 1996. “The SOZEmissions Trading Program: Cost Savings Without Allowance Trades,”
Contemporary Economic Policy, vol. XIV, no, 2 (April), 79-94,
Btiaw, Dallas, Winston Barrington, Alan J. Krupnic~ and Myrick Freeman III, 1995, “Optimal ‘Adders’
for Environmental Damage by Public Utilities.” Journal of Environmental Economics andA4anagement
29(3) :S1-S19, Novembm,
Chestnut, Lauraine G., Robin L. MS
and Douglas A. Latimer. 1994. “Economic Benefits of
Improvements in Visibility: Acid b
Provisions of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments,” Proceedings of
the International Speeialty Conference,Aerosols and Atmospheric Optics, Voh.uneA, Air & Was~
Management Association.
Cruz, Miguel and Lawrence H. Godder, 1992. “h Intertemporal General Equilibrium Model for Analyzing
U.S. Energy and Environmental Policies: Data Doeumentation.” Unpublished manuscript, Stanford
University.
Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI), 1995. ~e Emission Allowance Market and Electric Utili~ SO1
Compliance in a Competitive and Uncertain Future, TR- 105490, prepared by K. White, Energy Ventures
Analysis, Inc., and Van Horn Consulting, Palo Alto, CA (Final Report: Sepkmber).

25

Ellermq A. Demy, and Juan Pablo Montero, 1996. “Why Are Allowance Prices So Low? An Analysis of
the SO, Emissions Trading Program,” CEEPR 96-001, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (February).
Godder, Lamen~ H., 1995. “Environmental Taxation and the ‘Double Dividend’: A Reader’s Guide.”
International Tax and Public Finance 2(2):157-183.
Hahn, Robert W., 1986. “Trade-offs in Designing Markets with Mdtiple Objectives.” Journal OJ
Environmental Economics andManagement 13:1-12.
Lee, Dwight R., and Walter S. MisioleL 1986. “Substituting Pollution Taxation for General Taxation: Some
Implications for Efficiency in Pollution Taxation.” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management
13:338-347.
Ng, Y. K., 1980. “Optimal Corrective Taxes or Subsidies when Revenue-Raising Imposes an Excess
Burden.” American Economic Review 70:744-51.
Nichols, Albert L., 1984. Targeting Economic Incentives for Environmental Protection. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Oates, Wdau E., 1993. “Pollution Charges as a Source of Public Revenues.” In Herbert Giersch, cd.,
Economic Progress and Environmental Concerns. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, pp. 135-52.
Oates, Wallace E., 1995. “Green Taxes: Can We Protect the Environment and Improve the Tax System at the
Same Time?” Southern Economic Journal 61(4):914-922.
Oates, Wallace E., and Robert M. Schwab, 1988. “Economic Competition among Jurisdictions: Efficiency
Edancing or Distortion Inducing?” Journal of Public Economics 35:333-354, April.
Parry, Ian W. H., 1995. “Pollution Taxes and Revenue Recycling.” Journal of Environmental Economics
andh4anagement 29:S64-S77.
P-,
Ian W. H., 1996. “Environmental Taxes and Quotas in the Presence of Distorting Taxes in Factor
Markets.” Resource and Energy Economics, forthcoming.
Portney, Paul R, 1990. “Economics and the Clean Air Act.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 4(4):173181, Fa11.
Poterba, James M., 1993, “Global Wtig:
Perspectives 7(4), 47-63.

A Public Finance Perspective.” Journal of Economic

Repetto, Robert, Roger C. Dower, Robin Jenkins, and Jacqueline Geoghegan, 1992, Green Fees: How a
Tax Shift Can Workfor the Environment and the Economy. World Resources Institu~, November.
Resource Data International, he., 1995, RDI’s Phase 1199S Databook Performance Under the Clean Air
Act Amendments of 1990. Bodder, CO. (Autumn).
Sandrno, Agnar, 1975. “Optimal Taxation in the Presence of Externalities.” Swedish Journal of Economics
77.
26

Shackletin, Robert, Michael Shelby, Alex Cristofaro, Roger Brinner, Joyce Yanchar, Lawrence Godder, Dale
Jorgens~ Peter Wilwxq and Peter Pady, 1996. “The Efficiency Value of Carbon Tax Revenues.” In Darius
Gaskins and John Weyant, eds., Reducing Global Carbon Dioxide Emissions: Costs and Policy Options.
Forthcoming, Stanford University Press.
Shoven, John B., and John Whalley, 1992. Applying General Equilibrium. Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge
University Press.
Stavins, Robert, cd., 1991, Project 88--Round 1~ Incentives for Action: Designing Market-Based
Environmental Strategies. Public policy study sponsored by Senators Timothy Wirth and John Heinz,
Washington, D.C., May.
Terldz Davi~ 1984. “TheEfficiencyValue of Effluent Tax Revenues.” Journal of Environmental Economics
and Management 11:107-23.
Tietenberg, T. H. 1985. Emissions Trading: An Exercise In Reforming Pollution Policy. Washington D.C,:
Resources for the Future.

us. En~mtal

Protection Agency (USEPA), 1995a. “Economichalysis of The Title IV Requirements of
the 1990 CleanAir Act Amendments,”prepd by ICF R.esom Incorporated,Washington D.C, (Final Report:
Septembw).
U.S. EnvironmentalProtectionAgenq (USEPA), 1995b.HumanHealth Benejtsfiom Sulfate Reductions under
TitleIVof the 1990 CleanAir Act Amendments,prepared by. prepared by Lauraine, G. Chestnut (Contract No.
68-D3-0005).
U.S. National Acid Precipitation Assessment Program (NAPAP), 1991.1990 Integrated Assessment Report,
Washington DC.
WeitzmW Martin L., 1974. “Prices vs. Quantities.” Review of Economic Studies 41:477-491.

27

Appendix A: Deriving Equation (11.13)

From (11,12)

and from the SIutsky equations

(A2)

d[

:=$-ZX
x

(A3)

x
%(T-1)

#=:L

L

where c denotes a compensated coefficient and 1 is disposable income. Substituting (Al )-(A3) in the
expression for fl[

in (II. 11) gives

a~c

From the Sluts@ symmetry property —
Ax

z

= –—
h,

~ Differentiating (11.2)yields:

Z=-(Z+EI

Making these substitutions in (A4) gives

&cl-rL

~

m’

=

{[

{

ZC1-TL
———
X
&L

a=

x

+~z(l-rL)(T-f)

x

dr

&cl-rL
———
T-l+&L
Y

~+

T-1

1[

Y

~X
——

h,

+~~(l-zL)(T-l)
T-1
dI
T-1

1-~=

X

11

~~

(l-rL)(T

-l)

a(l-rL)(D-rx)x
I ‘~=

X

rL(T–/)

‘ Note that increasing rr increasesthe price ofX. while increasing r~ reducesthe price of leisure.

A-1

qM.

ml-r,
. —_

,

&,x’

and (11.2),gives

ne term ti q~ ~ the numerator is trivial when environmentiI damages from X are small relative to
aggregate net labor income in the economy, and the term in qm in the denominator is trivial when
environmenhl -es
Hence the approtiation

net of environmenbl tax revenues is small relative to aggregate labor tax revenues.
in (11.13).

A-2

Appendix B: The Numerical Model

A. Parameters

mote: except where otherwise specified, i ranges over industries G, E, C,, and CN

Production Function Parameters
a
P:r’

distribution parameter for input m in industry I
substitution parameter for indushy i

Abatement Function Parameters
as, az,

P

parameters for sdfirr abatement fmction for electricity fums

Household-Related Parameters
T
~~, ~~
aCI,acN
Pu> Pe

total time endowment
distribution parameters for utility function
substitution parameters for utility fuction

Other Parameters
‘LO

r~
s
m

initial marginal tax rate on labor income or rents
per-tit tax on emissions of S
aggregate sulfur dioxide emissions target
real lmp-surn transfers to households (fixed in real terms)

B. Endogenous Variables

a

c:’
c–M

c

E
E_AD
G
G_AD
L
L_AD

use of input m per unit of output of good i
quantity demanded of eleeb-icity-intensiveconsumption good
quantity demanded of non-electici~-intensive consumption good
quantity demanded of composite consumption good
aggregate supply of elwtricity
aggregate demand for electricity
aggregate supply of general intermediate good
aggregate demand for general intermediate good
aggregate labor supply
aggregate labor demand

B-1

Pe

price of composite consumption good
price of output from industry i
price of labor (before tax)
total rent earned by electricity producers
government revenue
sulfw dioxide emissions by electricity producerj”
overall household utility
utility associated with level of sdfur emissions
output horn industry i
use of inputj by indus~ i
abatement equipment purchased by electricity producerj
change in marginal tax on labor income
rent earned by electricity producerj

PI
PL

RENT
REV
~
u
v
x,

C, Equations

Production Functions and Optimal Input Intensities
In all industries, output (~ is produced according to:
1

-- General Intermediate Good and Consumer Goods Industries,
In the G, C’,,and C~ industries, profit is given by p~i - pLxL,- p~~i - p~~,. Differentlatmg profit
with respect to the variable inputs X.i (m = L, E, G) yields the marginal productivity condition, pi dX,/~.,
= p.). Evaluating this condition with the functional form in (B 1) yields the optimal input intensities:
1

(B2)

am,

❑

~
= ami

~
I

pm -~
—
P,

[1

1

for m = L, E, G.

-- Electrici~ Industry:
In the electricity (E) industry, fms choose optimal input levels not only of L, G, and E, but also the
optimal level of expenditure on abatement equipment (~. We first indicate optimal input and abatement
choices where the fm faces a pollution tax. We will then show that the firm’s optimal choices under a
pollution quota are the same as under the pollution tax, which enables us to model the pollution quota as a

B-2

pollution tax with revenues retained as rents to the Fro.’ For a representative firm in the electricity industry,
profit is given by:

(B3)

)’C,= P#,

-pLXE

-p@GE

-p@EE

-pzz

- T$

wherepfi p~, andp~ represent the prices of inputs of labor, electrici~, and the general intermediate input,

respectively. Z and S represent abatement equipment or services and SOZemissions, respectively; pz is the
uit price of abatement equipment or services (assumed to be equal to the price of labor) and r~is the tax rate
on SOZemissions.
The relationship between electricity output, pollution emissions, and abatement equipment is:

(B4)

S/X, = as - az~X~fi

The ratio of S to electricity output is a decreasing tiction
equipment employed.

of Z, the quantity of abatement services or

Electricity producers maximize profits subject to to (B4). Substituting the production function (B 1)
and the SOa emissions function (B4) into (B3) anddifferentiatingby the choicevtiables XM, ‘GE, xEE, md z
yields the fust-order conditions:

- llpx

au=x#X~=aw+a
[

(B5)

‘GE

❑

xGE/XE

=

4:::]5+aG(:&]*
PGaLE

a~~ —
[1PL aGE

&

1

aEE

❑

pEaLE
XEE/XE = aLE —
[ PL aEE

1p. -1

The equivalence to fm behavior betw~n the virtual tax and the quota can be seen as follows.
Under the pollution quota, the fro’s profit function is

lPollution quom are implemented by the government’s giving a fixed number of pollution permits to existing
fins. Since rents are ajoyed ordy by fms with permits and the number of permits is fixed, the existence of rents does
not bigger Mer entry.

B-3

(B6)

n-, = pJE - pLxu - p$GE - p#EE - pzz

Firms maximize (B6) subject to the constraint imposed by the quota:

where E represents the emissions quota. The Lagrangean expression corresponding to this maximization
problem is:

(B8)

~ = PEX’ - p~x~~ - p~x~~

- P~x~~ - pzz

- A{xE[a,

- az (z/xE)~]

- i)

Let the (virtual) pollution tax be set equal to A, the shadow price on the emissions constraint. In this case,
the Lagrangean expression is identical to the maximization problem under the pollution tax case, except for
the constant r~S. Thus the fust-order conditions from this maximization problem are the same as those
under the pollution tax, implying that fu-ms’behavior under the pollution quota can be modeled through a
virtual pollution tax. Under the virtual tax, the fm regards and responds to the tax as if it is a cost, but in
fact the tax “revenues” are rebated as rents to the fm.

Household Utility Function, Labor Supply and Consumer Good Demands
The representative household’s utility fiction is:

(B9)

u = (a[[p”
+ .,zpu~ + V($
—

where Pis leisure and C is composite conswption, given by

(B1O)

~ =

(

)

1

CYCIC;F+ acNC;E =

The household’s budget constraint is:

PC$J + PCNCN= PL(l -rL)(T-!)
(Bll)
+ (1 -~,)RENT

+ TR

B-4

where rL is the marginal tax rate on labor, T is total labor time (thus L = T- t), RENT is the total rent equal

by electricity fums , and ~ is a lump-sum transfer from the public sector, Equations (B 12-B 17) express the
solution the household’s maximization problem:
—1
P@

(B14)

PC ‘ Pclal~ + PCNaNC

(B15)

! =

PL(l ‘rL)T+TR

+ (l-rR)~NT
aop~

[1

P~(l ‘rL) + aEpL(l-~L)

(B16)

L= T-l

(B17)

~ = @j)-l~L(l

-rL)L

1

—
p“-1

P?

+ (1 -rR)MNT

+ TR]

Combining (B 17) with (B 12) or (B 13) yields the optimal levels of C, and CM

The Government Sector
Government revenues finance a fixed level of real government transfers, ~. Revenues (REV
depend on whether the policy is an actual emissions tax ( r~d)or an emissions quota (virtual tax, r~’). Under
the pollution tax policy, revenues are:

(B 18) REV= rLL+ r;S

B-5

where r~is the tax rate on labor income, and S is aggregate sulfur dioxide emissions. Under the emissions
quota policy, revenues are:

(B19)

REV=

r.L + r, RENT

where RENT equals r: S and denotes the total rent generated by the quota,
Under all policies, the tax on labor is equal to the initial tax rate plus Ar~,the rate change necess~
to yield total revenues equal to the given level of spending (fixed real transfers), Thus:

(B20)

rL =

rLO+ Ar~

For simplicity we usually assume that rents are taxed at the same rate as is labor income: r~ = r~,

Prices (other than primary prices2)
(B21)

PC1 = aLC]PL +

(B22)

p~~ = aL~~PL + aEcNPE +

(B23)

PG

(B24)

PE = aLEPL + a~EP~’

= aLGpL

aECIpE

+ aEGpE

+ aWIpG
aGCNpG

‘awpG

a~~p~

+ p~zlx~)

+ ~~(sfx~)

The electricity price p~ equals mit input cost (first three terms) plus unit abatement expenditure (fourth)
term plus whatever tax costs or rents may apply. The last term in (B24) represents the tit tax cost in the
pollution tax case and the unit rent in the quotas case.

Aggregate Supplies and Demands

..

aggregate supplies and demands of intermediate goods.”

Since production of the general intermediate good and electricity follows constant returns to scale,
the supplies G and E are demand-determined, Thus X~ = G_AL)and X,= E_AD, where G_AL)and E_AD
denote the aggregate demands. The aggregate demands for G and E areexpressed by:

2See sectionD below for deftition of primary prices

B-6

(B25)

G_AD = a~~

+ a~~,

+ a~,C, + a~<~

(B26)

E_AD = a,~.

+ a~d, +

aE~/

+

aE~N

Equations (B25 and (B26) are solved simultaneously to obtain G_AD and E_AD,

-- aggregate demand for labor @_D):

(B27)

L_AD = a~~G_AD+ au E_AD + Z + aUC1+ ad.

D. Equilibrium Conditions

The equilibrium conditions are:

(B28)

L_AD
S
REv

=
=
=

L
S
m

Solution of the model involves finding the vector of primary “prices” satis~ing the equilibrium
conditions. These prices uniquely determine all quantities and other prices of the system, The primary prices
are p~, r~,andAr~. We use p~ as the numeraire and solve explicitly ordy for the latter two primary prices.
By Walras’s Law, one of tbe equilibrium conditions is redundant: we need only apply tbe latter two
equilibrium conditions to detetie
r~,and A r~

B-7

Figure 1
Input Types ancl uses in the Numerical

Model

uses of inputs

E

E

G
inputs

L

s

G

C1

CN

t

(UO]/$066L)

~0~

IEU!6JEW

0
1-

a
a

Oogooo
m
o
c9m

NNr

0

mom

00
-

(uO1/$0661)
woa leu!64ew

Table 1

Benchmark Data and Parameters for the Numerical Model

A. Input-Output Flows
(Sin millions of tons per year; all other flows in millions of 1990 dollars per year)

E

G

c,

CN

Leisure
Timel

Total Input
Value

E

54.9

117151.1

63684.3

59,5

0.0

180949.8

G

82557.5

6282925.6

199232.3

4047791.0 0.0

L

95337.4

4212429.7

0.0

0.0

Total

177949.8

10612506.4

262916.6

4047850.5

Rents

3000.0

0,0

0.0

0.0

Total Output
Value

180949.8

10612506,4

262916.6

4047850.5

S (tons x 10’)

10.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

10612506.4

6030873.9 10338641.0

Expenditure

B. Parameter Values
(SG=CE=0.8
acl = ~CN‘0.9
(SC=

0.85;
au

=

0.792

C. Sources
Input-output flows for 1990 are from U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of
Economic Analysis, Survey of Curreti Business, “Use of Commodtiies by Industries,” April 1994.
(These flows were then projected forward to the year 2000 using the growth rate of real GDP
of the United
over the period 1984-1994, as reported in Table 699 of the 1995 Statistic/Abstract
States.) Flows related to electric utilities were split into coal-fired and non-coal-fired utilities
based on data from Table 7.1 of the Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration,
Month/y Energy Review, September 1990. The input composition of the two consumer goods C/
and CN is based on Table B of the May 1984 Survey ot Curreti Business. Sulfur emissions data
derive from Table 369 of the 1993 Statisfica/ Abstract of the Untied States.

‘ Benchmark leisure time in 2000 is assumed to be 1.4 times observed work time.
wage elasticity of labor supply of 0.15.
2 ou is calibrated to generate an uncompensated

Table 2

Welfare Effects under Alternative Policies

Uarginal Environmental Benefit:

$100tton

$250tton

3.3
160.2
169.8

8.3
1024,5
1050.5

$1000/ton

1.RR Policy
Optimal Abatement
Total Abatement Cost
Net Weifare Gain

20.0
6073.3
13926.7

!. NRR Policy
Optimal Abatement
Total Abatement Cost
Net Welfare Gain
% of RR Net Welfare Gain

1. RR Policy and “Pigouvian”

0.0

7.3

20.0

1306.3

6073.3

518.7

13926.7

0.0%

49.4%

100.070

5.3
260.9
415.1
114.9

13.1
1614.8
2575.8
699.2

20.0
3801.5
6073.3
13926.7

67.7%

66.6%

100.0%

13.1
1614.9
3086.9
188.1
17.970

20.0
3802,2
6073.3
13926.7

Level of Abatement

Abatement
Assumed Total Abatement Cost
Actual Total Abatement Cost
Net Welfare Gain
% of RR Net We/fare Gain

1. NRR Policy and “Pigouvian”

0.0

0.0

Levei of Abatement

Abatement
Assumed Totai Abatement Cost
Actual Total Abatement Cost
Net Welfare Gain
% of RR Net Welfare Gain

5.3
260.8
845.5
-315.5
-185.87.

1oo.o%

NOTE: Abatement figures are in millions of tons of S02. Costs and welfare changes are in millions of 1990 dollam.

0

m

0

0

m

0

c

!
c
=
=

E
c

a

dd

n

