NBER WOR~G

PAPER SERIES

PUBLIC SCHOOL FINANCE IN A GENERAL
EQUILIBRIUM TIEBOUT WORLD:
EQUALIZATION PROGRAMS, PEER
EFFECTS AND PRIVATE SCHOOL VOUCHERS

Thomas J. Nechyba

Working Paper 5642

NATIONAL

BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

I am grateful for the very able research assistance by Randy Reback and especially Robert
McMillan, as well as the financial support from the Center of Economic Policy Research (CEPR)
at Stanford University. The paper is part of the NBER’s research program in Public Economics
and has benefitted from comments and discussions by participants of the 1995 NBER Summer
Institute session on School Finance, the 1996 Winter Econometric Society Meetings, the 1996
Public Choice Society Meetings, and seminars at Washington University in St. Louis, the
University of Kentucky, the University of Michigan, Michigan State University and the
University of California at Santa Barbara. All remaining errors are, of course, mine. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
O 1996 by Thomas J. Nechyba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O
notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5642
June 1996

PUBLIC SCHOOL FINANCE IN A GENERAL
EQUILIB~M
TIEBOUT WORLD:
EQUALIZATION PROGRAMS, PEER
EFFECTS AND PRIVATE SCHOOL VOUCHERS

ABSTRACT

This paper uses computable
private school vouchers.

Itimproves

general equilibrium

simulations

onpastcomputational

to investigate

approaches by(i)

the effect of

endogenizing

the

funding of public schools through the modelling of an explicit political process at the school
district level; (ii) embedding the private/public

school choice in a Tiebout model in which agents

also choose between communities that provide different public school/property
(iii) allowing for a variety of different public school financing mechanisms
local financing and control all the way to pure state funding.
to increase
stratification.

school-based

stratification

of agents,

This implies that untargeted

vouchers

tax packages; and

ranging from purely

While voucher programs are shown

they tend

to decrease

residence-based

may be equity-enhancing

institutional settings even when there are no direct improvements

under some

in public school efficiency from

increased competition,

Furthermore, the effects of targeting vouchers to low income districts may

not differ significantly

from the effects of untargeted voucher plans.

Thomas J. Nechyba
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER

1
1, Introduction
Increasingly

frustrated

many states and localities

with the perceived low quality of government-provided
are looking to the market for solutions.

voucher experiments

are under way in Minnesota and Wisconsin;

state superintendent

positions

in many states including

education,

As a result, private school
school choice advocates hold

Arizona, Georgia and California;

and

governors and state legislators are increasingly making vouchers a theme of their campaigns.1 At
the same time, however, uneme over the equity implications of introducing an increased degree of
private school competition persists and has contributed to defeats of voucher proposals in several
legislatures as well as in a recent California referendum. While both sides of the debate seem to
generally accept Friedman’s
use of public resources
substantial

(1955, 1962) argument that vouchers might result in more efficient

in schools,

they disagree

whether

this improvement

is likely to be

enough to offset expected equity losses resulting from the loss of highly motivated

students to priva~ schools, in particular for students who remain in low income public schools.
Largely because voucher experiments have been small in scale and relatively recent, empirical
evidence in this debate is still quite scarce. While recent work by Hoxby (1994) suggests we
should expect substantial improvements in public school performance under increased competition,
Grosskopf,

Hayes, Taylor and Weber (1995) find only weak support for this proposition

when

performance is memured by the degree of inefficiency. Neither of these studies, however, is able
to use data involving

private school vouchers. Rather, they rely on current public and private

school data and either speculate

or leave the reader to speculate

increased

vouchers.2

competition

competition

through

about possible effects from

Thus, even if the empirical

were to agree on the expected

magnitude

literature

of the efficiency-enhancing

on school
effects of

increased competition, it wotid, until data from such experiments becomes available, be difficult to
quantitatively predict the impact of large scale public policy experiments that have never been tried.
In the meantime,
1

the complexity

of the issues involved and the ambiguity

There have also been private voucher initiatives

over the size of

in several US cities. For an early progress report on these, see Moe

(1995).
2

Hoxby (1994) uses an instrumental
competition

variables strategy to assess the impact of exogenous

on test scores, educational

school districts

and an input distance

weak support for the preposition

attainment

and wages, while Grosskopf

function model to ftnd strong evidence

that the degree of competition

variations

in Catholic School

et. al. (1995) use data on Texas public
of inefficiencies

is related to these inefficiencies.

in public schools but

2
opposing effects have made meaningful
has led several researchers

theoretical work on the

in the direction of constructing

topic

nearly impossible.3 This

plausible computational

models of

education markets, calibrating them to available data, and simulating the effects of simple voucher
proposals. While these models obviously must abstract from many real world features, they can
give indications of the direction and magnitudes of voucher-induced

changes in public and private

education in a way that is impossible to do through either ordinary theoretical or empirical work.
Two recent examples

of this approach are represented

by the important

models in Epple and

Romano ( 1996) and Manski ( 1992) on whose insights we seek to build,4

1.1. Simulation Models of Private Scbol

Vouchers

Epple and Romano assume there are no efficiency-enhancing

effects of competition on public

schools in order to focus on the equity and efficiency implications of a voucher system in the worst
case scenario that such beneficial competitive effects do not exist. Their assumption of a passive
open enrollment public school sector implies that educational

quality is the same in each public

school, which means that the public sector can be treated as a single school. Private schools, on the
other hand, maximize profits subject to providing students with their maximum utility obtainable
elsewhere. Furthermore,
discriminate

private schools are able to observe the ability type of each student and

between students by charging differential tuition. It is immediate in this framework

that all public schools
stratification

must be of lower quality

occurs along two dimensions:

than every private schools

Furthermore,

all else equal, the public school system absorbs only

the relatively low income and the relatively low ability students. Private schools, M suggested by
Vandenberghe

(1996), “skim the cream” off the public schools and may even subsidize the tuition

of low income/high
3

ability students. 6 These theoretical insigh~ as well as additional simulation

For one of the few theoretical
certain

environments,

vouchers

treatments,

see Hoyt and be

can produce

Pareto

(1996). In this paper, the authors demonstrate

improvements

by causing

lower tax rates,

that in

and that politically

feasible voucher programs may have this property.
4

Another more macroeconomics
Rogerson

5
6

oriented approach can be found in Glomm and Ravikumar

(1995) provide an interesting

simulation

approach to analyzing

centralization

(1995), and Femandez

and

of school finance.

This is true because private schools charge tuition while public schools are free,
This allows private schools to internalize
something

not possible

the introduction
across private

of free public
schools.

peer group externalities

for public schools. A tentative efficiency
schools eliminates

The distribution

of students

through admissions

and pricing policies.

which is

argument in favor of private schools follows in that

the possibility
across private

of a constrained

efficient

allocation

of students

schools in the absence of free public schools is

3
results add fuel to some of the fears voiced by opponents of increased school choice. In the model,
those who gain from a school choice system in the absence of beneficial competitive

effects on

public schools are those already in the private schools before the voucher program and some of
those who switch from public to private schools, while those remaining
experience

welfare losses. It should be emphasized,

however,

in the public schools

that the addition of beneficial

competitive pressures on public schools may soften these adverse equity implications of the model
and could, if strong enough, lead to improvements

in welfare for all agents.

Contraty to Epple and Romano, Manski (1992) addresses the tradeoffs between benefits from
competition

and adverse peer effects on public schools more direcdy by comparing two extreme

types of public sectors: one that is perfectly efficient (meaning that it spends all i~ resources on
factors that directly benefit students),
splitting expenditures

and another that seeks to maximize

its own surplus (by

into spending on factors that benefits tuden~ and factors that do not benefit

students) subject to the threat of students leaving the system. In both cases, the public sector is
assumed (as in Epple and Romano) to act as one unitary body that receives some exogenous level
of funding

per pu-pil. Under the surplus maximizing

competition

leads to an increase in the fraction of public school expenditures

benefiting

specification,

students in public schools. Thus, competition

increased

private school

devoted to inputs

directly improves public schools, a

possibility not allowed for in the work by Epple and Romano in which public schools are passive.
In the case of the first specification

(that assumes efficient public schools to begin with), this

effect, as expected, does not materialize.7
efficient
efficient,

if the number

of schools

then the possibility

is efficient

of discrimination

(which

is not guaranteed).

in private

school

However,

admissions

without public schools but not with them. This, of course, ignores the possibility

if this number

makes

possible

happens

a Pareto

of other externalities

to be

optimum

that arise from

greater integration. Others have addressed the peer group externality issues raised by Epple and Romano as well. De
Bartolome ( 1990) sets out a model of locaI governments with peer effects and demonstrates that voting/locational
equilibria

with heterogeneous

community

compositions

can be inefficient

because families

fail to internalize

the peer

group externality when choosing to migrate. It is suggested that one appropriate policy response might be to use
tax/subsidy programs to deal with the externality. Schwab and Oates (1991) demonstrate that, just as private schools
internalize

the peer group externality

low peer quality students

in Epple and Romano, more active public schools could do the same by charging

higher taxes. While this is objectionable

on equity grounds,

Schwab and Oates proceed to

analyze the same problem when locat governments are constrained to charge equal tax rates. They show that a system
of equalizing grants that compensate communities for accepting low peer quality students may be constrained efficient.
7

For a recent critique of tbe Manski paper, see Moe and Shotts (1996), In addition to pointing out the timitations
framework

used by Manski,

they calculate

find that, while utility does decrease when there are no efficiency
are very smatl compared

of the

utility levels for low income parents within the context of the model and
enhancing

benefits to competition,

these decreases

to the large increases in utility for the same parents in the presence of those benefits.

4

The results from these papers are thus, in many ways, consistent with conventional wisdom:
to the extent that competition

improves the public sector, low income parents in the public school

system may benefit, but as these beneficial competitive

effects vanish, so do the benefits to low

income parents who are left with the same (efficient) public school but without the more motivated
students who have left for private schools. Since the assumption is that highly motivated students
improve the school, public schools become worse when competition has no efficiency enhancing
effect on the operation

of those schools.

The characterization

paragraph of this paper is therefore confirmed in the simulation

of the debate in the opening
literature: there seems to be a

tension between the positive efficiency enhancing effects of vouchers and their possible negative
equity implications. If this is correct, the desirability of vouchers then ultimately rests on the extent
to which positive impacts of competition such u those found by Hoxby (1994) actually exist.

1.2. Features of a New Model
We will argue here that, while both of the simulation
contributions

to our understanding

models discussed

above make great

of private school choice, three important elements of public

schooling in US states have been left out. (For a brief illustration of the differences between our
approach and previous models, see Figure 1.) First, both Manski and Epple & Romano model the
public sector as being exogenously
spending is determined

funded on a per pupil basis when, in fact, public school

through the political interaction of voters and legislators at the state and

local levels. Second, while Man ski considers separately the cases of poor, middle income and
wealthy communities,

he does not allow for the endogenous

populations within communities

development

of public school

through the Tiebout ( 1956) sorting that is familim from the local

public finance literature and that seems particularly relevant in the case of education. Similarly,
while Epple and Romano allow, in principle, for different public schools in different communities,
they assume an open enrollment system which resul~ in all these public schools being identical. In
both models, the empirically relevant fact that individuals sort themselves into communities based
in large measure on income, and thus consume different levels of public education to begin with, is
left out. Finally, neither model attempts to address the differences in expected effects of vouchers

5
in different
different

political

settings

Specifically,

mixes of state and local financing

public education
schemes

is financed

through a variety of

ranging from purely local funding to

foundation grants and district power equalization all the way to pure state funding. It could well be
the cwe that the effect of vouchers differs under different pre-existing state policies. We therefore
propose to reconsider

vouchers in a model in which we relax (i) the assumed erogeneity

of

funding for public schools, (ii) both the assumed absence of Tiebout migration effects and the
assumed existence of a homogeneous

public sector, and (iii) the assumed lack of state and local

interaction.
We begin by fully defining a local public goods model with multiple local governments
providing different levels of local public school quality (where parental perceptions

of school

outputs are a function of local per pupil spending on schools and the average “peer quality” of
studen~ in that school.) Unlike Epple and Romano, however, an agent who sends his child to a
particular school must reside in that school’s district (i.e. no open enrollment), and, unlike Manski,
we assume that agents are mobile between districts. Furthermore, we endogenize local funding for
public education by assuming that local school boards are subject to political pressures in that their
budget (funded through a property tax) is set by the median voter. Thus agents choose not only
whether to attend public or private schools, but also, given market clearing house prices, which
community

to reside in and what level of funding for public education within that community to

support at the ballot box.
After analyzing vouchers in the context of this purely local system of public school finance,
we add a higher level government

that is also actively engaged in the funding of education. In

particular, we consider the effect of vouchers under three types of institutional schemes other than
a purely locally funded system: (i) a system of exogenously

set state foundation

(block) grants

financed through a state income tax; (ii) district power equalization (which is equivalent to a system
of exogenously

set state matching grants); and (iii) pure state funding of education in which the

state median voter sets the level of spending (funded through an income tax). The first two of
these preserve local control but change local policy incentives, while the third essentially removes
all local control and puts the state in charge of educational funding. We will demonstrate that the
effects of voucher programs

depend critically on the type of current institutional

setting used

6
because these institutions

alter the set of expected users of the vouchers as well as the political

implications for public school funding.
Of course, adding these additiond

complexities

to previous models naturally forces us to

sacrifice some of these previous models’ richness in other dimensions. In particular, we will allow
for neither the rent seeking behavior suggested in Mansk.i nor the complex private school pricing
mechanism derived in Epple and Romano. More precisely, since it is clear from Manski’s work
that modelling

public schools as inefficient

in the absence of competition

improves the equity

properties of vouchers, we will resume efficiency (at least as observed by parents) of both public
and private schools and thus look at worst case equity implications.
that the private school market consists of competitive,
single admissions

price for all students

Furthermore

profit maximizing

we will assume

schools who charge a

and can “cream skim” explicitly

in their admissions

policies. 8 Finally, peer quality, is modelled more crudely than in Epple and Romano and Manski
in that we assume that it is perfectly correlated with parental socio-economic status. While these are
simplifications

of previous models that should be kept in mind throughout

our analysis, they

permit us to focus on an entirely new set of issues not previously analyzed in the literature without
“rediscovering”

the important insights already obtained in Manski (the trade-off between adverse

effects from cream skimming and positive effects from competition)

and Epple and Romano (the

efficiency and equity implications of price discriminating behavior by private schools.)
Section 2 proceeds to outline the model, and Section 3 comments on computational

issues.

Section 4 then investigates the general equilibrium effects of vouchers in a variety of institutional
settings, and Section 5 ends with comments on the limitations of the model, possible extensions to
the analysis and some concluding remwks.

2. The Model
The computable
8

For reasons elaborated

general equilibrium model developed here is calibrated to New Jersey datag
below, the more complicated

pricing mechanism

of Epple and Romano loses its intuitive appeal

under our setting.
9

While we have thus made an attempt to calibrate the model to be consistent with the data, we do not take the view that
the simulation

results offered should be interpreted

m&e a number of simplifying

assumptions,

aid in developing basic intuitions concerning
witl therefore

very literally.

In pwticular,

since any computational

model must

we view our approach as an extension of theory that, tike pure theory, can
the nature and magnitude of vtious

general equilibrium

be on general lessons learned from the analysis rather than a literal interpretation

effects. Our focus

of any single set of

7

and is based on the theoretical model in Nechyba (1996a) where the existence of an equilibrium
without private schools is proved.10 The model takes as given community boundaries that divide
a large set of different houses into local political entities which produce public schooling funded
through a property tax. An additional political unit called the state (or nation) encompasses

all

communities and may finance additional education programs through a state income tax. There are
no a priori restrictions on the mix of house types across communities;

i.e. some communities

may

have a fairly homogeneous

housing stock while others have both “good” and “bad” houses.

Similarly, some communities

may be inherently more preferred because of particular community

qualities. The model is therefore attempting to explain neither the evolution of the housing stock
nor the formation
resulting

of communities.

Rather, it takes these as having evolved exogenously

from some given history. 11 Its potentially

heterogeneous

intracommunity

and

housing

structure allows for the empirically important possibility of the coexistence of rich and poor sectors
within a particular community,
divisible,

homogeneous

a feature not possible in models that view housing as a perfectly

good (Epple, Filimon

and Romer (1993), Rose-Ackerman

(1979)).

Consumers in the model own both houses and some amount of the private good, both of which are
tradeable at market prices, and choose their optimal place of residence given their preferences and
budgets. The existence of a land market rather than housing exogenously

supplied by absentee

landlords (as is common in the literature (see, for example, Epple, Filimon and Romer (1993)))
enables the model to seriously investigate capitalization

and its impact on communities.

Finally,

each agent also votes on the level of local property taxation (or state income taxation in the case of a
state financed public school system).

simulation
10

numbers.

The sufficient

conditions

literature.

They include

conditions

(Westhoff

for the existence
standard

of an equilibrium

assumptions

on preferences

in this model are fairly weak compared
and technologies

without

to others in the

the usual single crossing

(1977), Epple, Fitimon and Romer ( 1993)) and without Dunz’s (1985) independence

It is trivial to extend

the existence

theorem

to the case of private

schools

assumption.

as noted below, Also, in this paper we

deviate from Nechyba (1996b) in that we do not explicitly model a separate state public good because it would add little
to the analysis.
11

Since construction

of new houses is not possible in the context of the model (and is technically

model (see Nechyba

(1996a)),

the model is most appropriate

economy. We do not view this as a particular
school competition

to the analysis of a relatively

extremely

developed

urban/suburban

weakness of the approach because it is in such economies

is likely to have an effect. (Demand for private schools in remote and undeveloped

likely to be less of a factor due to tie limited market size.)

difficult to
that private

rural areas is

8
2.1 Endowments and Preferences
The main elements of both the general model as well as its CGE derivative are summarized
formally in Table 1. The set N represents both the set of agents and the set of houses in the model,
where n= N is defined

as that agent

who is initially

endowed with

house

n. 12 A fixed

community structure C is imposed on this set of houses and partitions it into a set of house types
H=(l,...,h

,...,~}

spread over a set of communities

set of houses of type h in community
houses.

The CGE

M=( 1,..., m,iii}iii}. C~~, then, is both the

m and the set of agenk

initially

endowed with such

version presented here defines N=[O, 1], H=( 1,2,3) and M={ 1,2,3}, which

implies the existence of nine different house endowment types (three house types in each of three
communities). Each of these is assumed to be represented in the economy in equal numbers; i.e.
# (C~h) = 1/9.
In addition to his house endowment,

(1)

each agent n is also endowed with a strictly

positive

amount of private good z(n) called income. The set of income levels is assumed to be finite which
gives rise to a set of income classes I = {1,,. .,i,.. .,:1). This implies that the house and income
endowments jointly define a set of endowment types
E = (Etii I (m,h,i)~ MxHxI}
where eti

●

(2)

Etii is an agent that falls into the income class i and is endowed with a house of type

h in community m. Our CGE model contains five of these income classes (with incomes of 2,3.5,
5,6.5 and 8 roughly corresponding
These,

combined

to New Jersey household income levels scaled by $10,000).

with the three house types in each of three communities,

endowment types each of which is represented qually
~(Etii)

= ~1

generates

in the economy; i.e.

V (m,h,i)~ MxHxI.13

Finally, agents are endowed with a utility function u“:MxHxR

(3)
~+ R+ which takes as its

argumen~ the community and house type the agent lives in, private good consumption
12

More precisely,

45

the set of houses and consumers is defined m part of a measure space (N,~p)

zc R+, and

where p is taken to be

the Lebesgue measure. AU subsets referred to are henceforth assumed to be measurable.
13

Some have suggested
reader to footnote

that this uniform distribution

of income is not endrely realistic.

9 which notes that we do not view the calibration

While this is true, we refer the

of the model as an important

feature of the

analysis. The effect of a skewed distribution of income on local versus state voting outcomes has been treated
effectively in Sonstelie and Silva (1995). Furthermore, we note that, despite the frequent use of the term “high income
agents” later in the paper,

this is very much a model of middle income communities

(given top incomes of $80,000),

9
a perceived

school quality level SE R+. In the CGE version, all agents have the same utility

function which is defined as follows: 14
un(m,h,s,c) = ktis PY
c

V n~N.15

(4)

where (m,h) is the community and house type of residence, s is their school’s quality and c is their
private good consumption.

2.2. Parental Perceptions of School Quality
The inclusion of school quality rather than student achievement in the utility function deserves
some attention. As suggested

by the household

production

school quality is only one of the inputs in the production
parental commitment

function literature (Becker (1991)),
of student achievement.

The other,

of time and resources, plays a major role as well (Hanushek ( 1986)). While

parents therefore care directly

about student achievement

(where achievement

as defined by

parents may entail substantially

more than good test scores), they care about school quality only

indirectly w one of the inputs required in the production process of this achievement.
utility function in (4) is somewhat
student achievement
14

As demonstrated

15

This utility function

“reduced form” in nature because school quality rather than

enters directly as an argument. 16 This is done for simplicity and, while it is

in Nechyba ( 1996a), there is no technical problem in including

in the model. We mmment
pmameters

Thus, the

on the effect of such externalities

satisfies

all conditions

are set to be consistent

necessary

spillovers

or population

externalities

on our resulk in Section 5.

for the existence

of an equilibrium

(Nechyba

with New Jersey micro tax data in Nechyba ( 1996c). Preferences

(1996a)).

The

are assumed to be

identical not only for computational convenience but also because skatification results in Nechyba (1996a) imply that
under these conditions, the equilibrium assignment of agents into house types is unique, Finally, we should note that
the CGE model described in Nechyba ( 1996b,c) contains an additional state public good financed by a state income tax.
16

This feature has been “turned off’ for the present exercise because it is not relevant to the issues discussed in this paper.
We can think, for example, of the following simple motivating example for this reduced form: Suppose each agent has
a utility function of the form u(~a,c) = Pa~c~ where [is parental leisure, a is the child’s achievement
consumption.
exogenous

In order to avoid a direct laborfleisure
(perhaps

choice (which is not part of our model), suppose that income z is

the result of a 40-hour workweek),

cannot be used for working;

and c is parental

and that parents are endowed

i.e. there is no overtime. ) Further,

with 1 unit of leisure (which

let us abstract for this illustration

from the Tiebout

model in the text and assume that any level of school quality s can be purchased on the market at price p per unit and
that the child’s achievement
child’s education

level a is determined

by a=ssx(l-s) where x is the amount of leisure parents spend on their

at home. Parents then solve the following maximization
rnax
X,5 u (Lac) , = ~a~c~ subiect to

The optimum occurs at s =
result of a reduced

pb z

(y+ps)p

aodx=

form utility maximization

p(l-b)
(a+~( l-~))

problem:
C=z-ps
a = ssx(l-h~
[= l-y..

yz
which implies c . —
(y+pb)

This result is equivalent

to the

problem in which parental inputs are ignored and parents care directly

10
usually not acknowledged explicitly, is standard in the entire literature cited in the introduction. It is
important, however, to recognize that the school quality argument in the utility function represents
school quali~
literature

as defined and perceived

reviewed

determining

by Hanushek

by parents. While the education

production

function

(1986) is still unclear as to what school inputs matter in

test scores, school quality (and student achievement)

more broadly defined may

include other aspects of schools (music classes, athletic activities, etc. ) that have little relation to
test scores themselves but that may nevertheless be important to parents. 17
This parentally defined school quality is provided by local governments (and in a later version
by the state government) as well as private institutions, and we assume that both private and public
school quality is judged by parents as if itresulted from a production process that uses as inputs
both per pupil spending and the peer quality in the school (as measured by per capita income of
parents). If per pupil spending in the school is Z, and average peer quality is P,, we define the
perceived school quality as
s =f~ (z~, p~) =
where

pE

z s ([-P) ~~P,18

(5)

R+ is a parameter indicating the strength of the peer effect paren~ perceive. Thus, if

p=O, only spending matters to parents, while if p= 1, only peer effects matter. Furthermore,

we

define Ps=I~15 (where 1, is the average income of parents who send theii- children to the school in
question) to make peer values roughly equal in order of magnitude to per pupil spending, which
then allows us to more easily interpret different values of p. (For example, p=O.5 can then be
interpreted to mean that parents place roughly equal value on pwr effects and spending.)
about school quality; i.e. the outcome is equivalent

to

m~axu (s,c) = SLC(l-*)subjwt to
pb

17

when k=—,
(y+pb)

While

general motivation

for viewing school quality as a reduced form argument that enters directty into utility functions,

It could, for example,

this still circumvents

be that spending

issues related

C=z-ps

to endogenous

labor/leisure

really does not matter very much in determining

choices,

it illustrates

the

test scores because lower

spending is replaced by increased parental inpuw; i.e. parents purchase private music lessons when schools no longer
fund them, or parents are more vigilant in monitoring homework progress as studentiteacher ratios rise. In that case,
parents may care about spending

despite

the empirical

observation

that spending

is not correlated

with test scores.

Empirical evidence to the effect that parents provide less effort as schools improve can be found in Houtenville
18

Note that we assume that parenk

act a.r if there was this underlying

production

process.

An alternative

(1996).

interpretation

is to think of parents simply caring about peer quality and spending without actually having an underlying

production

process in mind; i.e. all else equal, parents simply desire to have high income peers for their children. (We have also
attempted to use other CES production

functions. Since results do not change qualitatively

they go unreported here. )

11
Again, we take no position in this paper on either the “proper” definition of school quality or
the “true” level of p. We do, however, argue that the empirical evidence suggests strongly a
definition of school quality by parents that makes the perceived level of p significantly less than 1;
that is, the fact that parents in different school districts choose to spend dramatically

different

amounts on education, and the fact that educational spending is such a strong focus in court battles
implies that parents must believe spending to be an important input to the production process of
school quality as they define it. If they did not, all communities would spend the minimum amount
necessary to run a public school. We therefore do not consider cases where p= 1 in this paper, but
we do allow for the possibility that parental perceptions are wrong, and that the true p is actually
equal to 1 (i.e., spending does not matter.) For this reason, we report not only the parentally
perceived quality level in our simulation

results, but also the level of per pupil spending on

education and the peer quality level for each community. The only factor that matters for parental
choices, however, is the perceived p and the resulting perceived definition of quality.
Finally, we note in passing that our specification

of peer effects is consistent with the general

empirical findings in Henderson, Mieszkowski and Sauvageau (1978) in that they are modelled as
equally important for high income and low income students. 19

19

We chose this fairly primitive

specification

of peer effects after

attempting to learn the me nature of peer effects from

the empirical literature. First highlighted in the Coleman Report (1966), peer effects have long been thought to play a
vital role in education, Summers and Wolfe (1977), using pupil specific evidence from Philadelphia, find evidence to
confirm the Coleman

finding that less able students benefit from more able peers while high ability students are little

affected by peers (which contrasts with our specification
Mies&owski
speaking
consistent

and Sauvageau

Canadian

students,

(1978),

are found with standard

h which peer effects are equal for all students).

while documenting

strong evidence

for peer effects

Henderson,

among French

find that these peer effects are equally present for both high and low ability students,

with our specification.

these results by demonstrating

however,

In an important

recent paper, Evans, Oates and Schwab (1992) cast doubt on all

that, in the case of teenage pregnancy

regressions

but vanish when endogeneity

and school dropout behavior, strong peer effects
problems

are addressed.

This suggests

that past

results on peer effects may be very much overstated. Link and Mulligan (199 I ) paint a very complex picture of peer
effects along both ability and racial lines and find that some groups (in particular blacks) benefit from having others in
that group in the class room. As is well known, the education production function literature is similarly littered with
contradictory evidence (Hanushek ( 1986)), but recent cross country examinations have provided further evidence that
peer effects of tie kind we model may be quite important
theoretical
empirical
theoretical

models

typically

measurements
existence

pick a somewhat

(Brueckner

and welfare

and for an excelfent demonstration

and Lee (1989),

theorems

(Toma (1996)).

simple specification
Arnott

and Rowse

in models with arbitrary

of the empirical difficulties

As a result of these ambiguous

of peer effects that is consistent

(1 987)). For a good summary

population

externalities,

involved in measuring

findings.

with some past
of general

see Scotchmer

(1994),

peer effects, see Manski ( 1993).

12
2.3. The heal

Public Sector

Local public schools are funded through proportional

property taxes set in accordance with

majority rule voting by local residents, and we assume that only residents within a community can
attend that community’s public school. Voters are assumed to be myopic in the sense that they tie
community compositions,

property values and their choice of private or public schooling as given

when they go to the polls. (Voter myopia is a relatively standard assumption in the literature (see
Epple, Filimon and Romer (1993), Dunz ( 1986), Rose-Ackerman

(1979)) and is inconsistent only

out of equilibrium .)20 Since local budgets have to balance, the relationship between t~, the local
tax rate, and Sm, the perceived public school quality in community m, is one to one and given by

where

P(Cm)

= ~

(L (Cmh)

F (Cmh))

t~

(cm)
N (students~

(

Sm=

(1-P) &

)()

(6)

15

local property

is the

p

tax base. This base varies with the

h~ H

endogenously

determined house price function ~: MxH+R+
that gives rise to a house price
—
vector p= R~h; i.e. the function ~ assigns a unique price to each house type in each jurisdiction.
(The first term is simply per pupil spending in the public school in community m.) This, combined
with myopic voting and standard assumptions
yield single peaked preferences

on preferences,

is shown in Nechyba (1996a) to

over local school spending levels (or, equivalently,

over local

property tax rates) which in turn implies the existence of local voting equilibria.21
Agents are also assumed to be myopic in their location decisions in that they take prices, other
public good levels and other agents’ locations m given. They do not, however, take their choice of
public versus private school as given when they make their migration

choices;

that is, when

determining their maximal utility in each potential place of residence, they consider both the case of
attending private and the cme of attending public schools.
20

This is because all expectations

implicitly

levels of public goods, community
equilibrium,
essential

voters

correctly

for the theoretical

held by myopic voters are fulfitled irs equilibrium

compositions

take current

levels

work underlying

statements regarding existence and “uniqueness”
methodological

21

when voters vote holding

and property values fixed at the actual equilibrium
of these variables

these

simulations;

into account.

without

Myopic

it, we would

voting

vulues. Thus, in
of this kind is

not be able to make the

of equilibria below that seem to us as important underpinnings

for our

approach.

Note that we avoid the Stiglitz

(1974) non-single

peakedness

problem

by assuming

that individuals

vote on local

public schools holding fixed their choice over public versus private schools. Thus, if the voter has chosen a private
school, his ideal point is a local tax rate of zero and his preferences
has chosen the public system, his preferences

are single peaked. If, on the other hand, the voter

are single peaked u demonstrated

in Nechyba (1996a).

13

2.4. Other Institutional Settings
Thus far we have defined the local public sector under a system of pure local public finance via
the property

tax. We will also consider

other financing

mechanisms

of public schools.

particular, we will discuss the effect of private school vouchers under a state foundation
system, a district power equalization

grant

system and a pure state financed system.22 We will discuss

these in more detail in Section 4. For now, we simply note that foundation
block grants to local governments

In

grants are per pupil

who are obligated to spend them on public education and have

the discretion to raise additional funds for local public schools through a local property tax (set in
accordance with majority rule). The block grants are funded by the state government
proportional

state income tax. District power equalization,

through a

on the other hand, is a system of

matching granh with a negative match rate for high tax base districts and positive matching rates
for low tax base districts. The intent of the program is to insure that equal tax rates imply equal
spending levels across communities,
the revenues raisd

and we will resume that the program is revenue neutral; i.e.

from the negative match rates on high base communities is exactly sufficient to

cover the positive matching grants to poor communities.

Therefore no additional state income tax

revenues me necessary, and local property tax rates continue to be set by the median voter. Finally,
a pure state funded system involves no local propefiy taxes and only a proportional

state income

tax whose rate is set by the median voter in the state.

2.5. Private Schools
Finally, with no cle~ guidance from the empirical literature as to the appropriate
functions of private schools, we assume that private schools are small, competitive

objective
and profit-

maximizing institutions that each set a single tuition level (equal, due to the zero profit condition, to
per pupil spending in that school) as well as a minimum peer quality standard below which they
will not admit any students. Since we allow private schools to be relatively small, we are implicitly
assuming that all scale effects are exhausted relatively early .23 Furthermore, we implicitly assume
22

For technical definitions

of these programs,

23

There is little empirical

evidence

to support

see Nechyba ( 1996 b).
large economies

of scale for schools

Dewey, Husted and Kenny (1995), for example, find no support for this.

beyond a few hundred

students,

14
away the type of price discriminating behavior derived in Epple and Romano where private schools
subsidize high peer quality children. While we think such behavior on the part of private schools is
reasonable

under the assumptions

it strikes us as unreasonable

in Epple and Romano,

in the

context of our model. More specifically, since we have made the simplifying assumption that peer
quality is perfectly correlated with income, the price discriminating
would imply regressive
especially

behavior in Epple and Romano

tuition structures .24 We consider this an empirically

unlikely outcome,

in the presence of voucher systems that are likely to be implemented

in a political

environment that would explicitly prohibit such price discrimination. Our model therefore results in
a private sector in which each private school is completely

homogeneous;

that is, each private

school, if it has positive enrollment, has studen~ of only the minimum peer quality (because higher
quality peers have their own private schools) and charges tuition equal to the most preferred level
of tuition for that peer group (because if a different level of tuition were charged, a new entrant
could make positive profits and attract all students to his school with a different tuition level).as

2.6. Definition, fiistence
An equilibrium

and “Uniqueness” of Equilibria

under some arbitr~

state program x (where x codd be a system of foundation

gran~, district power equalization, or vouchers) is defined as follows:

24

We should further note that implementing
communities

(such as ours) would be technically

25 This logic is similar
schools)

fix a local

(analogous

to Hamilton’s
taxlspending

to our minimum

school market

assumptions:

1.

non-profit

A single

specifications.
2.

Epple and Romano’s

(1975)
package

peer quality).

private

school

differential

pricing scheme in a model with multiple

extremely challenging.

familiar

zoning

(analogous

argument

to tuition

in which

levels)

In the course of our analysis,
that seeks to maximize

enrollment.

(This

is similar

to one of Manski’s

results under these assumptions

the analysis;

(ii) results

subject to not accepting

for several reasons: (i) additional

technical problems arise

are qualitatively

similar

we do not view either of the above assumptions

differentiate

on the basis of peer qualities.

More precisely,

but more difficult

as plausible

in equdibria

under both these assumptions,

arise and make positive profits by catering to certain peer groups. This competitive
in the body of the paper
each school charges

The only such tool would
infeasible

involve

that many private

the optimal

can find a way of mixing individuals
politically

requirement

two other private

enrollment

importantly,

we assume

than private

zoning

)

We have foregone reporting

environment,

(rather

we have also investigated

A single non-profit, cream stiing
private school that seeks to maximize
students below a certain “peer quality”.

that complicate

communities

and set a minimum

of different

who cater

and (iii) most

in which private schools can
another private school could

process then leads to the outcome

to each type will arise. In such an

of the type they are serving.

Unless schools

types within one school, there is no way to break this equilibria.

price discrimination

in a model such as ours.

schools

tuition for the members

to interpret;

which,

we argue in the text, is unlikely

to arise and is

15
Deftition:

An equilibrium

(J,p, t,x,.s,.s~)under $tate program x is a list of population assignments

to communities

m , tax rates t~ R ~, local public school quality levels
J, prices p~ R +

sc R ~, and private school quality levels sP= R fs (there are 45 types) such that:2G
(i) prices clear the market; i.e. there is no excess demand or supply for any house;
(ii) all local government budgets balance;
(iii) consumers cannot gain utility by moving and/or changing schools;
(iv) local property tax rates are determined through majority rule;
(v) if positive, private school spending in each school is equal to the most preferred
spending level by its homogeneous customers;
(iv) any net costs the state government

incurs under state program x must be fully

financed through a proportional state income tax.27

As noted already, Nechyba (1996a) proved the existence of equilibria in the presence of peer
effects (spillovers) when there are no private schools. Extending the mere existence result to the
case of private schools is trivial: simply assume that there are no public schools. In that case,
everyone attends a private school and votes for zero spending on public schools (given that they
have chosen private schools). Existence of this new but trivial equilibrium

can be shown by the

same methods as employed in Nechyba (1996a). Similar somewhat less trivial equilibria in which a
subset of the local communities
interesting type of equilibrium

provide no public education

can be shown to exist. However, the

in this model is one that generates, under certain policies, a mix of

public and private education in each community.
suggest that, when preferences

The stratification

are identical and communities

results in Nechyba (1996a)

are sufficiently

inherent desirability (i.e. when utility functions are identical and the kti’s
are sufficiently different as in this model), the ptiition
26

Note that J = {Jti

c N I p(Jmh)=v(Cmh)

27

assignment

equilibrium,

see Nechyba (1996a).

We also use an analogous equilibrium
longer fund public education
changes

to read “the s[ate

through majority

of agents)

of agents to houses and communities.

the state government

budget must balance”,

rule voting. ”

of N. The difference,

to house types and communities,

however,

while J gives the

For a more formal definition of both an economy and an

concept for the last case considered

but rather

in those utility functions

of agents into communities in the presence

v (m,h)~ MxH ) and C are both partitions

is that C assigns houses (and the irritiat distribution
equilibrium

different in their

and condition

in this paper in which local governments

takes over this funding.

In that case, condition

(iv) reads “the state income

no
(ii)

tax rate is determined

16
of public schools in all communities

is unique up to a transformation

model in this paper attempts to find this equilibrium
trivial equilibrium

(i.e. the equilibrium

of prices .28 The computable

and only when it cannot, resorts to the least

under which the fewest possible number of communities

have no public school.) As we will see, however, under some policies, no equilibria with public
schools in every community exist.
2.7. Calibration of the Model
The utility function in the model is parametrized

to be consistent with data from several school

districts in Camden County, New Jersey. Other parameters, such as endowments

and community

sizes were arbitrarily fixed. The calibration described here is therefore “partial” in the sense that,
while parameter values are picked to be consistent with data, the benchmark equilibria reported in
Table 2 are computed
considerations,

(and then observed

to be consistent

the specifics of this parameterization

with the data). Due to space

are not reported here (see Nechyba ( 1996c)).

We do note, however, that the model must be re-parameterized for different assumed values of p in
the perceived education
consistent
assumptions

production

process; i.e. in order to keep public school spending levels

with the data, ~*p must be constant, which means that ~ must be adjusted as our
about p change. Finally, we refer the reader to footnote 9 which cautions against

overinterpreting any specific set of simulation numbers.

3. Computation
Each simdation

of and Characteristics

of Equilibria

begins with the number of private schools set to zero and calculates the “public

school benchmark equilibnum’’without

private schools. (This process is illustrated in Figure 2).

The CGE program to calculate these benchmark equilibria begins with the information contained in
Table 1 as well as a vector of initial house prices. It iterates to an equilibrium by first fmdin.g local
election outcomes, then determining equilibrium prices given those outcomes, before using those
prices (and the new community compositions)
28

Due to the discreteness
public good levels.

to update election results, and so fofi.2g

of the house types, however, prices themselves

The computer

program picks the frrst equilibrium

may vary within small intervals,

Simulation

tests have shown these intervals to be quite narrow. Furthermore,

differences

across communities

(the ~’s)

are sufficiently

simulation

different to yield uniqueness

agents.
29

me program is written in GAMS (Generat Algebraic Manipulation

as may local

price vector within those intervals that it finds.

System).

tests indicate that the inherent
of the equilibrium

partition of

17

More precisely,

the program uses the initial data in Table 1 to identify each community’s

median voter who takes prices and everyone’s
determines the community’s
with the endogenously

location as given. That voter’s optimal choice

school spending level (and local property tax rate) which, combined

determined peer level, determines the perceived public school output level.

Given these election results, the program iterates to find equilibrium property values. In particular,
during every iteration, each agent’s optimal location at the current prices is determined, and these
prices are adjusted upward (by a small fixed amount) if the house type in question WM in excess
demand during this and the past iteration and downward (by the same amount) if it was in excess
supply during these iterations. If a particular house type alternated between being in excess demand
and excess supply, the previous two prices Me averaged. This process, while not guaranteed to
converge, typically does converge within twenty iterations. Once equilibrium

prices have been

found, i.e. once excess demands for all houses are zero, the program starts over with a new major
iteration by identifying
until the perceived
Throughout

median voters in the new community populations.

The process continues

school output levels, the local tax rates and the prices have converged,

the process, the value of each agent’s initial house endowment

is used to determine

that agent’s budget. Values typically converge within several major iterations and are only slightly
sensitive to initial prices (subject to scaling).
The public school benchmark equilibrium
Table 2 with

without governmental

interaction

is presented in

p=O.O (i.e. for the case when parents care only about school spending).

School

spending levels (equal to perceived school output levels in this case) can be interpreted as per pupil
spending by local govemmenu.

The school spending figures fall within the actual range of per

pupil spending on education (roughly between $2500 and $5000) for Camden County in 1987 (for
which the model was calibrated). Agents separate into low, middle, and high income communities,
but there is some overlap due to overlapping

values of the k~~’s (see Table 1). Higher income

communities tend to have higher school spending levels and lower property tax rates, and property
values (the value of yearly housing services) tend to increase in community wealth. The fact that
property values are inversely related to property taxes in Table 2 is simply due to the fact that
property in community

3 is inherently (i.e. all else being equal) more desirable than property in

18
community

2 which again is inherently more desirable than property in community

reflected in the different values of ~

1. (This is

as reported in Table 1.)30

Note that the only feature of Table 2 that is exogenous is the sum of the entries in the “Income”
column.

Each entry in that column

represents

the average

household

income

within

that

community. Since the average income endowment (see Table 1) is 5, the average of the entries in
the income column will always be equal to 5. Everything else in the table is endogenous. “Wealth”
is defined as the community

average of individual incomes from both private good endowments

and property endowments; “Property” is the average house value in the community; “Prop. Tax” is
the tax rate on the yearly housing services in the community; “School” is the parentally perceived
level of school quality (as defined in equation (5)); “LPSpend” is per pupil spending in local public
schools; “LPeer” is the peer quality level in the local public school; and “%Private” is the fraction
of parents sending their children to private schools. (In later simulation

tables, “PrPeer” is the

average peer quality level of children attending private schools. ) All dollar values are scaled by
$10,000.
So f~, the benchmark equilibrium

does not include private schools. Once the public school

equilibrium (of the kind presented thus far) is determined through the algorithm described in Figure
2, we proceed to calculate the actual equilibrium

with private schools from this public school

benchmark. This process is illustrated in Figure 3. More precisely, we determine each type’s most
preferred

private

school

tuition

level under our assumption

that private

schools

perfectly

discriminate between different peer quality types, taking as given the present location of all agents
as well w all prices, taxes and public school levels. By comparing each agent’s utility under local
public school consumption

to his utility under the new private school option, we determine

whether he is a private or public school consumer.

We then recalculate

voting outcomes (by

assuming that private school attendees have single peaked preferences over public school levels
30

It has been suggested that, were entrepreneurs
to enter the model, they would choose to build houses solely in
community 3 because of the higher property values. This is not necessarily the case, Property values here can be
thought of as the value of both the land the houses are built on arrd the houses themselves, They are higher in
community 3 than elsewhere because (i) land may be inherently more desirable in community 3 (scenery, lakes, trees,
etc. ) md (ii) a house of type i in community 3 may be bigger and better than a house of type i in other communities.
(The fact that houses in atl tiee communities are labeled 1, 2 and 3 should not necessarily be interpreted to mean that a
house of type i in community m is identical to a house of type i in community m’. These differences could be due to
exogenous phenomena such as zoning. ) Thus, entrepreneurs would not automatically choose to build in community 3:
while property values are higher, so are land costs and house construction. The fact that houses are extraordinarily
expensive in Beverly Hills, for example, does not imply that entrepreneurs will build new houses only in Beverly
Hills.

19
with peak at zero spending). Given these outcomes as well as prices, consumers then choose their
most preferred location and public/private

school simultaneously,

and prices adjust until supply

equals demand. Then a new iteration begins with a new voting stage, a new price adjustment
phase, etc. until the process converges (usually within a few iterations). In many cases, such as in
the benchmwk case reported in Table 2, the addition of the private school option does not change
the initial benchmark equilibrium,

and no private schools arise. In this case, only one iteration in

Figure 3 occurs and simply gives confirmation that the public school benchmark equilibrium is in
fact also an actual equilibrium with the potential for private schools, The reason no private school
arises for the benchmark public school equilibrium
peer effec~, disagreements
not sufficiently

when p=O (Table 2) is that, in the absence of

within communities concerning the level of public school spending are

large to induce anyone to choose to opt out and pay his most preferred private

school tuition.ql
Under higher peer effects, we might expect a larger propensity

of high income/high

peer

quality types to opt out of the public school system. This is, in fact, precisely what happens. Table
3 shows both the Public School Benchmark Equilibrium (i.e. the output from the process in Figure
1) as well as the Actual Equilibrium

(with private schools). Note that the former is considerably

more stratified than the equilibrium

in Table 2 where p was set to O rather than 0,5. This is an

observation

that will, ceteris paribus, hold throughout

the simulation

results we present in this

paper: In the absence of private schools, increased perceived peer effects lead to larger residential
stratification

of agents based on income and wealth, wre

stratified property values as well as

more stratified public outcomes. When we allow for the existence of private schools, however, as
peer effects get large, private schools appear in low income communities
Furthermore,

these private schools decrease the level of residential stratification

residents find it advantageous
31

to settle in low income neighborhoods

(see Table 3(b)).
as high income

(to avoid house payments in

The reader may express some initial skepticism at this point because the model so far predicts no private schools while
we do observe private schools in the real world. We have three conunents in this regard: (i) If peer effects were larger,
as we will see shortly, we would see very high income individuals form private schools. (ii) If some individuals have
strong preferences for private (perhaps religious) education, our framework would predict the private schools to arise
even in the absence of peer effects (see Long and Toma ( 1988)). (iii) The current model looks at moderate to middle
income households earning between $20,000 and $80,00C. The absence of substantially wealthier individuals is in
part responsible for the lack of interest in any private school in the absence of peer effects (see Schmidt (1992)). Our
suspicion is that private school enrollments in the presence of Tiebout stratification are primarily due to inherent
preferences for some particular form of private (especially religious) education as well as the presence of very high
income families. These types of individuals are not the focus of the present analysis.

20

high income neighborhoods

that capitalize good public schools) and attend private schools. Thus,

while community 1‘s average income is substantially higher due to these different location patterns
caused by the private school, the increase in peer group effects in that community’s
is small in comparison

(and uncharacteristic

of the rest of the simulation

below. 32) The peer level in the private school, however,

public school

results reported

is 0.5333 which indicates

that the

average parental income of students attending that school is 8 (0.5333 times 15) which is the
highest income of any agent in the model. Thus, private schools are occupied by high income
agents who reside in low income communities in order to take advantage of private schools, The
perceived public school quality, however, rises not because of the small increase in the peer quality
in community

1‘s public school, but more because of increased per pupil spending on public

education. This increase occurs as more local funds per pupil are available due to lower public
school enrollment in community

1 and as those attending private schools pay a disproportionately

lmge share of local taxes (because they reside in the best houses) while not consuming any of the
locally provided public education.

(The fact that the private school attendees now vote for zero

public school spending does not change the median voter result sufficiently

to offset the former

positive impact on per pupil spending.)
In moving from the equilibrium

without private schools (Table 3(a)) to the equilibrium

with

private schools (Table 3(b)), the migration of high income residents comes from the middle income
community. Thus, while we see an increase in all variables in the poorest community as a result of
the migration,

the middle income community

suffers from lower property

values as well as

decreased spending and peer effects in its public school. Community 3, on the other hand, remains
largely unaffected

as its high income residents are still sufficiently

satisfied with their public

schools. As we show in the next table, however, ~ peer effects rise further, private schools show
an increasing presence in all three communities.
In Table 4, we report average community variables for levels of p ranging from O to 0.7. (As
32

As demonstrated below, the introduction of private schools more commonly leads to a decline in peer quality in low
income public schools. The small increase in peer quality here is due to capitalization effects that increased the total
income of a small low income segment of the population (that is endowed with community
l/type 2 houses)
sufficiently for them to reside in community 2 rather than community 1. They are replaced by some residents of
community 1 who used to reside in higher quality houses in that community, thus opening the higher quality houses for
some higher income residents who choose the public schools. These effects are usually minor (see the relatively small
change in individual house values) compared to otiers and therefore play virtually no role irr the rest of tie paper.

21
indicated previously,

it makes little sense to push p much closer to 1 because of the substantial

empirical evidence that suggests parents in fact do care about public school spending. Furthermore,
even at p=O.7, public schools have already almost disappeared as peer effects are large enough for
enough agen~ to forego the public sector, consume individualized

private education instead and

vote public schools out of existence. ) Although these results are not surprising, they are illustrative
of the potential importance of peer effects m well as the potentially misguided emphasis by state
supreme courts on per pupil spending. When p=o and local communities
communities

are stratified

use property taxation,

along income and wealth lines not because there is any inherent

advantage from having high income neighbors but rather because the demand for public education
and housing

is monotonic

in income. Thus, stratification

occurs due to differences

in final

demands for public outputs and houses. As p rises, however, there is an inherent advantage high
income individuals gain by segregating themselves (assuming, as is done here, that peer quality is
perfectly correlated

with family income). As a result, Table 3 shows an increasing

degree of

stratification along income and wealth lines with increasing values of p until peer effects become
large enough to cause the appearance of private schools. As soon as private schools appear, we
observe less residential stratification: 33 once private schools for high income individuals become
an option, desirable houses in low income communities
individuals

become sought after by high income

who migrate to take advantage of lower prices without having to endure bad public

schools. Again, the appearmce

of private schools catering to high income residents in community

1 does not improve local public schools directly; but indirectly, the fact that more money is now
available per pupil more than offsets, in the eyes of parenh, the lower peer quality levels in the
public schools. Peer effects thus have the potential of driving the local public goods economy
towards substantially

larger inequities, but cream skimming private schools can stop and reverse

that trend. It is worth emphasizing

again that those choosing priva~ schools in poor communities

are not the original (pre-private schools) residents of those communities
migrants who are fleeing communities
due to relatively
33

but rather high income

in which they would be paying a premium for their house

good public schools. Furthermore,

we see the fraction of students in private

This is mnsistent with stylized trends and anecdotal evidence from many US cities in which Catholic Schools open (at
subsidized tuitions) and cause an in-migration of middle income families who send their children to those schools. It is
also consisknt with empirical econometric evidence (Dowries and Greenstein (1996)).

22
schools leveling off at 0.3333 in community

1 because only one third of the houses in community

1 are sufficiently desirable for high income residents to live there. Thus, once all the residents of
those houses are attending private schools, new private schools begin to open in community 2.
The voucher simulations in the following section begin with the actual equilibrium (with private
schools) and find the new equilibrium
equilibria are calculated

as different levels of vouchers are introduced.

in much the same way as the initial equilibrium

The new

except that the CGE

program now begins with the initial equilibrium. Each agent’s wealth, however, is now affected by
price changes of his equilibrium

house, not his initial house endowment

(which he sold on his

way to the initial equilibrium.) When different magnitudes of a voucher program are simulated, the
simulation always begins with the initial equilibrium; i.e. the following tables should not be read u
if a program was slowly being phased in.

4. Private

School

Throughout

Vouchers

this paper, we will simulate a very simple voucher program, under which each

resident of each community

is entitled to a voucher of the amount specified by the program. The

state government commits to re-imburse private schools for the face value of the voucher, which
thus allows residents to use their voucher as part of their tuition. If the face value of the voucher is
larger than the tuition of a school, then the school gets paid the tuition and the state keeps the
difference. Thus, in equilibrium,

tuition is never set below voucher levels. The state pays for the

voucher program through an income tax which residenN/voters

know at the time they make their

moving and voting decisions.
4.1. Private School Vouchers in hcally
Table 5 presents equilibrium

Financed School Systems

community

averages for all three communities

under different

levels of state vouchers when all financing for the public school system occurs at the local level.
We report here results
straightforward.

for both p=O and p=O.5. In the case of p =0, the results

are very

Since peer effects do not matter and since agents have already chosen school

distric~ in part based on per pupil spending, no one chooses to use vouchers until the level of the
voucher comes close to the level of current local public spending in one of the communities.
conceivable

that some agents could want significantly

more spending

(It is

than is provided in any

23
community

and thus chooses to make use of vouchers early on. However,

agents are already

sufficiently segregated, and there are no extremely high income agents whose demand for spending
would be sufficiently high in the model. This means that vouchers are not used until they are close
to current spending levels.) Once vouchers are sufficiently high for some agenm to use them, all
agents in that community will use them which implia

the local public school collapses from lack of

public support, and property taxes fall to zero .34 Thus, it is extremely difficult to get a mixture
between public and private schools within communities

when p=O. For this reason, while we will

continue to report results for p=O when they offer insights into different institutional

funding

mechanisms, we will forego reporting voucher simulations for the uninteresting case of p=O.35
When p=O.5, individual responses become more subtle. From the column “PrPeer” in Table
5(b) it is apparent that the first to make use of vouchers are high income (high peer quality)
studen~. Furthermore,

private schools arise first in poor communities

migrate from high income weas. As “good houses” in community

as private school attendees

1 are “used up,” private schools

appear in community 2; and as they are used up there m well, private schools finally appear in the
wealthy community.
relatively

All along, migration

of income is from relatively

low income areas which causes communities

high income areas to

to become less stratified

property values and wealth levels. This decrease in residential stratification,
benefit public schools in poor communities

however, does not

whose peer quality levels are falling as high peer

quality students leave for either private schools or, more often, other communities
public schools.
communities

These are the residents

in income,

that originally

occupied

with better

the best houses in the poor

which they sell to high income immigrants who come for the private school. Thus,

public school peer quality levels fall in poor communities

with the introduction

of vouchers

because high peer quality resident-s are leaving for other cotnmunities and are not replaced in the
public schools by high peer quality immigrants

who choose private schools. At the same time,

however, as the pool of local public school students shrinks while public support for local public
schools remains above 50%, the median voter public spending outcome produces more funding
34

In some earfier simulations we assumed that public schools would always be available at $2500 per pupil, regardless of
whether the voting outcome suggests less spending is desired. In those simulations, the transition from the public to
the private school system in the presence of peer effects is somewhat smoother.

35

Qua~itative results are the same for different reasonable values of p, In particular,
to 0,6.

we tried values of p ranging from 0.3

24
per pupil as voucher levels increase.sb Thus, per pupil spending on public education in poor
communities rises at the same time as peer quality levels fall. Under the specification of p=O.5 (as
well as most other reasonable

specifications

we tried), however,

the former of these effects

outweighs

the latter to produce a higher perceived

level of public school quality in the poor

communi~

as vouchers grow. This occurs up to the point when voter support for public schools

falls below 50~0 at which time the local public school collapses and everyone in community

1 uses

the private school vouchers.
The common notion that private school vouchers will cause lower school quality in local public
schools therefore does not necessarily hold in a local public finance economy unless we think that
spending matters sufficiently little as compared to peer effects. In fact, the perceived public school
quality suffers only in community

3, the wealthiest

residents to private schools in other communities

community,

which is losing high income

and thus is losing both peer quality and the

constituency for high per pupil spending. Therefore, all three indicators of quality (spending, peer
effects and parental perceptions) fall, while at lewt two of these rise or stay constant in the other
communities.
communities

This implies that, contra~
that suffer unambiguously

might benefit. Far from increwing

to commn

perceptions,

it is public schools in wealthy

from voucher systems while those in poor communities

inequities in public education, simulations

demonstrate that vouchers, while not benefiting

in Table 5 actually

low income residents directly unless they are of

high enough face value, can help equalize local public school quality.
4.2. Private School Vouchers in State Funded Public School System
We now turn to comparing

the results from Table 5 to those in Table 6 in which all public

education is assumed to be funded by the state government

through a proportional

income tax

whose rate is set in accordance with majority nde voting by all voters in the state. Furthermore, the
state government is assumed to spend equal amoun~ per pupil on students in all schools regardless
of community

income.37 (This is essentially

the California

post-Semano,

post-Proposition

13

36

Since those attending private schools have single peaked preferences for local school spending with pe& at zero, an
increase in the fraction of local residents who send their children to private schools thus causes the median voter, all
else being equal, to shift toward less spending. However, this is more than offset by the fact that the private school
attendees live in the best houses and therefore pay a dispro~rtionately
large share of local property taxes without
tting
advantage of local public schools. Thus, per pupil spending in public schools increases.

37

We do not address here the issue of whether average per pupil spending rises or falls as a result of a state takeover of

25
system. ) Having seen the intuitive results from the p-+ case in the previous table, we do not repeat
this exercise for the rest of the policy environments.
First, we can note that equality of spending certainly does not guarantee equality of outcomes.
Unless we think that spending

is the only input into education

that matters, the substantial

stratification of income across communities before the introduction of vouchers yields substantially
unequal outcomes when peer effects matter. While this is a simple point, it is often overlooked by
policy makers and courts who tend to focus solely on variances in per pupil spending levels as a
memu.re of interjurisdictional

inequity in the provision of education.

Second, the pattern of school voucher use is substantially
Private schools develop first in the poor community

the same as in the previous table.

but are catering to high income immigrants

while middle to high income residents of the poor community emigrate to other communities. Peer
levels in the low income public school therefore fall while per pupil spending levels rise so long as
there is above 50% public support for public education within the community,
effects are offsetting

and parental impressions

Again, the two

of public school quality in the community

rise

modestly (while this time they fall in the middle community). Furthermore, property values rise in
the poor community. As the most desirable houses become occupied with private school attendees
in the poor community,

private schools again begin to develop in the middle income community

and then finally, at extremely high voucher levels, in community 3.
While the patterns of private school use and development
therefore similar to those under local funding,
voucher levels rise is surprisingly

under the state funded system are

the speed of the privatization

of education

as

slower under state funding than under local funding. One

would, perhaps, expect that high income residents will respond to vouchers sooner under state
funding because they are farther from their ideal level of spending than they would be under local
funding. However, one of the reasons high income residents are so eager to use private schools
under local public funding is that, once they migrate to the poor community, they no longer have to
pay as high a property tax bill. Under state funding, this advantage of migrating and attending
private schools vanishes as high income residen~

must pay income taxes to support the public

system regardless of where they live.
education finance. Sinm our model does not contain the skewedness of income distributions
analysis (see Sons telie and Silva (1995)), it would be ill-suited for this purpose.

which is important in such

26

Furthermore, we note that, compared to a locally funded system, a state financed system does
not yield ne~ly as many fiscal benefits for public schools in poor distric~. Under a local system,
an exit of some community

residents

into the private system translates

spending in the public school in that community.

Under a state system, on the other hand, this

same exit leads to an increase in per pupil spending
concentrated

in one community.

spending (and no darease

into larger per pupil

spread across the entire state and not

This translates into a much smaller improvement

in the interjurisdictional

in per pupil

variance) under the state controlled system than

under local funding and control. At the same time, however, public schools, at least in the eyes of
parents, are still improving despite the outmigration
public school system in poor communities.

of high income#zigh peer students from the

Finally, in contrast to the previous case, the public

school in the wealthy community no longer suffers but rather benefits because now, it too receives
additional per pupil funding as individuals shift into private schools.
4.3. Private School Vouchers Under bcal
Table 7 presents community

Financing Combined with State Foundation Grants

averages under different levels of per pupil foundation

grants

funded through a state income tax. (Note that all entries in this table assume the absence of any
vouchers program. ) Each community is constrained to spend at least the amount of the foundation
grant on public schools and is free to add additional per pupil spending funded by local, voterdetermined property taxes. These foundation grants are similar to the “redistributive

block granm”

analyzed in Nechyba ( 1996 b). Since the grants have only small income effects and no price (or
substitution)

effecw, they Me extremely ineffective at raising per pupil spending in any district

unless the foundation grant is greater than what the community
For example,

in Table 7(a) where p=O, public spending

would have spent to begin with.

essentially

remains

unchanged

in

community 1 until the foundation grant rises to 0.30 per pupil and thus is binding. The major effect
of the grants (which are redistributive in the sense that low income communities receive grants that
are larger than the income taxes paid by its residents to fund the grants) is to make low income
communities slightly more desirable and high income communities
reflected in the slight convergence
interesting

slightly less desirable. This is

of property values, income levels and wealth levels. The

difference in Table 7(b) where p=O. 50 lies in the response of private schools to the

27
increase in foundation grants. So long as these grants are not binding on any community,
schools continue

to exist. In fact, when the foundation

private

grant reaches 0.20, we see a further

migration of high income residents from communities 2 and 3 into community

1 to take advantage

of lower property valu~ and private schools. This is due to the fact that the redistributive nature of
the grants makes these high income communities somewhat less desirable and thus persuades some
of its residents

to opt out of the public school system.

Once the foundation

grant binds in

community 1, however, private schools collapse and their high income/high peer quality clients no
longer choose the low income district. They are replaced by lower and middle income residents
from the other communities

who now find it worthwhile

to return to community

1 as the public

schools have improved; i.e. they now outbid the potential high income immigrants
houses in community

for the best

1.

Table 8 proceeds to simulate the general equilibrium
vouchers in the presence of a foundation

effects of different levels of simple

grant system of 0.40. While the evolution

of private

schools with increases in vouchers is the same as before for exactly the same reasons, the effects
on public schools from the same type of private school vouchers are now substantially

different:

By all measures of school quality (pure spending, pure peer effects and parental perceptions),
public schools in all communities
poor community,

deteriorate as higher levels of vouchers are introduced. In the

for example, the fact that the foundation grants are given in per pupil amounts,

and the fact that the grant is sufficiently large to be binding, implies that local per pupil spending
remains the same as relatively high peer quality students are leaving the local public system for
other school districts without being replaced by the high income immigrants
private schools. Thus, the peer quality falls in the community’s

who are choosing

public school while per pupil

spending does not rise as it did under local financing and, to a lesser extent, understate
There is, therefore, no opposing effect to the deterioration

financing.

of public schools brought about by the

decline in peer quality, which means parental assessments of the local public schools fall (which in
turn pushes further high peer quality students into private schools and out of the community).
While vouchers still have the eflect of decreasing the stratification
values across communities,

of income, wealth and property

they can no longer improve education for both public and private

students under a binding foun~tion

grant system.jg

28
4,4. Private School Vouchers under A System of heal

Financing and District Power Equalization

Finally, we examine the effect of private school vouchers under district power equalization
(DPE). DPE is a state program that sets a guaranteed per pupil tax base Pi for each community i
and guarantees the community a per pupil spending of <Pi. If the actual per pupil tax base is below
the guaranteed base, the state government makes up the difference; if the actual level is above the
guaranteed base, the state government collec~ the balance and uses it to fund the paymenw to low
base communities.

As demonstrated

in Nechyba (1996b), this system is equivalent to as ystem of

positive and negative matching grants that contains both income and price (substitution)

effects.

We will assume here that the state program is revenue neutral; that is, the bases are set in such a
way as to insure that the sum of the negative payments to high income communities
sum of positive payments to low income communities.

is equal to the

Furthermore, we will say that a program is

“xYobase equalizing” if it sets bases such that the high income community’s base is XYOhigher than
the middle income community’s

base which in turn is XYOhigher than the poor community’s.

When x–+, we will call the program “FuH Revenue Neutral District Power Equalization.”
Table 9 summhzes

the general equilibrium effects of different degrees of revenue neutral DPE

assuming both p=O and p=O.5. (These resul~ are in the absence of any voucher programs.) For
the same reasons m in the last section, increasing equalization leads to decreases in stratification in
income, wealth and property values. (Due to the additional price effects of the implicit matching
grants, these effects are somewhat larger.) Also for similar reasons, private schools collapse with
increasing

degrees of district power equalization

causing middle income residents
foundation

as public schools improve in poor districts

to return to the better houses in community

grants, DPE is, however, effective at reducing

1. Unlike the

public school spending disparities

between school districts even at low levels of the program. This is a direct result of the fact that,
unlike foundation grants, DPE lowers the price of public schools substantially in poor communities
and raises it substantially in high income communities.

As can be seen from Table 9(a), it is easily

possible for a full DPE program to even reverse the order of communities

in terms of their per

pupil spending levels.sg
38

This is, in spiri~ similar to the Epple and Romano ( 1996) and Manski (1992) result in that the level of public school
spending in the poor community is exogenous to the local political process. Therefore, the positive fiscal benefits
from having high income residenk who do not use local public schools do not wise.

29

Next we demonstrate the general equilibrium effects of private school vouchers in the presence
of district power equalization

in Table 10. The striking feature in this table is the very different

pattern of private school development

compared to all three previous institutional

particular, while under local financing, state financing, and foundation
case that private schools appeared slowly and in poorer communities

settings. In

gran~ it was always the
first, we see here a rapid

switch to private schools in the wealthiest community. While high income residents do migrate into
the poor community and a modest amount of private school activity takes place there as the level of
vouchers increases, the bulk of private school attendance occurs in community 3 for most levels of
the voucher program. Once the most desirable houses in community

1 are filled with high income

private school attendees, the remaining homes are held by residen~ who value the DPE-improved
local public school. Similarly, only a limited number of houses are available to high income private
school attendees in community

2 which still leaves a large number of high income agents in

community 3 who are dissatisfied with the DPE-induced
public schools. Furthermore,

reduction in educational quality in their

unlike in the case of state funding or foundation gran~, residents of

high income communities can eliminate the adverse price effec~ from DPE by switching to private
schools. (This is because redistribution

to low income communities

occurs only to the extent that

the high income community has positive tax rates. If everyone in community 3 switches to private
schools, local tax rates can fall to zero and thus stop redistribution.)

Thus, a sufficient number of

community 3 residents choose to abandon the public school system to remove public support from
the system and drive property tax rates in community
public school system first in the wealthiest
under extreme adverse pressuresfiom
foundation grants) by aban~ning

community

3 to zero. We thus see the collapse of the
under DPE because that community

is

the DPE program, pressures that can be eliminated (unlike

the public school system.

While per pupil spending rises in community

1 as a result of the exit from the public system,

this increase is not nearly m big as it would have been had the public schools in community
survived. The collapse of those schools severely undermines

district power equalization

3

which

relies on revenues from the high income districts to finance price subsidies to low income districts,
39

For a more complete treatment of the relative differences between district power equalization and foundation grants on
both local and state government behavior within the context of this model, see Nechyba ( 1996 b).

30
As a result, while per pupil spending does rise and help offset the decline in peer quality in the low
income public schools (from the exit to the private system), it is now no longer sufficient to cause
an improvement in parental perceptions of educational quality in that community. Thus, unlike the
case of pure local funding as well as state finding,
falls in all three communities.
underfoundation

parental perceptions

of public school quality

This decrease is not, however, as large as the decrease observed

grants. The latter is true because, while per pupil spending remains constant as

high peer quality students

leave for other schools under binding foundation

grants, per pupil

spending can (and does) nevertheless rise under DPE. Thus, even if the effect is not large enough,
there is a positive effect on local public spending (that does not have a parallel under foundation
grants) as vouchers are introduced under.
5. Summary,

Limitations,

Empirical

Questions

and Conclusion

This paper has extended the literature on computational
endogenizing

local public outcomes and local populations,

models of private school choice by
and by considering

affects local public schools under a variety of institutional

how competition

settings. While we have reported

simulation results mainly for the case in which parents perceive peer effects to be as important as
per pupil spending,

the results also hold for other reasonable

effects. We can thus come to some broad genertizations

levels of perceived peer quality

and point to open empirical questions:

1. In the absence of private schools, the presence of peer effects causes substantial increases in
interjutisdictio nal stratification

and inequities in the provision of public schools. While even

under zero peer effec~ we expect disparities

to arise due to different demands for public

spending by different income groups in different communities, the presence of peer effects that
are correlated with socioeconomic

status provides additional incentives for high income types

to separate into their own communities.
individuals

As perceived peer effects become unrealistically high,

abandon the public schools to attend more tailor-made private schools. Although

we have argued strongly that the available evidence points to the presence of such perceived
peer effec~, to what extent peer effects play a large role in improving actual school quality
remains an unsettled empirical question. The normative interpretation

of our positive results

clearly depends critically on a more objective definition and understanding of school quality.

31
2. Throughout

the analysis, whenever private schools arise either because of high peer quality

effects or because of private school vouchers, stratification
values across communities

of income, wealth and property

becomes weaker. More precisely, high income/high

types migrate to low income communities

peer quality

with the intention of paying lower house prices and

taxes and sending their children to private school. Thus, private schools appear first in poor
communities, but they cater not to the original residents but rather to high income immigrants.
3. Although

the emergence

of private schools thus causes greater interjurisdictional

between income types, public schools in poor communities
This occurs because

those leaving

mixing

lose high peer quality students.

to make room for the high income,

private-school-

consuming immigranw are the former residents of the best houses in the poor community who
are also the highest income residen~. These parents and students leave the local public system
in the poor community

not with the intention of attending private schools but rather to attend

public schools elsewhere.

They leave because the higher income immigrants

who wish to

attend private schools are willing to pay more for the houses the emigrants originally occupied.
4. The previous two poinu can be summarized

as follows: The presence of private schools (and

the introduction

of vouchers)

increases

school-based

residence-based

stratification.

This decrease

stratification

in residence-based

while it decreases

stratification

(which is

consistent with some evidence cited in the text) creates fiscal benefits for public school students
in poor ~eas when public schools are funded, at least in part, locally. More precisely, those
moving into the community

do not use local public schools but still pay a disproportionately

large share of local taxes. Therefore, even though they may vote for less spending, per pupil
spending rises (unless more than 50% of voters send their children to private schools, )
5. To the extent that peer quality matters not only in schools but also in communities in general (m
suggested

by Durlauf (1996), Wilson (1987), Jencks and Mayer (1990), Crane (1991) and

others), the decrease in residential stratification
previously been emphasized.
current paper. If neighborhood
agents to lower income

is a positive effect of vouchers that has not

We do not, however, explore these neighborhood

effec~ in the

externalities are primarily positive and run from higher income

agents,

the descriptive

results

of the analysis

do not change

32

substantially.

(High income individuals still move to good houses in low and middle income

neighborhoods
interpretation

when sending

their children

to private

schools.)

At the same time, the

of the results would change because the decrease in residential

would then not only be potentially

stratification

equity-enhancing

(because of fiscal benefits to those

attending public schools in low income communities)

but also efficiency enhancing in that

greater residential mixing of agenu is Pareto improving. However, if negative neighborhood
externalities

also run from low income agents to high income agents, the migration effects

might be muted, and no clear efficiency interpretation
there is widespread

speculation

could be given. Unfortunately,

that non-school related neighborhood

while

effects are important,

there is little agreement exactly what form these externalities take. Furthermore,
empirical evidence regarding the extent to which perceived neighborhood

there is little

peer effects (which

motivate migration choices) differ from actual neighborhood effects.
6. The extent to which the loss in public school peer quality in low income communities (resulting
from an increase in vouchers) affects public school quality depends on the degree to which
parental perceptions
institutional

of the relative importance

of peer quality are correct as well as the

setting used to finance public education.

Under both local funding and state

funding, per pupil spending rises in the poor community and more than offsets the loss in peer
quality if parental perceptions
effects). Under foundation

are accurate (or if they overestimate

grants and district power equalization,

public schools worsen in the poor community

the importance

of peer

on the other hand, local

because per pupil spending

either remains

constant or does not rise sufficiently much to offset the losses in peer quality (unless parents
are overestim sting the importance

of peer effects. ) Our simulations

suggest that if we are

primarily concerned about parental perceptions about public school quality in poor communities
(or, for that matter, about per pupil spending

in poor public schools),

vouchers

are most

desirable under a locally funded school system and become progressively less desirable under
state funding, district power equalization and foundation aid. Again, better empirical evidence
on which of our “quality” measures (parenti

perceptions, spending, or peer quality) accurately

reflect actual school quality is needed for a full normative analysis of our positive results.

33

7. Finally, the results also have implications regarding the targeting of vouchers. It is often ~gued
that the equity implications
when the vouchers
However,

of private voucher proposals become significantly

are targeted at low income residents

the distinction

between

more favorable

or at low income communities.

these two ways of targeting

vouchers Me targeted at low income parents, our simulation resdh

is quite important.

If the

indicate that they will have

to be of fairly high face value in order to convince low income parents to opt out of the public
system. If however,
California),

they are targeted to low income communities

then our resul~ remain intact as long as immigrmts

(as recently done in

into those communities

can

make use of vouchers as well. Again, high income residents will migrate to take advantage of
the vouchers which is something they are already doing in the model even when vouchers are
not targeted. Thus, our analysis suggesw that targeting either makes the program less effective
or is no different than an untargeted program depending on how the targeting is accomplished.
We would like to conclude by emphasizing

that, while we think these results are new in the

literature and quite relevant for thinking more deeply about vouchers, several limitations shodd be
kept in mind. First, many of our interpretations may have to be modtiled as new empirical evidence
regarding the issues raised in the points above emerges. Second, we have assumed that all agents
in this model are perfectly informed. Often, a criticism of vouchers has been that low income
parents may not be informed
overpredic t the effectiveness

enough

to make use of vouchers,

and thus previous

models

of vouchers in getting low income parents to exert competitive

pressures on their public schools. While we think that this is a valid criticism, it is not as relevant
for our restits as it was in the previous literature. In particular, low income agents are not the ones
choosing to use the vouchers, at least not at relatively low voucher levels. Rather, high income
residenfi that migrate into low income communities

are using the vouchers and, we think, can be

expected to be more informed. Those residents in poor districw that are leaving the the low income
public schools are not doing so because they are choosing to use vouchers but rather because
market pressures drive them to move to a different community and a different public school.
Third, one of the major political hurdles to implementing

vouchers is that currently a large

number of children already attend private schools. A broad voucher program will thus be costly

34
even if it does not achieve any change in behavior. In our model, however, few children attend
private schools without a voucher program. We commented before that we think this is due to the
fact that we have assumed identical preferences for all agents while, in the real world, some agents
have preferences for particular forms of private education quite apart from anything having to do
with spending levels or straight peer effects. Our model does not capture those types of private
school consumers.

Also we have not explicitly considered

agents with very high incomes who

would choose private schools even under the current assumption if identical preferences.
Fourth, in the absence of construction
which acceptable
communities
relatively

housing

and renovation, migration only occurs to the extent to

can be found in low income communities .40 We think that most

are in fact not perfectly homogeneous

more attractive

housing opportunities

in housing quality and that at least some

exist even in most low income jurisdictions.

Furthermore, although more empirical studies are needed, available anecdotal evidence regarding
subsidized Catholic schools suggests that middle income agents often do, in fact, migrate to low
income communities to take advantage of private schools there. Keeping in mind that all agents in
our model are “middle income” (given a top household income of $80,000), this is consistent with
our results. The inclusion

of very high income agents, however, would result in those agents

choosing private schools without migrating from the best houses located in the best communities.
Finally, we should emphasize once again that we have made a series of assumptions

that we

thought, a priori, very much “stacked the deck” against vouchers. By assuming away all beneficial
effects from increased
without

vouchers,

competition

because all schools, public and private, are efficient even

we have eliminated

the main economic

argument

in favor of vouchers,

Furthermore, we assumed private schools are extreme “cream skimmers” that discriminate against
low income/low peer quality students. Thus, we have not only eliminated the common efficiency
argument for vouchers but also assumed a private sector that seems less than equity oriented. Still,
we demonstrate

that the equity argument against vouchers holds only under certain institutional

settings or when school peer effecfi are larger than recognized

by parents. Furthermore,

vouchers are demonstrated

they may bring about positive

to reduce residential

stratification,

since

neighborhood effects in low income communities that have not been part of the previous analysis.
40

The model could also be extended to include construction and renovation which would strengthen our migration results
as well as give rise to them even if housing was uniformly bad in low inmme communities to begin with,

35
References
AmotL R. and J Rowse ( 1987): “Peer Group Effects and Educational
305,
Becker, Gary S. (1991): A Treatise on [he Family, Cambridge:
Benabou, R. (1992): “Workings
Brueckner,

Harvard University

of a City: Location, Education,

De Bartolome, C. (1990): “Equilibrium

Effect,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 19, 399-

Opportunity,

and Inefficiency

Press.

Quaflerly Joumaf of Economics, 619-51.

and Production,”

J. and K. Lee ( 1989): “Club Theory with Peer-Group
420,

Coleman, James S. ( 1966): .Equdity of Educational

Journal of Public Economics 32, 287-

Attainment,”

Washington,

in a Community

D, C.: U. S,GPO.

Model with Peer Group Effeck,” JPE 98, 110-33.

Dewey, James; Thomas A. Husted and Lawrence W. Kenny (1995): “ke
the Evidence,” fiio,

Educational Inputs Irrelevant?:

Dowries, Thomas A. and Shane M. Greenstein (1996): “Understanding the Supply Decisions
Location of Private Schools,” me Rand Journal, forthcoming,
Dunz, K. (1985): “Existence of Equilibrium
Discussion Paper #201

Epple, D. and R. Romano ( 1996): “Competition
Economic Review, forthcoming.

Department

Evans W., W. Oates and R. Schwab ( 1992): “Measuring
Political Economy 100, 968-91.

Raquel and Richard Rogerson (1995): “Education
from California,” NBER working paper #5369.

Friedman,

M. (1955): “The Role of Government
Brunswick: Rutgers University Press.

A Study of Teenage

Finance Reform and Investment

Behavior,”

in Human Capital: Lessons

and Freedom, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

S., K. Hayes, L. Taylor and W. Weber (1995): “On Competition

E. (1986): “The Economics
Literdure 24, 1147–1 17,

of Schooling:

Henderson, V., P. Mieszkowski and Y, Sauvageau
Journal of Public Economics 10, 97-106.

Production

and School Efficiency,”

(1978):

and Efficiency

Hoxby, C. M. ( 1994): “Do Private Schools Provide Competition
Hoyt. WiUiam H. arsd Kangoh Lee (1996): “Educational

in Public Schools, ” Journal of Economic

for Public Schools?”,

on Black Student

Achievement

in Public

Manski,

the Reflection

Moe, T. (cd) (1995): friv~e

Functions,”

mimio, University of

NBER working paper # 4978,

of Private School Attendance,

Choice (Vouchers)

Production

and the Quality of Schooling,”

Long, James E. and Eugenia F. Toma (1988): “The Determinants
Economics and Statistics, 351-57.

Manski, C. (1992): “Educational

rnimio,

Vouchers, Welfare Effects, md Voting, ” mimio,

Link, C. and J. Mulligan (199 1): “Classmates’ Effects
Economics of Educ@ion Review 10, 297-310.

of Endogenous

Distribution,”

Urban Studies 12, 205-11.

“Peer Group Effects and Educational

Houtenville, Andrew J. (1996): “Parental Effort, Student Achievement,
New Hampshke.

C. ( 1993): “Identification
60, 531-42.

Joumrd of

in Education, “ in Economics and the Public Interest (R, Solo, Ed.). New

Hamilton, Bruce (1975): “Zoning and Property Taxes in a System of Local Governments,”
Hanushek,

of Economics

in a System of Communities

“Vouchers, Public and Private Education, and Income
Gerhard and B. Ravikumar ( 1995):
Econometrics and Economic Theory Worting Paper No. 9508, Michigan State University.

Grosskopf,

the

Journal of Economics Growth 1, 75-94.

Peer Group Effects:

Fernandez,

Glomm,

Modelling

of

between Private and Pubfic Schools, Vouchers and Peer Effec&,” American

Epple, D., R. Filimon and T. Romer. ( 1993): “Existence of Voting and Housing Equilibrium
with Property Taxes,” Regional Science and Urban Economics 23, 585–6 10.

Friedman, M. (1962): Capitalism

of Non-Profits:

with Local Public Goods and Houses,” SUNY-Albany

Durlauf, S. (1996): “A Theory of Persistent Income Inequality,”

A Reexamination

Social Effects:

and Social Mobifity,”

Vouchers, Hoover Institution

Problem,”

School Classrooms,”
1970- 1980,” Review of

Review of Economic Studies

Economics of Education Review 11, 351-69.

Press, Stanford, CA.

Moe, T. and K. Shotk (1996): “Computer Models of Educational
Journal of Educ&ion Policy, forthcoming.

Institutions:

me

Case of Vouchers

and Social Equity,””

36
Nechyba,

T. (1996a): “Existence of Equilibrium and Stratification in Local and Hierarchical
Property Taxes and Voting,” NBER Technical Working Paper #190.

Nechyba, T. ( 1996b): “A Computable General Equilibrium Model of Intergovernmental
forthcoming. (Also NBER working paper #5420)
Nechyba, T. ( 1996c): “Fiscal Federalism and Local Public Finance: A Computable
Intemationd Tax and Public Finance, forthcoming.
Rose-Ackerman, S. (1979): “Market Models of Local Government:
Economics 6, 319-37.
Rubinfeld, D. (1995): “California

Fiscal Federalism:

Schwab, R. and W. Oates (1991): “Community
Economics 44, 217-37.

Tiebout

Aid,” Joumd

Composition

Schmidt, Amy B. (1992): “Private School Enrolfrnents

of Pub[ic Ecorromic~.

General Equifibriuor (CGE) Framework.”

Exit, Voting, and the Land Market,” Joumaf of Urban

and the Provision of Local Pubfic Goods,” Joumd
Areas,” Public Finance Quatier[y

in Metropolitan

Hand, “ in Modem

Pub[ic Finance, (J. Quigley

Sons telie, Jon and Fabio Sdva (1995): “Did Serrano Cause a Decline in School Spending?” N~ional
215.
for Education

in Public and Private School Systems,”

Summers, A. and B. Wolfe (1977): “Do Schools Make a Different?”,
Tlebou4 C. ( 1956): “A Pure Theory of heal

Expenditures,”

Joumaf

of Equilibria

in Economies

20, 298-320.
and E. Smolensky,

Tu Joumd

48, 199-

of Public Economics 3,

Journal of Politic& Economy 64, 416-24,
Across Countries,”

Joud

of Law and Economics,

Vandenberghe, V. (1996): Functioning and Regdation
of Educational Quasi-Markets, unpublished
Institut de Recherches Econom.iques et Sociales (IRES), Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.
F. (1977): “Existence
84–112.

o~ Public

American Economic Review, 639-52,

Toma, Eugenia Froedge (1996): “Public Funding and Private Schooling
forthcoming.

Westhoff,

with

A School Finance Perspective, ” mimio.

Scotchmer, S. (1994): “Public Goods and the Invisible
eds.), Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Stiglitz, J. (1974): “The Demand
349-85.

Economies

with a Local Public Good,” Joumd

Ph.D. dissertation,

of Economic Theo~,

14.

37
FIGURE 1

Simulation

Literature

on Private

School Vouchem

and Peer Effects

Epple and Romano (1996)

Manski (1992)

This Paper

Public Schools

Efficient

(i) Efficient
(ii) Rent S=king

Efficient
(at least in the eyes of parents)

Private Schools

Profit-m ting,
price discriminating
(based on peer quality)

Maximize number of
students,
no price discrimination

Perfectly Competitive,
profit Minimizing,
Cream Skimming,
no price discrimination

Institutions funding
Public Schools

Per Pupil Spending
Exogenously Determined

Per Pupil Spending
Exogenously Deterrnind

Public sct1001
Choice

None
(Open Enrollment implies
all public schools
are identical)

None
(Different Communities
but no mobility behve.err
communities)

Spending is Endogenous (voting) 4 Institutional Settings Considered:
(i) local voting under property tax
(ii) state voting under income tax
(iii) state foundation aid with local
marginal funding
(iv) district power equtiution
3 Communities with different
quality public schoo Is,
mobility across communities,
no open enrollment

38
FIGURE 2

CGE Program h Calculate the Public School Benchmark

Equilibrium

IJ

I

Initial
Data

J

community Sirucb
Wowrnenta
Prcfcr* Ruduction Fwti
Beg-g
h
No tiV&
Schti
●

●

●

●

r

●

#

Prim Adjustments*

●

●

_

●

EDO(~h) and ED-I(rn,h) ti
Pl(~)

d

P.Z(@) d

. lf~m,h)
>0 dED.l(m,h)
>0, r& P-l(m,h) by 0.01;
If EDo(@) >0 d ED.l(m,h)SO, avaage P-l(m.h) ~ P-2(m,hh
try 0.01;
. If EDo(m,h) <0 urd ED.l(m,h) <0, low= p-l(~)
tfEDo(m.h) <0 md ED.l(mfi) 20, av~~e P.](m,h) d P. flm,h);
~ fUSIite~w
frr exa

su ~.l(mh~

~

p-~ti)=p-l(ti)

demand for (~h) during the current ~

fa the prim of (m)

one and IWOite~onr

V (m.hkM~.)
previm iteratiom respective y.

@a to the uent

iteration.

39
FIGURE 3

CGE Program to Calculate the Actual Equilibrium
Benchmark

Public Schwl

with Rivate

Schools from the

Equilibrium

Schd

D

Spending&

Idatify

PubUc School
Equlllbrlum

the ~ian

and *UhC

COMMIMity
Id

-

c-t

(Demh4
ad
kw
ill
Pigurc2)

late hotding
-

Icvek,

hia publ*vate

●

Prke AdJuatmenti*
If EDo(m~) >0 d ED.l(m,h) >0, ti

Tax Rates
vtia

in -h
his @d

tixd

pricm,

his Imatim
choice,

P-l(rn,h) b 0.01;

*If EDo(m,h) >0 and ED.l(m,hW, ●veqe P-l(m.h) d P-2(mJJ
<0 d ED.l(m,h) <0, Iowa P.l(m.h) by 0.01:
. lfmdm~)
avu~e
P-l(mJ)
d
P-2(m.hk
. If EDo(m,h) <0 dED.l(mh)20,
_

*

f~t

~m

* EDO(mh) and ED.l(mh) stand fm ex=
P.I(@) and P2(@) d

~

~.l(mJrW

~

p-2(mh)=p-l(m.h)

V(ti)c

demand for (~h) during the aurent d

f- the pricu of (m,h) one and IWOitions

prim

Mm.)

previars iterations r+ctively.

10 the

current

iteration.

the
and

40
TABLE 1

Summary of Computable

General Equilibrium

Model Including Parameter Values
CGE Version and Parameters

General Model

Community

Structure

Endowment Types

c=

Cfic

N I (m,h)~ MxH}

N=[O,l]; M=[l,2,3}

1={1,2,3,4,5};

E = (Efii I (m,h,i)~MxHxI)

#(Etii

(z(etil),...,z(eti

U = (U’:MXHXRS2+R+

I n~N)

;H={l,2,3);

)=&

and p

(cih)=~

V(m,h)

V (m,h,i); and

)) = (2, 3.5,5,

6.5,8)

V (m,h)

un(m,h,s,c) = kti SPC7 V n~ N where
(D, Y)= (0.06, O-@),a and
(k,,,..., kl~, kzl,..., k,~) =
(0.82, 0.89, 0.96, 0.85, 0.95, 1,05, 0,93, 1.03, 1.13)

Perceived Production
of School Quality

~: R:+R+

a The actual specification

of the utility function in the CGE programs

s

=f, (2,, 1,)=

z,

(1-P) p P
s

contains an additional

arguments

(a state public good)

with Cobb Douglas coefficient CC=O.13. While in past papers (Nechyba (1996b,c)) the level of state public good spending has
been determined endogenously, it is exogenous in this model (set consistent with New Jersey data) and financed through an
exogenously set state income tax. Thus, it becomes a constant and irrelevant for tie choices analyzed in the current paper.

41
TABLE 2
Benchmark

Equilibrium

.. .

Without Fiscal Interaction and

witi Peer Factor p=O.00
Community

Income

Wealth

Propertyb

Averagesa

Prop. Taxc

Schoold LPSpende

LPeerf

%Private

Community

1

3.3000

4,3900

0.6550

0,4247

0.2782

0,2782

0.2200

0,oooo

Community

2

5,2000

6,3027

1.0250

0,3880

0.3977

0,3977

0.3467

0.0000

Community

3

6.5000

7,5573

1.5700

0,2706

0.4248

0.4248

0.4333

0.0000

House Vahres
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Average Private Peer Level

Community

1

0.4350

0.6301

0.9000

0.0000

Community

2

0,5800

0.9799

1.5150

Average Private Output

Community

3

0.9900

1.5600

2.1600

0.0000

a

All dollar values are scaled by $10000.

b

Roperty values are expressed as annual payments on a fixed rate mortgage at 7% interest.

c

Property tax rates may appear high because they are tax rates on annual payments,

not on the full value

of the property.
d

“School”

e

simulation because of the absence of peer effects).
“LPSpend” is per pupil spending on education in the local public school.

f

“LPeer” is tie peer quality level in the local public school.

represents

parentally

perceived

school quality (which is the same as school spending

in this

42
TABLE 3
Equilibrium

Without Fiscal Interaction and p=O.50

(a) Public School Benchmark Equilibrium
(i.e. No Private Schools)
Community
Income

Wealth

Property

Averages*

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

%private

Community

1

3.0000

3,8773

0.4983

0.5671

0.2377

0.2826

0.2000

0.0000

Community

2

5.0000

6.1405

1.0325

0.4017

0.3718

0.4147

0.3333

0.0000

Community

3

7,0000

8,2925

1.7800

0.2863

0.4877

0,5097

0.4667

0.0000

House

Values

Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Average Private Peer Level

Community

1

0.2750

0.4750

0.7450

0,0000

Community

2

0.5475

1.0050

1,5450

Average Private Output

Community

3

1.1700

1.7700

2.4000

0,0000

(b) Actual Equilibrium
Community

(with Private Schools)
Averages*

Income

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

%private

Community

1

3,4000

4,3009

0.5325

0.5325

0.2523

0.3109

0.2048

0.0667

Community

2

4.6000

5.7523

1.0075

0.3976

0.3505

0.4006

0.3067

0.000o

8,2684

1.7683

0,2861

0.4859

0.5060

0.4667

0.000o

Community

3

7.0000

House Values
Type 1

Type 2

Type 3

Average private Peer Level

1

0.3200

0.5350

0.7900

0.4439

Community

2

0.5425

0.9800

1.5000

Average Private Output

Community

3

1.1600

1.7650

2.3800

0.5333

Community

*Note: All dollar values are scaled by $10000. Roperty values are expressed as annual payments on a fixed
rate mortgage at 7~0 interest. Roperty tax rates may appear high because they are tax rates on these
annual payments, not on the full value of the property.

43
TABLE 4
Benchmark Equilibria with Local Financing and Different Levels of Peer Effects (p)*

P

Community
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70

1

Community
0,00
0,20
0,40
0.50
0.60
0.70

2

Community
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.50
0,60
0,70

Income

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

PrPeer

3.3000
3.1000
3.0000
3.4000
3.9000
3.5000

4.3900
4.1453
3.8755
4.3009
4.7877
4.5310

0.6550
0.6383
0.5550
0,5450
0,5950
0,5033

0.4247
0.4287
0.4576
0.5325
0.5369
0.0000

0.2782
0.2587
0.2308
0,2523
0.2585
****

0.2782
0.2736
0.2540
0.3109
0.4577
****

0.2200
0.2067
0.2000
0.2048
0,1633
****

****
****
****

5.2000
5,4000
5.7000
4.6000
5.0000
5,0000

6.3027
6.4143
6,6390
5.7523
5.8930
6.0140

1.0250
1.0317
1.0592
1.0075
1.0883
1.0367

0,3880
0,3977
0,4332
0.3976
0.3476
0,0000

0.3977
0.3997
0.4255
0.3502
0.3191
****

0,3977
0,4103
0,4589
0,4006
0,4178
****

0,3467
0,3600
0.3800
0.3067
0.2606
****

6.5000
6.5000
6.3000
7.0000
6.1000
6.5000

7.5573
7.7037
7.7563
8,2684
7,8553
8.0450

1.5700
1.5933
1.6567
1.7683
1,8567
1.9800

0.2706
0.2686
0.2678
0.2861
0.2714
0.2634

0.4248
0.4290
0,4340
0,4859
0.4521
0,4698

0.4248
0.4279
0.4436
0.5060
0.4930
0.6518

0.4333
0.4333
0.4200
0.4667
0,4067
0,4083

0.5333
0.4534
0.2333

****
****
****
****
0.5333
0.3333

%Private

0,0000
0,0000
0.0000
0,0667
0,3333
1.0000

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.2667
1.0000

3

*As peer effects rise, the utility functions me re-parameterized
all simulations.

****
****
****
****
****
0.5333

0,0000
0.0000
0.0000
0,0000
0,0000
0.2000

to keep spending roughly constant; i.e. ~*p =0.06 in

44
TABLE 5
Equilibria with Different Levels of Vouchers and Local Financing
Income

Voucher

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tm

School

LPSpend

LPmr

PrPeer

~.private

(a) Peer Effect: p=O.O
Community
0.00-0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40

1

Community
0.00-0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40

2

Community
0.00-0.25
0,30
0.35
0.40

3,3000
3.7000
3.6000
3.7000

4.3900
4.6755
4.6793
4.5607

0.6550
0.7800
0.8033 0
0.6042

0.4247
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.2782
****
****
****

0.2782
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.2200
****
****
“***

****
0,2467
0.2400
0.2467

0.0000
1.0000
I .0000
1.0000

5.2000
5.2000
4.9000
4.9000

6.3027
6.0358
5.9603
6.0335

1.0250
0,8367
0,8183
0,9617

0.3880
0.4827
0.4969
0.0000

0,3977
0.4039
0.4066
****

0.3977
0.4039
0.4066
0,0000

0.3467
0,3467
0,3267
****

****
****
****
0.3267

0,0000
0.0000
0.0000

6,5000
6,1000
6.5000
6.4000

7,5573
7.2670
7.3303
7.4617

1.5700
1.3617
1.3483
1.4900

0,2706
0.3031
0,3041
0.0000

0.4248
0.4127
0.4100
****

0.4248
0,4127
0,4100
0.0000

0.4333
0.4067
0.4333
****

****
****
****
0,4267

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
1.0000

3

1.0000

(b) Peer Effect: p=O.5
Community
0.00
0.05
0,10
0.15
0,25
0.35
0.40

1

Community
0.00
0,05
0.10
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.40

2

Community
0,00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.25
0.35
0.40

3.4000
3.7000
4.0000
4,0000
4,4000
4,2000
3,6000

4.3009
4,5185
4.8531
4,7591
4.8396
4.7146
4.2783

0,5450
0.5517
0,6175
0.5783
0.6700
0.5225
0.4467

0.5325
0.5470
0.4671
0.5207
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000

0,2523
0,2689
0.2658
0.2798
****
****
****

0.3109
0,3772
0.4326
0,4517
0,0000
0.0000
0,0000

0.2048
0,1917
0,1633
0,1733
****
****
****

0.5333
0.4666
0.4733
0.4533
0.2933
0.2800
0,2400

0,0667
02000
0.3333
0.3333
1.0000
I .0000
1.0000

4.6000
4.6000
4.7549
4.8000
4.9981
5.5000
5.1000

5.7523
5.6957
5.7627
5,8057
5,9834
6.0663
5.9163

1.0075
1.0192
1.0658
1.0325
0,8675
0,9508
0.8342

0.3976
0.3554
0.3377
0.3449
0.4486
0.0000
0.0000

0,3502
0.3358
0.3439
0.3431
0,3689
****
****

0.4006
0.3881
0.4337
0.4856
0.5838
0.0000
0.0000

0.3067
0.2905
0.2727
0.2424
0.2331
****
****

****
0.5333
0.5333
0.5333
0.5333
0.3666
0.3400

0.0000
0.0667
0.1699
0.2667
0.3333
1,0000
1.0000

7.0000
6.7000
6,2451
6.2000
5.6019
5.3000
6.3000

8.2684
8.1045
7.7803
7.7313
7.1411
6.8832
7.4700

1.7683
1.7467
1.7117
1.6833
1.4167
1.1833
1.3767

0,2861
0,2930
0.2693
0.2730
0.3153
0.3505
0.0000

0.4859
0.4781
0.4381
0.4359
0.4163
0.4035
****

0,5060
0,5118
0.4610
0.4596
0.4786
0.5655
0.0000

0.4667
0.4467
0.4163
0.4133
0.3620
0.2879
****

3

****
****
****
****
0,5333
0.5333
0,4200

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0667
0.2667
1.0000

45
TABLE 6
Equilibria with Different Levels of Vouchers and Full State Funding
Peer Effect: p=O.5
Income

Voucher

Community
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0,35
0,40

1

Community
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0,30
0,35
0.40

2

Community
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0,30
0,35
0.40

Wealth

Property

State. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

PrPeer

****

0,0000

0.5333
0.4933
0.4734
0.4534
0.4534
0.4333
0.3933
0.2533

0,0667
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.3333
0.4000
0.6667
1.0000

2.9941
3.4861
4.3000
4.2000
4.0500
4.1000
4.0000
4,6000
3,8000

3.9079
4.2380
4.8292
4.7719
4,6692
4,7040
4,6393
5,0357
4.5959

0.3783
0.4100
0.4350
0.4817
0.4643
0.5050
0.4783
0.4967
0.5317

0.0779
0.0779
0.0777
0.0776
0.0772
0,0771
0.0768
0,0754
0,0000

0.2791
0,2882
0,2832
0,2902
0.2976
0.3014
0.2811
0.2794
****

0.3896
0.3984
0.4373
0.4592
0.4965
0.4954
0.5081
0.5853
0.0000

0.1996
0,2109
0,1833
0,1833
0,1783
0,1833
0,1556
0.1333
****

5.5059
4.9804
4.7500
4.5000
5.0500
4.9000
5.2000
4.9000
4,9598

6.3283
6.0028
5.9512
5.6199
5.8928
5.8469
5.9431
5,7241
5,9391

0.9550
0.9617
1.0017
0,9633
0.9467
0,9450
0.9667
0.9633
0.9533

0.0779
0.0779
0.0777
0.0776
0.0772
0.0771
0.0768
0.0754
0,0000

0.3762
0.3673
0.3721
0.3483
0,3440
0,3326
0.3588
0.3615
****

0.3896
0.3984
0.4373
0.4592
0.4965
0.4954
0.5081
0.5853
0.0000

0.3671
0.3320
0.3167
0.2641
0.2383
0,2233
0.2533
0,2233
****

6.5000
6.5335
5.9500
6.3000
5.9000
6.0000
5.8000
5,5000
6.2402

7.7191
7.7646
7.3131
7.7572
7.5305
7.5185
7.5185
7,3229
7.4940

1.6175
1.6283
1.6550
1.6983
1.6700
1.6833
1.6500
1.6150
1.5383

0.0779
0.0779
0.0779
0.0776
0.0772
0.0771
0.0768
0.0754
0.0000

0.4124
0.4144
0.4165
0,4392
0,4419
0,4451
0.4432
0.4557
****

0.3896
0.3984
0.4373
0.4592
0.4965
0.4954
0.5081
0.5853
0.0000

0.4333
0.4333
0.3967
0.4200
0.3933
0,4000
0,3867
0,3548
****

%***
****
****
0.5333
0.5333
0.5333
0.5333
0.5333
0.3307

%Private

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0,1333
0,3333
0,3333
0.3333
0.3333
1.0000

3
****
****
****
****
****
****
****
0.5333
0.4106

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0667
1.0000

46
TABLE 7

~

Equilibria with Different Levels of Foundation Grants

Income

Grant Level

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

PrPeer

%Private

(a) Peer Effect: p=O.00
Community
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0,40
0,50

1

Community
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50

2

Community
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0,40
0,50

3.3000
3.4000
3.4000
3.3759
3.6000
3.6000

4.3900
4,3793
4,3871
4,3455
4,5995
4.5997

0,6550
0,6769
0.6696
0,6684
0,6575
0.6750

0.4247
0.2462
0.1030
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.2782
0.2667
0,2690
0.3000
0,4000
0.5000

0.2782
0.2667
0,2690
0.3000
0.4000
0,5000

0,2200
0.2267
0.2267
0.2251
0.2400
0.2400

****
****
****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

5,2000
5,3000
5,3715
5.5250
5.2000
5.0000

6.3027
6.3685
6.3792
6.4068
6.1223
6.0533

1.0250
1.0274
1.0189
1.0116
1.0167
1.0283

0,3880
0,3093
0.2307
0.1456
0.0000
0.0000

0.3977
0.4178
0.4351
0.4473
0.4000
0.5000

0.3977
0.4178
0.4351
0.4473
0.4000
0.5000

0.3467
0.3533
0.3581
0.3683
0.3467
0.3333

****
****
****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0,0000

6.5000
6.3000
6.2285
6.1000
6.2000
6.4000

7.5573
7.5119
7.4656
7.4625
7.4873
7.5853

1.5700
1.5554
1,5432
1,5347
1.5350
1,5350

0.2706
0.2053
0.1402
0,0755
0.0168
0,0000

0.4248
0.4194
0,4163
0,4158
0.4259
0.5000

0.4248
0.4194
0.4163
0.4158
0.5259
0,5000

0.4333
0,4200
0.4152
0,4067
0,4133
0.4267

****
****
****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

3

(b) Peer Effect: p=O.50
Communi~y
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50

1

Community
0.00
0,10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50

2

Community
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0,40
0,50

3.4000
3.4000
3.7000
3.0000
3.1000
3.2000

4.3009
4.2465
4.3725
4.0100
4.0140
4.0520

0.5450
0.5217
0.4850
0.4833
0.4408
0.4817

0.5325
0.3713
0.2182
0.1040
0.0000
0.0000

0.2523
0.2524
0.2417
0.2647
0,2875
0,3266

0.3109
0.3122
0.3443
0.3503
0.4000
0.5000

0.2048
0.2048
0.1697
0.2000
0,2067
0,2133

0,5333
0,5333
0.4583
****
****
****

0.0667
0.0667
0,2667
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000

4.6000
4,6000
5,1000
4,9000
5,4000
5.1000

5.7523
5.7451
6.1235
5.8790
6.2108
6.2327

1.0075
0.9950
1.0250
1.0133
1.0133
1.0300

0.3976
0,3095
0,2132
0,1061
0,0514
0.0000

0.3505
0.3525
0.3772
0.3649
0.4034
0.4123

0,4006
0.4079
0,4185
0,4075
0.4521
0.5000

0,3067
0,3067
0,3400
0.3267
0.3600
0.3400

****
****
****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

7.0000
7.0000
6.2000
7.1000
6.5000
6,7000

8.2684
8.2704
7.7044
8.3610
7,9102
7.9237

1.7683
1.7483
1.6900
1,7533
1.6808
1.6967

0.2861
0.2357
0.1779
0.1133
0.0475
0.0000

0.4859
0.4877
0.4549
0.4858
0.4560
0,4726

0.5060
0.5120
0.5006
0.4986
0.4799
0.5000

0.4667
0.4667
0.4133
0.4733
0,4333
0,4467

****
****
****
****
****
****

0,0000
0.0000
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

3

47
TABLE 8
Equilibria with Different Levels of Vouchers and Foundation

Grant= 0.40

Peer Effect: p=O.5
Voucher

Community
0.00-0.05
0,10
0.20
0.25
0.35
0.45

1

Community
0.00-0.05
0.10
0.20
0,25
0.35
0,45

2

Community
0.00-0.05
0.10
0.20
0.25
0.35
0.45

Income

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

PrPeer

3.1000
4.1000
4,1000
4,1000
3,8000
3.4000

4,0140
4,7078
4.7489
4.8132
4.6303
4.4973

0.4408
0.5125
0.5142
0.5575
0.5642
0.5658

0.0000
0.0000
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.2875
0.2708
0.2582
0.2309
0.2309
****

0,4000
0,4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.4000
0.0000

0.2067
0.1833
0.1667
0.1333
0.1333
****

0,4534
0.4333
0.3433
0.3333
0,2267

5.4000
4.9000
5.2000
5.2000
5.1000
5.3500

6.2108
5,8227
5.9564
6.0685
5,9540
6.0638

1.0133
0,9550
0.9683
0,9900
0.9750
0.9733

0.0514
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0,0000
0,0000

0,4034
0.2989
0,3055
0.2633
0.2309
****

0.4521
0.4000
0.4000
0,4000
0,4000
0.0000

0.3600
0,2233
0,2333
0,1733
0,1333
****

0.5333
0.5167
0.4333
0.3718
0.3566

6.5000
6.0000
5.7000
5.7000
6.1000
6.2500

7.9102
7.6412
7.4297
7.2450
7.5023
7.5205

1.6808
1.7042
1.6525
1.5792
1,5475
1.5425

0.0475
0.0255
0.0235
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.4560
0.4211
0.4083
0,2944
0,2309
****

0.4799
0.4434
0.4388
0.4000
0.4000
0.0000

0.4333
0.4000
0,3800
0.2167
0.1333
****

****

****

Y.Private

0.0000
0.3333
0.4000
0.6667
0.6000
I .0000

0.0000
0,3333
0.4000
0.6667
0.8667
1.0000

3
****
****
****
0.4888
0.4262
0.4167

0.0000
0.0000
0,0000
0,6000
0.9333
1.0000

48

TABLE 9
Equilibria with Different Levels of Revenue Neutral DPE
%Equaliz.

Income

Wealth

Property

Prop, Tax

School

LPSpend

LPeer

PrPeer

Y.Private

(a) Peer Effect: p=O
Community

1

None
20%
1o%
Futl
Community
None
20%
1070
Full

3.3000
3.7200
3.8000
3.8000

4.3900
4.5976
4.7183
4.7165

0.6550
0,6874
0,7318
0,7462

0.4247
0.4138
0.3960
0.3916

0,2782
0,3259
0,3707
0.4073

0.2782
0.3259
0.3707
0,4073

0,2200
0,2480
0,2533
0,2533

****
****
****
****

0,0000
0,0000
0,0000

5.2000
5,0800
5.0000
4,9000

6,3027
6.1770
6.1168
6.1059

1.0250
1.0202
1.0370
1.0322

0,3880
0,3749
0.3660
0.3741

0.3977
0.3936
0.3854
0.3891

0.3977
0.3936
0.3854
0.3891

0.3467
0.3387
0.3333
0.3267

****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

6.5000
6.2000
6.2000
6.3000

7.5573
7.4310
7.4016
7,3916

1.5700
1.4980
1.4680
1.4356

0.2706
0.2830
0.2915
0.2985

0.4248
0.3713
0,3411
0,3104

0.4248
0.3713
0.3411
0.3104

0.4333
0.4133
0.4133
0.4200

****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

2

Community 3
None
20%
10%
Full

0.0000

(b) Peer Effect: p=0,5
Community
None
20%
1Wo
Full

1

Community
None
20%
10%
Full

2

Community
None

3,4000
3..3000
3.3000
3.3000

4.3009
4.0833
4.3457
4.3312

0.5450
0.5933
0.6183
0.6717

0.5325
0,4654
0.5081
0.5146

0.2523
0.2831
0.3165
0.3429

0.3109
0,3644
0,4553
0.5344

0.2048
0.2200
0.2200
0.2200

0.5333
****
****
****

0.0667
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

4.6000
5.4000
5.4000
5.1039

5.7523
6.4597
6.3573
6,3125

1.0075
1.0483
1.0400
1,0450

0.3976
0.4366
0.4429
0.4695

0.3505
0.4051
0.4010
0.4073

0.4006
0.4558
0.4466
0.4876

0.3067
0.3600
0.3600
0.3403

****
****
****
****

0.0000
0,0000
0.0000
0.0000

7,0000

8.2684
7.7087
7.5070
7.6229

1.7683
1.6100
1.5517
1.5500

0.2861
0,2830
0.2945
0.3628

0.4859
0.3938
0.3722
0.4070

0,5060
0,3693
0,3299
0.3768

0,4667
0,4200
0.4200
0.4397

****
****
****
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

3

2W0

6.3000

1Wo
Full

6.3000
6.5961

49
TABLE 10
Equilibria with Different Levels of Vouchers and Full Revenue Neutral DPE
Peer Effect: p=O.5
Voucher

Community
0.00-0.15
0.20
0.30
0.35
0.45
0.50

1

Community
0.00-0.15
0.20
0.30
0.35
0.45
0.50

2

Community
0.00-0.15
0.20
0.30
0.35
045
0.50

Income

Wealth

Property

Prop. Tax

School

LPSpend

LP&r

PrPeer

3.3000
3.3616
3.7000
3,6634
3.6691
3.7000

4,3312
4,3860
4.5153
4.5041
4.5333
4.4384

0,6717
0.6933
0.5217
0.5250
0.5283
0.4953

0.5146
0,4852
0,6104
0.5243
0.6147
0.0000

0.3429
0.3342
0.3219
0,3262
0.3261
****

0,5344
0,5530
0.5979
0.6137
0.6135
0.0000

0.2200
0.2020
0.1733
0.1733
0.1733
****

0.0000

0.0000

0.5333
0.3934
0.3861
0,3872
0.2467

0.0667
0.3333
0.3333
0,3333
1.0000

5.1039
5.2384
4.8000
4.8366
4.8309
4,9000

6.3125
6.3640
5.8711
5.8892
5,8785
5,9215

1.0450
1,0692
0.8117
0,8312
0,8567
0.8867

0.4695
0.4539
0.5188
0.4760
0.4405
0.0000

0.4073
0.4106
0.3369
0,3384
0.3281
****

0.4876
0.4828
0,5083
0.5849
0,5496
0,0000

0,3403
0,3492
0.2233
0.1958
0.1958
****

0.0000
0.0000
0.5134
0.4672
0.4666
0.3267

0.0000
0,0000
0.3333
0.4667
0.4667
1.0000

6,5961
6.4000
6.5000
6.5000
6.5000
6.4000

7.6229
7.5676
7.7276
7.7500
7.7673
7.5000

1.5500
1.5583
1.7483
1.7583
1,7700
1,4350

0.3628
0.3583
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.4070
0.4033
****
****
****
****

0.3768
0.3811
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000

0.4397
0,4267
****
****
****
****

****
****

0.0000
0.0000
I .0000
1,0000
1.0000
1.0000

3

0.4333
0.4333
0.4333
0.4267

%Private

