NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

LOCAL LABOR MARKETS AND
WELFARE SPELLS: DO DEMAND
CONDITIONS MATTER?

Hilary Williamson Hoynes

Working Paper 5643

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 1996

I am grateti to Timothy B*
Becky Bl@ Nada Eisw Jonathan Gruber, Larry Katz, Jacob Klerma
JonathanLeonar~ Robert Moffi~ Jim Poterbaand to seminar participants at Columbiz Dartmou@ HarvN4
MIT, PrincetoLYale, and workshops atIRP andtieNBER SummerInstitute foruseti comments. I also wotid
liketothankLois Van B-,
SusanAyasse, Henry Brady, and Werner Schirikfor assistancewitithe LDB data.
Cindy Gustafson has provided excellent research resistance. Financial support was received from the
National Institute for Child Health Development and computing support was provided by the Econometrics
Laborato~ at UC Berkeley. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Labor Studies and Public
Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author andnotthose oftheNatioti Bureau oftinornic
Research.
O 1996 by Hilary Williamson Hoynes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fill credit, including O notice, is
given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5643
June 1996

LOCAL LABOR MARKETS AND
WELFARE SPELLS: DO DEMAND
CONDITIONS MATTER?
ABSTRACT

This paper examines the role of local labor markets in determining how long families receive
benefits from the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. Given the current policy
emphasis on devolution and tiucing the AFDC -load

through ernploymen; understanding the role of local

labor demand is important. The study uses a unique data set based on administrative data which has detailed
information on welfae spells for over 100,000 AFDC cases. The empirical work is based on estimates of a
duration model where the hazard rate is a function of demographic characteristics, local labor market
variables, neighborhood

characteristics,

county fixed effects and time effects. Several alternative

measures of local labor market conditions are used and the results show that higher unemployment rates,
lower employment groti
longer welfare spells.

lower employment to population mtios, and lower wage growth m associated tith
On average, a typical employment

fluctuation over the business cycle, if

permanen~ would lead to an 8-10 percent reduction in the AFDC c~load.
earnings generate sometit

TWical changes in real quarterly

smaller effwts. The combined effwt of these two changes, if permanent, would

lead to sizeable reductions in the caseload, on the order of 15 percent. The estimated labor market effects
are robust to including county level fixed effects and time effects. AFDC-UP participants, blacks, and
residents of urban areas are more sensitive to changes in economic conditions while teen parents and
refugee groups are found to be much less sensitive to changes in local labor market conditions.

Hilary Williamson Hoynes
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94707-3880
and NBER

1. Introduction

There is currently a great deal of interest among policy makers and the general public in reforming
the welfare system. While there exists very divergent views as to how the programs should be reformed,
there seems to be a consensus that employment should play a central role in reducing reliance on public
assistance. Most prominent proposals for modi@g the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC)
progrq

for example, involve increasing the work activities of recipients either through mandatory work

programs, training programs or time limiting of benefits. However, despite the belief that pursuing
employment strategies will reduce welfare dependency, little is known about the factors that contribute
to achieving independence.
What we do know is that employment has become a very important factor in facilitating transitions
off welfare. Among female headed households, changes in the employment status of the mother is the
characteristic most commonly msociated with art exit from welfare, accounting for as much m one half of
exits among AFDC recipients (Blank 1989, Blank and Ruggles 1996, Fitzgerald 1995, Gritz and MaCurdy
1992, Harris 1993, Pavetti 1993).’ However, remarkably little is known about the factors which determine
these exits from welfare. The literature has examined the importance of supply side factors such as
education ftiy

structure, job training and placement programs and the availability of transitional benefits

for child care and medicd care as well as examining the role of program incentives such as the benefit level
and implicit tax rate on earned income, At the same time, we wodd also expect that the level of wages
and availability of job opportunities would affect the affect the length of time on welfare. These demand
side factors have received little attention in the literature.
Understanding the link between macroeconomic conditions and welfare utilization is important for
several reasons. Ffi~ to what extent can economic growth alone reduce welfare reliance?

Can a regime

‘Earlierwork found that marriage was the most common route off welfare (Bane and Ellwood 1983). Marriage
more permanent route off welfare as those exiting via work are more likely to return to welfare

may representa
(Pavetti 1993),

1

of high employment growth and increasing real earnings significantly reduce the welfare rolls? Second,
understanding the role of local labor market conditions may also be of direct importance to the policy
debate. Time limiting welfare benefits is an integral part of almost all existing welfare reform proposals
and many states are currently experimenting with imposing these limits (Savner and Greenberg 1995).
While this represents a significant change for public assistance programs in the U,S., the new program
would more closely resemble the Unemployment Insurance (UI) system, where benefits are limited,
initially, to a period of 26 weeks. Implementing a time limit, however, raises the issue of equi~ across
areas which have varying labor market conditions. The UI system addresses this by extending benefits for
an additional period if the state has relatively high unemployment rates. Linking time limitations in welfare
receipt to local unemployment rates has been raised in welfare reform discussions but was abandoned in
part because the empirical research provided no evidence supporting a link between local labor markets
and welfare dependency.

Further, devolution of responsibility to the states wor,dd result in less

opportunities for risk pooling across areas leaving the state vtierable

to labor market shocks. This is

reflected in proposrds to set up “rainy day” fi.rndsto cover such possibilities (Sawhill 1995).
me available evidence does not make a strong case for a link between length of time on welfare
and labor market conditions. This literature, however, suffers from two limitations, First, most studies
utilize state level labor market controls which may not accurately memure employment opportunities,

This

literature consistently finds small and statistically insignificant effects, For example, Hoynes and MaCurdy
(1993, 1994) find thti labor market conditions, measured by state unemployment rates and average wages,
play no role in explaining changes over time in the length of welfare spells among female heads of
household. Other studies (Fitzgerald 1995, Harris 1993, Sanders 1992) use county or grouped counties
to define local labor markets and find mixed evidence on the importance of the labor market. These
studies, however, rely pnmtily

on cross-uea differences to identifi the effect of labor markets, To the

extent there may be omitted variables correlated with both labor market conditions and AFDC utilization,
these estimates may be biased. For example, welfare recipients with low education levels and little labor
2

market experience may be more likely to live in areas with adverse labor markets. In this case, incomplete
measures of individual characteristics would lead to an overestimate of the effect of labor markets, The
importance of these cross-area differences has not been demonstrated in the literature,
A significant barrier to doing research on the impact of local labor markets is the data requirements.
First, one needs longitudinal data in order to track welfare spells, Second, one needs information on
geographic location to assign local labor market variables. Lastly, one needs sufficient sample sizes to
examine a broad set of covariates for the relevant subsamples of the recipient population. No data set used
in the literature satisfies these conditions. Researchers in this area have primarily relied on the Panel Study
of Income Dynamics (PSID), but have also used the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) and
the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The geographic area identified in these data is
typically the state (PSID, SIPP), or SMSA, and sometimes county @LSY). In all of these surveys, the
sample sizes for female heads of household receiving welfare are quite small, on the order of 1,000 for the
PSID, the SIPP, and the NLSY.
This study uses a unique new data set to comprehensively examine the role of Iocd labor market
conditions in determining how long families receive benefits in the AFDC program, The Longitudinal
Database (LDB) contains a 10 percent sample of all AFDC cases in California from 1987-1992,

The

sample is based on administrative data and includes tiorrnation on monthly utilization of AFDC for about
100,000 cases over this period (UC Dat& 1994). The data set identifies the county and zip code of
residence which is used to assign labor market variables at the county level while controlling for the
characteristics of the neighborhood of residence using summary tabulations from the 1990 Census. Many
measures of local labor market conditions are used including unemployment rates, employment growth by
sector, employment to population ratios, average earnings by sector, and industrial composition of
employment.
The LDB data dso contain demographic information which is used to examine how the
determinants of welfare experiences differ for families with different characteristics, For example, two
3

parent families are eligible to receive benefits as part of the AFDC-Unemployed Parent (AFDC-UP)
program and differ from female heads of household in terms of their labor market history, characteristics
and behavioral responses to program changes (Hoynes 1996), However, they represent less than ten
percent of the total AFDC caseload (U.S. House of Representatives 1994) and, accordingly, have received
little attention in the literature. The empirical model allows for differences between female heads of
household and intact families; for teen and non-teen parents; for urban and non-urban families; and for
various racial and ethnic groups. This is not only important for examining which groups are more likely
to benefit from strong economic conditions but may also examine some m yet unexplained higher rates of
welfare dependency among various groups such as blacks and urban residents,
The results are estimated using a discrete duration model where the monthly exit probability is a
function of demographic characteristics, local labor market variables, neighborhood characteristics, and
fixed time and county effects. The results show that higher unemployment rates, lower employment
gro~

lower employment to popdation ratios, and lower wage growth are associated with longer welfare

spells. The results are consistent across the different specifications for labor market variables and are
robust to including fied county and time effects. Overall, the estimated effects are statistically significant
and important, A 10 percent increase in employment or a 5 percent increase in real earnings would lead
to a 5-9 percent increase in the likelihood that a spell lasts one year or less. Blacks, residents of urban
areas, and AFDC-UP recipients are more sensitive to changes in economic conditions wfile teen parents
and refugee groups are much less sensitive to local labor market conditions,
The broader policy question is to what degree do changes in economic conditions affect the AFDC
~

ad prow~

expenditures. The size of the caseload is determined by entry rates ~

length of

spell conditional on entry, both of which may be affected by local economic conditions, I have decided to
focus my tiention fust on the determinants of the length of spell primarily because studies examining the
routes of entry into and exit out of welfare suggests that changes in labor market status are more likely to
be associated with exits from welf~e than with entry into welfare (Bane and Ellwood, 1983; Gritz and
4

MaCurdy, 1992). Bane and Ellwood state that “The fact that so few spells of AFDC begin with earnings
changes suggesb that it is not typically the cme that a female household head goes on AFDC because she
has lost her job, reduced her hours, or experienced a drop in wages” (p. 19). This may or may not be true,
however, and fiture work will examine the effects on entry.z
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on economic
effects of local labor market conditions on welfare and employment. Section 3 describes the data and
presents the descriptive statistics.

Section 4 describes the empirical model and Section 5 presents

descriptive statistics for the estimation data set, The resuks are presented in Section 6 and Section 7
concludes.

2. Background
The majority of the literature examining the determinants of welfare dependency focuses on the

supply side as opposed to the demand side. Bane and Ellwood (1983) present the first estimates of spell
durations and the determinants of welfare dependency. They estimate the probability of exiting from
wetiare as a fiction

of individual characteristics, AFDC benefits, and length of spell, based on a sample

of female heads of household from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). Similar approaches based
on a variety of different data sets are found in Blank (1 989), Blank and Ruggles (1996), Ellwood (1986),
Fitzgerald (1992), Gntz and MaCurdy (1992), Harris (1993), Hoynes and MaCurdy (1993, 1994), and
ONeill et. al (1984, 1987).3 ~ese studies estimate that the likelihood of leaving welfare decreases as the
spell length increases and that spells are likelyto be longer for younger, unmarried, non-white women with
larger families and lower education levels living in states with higher benefit levels. Those studies that

2Sanders (1992), in fact, finds a larger effect of labor markets on entry than on exit for a sample of young
women. More generally, the literature examining routes into and out of welfare has focused on the direct effects
of labor markets. We might also expect indirect effects of the labor market though its effect on family structure
outcomes such as divorce and fertility (Duncan and Hoffman 1990).
‘For a review of the welfare dynamics literature see Moffitt (1992).

5

examine the routes off welfare (Blink 1989, Blank and Ruggles 1996, Ellwood 1986, Harris 1993), find
that the variables most important for increasing the likelihood of an “earnings related” exit from welf~e
are education, work experience, marital status (previously married), and number of children (fewer)
While not the focus of these studies, most control for job opportunities in the state by including the
state unemployment rate and the coefficient is typically small and statistically insignificant. This may be
because the state is too large a jurisdiction for measuring labor market opportunities, A few studies use
coun~ or grouped county level labor market controls and find some evidence that local labor market
conditions matter.

Harris (1993) uses the PSID and fids that women living in counties with lower

unemployment rates are more likely to have shorter spells and are more likely to leave via work. Sanders
(1992) uses a sample of young women from the NLSY and finds that lower county unemployment rates
lead to higher rates of entry into AFDC and lower rates of exit. Fitzgerald (1995) uses a sample of female
heads of household from the SIPP appended with “labor market area” employment and unemployment
d-

These labor market areas are groups of counties and resemble SMSAS in urban areas, but also group

together rural counties.4 He finds that strong labor market conditions are associated with shorter spells for
blacks, but do not significantly affect whites .5 In each of these studies, however, the effect of the labor
market variable is identified primarily off of cross-area differences in labor market conditions. If there are
any omitted area characteristics which are correlated with the labor market variables then the results will
be biased.

For example, areas with high unemployment rates may partially be reflecting the weaker job

skills of its residents, Other omitted variables such as differences in the cost of living and county services
for job placement and job search may also be important,
The importance of otitted area variables is addressed by Fitzgerald (1994). When he introduces
labor market area fixed effects, the labor market variables become small and statistically insignificant for

4The public release version of each of the SIPP data sets identifies ordy the state of residence.
Fitzgerald
received access to this confidential data on county of residence while working as a Census Department Fellow.
% addition, Blank (1989) uses SMSA level unemployment rates and finds that no significant relationship.
sample, however, consists of data from only two cities, Seattle and Denver.

6

Her

both whites and blacks, He suggests that this may be due to insufficient variation in the labor market
conditions over time (p. 12), but may also be due to relatively small sample sizes. He pools the 1984 and
1985 panels of the SIPP which yields 533 spells of welfare receipt for female heads of household. With
this sample, he includes 88 local area effects along with the labor market vtiables.
While the evidence from the welfme spell literature is inconclusive, related studies suggest that
labor market conditions may be important for welfare recipients. Labor market variables are significantly
correlated with changes in the size of the AFDC caseload. As reviewed by Peskin (1993), most of these
studies look at the national cmeload or the caseload in a particular state and very few studies pool stateIevel caseload data. Peskin finds that the elmticity of the AFDC cmeload with respect to changes in the
unemployment rate to be 0.1 and the elasticity of the AFDC-UP cmeload to be 0,5, While these results
are encouraging, the use of micro data is preferred to the cmeload approach for several remons. First, the
aggregate caseload literature combines the effect of labor market variables on entry into welfare with the
effects on the length of spell, conditional on entry Both for policy purposes and measurement purposes
it is important to differentiate between these two components of the caseload. Second, with micro dat~
one can examine how the sensitivity to changes in labor market conditions varies across demographic
groups which may be important for policy purposes,

Micro data can also be used to look at recidivism

and to examine how labor market variables affect short versus long time recipients. Lastly, and potentially
most importantly, the aggregate caseload analysis gives more weight to long spells, leading to an upward
bim in the estimated effwt ~areas with poor economic conditions are more likely to contain persons with
a propensity to have longer spells. This is related to the problem of length biased sampling,
Many studies have examined the role that local labor markets play in tiecting youth unemployment
(Acs and Wissoker, 1991; Cain and Finnie, 1990; Freeman, 1981); racial differences in labor market
outcomes (Bound and Holzer, 1993 and 1995); and labor market outcomes more generally (Bartik, 1991

7

and 1995; Blanchard and Katz, 1992; Holzer, 1991; Hotz et al, 1995),6 These studies almost universally
find an important role for local labor market conditions. Another related study shows that local labor
market conditions affect the probability of marriage among low income women (Winkler 1994).

3. Data
3,1 LDB Data

The main data set for this study is the Longitudinal Database oJCases (LDB) compiled by UC
Data at the University of Califomi< Berkeley in association with the California Department of Social
Services as part of the California Work Pays Demonstration Project (CWPDP), The goal of the project is
to document the dynamics of family poverty and welfare use in California (UC Dat~ 1994). The LDB
sample consists of 10 percent of all cases receiving Medi-Cal (California’s Medicaid program) for at least
one month during the period January 1987 to December 1992. Specifically, the data set consists of a 10
percent sample of all cases ongoing in January 1987 plus a 10 percent sample of all new Medi-Cal cases
starting each year from 1987 to the present. A “new” case is one where the person has not received MediCal since January 1987, Operationally “receiving Medi-Cal” means that the individual holds a Medi-Cal
card, It is not necess~

that they actually receive benefits, just that they are potentially able to do so. This

study uses a subset of the LDB, persons receiving AFDC. Because all AFDC recipients are categorically
eligible for Medicaid benefits, they should be Wly represented in the LDB data, In fact, AFDC cases
repraent tie Itigest group in the LDB dat~ accounting for over 30 percent of all cases. Other recipients
of Medicaid are the elderly and disabled through Supplemental Security Income (SS1) program and AFDCMedically Needy recipients, each accounting for about 20 percent of the LDB cases,
The LDB data is compiled from administrative records and contain monthly recipiency information
from the time the case is first observed through the end of 1992.

Each person in the sample is followed

~S
litemture is quite large and this is not meant to be a comprehensive
relevant for this analysis.

8

review.

I have cited the studies most

throughout the sample period. If a person leaves welfare in 1990 then returns in 1992, both the earlier and
later spell are observable. There are 97 different aid codes provided for each month of recipiency and
AFDC cases are easily identified from this information. The AFDC aid codes which are identified include:
single parent families with children (AFDC-FG or Family Group), two parent families with children
(AFDC-UP), AFDC refugee assistance, AFDC assistance for pregnant mothers, and AFDC for foster
chi!dren,7
Characteristics of the family that are contained in the data include: age, race/ethnicity and gender
of parent(s), number, ages, and race/ethnicity of each of the children in the case, AFDC recipiency status,
and residential location. The ethnici~ variable identifies white, black, Hispanic, as well as eight Asian
groups, Native Americans, and Pacific Islanders.*
This data set is uniquely suited for this analysis for a number of reasons. First, the sample size is
large comprising over 100,000 AFDC cases. This allows for the identification of important subgroups of
recipients including two parent ftilies

receiving AFDC-UP, and different racial/ethnic groups such as

blacks, Hispanics, and southeast Asians. Second, the data set contains information on the county, public
use micro data areas (PUMA), SMS~ and zip code of residence.9 Third, because the data set is based on
administrative dat~ the spells are accurately memured, without recall error, 10 The data allow for the
identification of monthly spells, while the PSID (the major data set used in this area) captures annual

%ere are several other data sek that will eventually be released as part of the CWPDP. These include amual
interviews with a small subsample to mllect information on labor market connection, family composition changes,
inmme, and other demographic variables. These efforts will result in a data set that includes all the strengths of
administrative data (accurate spells, relatively large sample sizes) along with the benefits of household survey data
(lots of control variables). There are also plans to match to state level UI and IRS databases to collect employment
information.
we
Hispanics can be of any race, separate race and ethnicity variables are ~
data is assigned by the case worker.

provided on the LDB.

The

me public use version of the data identifies the all PUMAS and all counties with 100,000 residents or more.
In addition I was given access to the full set of county identifiers and the zip code data.
‘%ere is some evidence of seaming in the LDB data. That is, a disproportionate number of spells end in
Demmher, and to a lesser extent, begin in January. California Department of Social Service analysts suggest that
this is a result of county record keeping procedures.

9

welfare spells. 11 As is well known, given that eligibility for AFDC is determined on a monthly bmis, the
use of annual data can create significant memurement error, or time aggregation, problems. Finally, data
from California provide an excellent sample to use for this study. California contains over 15 percent of
the nation’s AFDC caseload, more than twice the size of the next largest state (U,S, House of
Representatives,

1994), Furthermore, the state’s caseload is unique in terms of the its racial and ethnic

diversity and its sizeable AFDC-UP caseload. Lastly, the time period covered by the data set includes a
period of economic expansion and falling unemployment rates (1987-1990) followed by a recession with
rising unemployment rates (1990-1 992).
The dti set, however, has some important limitations. Because it is based on administrative dat<
the demographic information for the recipients is limited. For example, marital status and education are
irnpo~t

determinanfi of length of time on welfare, but are not available in the LDB data. 12 The approach

for obtaining unbiased estimates in the presence of these omitted vtiables is discussed below.
the survey is a srunple of Medi-Cal recipiency not AFDC receipt. If a woman st~

Second,

receiving AFDC, but

is never issued a Medi-Cal card, she would never appear in the sample. This problem is not likely to be
severe since the participation rate in Medicaid among AFDC recipients is over 97 percent (US House of
Representatives, 1994), According to state welfare analysts, application for Medl-Cal usually is done at
the same time application of AFDC is started. L~tly, people moving out of state are lost entirely and can
not be differentiated from people ending a welfare spell.
The monthly welfwe receipt information is used to construct information on spells. Welfare spells
are defined to be a period of continuous AFDC receipt. However, interruptions of one month are ignored

“The SLPP allows for monthly spells but it suffers from seaming problems @lank and Ruggles 1996) and a
relatively short -32 month - survey pericd. The N~Y allows for monthty spells but is only valid for the young
cohort that it covers. Since 1984, the PSID has ~llected monthly AFDC participation information.
nis is
retrospective data and is collected at amual interviews
‘*As mentioned above, data for a subsample of the LDB data set (1,000 cases in four counties) has been
supplement
with extensive demographic data obtained from household interviews. This w il 1 be used to examine
the sensitivity of the results to the excluded covariates.

10

in the construction of spells.13As is typical with panel dat% the welfare spells in the LDB data can be left
or right censored. A left censored spell is one in which the individual is observed to be on welfare in the
first period of the sample (Januw

1987) while a right censored spell is one in which the individual is still

on welfare when last observed (December 1992).

All left censored spells are dropped from the analysis

since one is unable to determine how long the individual has been on welfare, and therefore unable to
control for duration effects in the model. 14The remaining data cover all new spells started tier January
1987, covering a periodof71

months. Using this dat~ we construct a sample of all spells in the data set,

including repeat spells, Recidivism is quite common among AFDC participants and about one half of the
cases in our sample have more than one spell, The model outlined in the next section treats each spell
independently. In fiture work, this assumption may be relaxed, 15
This sample consists of about 250,000 AFDC spells which resdts in about 4 million monthly
transitions (the unit of observation for the discrete duration model). Because of the large sample size, the
results presented here use a 1 percent sample of all Medi-Ca.l recipients, also released by UC Data, The
1

percent sample contains a total of 23,560 AFDC spells. The final sample is obtained tier dropping all

lefi censored spells, cases with no children, UP cases without two parents, and FG cases without any
parent, cases where the parents are older than age 55, and cases with miscoded race data.

Parents over

age 54 were dropped because employment is less likely to be an option for them. After the sample
selectio~ there remain a total of 12,221 AFDC spells, or 191,294 monthly transitions. 16 About 7,100 are

‘3Acwrding to discussions with county welfare administrators, the majority of spell disruptions of one month
are due to recipients’ delay in submitting routine eligibility forms.
14An alter-native is to use distributioml assumptions to integrate out the welfare history for the left censored
observation as described by Heckman (1981).
‘sIgnoring multiple spells may reduce the efficiency of the results, but for the purposes of the question posed
here, it makes sense to treat spells individually as opposed to constructing some sort of multiple spell model.
Examining recidivism is very important and inbresting, but is being left to future work when the welfare utilization
data is merged with individual earnings data.
lbDropping left censored spells and “child only” cases (no parent in the recipiency unit) account for most of
the sample reduction. 5,783 spells are left censored; 4,670 spells are child-only; 1,181 UP spells have only one
Parent about 400 cases have parents older than 54; 50 have no children; and 10 have improper race codes. Child
only cases are quite common in California, accounting for about 20 percent of all AFDC cases (California DSS,

11

first spells and 3,600 are second spells
3.2 Local Labor Market Variables
Local labor market variables are assigned to each recipient in each month they are on welfare
based on their county of residence,

I consider several alternative labor market variables including

unemployment rates, employment, employment to population ratios, average earnings and the industrial
composition of employment. All employment and earnings data come from quarterly UI reports known
as 202 data.

The 202 data are establishment dat~ breed on a large sample of employers in various

industries, artd provide county level employment and earnings figures by 1-digit SIC code on a quarterly
basis. This is used to construct a time series of county level employment (total and by sector), average
earnings (total and by sector), and employment to population ratios, Average quarterly earnings are
constructed by dividing total quarterly payroll by quarterly employment. This is not a wage measure, but
instead reflects expected earnings conditional on obtaining a j ob. The earnings variable will increwe when
turnover is low and hours are high. Industrial composition is consh-ucted by dividing 1-digit level industrial
employment by total employment, Employment to population ratios use annual county population figures,
which are interpolated between decennial census years. The empirical work will explore the importance
of wages and employment by industry with a focus on the retail trade and se~ice sectors, as they are more
likely to employ the relatively low-skilled welfare participants (Brandon 1995).
Most studies have used unemployment rates as a memure of labor market opportunities, and I
consider them here as well. Unemployment rates at the county level are available montiy

but must be

estimated using an imputation procedure known as the “handbook method” (Bureau of Labor Statistics,
1992).

Several different data sources are used to construct these unemployment rates for counties

including the Current Population Survey, UI data on insured unemployment, and other establishment level

1994). me most mmmon reason for this is that the parent(s) is undocumented. Because these parents are not in
tbe aid group, I do not have any information about them. This is also the reason for dropping UP cases with ody
one parent. Pregnant women with no other children were ~ dropped as these women are eligible for AFDC in
the last trimester of their pregnancy.

12

survey, As discussed by Bartik (1995), because of its reliance on multiple data sets, the unemployment
rates may be subject to significant memurement error. This could be particularly troublesome when the
intimates are identified using cross county differences in the trends of labor market conditions as is the cme
when county and time effects are included. Furthermore, movements in the unemployment rate are
tiected by fluctuations in labor supply through changes in the labor force participation rate. This is less
likely to be the case with employment based measures, For both reasons, employment based measures are
preferable to unemployment based memures.
Critical to the study is sufficient variation in labor market conditions both across areas and over
time. Within the state, there is significant variation in the labor market conditions, For example, in June
1991, unemployment rates varied from relatively low levels in northern urban areas (6.1 Y. for Oakland,
5.4% for San Francisco), to moderate levels in the southern urban arem (8,5% in Los hgeles),

to very

high levels in the rural areas (12,2% in Fresno). Figure 1 shows unemployment rates by county for a few
large and illustrative counties. LA coun~ accounts for about 35 percent of the states’ total AFDC caseload,
while the other counties represented in the graph each account for 5-8 percent of the state caseload. The
recession hit sooner and harder in southern California. Unemployment rates in the northern urban areas
are generally lower than those found in the south throughout the period, Fresno county is an important
agricdtural couty in the state, and has the largest caseload outside the major urban areas. Unemployment
is much higher in these areas and is much more seasonal, reflecting the importance of the agricultural
sector. This variation will be important for the identification of local labor market effects, 17
3.3 Neighborhood Variables and Othe r Countv V ariable~
Because of limited demographic variables, I augment the LDB data by controlling for the
characteristics of the neighborhood in which the family resides, The neighborhood variables are measured
at the tip code level and are constructed from the 1990 Census summary files. These effects are resumed

“In some cases the relevant labor market area may be larger or smaller than the county. While sub-county
data is, in general, not available, using MSAS for labor market areas did not change the results significantly,

13

to be constant throughout the spell since they are measured at a single point in time. Variables examined
include poverty rates, median household income, high school completion rates, employment rates for men
and wome~ percent of ftilies

headed by single wome~ urban composition, and percent of women never

married. Many of these variables are also tabtiated by race and ethnicity. In practice, these variables were
found to be highly collinear, and only a subset are used in the estimates. The literature on neighborhood
effects, as reviewed by Jencks and Mayer (1990), provides evidence that zip code or census tract areas are
prefemed to county, P~

or SMSA arem, There area total of 1,106 zip codes represented in the data,

or about 26 per county.l*
Resources spent on job training and education may vary significantly across counties. Accordingly,
the empirical work also includes measures of participation and cost of the Greater Avenues for
Independence (GAIN) progrm

California’sGAIN program is the nation’sfirst and largest welfare to work

program and stresses educatio~ basic skills, training, and job search, The GAIN data is available annually
and is used to construct two variables, county participation rate and expenditures per GAIN participant,

4. Model
The length of time that an individual receives welfare can be thought of as the outcome of a
dynamic optimization process, where the individual compares utility on and off welfare at each point in
time.

This should take into account not ordy current income (and utility) on and off welfme, but

expectations about fiture income given the participation decision made today. Primary routes off welfare
include labor market success (either increasing hours or getting a new job), and, for female heads of
household, marriage. A standard implication of dynamic utility based models is that increases in resources
available on welfare (e,g. welfare benefits) lead to longer welfare spells while increases in resources off

18Zip codes represent a relatively small geographic area. While census tracts contain about 4,000 to 5,000
persons, zip de areas in California average about 10-20 times the size of a census tract. They are smaller than
PUMAS, which contain at least 100,000 persons, and MSAS.

14

welfare (e.g. higher wages, higher likelihood ofjobs, greater marriage opportunities, stronger labor market
conditions) lead to shorter welfwe spells. Thus, local labor market conditions naturally enter the problem
through changing current m well as future earnings prospects for the parent(s) in AFDC families as well
as the potential spouses of the female headed recipients, Therefore we would expect that increases in
employment and decreases in unemployment rates, though increasing the probability of job market success,
and increases in real earnings, through increases in the returns to working, will decrease the length of
welfare spells, Models of welfare participation dso incorporate the “costs” of participating in the program
which can include time and money costs of application as well as the “stigma” or distaste of welfare
participation. These costs were introduced m an explanation for the fact that the take-up rate for AFDC
is far less than 100 percent (Moffltt 1983).
Ern~irical Model
The detetiants

of welfare spells are estimated using a discrete time haz~d model,’9 The basic

element of a duration model is the huard or exit rate P(t, Z), which captures the probability of leaving
AFDC in the tth period given continuous welfare receipt for the last t-l periods and covariates Z, The
hazard rate is used to cons~ct two other distributions of interest: the duration distribution and the survivor
function.

The duration distribution ~(t,Z) characterizes the likelihood that an individual experiences t

periods of continuous AFDC receipt and the survivor fiction

F(t,Z) depicts the probability that an

individ~will experience a welfare spell that lasts at least t periods.20 Both distributions are conditional

on covariates Z and on initial entry onto welfue.

The probability of observing an uncensored spell of

length T is the duration distribution and the probability of observing a right censored spell is the survivor

lgAn introduction to duration models can be found in Heckman and Singer (1984), Kalbfleisch
(1980), and bnwster
(1990).

and Prentice

%nm a form for the hazard rate is specified, one can construct the estimates for the duration distribution and
survivor function using the properties of conditioml probabilities. In the discrete case, the hazard rate, duration
distribution and survivor function are linked by /([)

= S(t-1)

P(t) and S(I) = fi
7.1

15

[ 1 -P(T

- 1) ] .

fmction.

Thus, given fictional

form wsumptions, the likelihood function for the sample is,

L(T,Z) = fi j( T,, Z,)l-6’F( T,, Z,)*’
J=l

(1)

where the indicator variable bi is equal to one if the spell is right censored.
Given a specification for the exit probability, the model is emily estimated using conventional
maximum likelihood methods,

Suppose we speci~ the exit probability is a f~ction

of the available

demographic variables and the time varying local labor market variables. Estimates of the labor market
variables from this model may be bimed for several remons,

First, there are omitted individual

characteristics that may be correlated with the labor market variables. For example, suppose that persons
with low education levels and poor employment prospects are more likely to be located in areas with
adverse economic conditions. Even if there was no relationship between welfare spells and local economic
conditions, the estimates would imply an effect. While this omitted variable bias is present to a certain
extent in all studies of local labor markets, it maybe particularly problematic in this application due to the
limited number of variables in the administrative data. In order to address this problem, as well as that of
omitted county characteristics, we include both county level fixed effects and the zip code level
neighborhood variables, Second, the family’s residence may be endogenously determined. If no family
moves during the sample then the county level effects will also eliminate this potential problem, However,
fties

do move and if ftiies

move in response to changes in labor market conditions, then the estimates

will be biased, For example, suppose families anticipating a long spell move out of their expanding labor
market in response to higher costs of living. If they move to an area with worse economic conditions then
our estimates will, m above, be biased upwards. In an extension to the main results we use the family’s
county of residence ~ the beginning of the spell to assign labor market variables,

Third, the composition

of the welfme caseload may change over the business cycle, When times are bad, we would expect that
the marginal new entrant will have more education and experience than those joining the rolls during good
times. If that is true, then it will act to dampen the estimated effects.
16

Lastly, the LDB data does not

identi~ what happens to welfwe recipients when they leave AFDC, Many of the recipients are undoubtedly
leaving for reasons other than labor market transitions, The estimated effects on earnings exits will be
larger than those estimated here.21
In the empirical work, the exit probability is modeled as a logit probability:

‘(f~z)

(2)

=

exp (~f+Zify)
I+exp(af+Zi,Y)

The ~ are dummy variables for length of the spell to date, accounting for the bmic duration properties of
the model. This non-parametric specification for the duration effects is ve~ flexible and can easily be
implemented with the data set. To implement the specifications in the discussion above, the vector Zj[
contains individual covariates, labor market variables, neighborhood variables, local area fixed effects, and
time effects, To control for the generosity of the welfare system, the regressions also include the combined
value of AFDC and Food Stamps benefifi. This variable only varies over time, however, and can not be
identified with time effects in the model.22
The Iogit specification has been used ofien in the literature (Bane and Ellwood,
1986; Fitzgerald,

1994 and 1995; and Hoynes

and MaCurdy,

1993 and 1994)

1983; Ellwood,

and is attractive

because

it

allows for time-varying covariates, a flexible form for the effect of time on welfare on exits, and is
relatively easy to estimate.23 The specification also easily allows for interactions between the duration

“Dropping left ~nsored speUs will likely lead to an upward bias in the labor market effects. In this case, the
results should be interpreted as the effects on new entrants. In addition, if those moving out of state come from
the worst labor markets, the estimates may be an underestimate, Manski’s example of a spurious relationship
between labor market variables and outcome variables (Manski 1993) is not likely to hold here since welfare
recipients represent a small fraction of the potential labor force and not all recipients enter the labor force when
they leave welfare.
me ~mbined benefit from AFDC and Fd
Stamps is equal to 70% of the maximum AFDC benefit plus the
Food Stamp maximum bemfit reflecting the fact that AFDC inmme is taxed in calculating the Food Stamp benefit.
AFDC benefits are set at the state level and do not vary within California. Food stamps are federally set.
‘Alternatively,
Blank (1989), Fitzgerald (1992), and O’Neill et al (1984, 1987) use continuous models to
analy~ welfare spells, Fitzgemld (1992) and O’Neill et al (1984,1987) use a complementary log-log specification
which results from aggregating the continuous proportional hazard into discrete intervals. Both the discrete and
continuous approaches easily allow for time varying covariates and including unobserved heterogeneity.
The
discrete approach generally has a computational advantage.

17

effects and the economic determinants of welfare spells. The duration effects cY~
determine how the exit
probability changes over the spell and the covariates Z act to scale the exit probabilities up or down
uniformly.

5. Descriptive

Analysis

Table 1 compares the distribution of spell lengths in our LDB sample to estimates from other
studies using monthly data The table compares estimates of the probability that a spell lasts at least 6, 12,
and 24 months. Each of these are non-pararnetric(Kaplan-Meier) estimates and do not control for any
covariates. The first row shows that 72 percent of AFDC spells in the LDB data lwt 6 months or more,
and 36 percent last 2 yeas or more. This data is fairly consistent with the other studies using monthly
welfare participation data (Fitzgerald, 1995; Blank and Ruggles, 1996; Gritz and MaCurdy, 1992, Harris
1993). The Gritz and MaCurdy estimates imply longer spells but they are based no a sample of youths,
a group who typically have longer spells. The LDB data shows somewhat longer spell lengths compared
to the SIPP which may be due to California’s relatively high AFDC benefits and differences in the
composition of the AFDC population.
To explore the differences in spells for demographic groups, Table 2 presents estimates of the
distribution

of length of AFDC spell for families with various characteristics.

The table presents the

probability that a spell lasts less than or equal to 6 months, 1 year, 2 years and 4 years. Like the estimates
in table 1, these are non-p~ametic

and do not control for any covariates,

Overall, 28 percent of spells

last 6 months or less, while 38 last more than 2 years. AFDC-UP spells are somewhat shorter than single
parent AFDC spells. While 49 perwnt of AFDC-UP spells end within 1 year, ordy 45 percent of AFDC-FG
spells end in that period. There are striking differences in the length of spells for different racial groups.
31 percent of spells end within 6 months for whites, compared to 23 percent among Blacks, and 28 percent
among Hispanics. Furthermore, teen parents and ftilies
older parents living in non-urban areas.
18

living in urban areas have longer spells than

To explore the relationship between local labor market conditions and the length of time on
welfme, Figures 2a and 2b plot the probabilities that a spell lasts a year or less against average labor market
conditions for each of the 58 counties in Califomia,24 Figure 2a uses unemployment rates and Figure 2b
mes employment to population ratios. The points are weighted by the size of the county, with larger circles
representing larger counties. The general pattern provides support that stronger labor markets (lower
unemployment

rates, higher employment to population ratios) are associated with shorter spells. The

figures also show that California’s larger, more urban counties tend to have stronger labor markets than
the smaller, more rural counties,
Figure 3 shows the empirical hazard rate for leaving welfare. The circles indicate the estimate of
the h-d

rtie and the vertical line indicties the 95 percent confidence interval wound the estimate, fier

rising for the first few months, the h~ard declines throughout the spell. This is consistent with other
studies,
Tables 3 and 4 pr=ent descriptive statistics on the estimation data set. Table 3 presents means of
all variables that are constant over the spell. About one third of the spells are right censored which is
mostly accounted for by spells starting in the last two years of the sample, Spell lengths average 12 months
for uncensored spells and 24 months for right censored spells, About 15 percent of the spells are AFDCUP spells. The MALEHEAD variable is defied as equal to 1 if the ftily

is a headed by a single male

(e.g. and not a UP recipient). The PREGNANT variable is defined as equal to 1 if the woman is pregnant
with no other children in the household at the beginning of the spell.25 PREGNANT along with the
dummies for age of the youngest child are exhaustive and mutually exclusive.
Table 4 presen~ the descriptive statistics for variables that vary over the spell. There is one
obsemation for each of the monthly transitions in the data. The unemployment rate averages 7.5 percent

me
“average” unemployment rate is constructed as a weighted average of each period’s rate, using the
caseload as the weight. The same is done for average employment to population ratios.
%s

is verified by the birth of a child in the first 3-4 months of the spell.

19

over the period while average quarterly wages are 6,699 dollars. All earnings variables are in 1992 dollars,
The employment to population ratio averages 0.40. The composition of employment is captured by the
nine employment by sector variables. Overall, set-vices are the largest sector, followed by retail trade and
manufacturing.
fie neighborhood characteristics and GAIN variables are summarized at the bottom of the table.2G
Urban-Inside is equal to one if, based on their zip code of residence, the family resides in an urbanized area
while the Urban-Outside variable is one if the family lives in an urban are% but outside the urbanized area.
86 percent of AFDC cases reside in urbanized areas while ordy 4 percent reside in turd areas. MED~C
is the median household income and FE MNVMAR is the percent of women over age 18 who are never
married. The GAfN participation rate is the number of participants divided by the number of AFDC adults.
The second GAIN variable is the average GAIN expenditures per GAIN participant, which reflects the
irttensity of the program.

6. Results
61
~s

Table 5 presents the initial estimates from the discrete duration model before adding any labor
market variables. The first specification in table 5 includes dummies for spell duration (to control for
duration effec~), the AFDC&FO guarantee, and family demographic characteristics such as age of head,
number and ages of childr~ AFDC eligibilitywe, and race/ethnicity, The demographic variables are set
as of the beginning of the spell and are not time varying.27 Duration dummies for single month are
provided for the first 12 months in the spell, followed by dties

for 3 month periods for the next 2 years,

followed by dummies for 6 month periods for the last 3 years. This model was selected tier extensive

‘Some

cases in the LDB data were missing zip codes.

11,458 of the 12,221 spells have a valid zip code.

me
otdy individual characteristics that are time varying are the number and ages of children. Because of
the potential endogeneity of fertility outcomes, these variables are fixed as of the beginning of the spell.

20

testing using conventional testing methods. The duration effects from the logit model, not shown here,
show the same pattern as the unconditional hazard in Figure 3, The probability of exiting welfare rises for
the first few months, then declines steadily throughout the length of the spell. These duration dummies are
jointly significant at the 1 percent level in all specifications. The individual significance of the dummies
is shong through spell lengths of three years, but the standard error is quite large for the last few periods,
The dependent variable is an exit from welfare. Therefore, a positive coefficient implies that an increase
in the covariate leads to higher exit probabilities and shorter spells.
These resdts show that longer spells are found for younger mothers, with more children, and with
younger children. Single parent families headed by men tend to have shorter spells than those headed by
women.

This may be due to better labor market opportunities that are not being controlled for in the

regression. These rmults also show significant differences by race. Hispanics and blacks both have longer
spells than whites, with blacks having the longest spells. This is consistent with analyses of young women
on welfare using the NLSY (Griti and MaCurdy, 1992). Cambodians, Laotians, and Vietnamese are found
to have dramatically longer speUsthan any other racial group. Most AFDC recipients from these countries
are recent immigrants with current or previous refugee status, The groups are generally thought to have
longer spe~s than ntive born individuals due to limited English proficiency and labor market skills,2* The
coefficient on AFDC&FO has the wrong sign, implying that increases in welfare benefits lead to shorter
spells. This variable, however, exhibits only time variation and may be proxying for other trends in the
state. Once the time effects are added to the regressio~ the benefit vtiable is not identified and is dropped
from the regression.
The second spectication in table 5 adds controls for selected county and neighborhood variables.
The neighborhood variables, assigned by zip code using the 1990 Census, are included as crude controls

Wpon arrival to the US, rekgees are immediately enrolled in public assistance programs, and the conditions
to maintain eligibility are more lenient than with other AFDC participants. This may also contribute to their longer
spells. California has a large number of refugees relative to other states. The main results of the paper hold when
persons in these racial groups are dropped from the sample.

21

for omitted individual characteristics such as education, prior labor market experience, and marital status,
all of which are important predictors of welfare dependency (Bane and Ellwood 1983) and may dso be
correlated with the labor market variables,
captured by high pove~

For example, it is possible that “bad” neighborhoods as

rates and low education levels are more likely to be located in areas with

depressed labor markets, By omitting neighborhood effects, one would get a biased estimate of the role
of labor markets in welfare dependen~.m Because of the limited number of individual covariates available
in the data, the coefficients on the neighborhood variables should not be interpreted as “neighborhood
effects’’.30 The estimates in (2) show that persons living in urban arem, with lower median household
income, and with more never married women have longer AFDC spells,31 Adding these neighborhood
variables dramatically reduces the differences between whites, Hispanics, and blacks, resulting in no
significant differences between Hispanics and whites,
Model (2) in Table 5 also shows that higher GAIN participation is associated with shorter spells
and higher GAIN expenditures per participant with longer spells. Interpreting this as a pure program effect
would suggest that GAIN is successful at moving participants from welfare to work. Higher G~
expenditures may be a result of more intensive trtig

programs which may delay employment.

The

evaluation of the GAIN program supports these interpretations (Riccio et al, 1994).

me implication of omitting important individual covariates can also be addressed by allowing for unobserved
heterogeneity such as in Blank (1989). Fitzgerald (1994) finds that adding unobsemed heterogeneity does not
change the irnportanm of the labor market effects. Further, the importance of unobserved heterogeneity has been
found to be small when a flexible form for duration effects is included (Meyer 1990).

‘It is difficult empirically to separately identify effects that operate through one’s own background
characteristics compared to the effects that operate though the characteristics of one’s local area (neighborhood
effects).
In this study, the prevalenw of omitted individual characteristics makes the interpretation even more
difficdt. In addition, the neighborhood variables are assigned based on the current residence for the individual.
Given the emphasis in the literature on schools and other institutional features, the neighborhood where one was
mised may also be important. The difficulties associated with identifying neighborhood and family effects is well
recognized in the literature and is discussed at length by Jencks and Mayer (1990).
311naddition to the variables presented in model (2), race specific high school graduation rates, poverty rates,
and employment rates were examined. The neighborhood variables are highly collinear so ordy a subset are

presented. Many alternative specifications were estimated and the results are not sensitive to the particular
specification presented here.
22

Table 6 explores the economic significance of the covariates by presenting selected characteristics
of the estimated spell durations for alternative values for the covariates using the estimates of model (2)
in Table 5. The table includes estimates of the probability the spell is completed in less than 6 months, 12
months, 2 yeas, and 4 years. The first row of Table 6 gives the predicted values for the spell distribution
using baseline characteristics (described in the table). me largest effects are found for race of the head,
age of the youngest child, and gender of the head, For example, only 39 percent of spells for pregnant
women without any other children end within one year compared to 55 percent of spells where the
youngest child is over age 6. Because the existence of pregnancy benefits is not particdarly well known,
this large difference for ftrst time pregnancies may reflect unobsemed differences concerning the propensity
to have a long spell. Single parent families headed by men are 24 percent more likely to complete a spell
within a year compared to female headed households. Black families and teen parents are both 10 percent
less likely to complete spells within one year. Individuals in rural areas have the shortest spells while those
living inside urbanized areas have the longest spells. The other neighborhood variables and GAIN variables
are statistically significant but have fairly small impacts on the length of the welfare spell.
Resuks Bwed

on Unemployment

Rates

To begin the examination of labor market variables, let us consider the effects of unemployment
rates and wages on the length of welfare spells. I have argued above that employer based data is preferable
to unemployment rates but I start with unemployment rates in order to compare my resdts to those in the
literature.

The results using average wages and unemployment rate are provided in table 7.32 The first

specification does not include county or time effects and shows that the county unemployment rate has a
negative and significant effect on welfare spells implying that higher unemployment rates lead to longer
spells. Higher earnings are associated with longer spells, which (although insignificant) is the opposite of
what thmry wotid predict. Because of many omitted county variables, it is not clear how to interpret this

%s
table and the remaining tables of estimates suppresses all covariates except the labor market variables.
The full set of estimates is available from the author.

23

coefficient. For example, higher earnings may reflect a higher skilled employment bme which may not be
accessible to the average welfare participant. In order to control for the differences between the counties,
specification (2) includes county tied effects for the 58 California counties. Comparing the results to those
in (l), adding county tied effects turns the coefficient on average earnings from negative and insignificant
to positive and significant and increases the magnitude of the unemployment effect by about 20 percent.33
Thus, in contrast to the resdts in Fitzgerald (1994), adding the county fixed effects make the results
stronger!
I suggested above that one reason thti this approach is preferred over the caseload approach is that
one can control for duration effects. In order to examine the significance of including duration dummies,
I ran a specification that included ordy the unemployment rate, earnings, and a constant term. In those
results (not shown here) the coefficient on the unemployment rate was about 50 percent larger than that
presented in (l). This upward bias resldts from the fact that persons living in areas with higher
unemployment rates have, on average, longer spells.
Returning to the resdts in Table 7, with county fixed effects the results are identified from within
county changes in unemployment rates and wages, If there was some factor, such m a change in state
policy concerning poor families, that affected all counties in the state and was correlated with the state’s
local labor market conditions then these estimat~ woldd be biased.34 In order to address this possible bias,
the third column of Table 7 adds period dummies to the model. This has no impact on the wages but
renders the unemployment rate small and insignificant. There are at least two explanations for this result.
The fit is that the unemployment rate is measured with a lot of error. Once county and time effects are
added, what remains is mostly noise. The second is that there is not enough variation in the trends in local

3b resdts not shown here, adding controls for the percent distribution of employment by sector (1-digit SIC)
also reverses the sign on quarterly wages. While somewhat difficult to interpret, these variables may control for
differences in the skill imposition of the labor market. These measures do not efibit much time series variation
and are measured veq imprecisely after county fixed effects are included.
~Examples

include an increase in the state minimum wage and reductions in state AFDC benefits.

24

labor market conditions across the counties to separately identi$ county, time artd labor market effects.
As we will see below, the alternative memures of job opportunities w robust to including time effects.
For this reason, and because and imputation procedure is necessary to construct county level
unemployment rate series, memurement error is the more likely explanation.35
In specifications (4) and (5), the average earnings variable is replaced by average earnings in
services and average earnings in retail trade. Earnings in services prove to be important for welfare
recipients, but surprisingly, earnings in retail trade are not statistically significant. This result is quite robust
and holds for alternative controls for job availability and holds in the absence of the period effects. An
analysis of variance shows that retail earnings vary less over time than service earnings which may explain
this result. As we will see below, retail sector employment growth is important.
Resuh

Bosed on Employmnt

Table 8 presents estimates which replace the unemployment rate with the log of employment in
the county. Each of the specifications in tie table include county fixed effects. Accordingly, the coefficient
on log employment captures the effects of employment growth on the probability of leaving welfare.3s The
table shows that in each specificatio~ higher employment and wage growth lead to significantly shorter
spells, These estimates are virtually unchanged by the inclusion of period effects, shown in column 2, The
last two columns of Table 8 replace the log of county employment with the log of service employment
(model 3) and retail tiade (model 4), This shows that higher growth in retail trade and service employment
lead to shorter spells.
Results Based on Employment

to Population

R&”o

‘A risk of estimating heavily saturated models such as this one (including time and county effects) is that the
controls will absorb some of the effects of interest, For example, suppose that county labor markets have
persistent differences or that there is some common (state) seasoml component to employment patterns.
Blanchard and Katz (1992) find that shocks to state labor markets tend to be transitory, disappearing within about
10 years.
~ote that adding employment growth directly in the regression,
very similar results to those presented here.

25

with or without county fixed effects,

shows

The final measure ofjob availability is the employment to population ratio. The results, presented
in Table 9, are qualitatively very similar to log employment regressions. Higher wages and employment
to population ratios are associated with significantly shorter spells. Adding time effects reduces the size
of the employment to popdation ratio by about 50 percent, but the wage results remain unchanged.

The

results in the lmt two columns shows, consistent with the results in Table 7, that service sector earnings
growth but not retail trade growth leads to shorter spells. In general, it is striking how consistent the
estimates are for the earnings variables across the different specifications shown in these three tables.
6.2 Simulated Effects of Chanzes in Labo r Market VarI“ables
The resdts in Tables 7-9 suggest that labor market variables play a statistically significant role in
deted

g the length of AFDC spells. However, it is difficult to interpret the magnitude of their impact

because of the non-linear specification. Table 10 presents simulations of the effects of changes in labor
market variables on the distribution of the length of welfare spells, Each of the seven panels in the table
present the sirntiations for a different speci6cation of the model. The figures in the table show the percent
change (relative to the baseline specification) in the probability that a spell is completed within a given time
period for a given change in the labor market variable. Each of the simulated changes in the labor market
variables represent @ical within coun~ changes in the variable observed over the 1987-1992 period.

In

general, these can be interpreted as variations we might expect between the peak and the trough of a
business cycle.
Panel (A) presents estimates from model (2) in table 7 which includes controls for the
unemployment rate, quarterly earnings and county fixed effects. The first row of the table shows that a
decrease in the unemployment rate of 3 percentage points leads to a 10 percent increase in the probability
that a spell lasts 6 montis or less, and a 8.6 percent increase in the probability that a spell lasts 1 year or
less.

In the Imt column of the table the distribution is summarized by showing the effect on the AFDC

caseload assuming that the entry rate into AFDC is constant and that the effect is permanent. These results
show that a 3 percentage point reduction in the unemployment rate would lead to a 10 percent reduction
26

in the AFDC caseload and a 5 percent increase in real quarterly earnings would lead to an 8 percent
reduction in the caseload.37
The next three panels present simulations using the log of employment as the measure of job
opportunities, where each specification includes time and county fixed effects. Panel (B) shows that a 10
percent increase in coun~ employment impermanent,would lead to a 9.7 percent reduction in the cmeload.
A 10 percent increase in service or retail employment show slightly lower reductions in the cmeload. The
last three panels present sirrtdations using the employment to popdation ratio. Here a 3.5 percentage point
increase in the ratio leads to an 8 percent reduction in the caseload while a 5 percent real increase in
earnings leads to a 7.8 percent reduction in the cmeload. Panel (F) shows that a 5 percent increme in real
service sector earnings leads to a 5 percent reduction in the caseload.

These results, and those for

employment above, suggest that the service sector is less important for welfare recipients that the industry
wide measures. Given that welfare participants are disproportionately represented in the service and retail
trade sectors (Brartdon 1995), this is somewhat surprising, For comparability, the simulated changes in
service and retail trade earnings (and employment) have been set at the same level m that used for the
aggregate variable, In most cases, however, services and retail trade grew more than the industry wide
variable and using the actual changes result in larger reductions in the caseload than those shown here,
The simdations in Table 10 show that there is a great deal of uniformity in the estimates across the
various specifications for the local labor market conditions.

On average, a typical fluctuation in job

opportunities over a business cycle (from trough to peak), i~permanent, would lead to an 8-10 percent
reduction in the AFDC caseload. Typical changes in earnings lead to a 7-8 percent reduction in the
caseload, These changes can add up to large effects. For example, an increase in employment growth of
10 percent combined with a 5 percent real increase in earnings would lead to a 16,2 percent reduction in

37clear1ythe assumption
of constant entry rate is not a valid one.

However, this is a convenient way to
summarize the effect of changes in labor market variables on the distribution of spells. Assuming that the entry
rate was counter cyclical --rising in periods of economic downturns-- the results here would be strengthened.

27

the AFDC caseload,
6.3 Results for demopraDhic mou Ds

Previous research has found significant differences in the responsiveness of different groups of
welfare recipients to changes in tax and transfer environment (for a review see Moffht 1992),

Descriptive

tables presented earlier also revealed that the average length of welfare spells differs, in some cases
substantially, across demographic groups,

Accordingly, we may expect to see differences in the

responsiveness to labor market conditions, which may be very important for policy purposes. Table 11
presents estimates from regressions which allow for differential effects across various demographic groups,
where two regressions are estimated for each group. These specifications are identicrd to those presented
in columns 1 and 2 of Table 9 and include the employment to population ratio and the earnings variable.
The first specification includes county effects and the second includes county and time effects.

All

parameters are allowed to vary, although the table just shows the estimates for the labor market variables.
For comparison the first panel of Table 11 shows the resdts for all families. The bracketed figures in the
table give the percent change in the caseload resulting horn a specified change in the labor market variable,
as calcdated in the last column of table 10 (and the magnitude of the changes in the labor market variables
match those presented there).
In general the resdts with time effects are less precisely estimated, but the coefficients show similar
patterns, The second panel shows that AFDC-UP fmilies are more sensitive to labor market conditions
than single parent families. This is sensible since AFDC-UP families contain two potential earners, and
since they ty-picrdlyhave more substantial labor market experience and higher potential wages than single
parent recipients (Hoynes, 1996), This is also consistent with the aggregate caseload studies which find
greater sensitivity for AFDC-UP cmeloads (Peskin 1993). Resdts not reported in the table suggest that
there are other important differenm in the determinants of welfare spells for the two groups. For example,
while tie spells for single parents with pre-school aged children are significantly longer than those with
older children, this is not true for ~

recipients, This seems sensible since two paent families are more
28

able to specialize in home production and labor market participation. Hispanic two parent families have
significantly shorter spells than their white counterparts, while Hispanic single parent families tend to stay
on welfare longer than white families.
The third panel of Table 11 shows that whites are found to be slightly less (although not
significantly less) sensitive to labor market conditions than either blacks or Hispanics. This result is also
found in Fitzgerald (1994, 1995) and is consistent with the evidence that white women are more likely to
leave welfwe through marriage and less likely to leave welfwe through employment relative to blacks
(Bane and Ellwood, 1983; B!@

1989; Blank and Ruggles, 1996), The results also show that teen parents

are not sensitive to changes in job opportunities, perhaps reflecting their lack of work experience and labor
force attachment.

Residents of urban areas are more sensitive to changes in labor market conditions

compmed to non-urban groups.38
b general, these restits are consistent with the literature on the effects of Iocd economic conditions
on labor market outcomes of different demographic groups, Bartik(1991) and Bound and Holzer (1995)
find larger responses to changes in economic conditions for blacks, less educated workers, and older
workers. They argue that this is due to lower migration rates among these groups. When the economy
turns down, workers with lower propensities to migrate are hurt more by the downturn relative to those
with higher migration propensities. This is an alternative explanation for the greater sensitivity among
blacks, Hispanics, and possibly female headed households,
6.4 Extension$

The county fixed effects will control for Unobsewed coun~ factors which arejxed

over time. If

there are changes over the sample, such as those induced by endogenous location decisions, then the

%me of these results are not particularly robust. For example, when the employment to population ratio is
replad by the log of employment, UP families are no longer found to have significantly greater sensitivity. In
some specifications, the differences between the racial/ethnic groups is much stronger than those presented here.
In ge=ml, the large standard errors on many of the estimates is reflected in part by the smaller sample sizes and
the diffemnw btwmn groups is not statistically significant. In fume work, estimating non-fully interacted models
may clear up these inconsistencies.

29

estimates will be biased. For example, if families who are likely to have long spells move from relatively
strong labor marke~ to relatively weak ones, the estimates will be biased in favor of finding a labor market
effect. To address this, we use information on the family’s county of residence at the beginning of the spell
to assign the labor market variables,

This information is used in both a reduced form and instrumental

variables estimation procedure. The reduced form model simply assigns the county fixed effect and labor
market variables based on county of residence at the beginning of the spell instead of current county of
residence.

The IV estimates instrument for the current county labor market variables using the labor

market variables for the initial county, These results are shown in Table 12. Each of the specifications
match that used in model (2) of Table 9 and include employment to population ratio, earnings, county wd
time effects. These results show that the estimates for employment to population ratio are reduced
somewha~ but remain Wcally

signi6cant. The earnings parameter remains unchanged. The robustness

to this extension is not surprising since migration rates are fairly low in this popdation, especially between
counties.39
I have hypothesized that the average level of job readiness of a welf~e entrant will be higher for
those entering during bad times compared to good. If this is true, the main estimates will understate the
effect of local labor market conditions on welfare spells. In an attempt to control for the composition of
the en~ populatio~ I included several variables measuring the absolute and relative economic conditions
during the period that the spell began. In each of these specifications, the variables were insignificant and
the main restits did not change.

7. Conclusion

39Long (1988), in a comprehensive amlysis of migration patterns over the past three decades, finds the
likelihood of moving within a munty b be over 2.5 times more likely than moving across counties (within a state).
This differenw is particularly striking for public assistance recipients who are 5 times more likely to move within
counties than across them, In the LDB sample, about 9 percent of families are observed to move across county
lines. The probability of moving is higher for whites, younger heads, and families headed by women.

30

This study shows that local labor market conditions have a significant impact on welfare spells for
most demographic groups. Minorities, r~idents of urban areas and two parent families are more sensitive
to changes in local labor market conditions. The resdts are robust to including county fixed effects and
time effects, On average, a typical employment fluctuation over the business cycle (from trough to peak),
impermanent, wodd lead to an 8-10 percent decrease in the AFDC cmeload.
earnings
would

generate

somewhat

lead to sizeable
Can economic

I believe,

reductions

reduce

effects.

The combined

in the caseload,

growth alone eliminate

show that the mswer

and wages

smaller

is no.

but do not eliminate

changes

of these two changes,

in quarterly
if permanent,

on the order of 15 percent,

the reliance

Optimistic

effect

Typical

on public resistance?

assumptions

the demand

about permanent

The resdts
increases

in this paper,
in employment

for welfare. However, this is a case of whether the

glass is half emp~ or half Ml. It is equally important to point out that there is a significant relationship
between

economic conditions and welfare exits, which contribute to the mounting evidence that

employment is an increasingly impotit

route for achieving independence, Thus if time limits for welfare

recipients are implemented, then linking them to local labor market conditions may be important.
me impacts in this study may underestimate the true effect of local labor markets on welfare spells
for two reasons. First, as mentioned in the introduction, local economic conditions may affect both entry
into welfare as well as length of time on welfare condition

on entry. We would expect that, on average,

individuals entering welfare during bad times will have higher skill levels and shorter spells than those
entering in good times. This factor alone will lead to a negative relationship between economic conditions
and spell lengths. Second, this sample does not contain any information about post-welfare employment.
Not all hose exiting the program are entering employment. A competing risks model, with emplo~ent
as one of the routes off welfare, wotid likely show larger labor market effects. Lastly, the earnings
measures used in this study are fairly crude, measuring at best variation in the returns to work in 1 digit
indus~ classes. Welfare recipients typically obtain low stiled jobs, and given the relative decline in wages
for low wage workers, using a more disaggregate wage measure may show huger effects.
31

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Acs, Gregory and Douglas Wissoker. 1991, “The Impact of Local Labor Markets on the Employment
Patterns of Young Inner-City Males. ” Mimeo, Urban Institute.
Bane, Mary Jo and David T. Ellwood. 1983, “The Dynamics of Dependence: The Routes to Self
Sufficiency”, Prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, OffIce of the
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation. Cambridge, MA: Urban Systems Research and
Engineering, Inc.
Bartik, Timothy J, 1991. ~o Benefitsfiom State and Local Economic Development Policies? W.E,
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research. Kalamazoo Michigan,
Bartik, Timothy J. 1995. “The Distributional Effects of Local Labor Demand and Industrial Mix.”
forthcoming, Journal of Urban Economics,
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Lawrence F. Kati, 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activi~ 1:1992.
Blank, Rebecca. 1989. “Analyzing the Length of Welfare Spells.”
39(3):245-273.

Journal of Public Economics.

Blank, Rebecca and Patricia Ruggles, 1996. “When Do Women Use AFDC and Food Stamps: The
Dynamics of Eligibility versus Participahon.”~e Journal of Human Resources31 (1):57 -89,,
Brandon, Peter. 1995. “What Happens to Mothers tier AFDC?” Focus 17:2(FalWinter).
of Wisconsin.

University

Bound, John and Harry Holzer. 1993. “Industrial Shifts, Skill Levels, and the Labor Market for White and
Black Males”. me Review of Economics and Statistics, August.
Bound, John and Harry Holzer. 1995, “Structural Changes, Employment Outcomes, and Population
Adjustments Among Whites and Blacks: 1980- 1990.” Institute for Research on Poverty
Discussion Paper #1057-95.
Cain, Glen and Ross Finnie, 1990. “The Black-White Difference in Youth Employment: Evidence from
Demand Side Factors.” Journal of Lubor Economics 8:S364-95.
California Department of Social Services. 1994, Unpublished memo on child only cues.
Duncq

Greg J. And Saul D. Hoffman. 1990. “Welfare Benefits, Economic Opportunities, and Out-Of
-Wedlock Births Among Teenage Girls.” Demography 27(4):5 19-535,

Ellwood, David T. 1986. “Targeting Would-be Long Term Recipients of AFDC”. Prepared for the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation. Princeton, NJ: Mathematical Policy Research, Inc.
Fitzgerald, John. 1992. “Welfare Durations and the Marriage Market: Evidence from the Survey of

32

Income and Program Participation, ” Journal of Human Resources, 26(3):545-561
Fitzgerald, John, 1994. “A Hazard Model for Welfare Durations with Unobserved Location-Specific
Effects.” Mimeo, Bowdoin College.
Fitzgerald, John. 1995. “Local Labor Markets and Local Area Effects on Welfare Duration. ” Journal of
Applied Policy and Management, Winter 1995.
Frwm~

Richard. 1981. “Economic Determinants of Geographic and Individual Variation in the Labor
Market Position of Young Persons.” h The Youth Lubor Market Problem: Its nature, Causes,
and Consequences, ed. R Freeman and D. Wise, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,

Gritz, Mark and Thomas MaCurdy. 1992. “Transitions from Welfare to Work. ” Prepared for the U,S.
Department of Health and Human Services, OffIce of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation. Mimeo, Stanford University.
Harris, Kathleen. 1993. “Work and Welfare Among Single Women in Poverty,” American Journal of
Sociolofl 99(2):317-352.
Heckman, James. 1981. “The Incidental Parameters Problem and the Problem of Lnitial Conditions in
Estimadng a Discrete Time-Discrete Data Stochastic Process,” in Structural Analysis of Discrete
Data with Econome&icApplications, eds Charles Manski and Daniel McFadden, Cambridge: MIT
Press,
Heckman, James and Burton Singer. 1984. “Econometric Duration Analysis”, Journal of Econometrics
24:63-132.
Holzer, Hany J. 1991. “Employment, Unemployment, and Demand Shifts in Local Labor Markets, ” The
Review of Economics and Statistics,
Hotz, V. Joseph, Lixin Xu, Marta Tiend~ and Avner Ahituv. 1995, “The Returns to Early Work
Experience in the Transition from School to Work for Young Men in the U,S,”, mimeo. University
of Chicago.
Hoynes, Hil~ Williamson. 1996. “Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labor Supply and Welfare
Participation Under the AFDC-UP Program”, Econometrics 64(2):295-332,
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson and Thomas MaCurdy. 1993. “Welfare Spells over the Lmt Two Decades: Do
Changes in Benefits Explain the Trends?”. Mimeo, University of CalifomiA Berkeley.
Hoynes, Hilary Williamson and Thomas MaCurdy, 1994. “Has the Decline in Benefits Shortened Welfare
Spells?” American Economic Review, 84(2).
Jencks, Christopher and Susan Mayer. 1990, “The Social Consequences of Growing Up in a Poor
Neighborhood,” in L. Lynn and M, McGeary, eds., Inner City Poverty in the United States.
Washington DC.: National Academy Press.
Kalbfleisch, J.D, and R.L, Prentice. 1980. ~e Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data, New York:
Wiley and Sons.
33

Lancaster, Tony. 1990, ~e EconometiicAnalysis of Transition Data, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Long, Larry. 1988. Migra”on and Residential Mobility in the United States. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation.
Manski, Charles F. 1993. “Identication of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem. ” Review
of EconomicStudies 60:531-542,
Meyer, Bruce, 1990. “Unemployment Insurance, and Unemployment Spells, ” Econometrics 58(4):757782,
MoffItt, Robert. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review. ” Journal of Economic
Literature 15(l): 1-61.
MoffiE Robert. 1983. “An Economic Model of Welfare StigmZ” American Economic Review 73(5):10231035.
O’Neill,June A,, Douglas A. Wolf, Laurie J. Bassi, and Michael T. Hannan. 1984, “An Analysis of Time
on Welfare. ” Final Report to the U.S, Department of Health and Human Services, Washington,
DC: The Urban Institute.
ONeill, June A., Laurie J. Bassi, and Douglas A. WOK 1987. “The Duration of Welfare Spells. ” Research
in Economics and Statistics 69;241 -248.
Pavetti, LaDonna, 1993. “The Dynamics of Welfare and Work: Exploring the Process by Which Women
Work Their Way Off Welfare.” PhD dissertation, Hward University.
Peskin, Janice. 1993. “Forecasting AFDC Caseloads, With an Emphasis on Economic Factors, ” CBO
Staff Memorandum. July.
Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander and Stephen Freedman, 1994. GtiN Final Report: Benejts, Costs, and
Three-Year Impacts of a Welfare-to- Work Program. Manpower Demonstration Resewch
Corporation.
Smders, Seth. 1992. “Preliminary Evidence on Human Capital Production and Welfme Participation”,
Chapter 3 of unpublished PhD dissertation.
Savner, Steve and M~k Greenberg. 1995, The CLASP Guide to We~are Waivers: 1991-1995,
Washington DC: Center for Law and Social Policy.
Sawhill,

Isabel (1995).
We~are
D. C.: The Urban Institute.

Reform:

An

Analysis

of

the

Issues.

Washington

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1992. “BLS Handbook of Methods”, Btiletin 2414.
U.S. House of Representatives. 1994. Background Materials and Data on Programs Within the
Jurisdiction of the Committee on Ways and h4eans. Washington D.C.: Government Printing

34

Office,
UC Data 1994, California Work Pays Demonstration Project: Statewide Longitudinal Database Persons: l% Sample, 1987-1992. Mimeo, University of Califomi~ Berkeley.
Winkler, Anne. 1994. “The Determinants of A Mother’s Choice of Family Structure: Labor Market
Conditions, AFDC Policy, or Community Mores?” Mimeo. University of Missouri - St. Louis.

35

Monthly Unemployment

Figure 1
Rates for Selected California Counties, 1987-1992

I
16

14

12

10
8

6

4

2’, ,,,
1987

,,,

,,,

+

,,, ,,,
1988

,,,

Alameda

,,,

,,,,[
[ [,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,,
1989
1990
Month
*

Fresno

+Los

1991

,,, ,,, ,,,
1992

Angeles *

Sacramento

,,,,,[1

Figure 2a
Correlation

Between County Level AFDC Spells

and Unemployment Rates
.

.
.0

0
0

II
v

o
n
u

0

.

0

L
m

6

.

0

0

0

o

0

0.

0

0

0

0

0
0°

0

“0

.

,25-

I

4

I

I

12
8
Average Unemployment Rate

I

16

by county
~a-

Figure 2b

Correlation

Between County Level AFDCSpells

.75

and Emp/Pop Ratio

.
.

.
.

.

00

.

0
Oo 0
0

00

8.0
0

0

0 ‘O.
.5

0
i

0

o

k

00%

m

o

0

.

.

0

0

u
00

.

.25

I
.2

I

I

.4

,3

Average Emp/Pop Ratio

by county

I

,5

I
,6

4=
..-

.

1
.

-c
L
m
N

2
.05

0

I

1

20

0
Nonparametric

I

I

40

Hazard for Probability of

Figure

~

60
Ending AFOC Spell

00

Table 1
Estimated Unconditional Survival Probabilities
Comparison of Recent Studies Using Monthfy Data

Probability that AFDC Spell kts
-t:
‘

at

Data Set

6 months

12 months

24 months

California LDB 1987-1992

0.72

0.56

0.36

Blank and Ruggles (1996)

SIPP 1986, 1987

nla

0.45

0.25

Fitzgerald (1995)

smP 1984, 1985

0.65

0.48

nJa

Gritz and MaCurdy (1992)

NLSY 1979-1989

nla

0.67

nla

Hanis (1993)2

PSID 1984-1989 (monthly)

0.76

0,56

0.36

~S

Study

‘Since 1984, the PSID has mlla
monthly AFDC participation information. This is retrospective data and is collected
at annd interviews.
% dculations from Harris (1993) measure the probability that the spell lasts greder fti each of the months shown
in the table. All of the others measure the probability that the spell Imts grwter than or equal to each of the months
shown .

Table 2
Distribution of Ungth of AFDC Receipt by Demographic
Unconditional Estimti

Group

Probability that a completd
Number of
Splls

<=6
months

<=1

year

spell lasts:

<=2 years

< =4 years

Au

12221

0.28

0.46

0.62

0.75

Single Parent (AFDC-FG)

10348

0.27

0.45

0.62

0.75

Two Parent (AFDC-UP)

1873

0.31

0.49

0.63

0.72

White

5835

0.31

0.51

0.67

0.79

Hispanic

2855

0.28

0.45

0.61

0.74

Black

2639

0.23

0.41

0.57

0.70

Asian Refugee Groups

458

0.10

0.19

0.31

0.43

Other

390

0.24

0,42

0.62

0.78

11120

0.28

0.47

0.63

0.76

1101

0.21

0.37

0.51

0.67

Non-t~n

Head

Teen Hd
Urban
Non-Urban

10647

0.27

0.45

0.61

0.74

1574

0.33

0.54

0.71

0.82

Source: Author’s tabulation of LDB 1 percent case file.

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for AFDC Spells

standard
Deviation

MTeen Head

0.09

Hwcl 20-24
Head 25-34
HA

# Non-Missing
Observations
Minimum

Maximum
0

1

12221

0.23

0

1

12221

0.44

0

1

12221

35-44

0,20

0

1

12221

Head 45-54

0.05

0

1

12221

White

0.48

0

1

12221

Hispanic

0.23

0

1

12221

Black

0.22

0

1

12221

Filipino

0.01

0

1

12221

Cambodian

0.01

0

1

12221

Laotian

0.01

0

1

12221

Vietnamese

0.02

0

1

12221

Other Race

0.03

0

1

12221

Number of Kids

1.65

0

12

12221

Pregnant ~/

0.09

0

1

12221

Youngest Child <=2

0.38

0

1

12221

1.11

Youngest Child 3-5

0.21

0

1

12221

Youngest Child 6+

0.31

0

1

12221

Male Head ~/

0.03

0

1

12221

AFDC-UP

0.15

0

1

12221

% Right Censored (RC)

0.35

0

1

12221

Length of Spell, if RC =0

11.92

11.19

1

68

7960

Length of Spell, if RC = 1

23.71

17.97

1

71

4261

Source: Author’s tabulations of LDB 1 percent case file. The sample contains one observation per spell.
Notes:
l/ Pregnant is @to
one if the woman is pregnant at the begi.oning of the spell and has no other children in
the case.
2/ Male hd is always equal to zero when AFDC-UP is equal to one.

Table 4
Descriptive Statistics for AFDC Monthly Transitions Data

Mean
Coun@ Iubo

standard
Deviation

Minimum

# NonMissing
Observations

Maximum

r Market Variubk~

Unemployment Rate

7.46

3.33

1.9

36.1

191294

Average Qtrly Earnings (1000s)

6.699

1.085

4.108

10.160

191294

Ave. Qtrly Earnings, Services (1000s)

6.585

1.046

2.842

9.642

191294
191294

Ave. Qtrly Earnings, Rtiil

(1000s)

3.920

0.408

2.084

5.201

tn(Employment)

13.23

1.59

6.70

15.28

191294

In(Service Employment)

12.19

1.61

5.61

14.26

191294

ln(Reti

11.55

1.48

4.09

13.42

191294

0.40

0.09

0.18

0.82

191294

0.14

0,10

0

0.93

191294

1,45

0

8.01

191294

Employment)

Employment/Population

Other COUW

Variableq

GAIN Part. Rate
GAIN $/Partic. (1000s)
~eiehborhood

2.16

Variables

Urban-Inside

0.86

0

1

181728

Urban-Outside

0.10

0

1

181728

Rural

0.04

0

1

181728

MEDHINC (1OOOS)
%FEMNVMAR

30.743

9.418

0.25

0.07

Sore:
Author’s tabulations of LDB 1 percent case fle.
spells data.

4.999
0

88.539

181728

0.77

181728

There is one observation per monthly transition in the welfare

Estimates from ~rete

Table 5
Duration Model, AU SpeUs

(1)

(2)
Standard Error

fitimate

Estimate

S-d

Error

20-24

0.163 **”

(0.048)

0.174 ***

(0.050)

Hea(l 25-34

0.150 ***

(0.049)

0.149 ***

(0.050)

Heacl 35-44

0.200 ***

(0.056)

0.205 ***

(0.058)

Hd

0.070

(0.076)

0.087

(0.079)

Hd

45-54

Hispanic

-0.119 ***

(0.029)

-0.042

(0.031)

Black

-0.273 ***

(0.030)

-0.148 ***

(0.035)

Filiptio

-0.158 **

(0.067)

-0.107

(0.070)

Cambodian

-1.250 ***

(0.221)

-1,188 ***

(0.232)

Laotian

-1.190 ***

(0.203)

-1.086 ***

(0.204)

Vi~ese

-1.430 ***

(o. 134)

-1.369 ***

(0.137)

Other Race

-0.165

(0.142)

-0.126

(0.146)

Number of Kids

-0.053

**

(0.013)

-0.056 ***

(0.014)

Pre~t

-0.334 ***

(0.049)

-0.345 ***

(0.051)

●

Youngest Child 3-5

0.042

(0.032)

0.032

(0.033)

Young=t Child 6 +

0.141 ***

(0.033)

0. 148***

(0.035)

Male Htid

0.367 ***

(0.064)

0.343 ***

(0.066)

AFDC-UP

0.105 ***

(0.035)

0.110 ***

(0.036)

Urban-Inside

-0.176 ***

(0.058)

Urban-Outside

-0.090

(0.062)

0.006 ***

(0.001)

%FEMNVMAR

-0.686 ***

(0.230)

G~

$ per participant

-0.022 **

(0.009)

G~

Participation rate

0.208 *

(0.113)

MEDHINC

AFDC&FO Guarantm
constant
Dura&ionDummies
Number of Observations
hg Likelihood

0,003 ***

(0.001)

0.003 ***

(0.001)

-6.047 ***

(0.454)

-5.941 ***

(0.480)

y=
191,294
-32147

yes
181,728
-30176

Author(stabulationsOf LDB 1% file. S~
errors in Parenthwes. Asterisks tiicate
_
significantly different from zero at the 10 percent (*), 5 percent (**), and 1 percent (***) level.

that the coefficient is

Effects of Changes of Demographic

Table 6
Variables on the Distribution of Spell Ungth

Probability that a compl~ti

<=6
months

<=lyw

1

spell lasts:

< =2 years

<=4
years

Median
Length of
spell

Baseline

0.299

0.502

0,701

0.769

12

Male Head

0.390

0.621

0.814

0.853

9

# Kids =2

0.286

0.483

0.681

0.754

13

# Kids =4

0.261

0.446

0.640

0.723

14

Pregnant

0.225

0.392

0,577

0.671

18

child 3-5

0.307

0.513

0.712

0.778

12

Youngwt child 6 +

0.337

0.553

0.752

0.808

11

AFDC-UP

0.327

0.540

0.739

0.798

11

Hispanic

0.289

0.488

0.686

0.758

13

Black

0.265

0.453

0.648

0.729

14

Cambodian

0.105

0.195

0.312

0.414

59

Laotian

0.115

0.213

0.339

0.443

51

Vi&namese

0.089

0.166

0.269

0.364

a

Teen parent

0.265

0.453

0,648

0.728

14

Parent 20-24

0.305

0.510

0.709

0.776

12

Parent 35W

0.313

0.521

0.720

0.784

12

Parent 45-54

0.285

0.481

0.679

0.753

13

Urban-Inside

0.299

0.502

0.701

0.769

12

Urban-Ou~ide

0.321

0.531

0.731

0.792

12

Rural

0.344

0.562

0.761

0.815

11

MEDHINC + 20%

0.309

0.515

0.714

0.780

12

%FEMNVMAR +0.07

0.288

0.486

0.684

0.756

13

G~PT

+0.10

0,299

0,501

0.700

0.769

12

$/PT + 10%

0.378

0.606

0.801

0,844

9

0,359

0.582

0.780

0.828

10

Youngat

G~

AFDCFO + 10%

Notes:
1. S*ons
based on estimates from model 2 in Table 5. Baseline case is a white, single mother aged 25-34 with 1
child <3, living inside the central city. All other variables are set to theti mean values. The changes in the continuous
variables are approximately equal to the variable’s s~
deviation.
2. The median for this group is longer th the sample period of 6 years.

Estimatw

Table 7
from Discrete Duration Model

cou~

(1)

Unemployment Rate

Quarterly Wgs,
Industries (1000s)

All

Unemployment R&e

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

-0.003
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.010)

-0.032 ***
(0.005)

-0.039 ***
(0.006)

-0.006
(0.010)

-0.027
(0,017)

0.269 ***
(0.045)

0.237 ***
(0.047)

Qtrly Earnings, Services
(1OOOS)

0.151 ***
(0.028)

Qtrly Earnings, Retail
(1OOOS)
Duration Dummies
County Ftid Effects
Time Effwts

0.024
(o. 130)
yes

yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

Number of Observations

181728

181,728

181,728

181,728

181,728

bg

-30162

-30056

-30014

-30013

-30024

Likeli.hocui

Author’stabulationsof LDB 1% iite. Stid
errors in parentheses. Asterisks indicate that the coefficient is
signifi~ly
dfierat from zero at the 10 percent (*), 5 percent (**), and 1 percent (***) level. Each specification also
includw individual and family characteristics, GAIN variables, and neighborhood variables. See text for dekils.

Table 8
Estimates from Discrete Duration Model

cou~

In(Employment)

Empbymeti Growth

(1)

(2)

1.225 ***
(0.298)

1.079 ***
(0.319)

(3)

ln(Services Emp)

(4)

0.851 ***
(0.239)

ln(Retail Trade Emp)

Quarterly Earnings
(1OOOS)
Duration Wmmies
County Fixed Effects
Time Effwts
Number of Observations
Log Likelihood

0.662 **
(0.268)
0.235 ***
(0.044)

0.234 “**
(0.047)

0.206 ***
(0.049)

0.231 ***
(0.048)

yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yw

181,728

181,728

181,728

181,728

-30066

-30009

-30009

-30013

_
Author’s kbulatiom of LDB 1 % file. Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisks indicate that the coefficient is
si@cantly different from zero at the 10 percent (*), 5 percent (**), and 1 percent (***) level. Each s~flcation
also
includes individual and family characteristics, GAIN variables, and neighborhood variables. See text for details.

Table 9
Estimates from Discrete Duration Model

county Empbyment to Population R&”o

(1)

(3)

(2)

Employment/Po~lation

5.115 ***
(0,603)

2.509 ***
(0.899)

Quarterly tigs
(1OOOS)

0.294 *“*
(0.045)

0.254 ***
(0.047)

Qtrly -gs,
(1OOOS)

(4)

2.040 **
(0.892)

0.154 ***
(0.028)

Services

-0.006
(0,130)

Qtrly Earnings, Rti
(1OOOS)
Duration Dummies
County Ffied Effects
Time Effects
Number of Observtiions

bg LikelihA

1.845 **
(0.895)

yes
yes

yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

181,728

181,728

181,728

181,728

-30038

-30011

-30010

-30025

yes
yes

Author’s ~ltiiom
of LDB 1% fde. Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisks indicate that the
coefficient is significantly different from zero at the 10 percent (*), 5 percent (**), and 1 ~rcent (***) level.
Each s~~lcation
also includes individual and family characteristics, GAIN variables, and neighborhood
variables. See text for dtis,

Table 10
Percent Change in Distribution of AFDC Spells under Alternative Labor Market Conditiom

Percentc-in
<=6
months

PrObabdlQ
thata c0 mpletd
<=lywr

< =2 years

‘

sDeu las
< =4’s
years

Percent Cw

nCase10

(A) Unempbyment Rate with COUW Fired E#ects- Tabk 7, Model (2)
Unemp. Rate -.03
Mgs

+5%

10.2%

8.6%

6.5%

4.5%

-10.0%

7.7%

6,5%

5.0%

3.5%

-8.0%

(B) Empbyment Growth with County and Time ~fects-

Tabk 8, Model (2)

Employment +10 %

9.0%

7.3%

5.3%

3.6%

-9.7%

mgs

6.5%

5.3%

3.8%

2.6%

-7.1%

+5%

(C) Employment Growth with County and Time Eflects- Tabk 8, Model (3)
Services Employment +10 %

7.0%

5.7%

Earnings +5%

5.7%

4.6%

(D) Employment Growth with County and Time ~fectsRti
mgs

Employment + 10%
+5%

(E) Empbyment to Popution

4.1%
3.3%

2.8%

-7.7%

2.3%

-6.3%

Table 8, Model (4)

5.4%

4.5%

3.2%

2.2%

-6.0%

6.4%

5.2%

3.8%

2.6%

-7.0%

Ratio wdh COUW and Time Effects- Tabk 9, Model (2)

Emp/Pop + .035

7.2%

5.9%

4.2%

2.9%

-8.0%

Earnings +5%

7.0%

5.7%

4.1%

2.8%

-7.8%

(~ Emphymeti

to Popumon

Ratio with

Counfyand Time Efleets- Tabk 9, Model (3)

Emp/Pop + .035

5,9%

4.8%

3.5%

2.4%

-6.5%

mgs,

4.1%

3.4%

2.5%

1.7%

-4.6%

Services +5%

(G) Empbymew to PopuMon R&o with County and Time Eflects- Tabk 9, Model (4)
Emp/Pop + .035
Earnings, Rd

Trtie +5%

5.3%

4.4%

3.2%

2.2%

-5.9%

-0.1 %

-0.1 %

-o. 1%

-0.0%

0.1%

Notes:
1. Baseline case is a white, single mother agd 25-34 with 1 child less than 3. AU other variables are s~ @

to their
mean values. Changes in labor mark& variables represent mdian changes within counties over the sample period.
2. Changes in caseload calculated assuming the change is permanent and the entry rate is constant.

UDLUUCU

—.

Lwm

.=.

U,IGLU

“J

No Em
Number of Obs

mu”

~

.puL

“L.

up

E~ects

Time Effects

Emp/Pop

Earnings
(1OOOS)

Emp/Pop

Earnings
(1OOOS)

All

154577

5.115 ***
(0.603)
[-15.8%]

0.294 ***
(0,045)
[-8. 9%]

2.509 ***
(0.899)
[-8. O%]

0.254 ***
(0.047)
[-7. 8%]

FG (single parent)

155442

4.823 ***
(0.656)
[-14.9%]

0.292 ***
(0.048)
[-8. 8%]

2.283 **
(0.996)
[-7.2 %]

0.272 ***
(0.051)
[-8. 2%]

UP (two parent)

26133

6.632 ***
(1.583)
[-20. 2%]

0.294 **
(O.129)
[-9. 8%]

3.571
(2. 175)
[-11.2%]

0.137
(0.136)
[-4. 2%]

White

79997

4.683 ***
(0.911)
[-14.6%]

0.316 ***
(0.070)
[-9. 6%]

0.860
(1.299)
[-2.8%]

0.230 ***
(0.074)
[-7.0%]

Black

45181

4.980 ***
(1.286)
[-15. 3%]

0.340 ***
(0.085)
[-10.2 %]

0.984
(2.286)
[-3. 1%]

0.342 ***
(0.092)
[-10.2 %]

Hispanic

40900

4.935 ***
(1.159)
[-15. 2%]

5.409 ***
(1.718)
[-16. 6%]

0.170 *
(0.096)
[-5. 2%]

Teen Head

17916

Non-teen Head

Urban-Inside

Urban-Outside

RuA

163673

156314

2.781
(2. 179)
[-9. 1%]

0.147
(0.089)
[-4. 5%]
0.564 ***
(0, 145)

[-16.2 %]

5.331 ***
(0.629)
[-16.4%]

0.266 ***
(0.047)
[-8. 1%]

5.750 ***
(0.663)
[-17. 7%]

0.280 ***
(0.047)
[-8. 5%1

-3.015
(3.496)

0.487 ***
(o. 155)

[9.9%]

[-14. 1%]

2.986 ***
(0.933)

0.230 ***
(0.050)
[-7. o%]

[-9. 4%/

3.546 ***
(1.077)

0.246 ***
(0.050)

[-11.1%]

[-7.5%]

17411

2.887
(1.927)
[-9.0%]

0.377 **
(0.186)
[-11.2%]

-0.225
(2.450)
[0. 7%]

0.246
(0.198)
[-7, 4%]

7608

1.887
(2.712)
[-5. 9%]

0.611 **
(0.257)

0.146
(3. 179)

0.486 *
(0.274)

[-0.5 %]

[-14, 2%]

[-17.6%]

TWOre~siom
~ ~ for -h demographic group, one with time effects and one without. The regressions also
control for family characteristics, neighborhood variables, duration dummies, and county freed effects. The full set of
estimates is available from the author. Standard errors in parentheses. Asterisks indicate that the coefficient is
significantly difFerentfrom mm at the 10 ~rcent (*), 5 percent (**), and 1 percent (***) level. The numbers in brackets
H are the percent change in the caseload, as calculated in the last column of Table 10.

Table 12
Estimatm of Duration ModeI Controlling for Endogeneity of bcation

Main &timates

Table 9, Mtiel

(2)

Reilucd

Form

Instrumental Variables

Employment / Population

2.509 ***
(0.809)

1,458 **
(0.765)

1.578 **
(0.823)

~erly
Earnings, All
Industries (1000s)

0.254 ***
(0.047)

0.216 ***
(0.043)

0.230 ***
(0.046)

yes
yes
yes

yes

yes

yes
yes

yes
yes

181,728

181,728

Duration Dummies
County F&d Eff~ts
Time Effects

Number of Observations

181,728

