                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE EFFECTS OF TAX-LAW CHANGES
                         ON PRICES IN THE PROPERTY-CASUALTY
                                 INSURANCE INDUSTRY




                                        David F. Bradford
                                         Kyle D. hgue




                                       Working Paper 5652

                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996

This paper is a part of the project on the Economics of the Property and Casualty Insurance Industry
within the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA, with the support of the
Insurance Information Institute. During its preparation, Bradford enjoyed the hospitality of the
Economic Policy Research Unit at the Copenhagen Business School. He would also like to express
appreciation for the support of the John M. Olin Foundation and Princeton University’s Woodrow
Wilson School and Center for Economic Policy Studies, Logue thanks his colleagues at the
University of Michigan Law School for many helpful discussions regarding the issues discussed in
the paper. He also received generous research support from the Cook Research Fund at the
University of Michigan Law School. Both authors thank Sean Mooney of the Insurance Information
Institute for helpful comments and suggestions, Stuart Thiel, of the University of Michigan, and
Ryan Edwards, of Princeton University, provided extraordinary research assistance. The usual
caveats apply. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Public Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by David F. Bradford and Kyle D. bgue.  All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper 5652
                                                                                         July 1996



                             THE EFFECTS OF TAX-LAW CHANGES
                            ON PRICES IN THE PROPERTY-CASUALTY
                                    INSURANCE INDUSTRY



                                                ABSTRACT



        During the 1980s, the federal income tax treatment of property-casualty        insurers and their

policyholders     underwent several important changes, the most significant of which came in 1986.

This paper develops       theoretical   predictions   for how these changes should have affected the

equilibrium     prices of property-casualty   insurance policies, and explores the extent to which the

theoretical predictions are reflected in data on industry experience.   The paper is devoted mainly to

a careful specification of the income tax rules, and to deriving the connection between predictions

about simple forms of insurance policy and industry data on “premiums earned.”                Although the

predicted impact of the changes in the tax rules enacted in 1986 translates into a tax on premiums

(net of the cost of acquisition) of up to 13 percent (on medical malpractice, the longest-tail line of

insurance, in 1987), it is small relative to the variability of the actual loss experience.




David F. Bradford                                                 Kyle D. hgue
Woodrow Wilson School                                             531 Legal Research
Princeton University                                              University of Michigan Law School
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013                                          Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1210
and NBER
                                            The Effects of Tax-Law Changes on Prices
                                           in the Prot)e rtv-Casualfi Insurance Industm

                                                     David F. Bradford&                    Kyle D. Logue




~TRODUCTION                 ................................................................................................................................................ 1

PART L DESC~ING                       AN INSURANCE POLICY ................em..................................................................... 5
       INSI-JJCE QUANTITY DEFINED:S~TPOLICIES............................................................................................. 6
       INSURAiiCEPNCESDEFWED: SWTPOLICtES.................................................................................................. 7
       STANDARD  POLICIES:~CESWDQUWTITIES ............................................................................................... 8
PART H. ACCOUNTING FOR INSURANCE POLICES                                                    ............................................................................... 9
       ACCOLWG FORAS~TPOLICY .................................................................................................................... 9
       ACCO~nNG FORASTWDWINSHCE             POLICY....................................................................................... 11
       FROMSPOTPRICESTOEARNEDPREMIUMS      ANDINCURRED            LOSSESBYAccIDENTYEAR,..,..,..,.,,..,..,..,......,...,. 12
       ACCO~TNG WDECONOMICINCOMECONCEHS.......................................................................................... 12
PART HL THE FEDERAL ~COME                                    TAX TREATMENT OF PROPERTY-CASUALTY                                                  INSURANCE. 15
       THETWTWATMENT OFWOPERH<XUMV INSWCECOMPWIES.,..,.,,..,,.,..,..,..,.,,..,..,..,..,..,..,...,..,..,.. 15
       THETN TREATMENT
                     OFLIABILITIES
                                 NOTFUNDEDTHROUGH
                                                PROPERTY-CASUALTY        I~S~W~CE COMPWIES.20
PART IV. THE EFFECT OF TAXES ON BREAK-EVEN P~CES .............................................................. 26
       BWti.EWN S~TPWCES ............................................................................................................................26
       FROMBREAK-EWNSPOTPWCESTOEARNEDPREMIUMS                         ...... .............................. ..... . . ...... ........................ 35
PART V. EMPIRICAL                    RESULTS ................................................................................................................... 35
       PROFILES,THmTES, DISCOUNTWTES, ~WSERWDISC~T                           FACTOW................................................. 35
       CALCULATED SFOTPREMIUMS,
                              1976.1993 .................................................................................................... 41
       CALCUL~TED STANDW POLICYPREMIUMS,1976.1993 ............................................................................... 49
       PREDICTED BREAK-EWNPREMIUMSvs. Acmw EmED PREMIUMS,                        ACCIDENT         YEARS1977- 1993 .............. 49
CONCLUSION ............................................................................ .................................................... ................. 57

REFERENCES ................................................................................................................................... ................. 58

APPENDIX A. LOSS RESERVE DISCOUNTING WITH TAXES ................................................................ 60

APPENDIX B. DET~S                       OF THE CALCULATIONS .................................................................................. 62
       CALCULATmG
                BREAK-EVEN
                         SPOTPWCES............................................... ...................... .. ........................... 62
       CWCUATWG STWD~POLICY PMMmWS................................................................................................69
       MODEL~GTHEWti   STATEME~DATAONEWEDPWM~S                          ..,.,..,..,.., ................................................. 77
db 14, revisedthrough06/20/963: 59 PM
Comments welcome. Please do not quote, cite, or reproduce without permission




                              The Effects of Tax-Law Changes on Prices
                             in the Pror)em -Casualty Insurance Industrv



                                    David F. Bradford & Kyle D. Logue-




Introduction

          Art insurance   company   is a financial intermediary        whose main line of business      is the sale of

a particular   type of contingent   contract,     called an insurance    policy.   Under this contract,    the

insurer   promises   to pay some amount         to the policyholder,    or to some other beneficiary,     following

the occurrence of an insured event. In the context of property-casualty                insurance, the relevant

insured events include, for example, the accidental destruction of the insured’s property or the

award of a liability judgment against the insured. In return for this promise the insured pays the

insurer a premium. The premium and the earnings on the premium are then used by the insurer to




.
  Princeton University and the National Bur~u of Economic Research, and the Universityof Michigan Law
Sch~l, rexvely.        This paper is a part of the projeeton the Economicsof the Propertyand Casualtyinsurance
Industry within the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,MA, with the support of the Insurance
Information Institute. Dting its preparation, Bradford enjoyd the hospitality of the Economic Policy Research
Unit at the Copenhagen Business School. He would also like to express appreciation for the supprt of the John M.
Olin Foundation and Princeton University’s Woodrow Wilson School and Center for Economic Policy Studies.
Logue thanks his colleagues at the University of Michigan Law Schml for many helpful discussions regarding the
issues discussed in the paper, He also received generous research support from the Cook Research Fund at the
University of Michigan Law School. Both authors thank Sean Mooney of the Insurance Inforrnatron Institute for
helpful comments and suggestions. Stuart Thiel, of the University of Michigan, and Ryan Edwards, of Princeton
University, provided extraordin~ research assistance. The usual caveats apply.
                                                         2


cover its administrative costs, to pay the eventual loss claims that arise under the policy, and to

provide a profit to the owners of the insurance company.

         During the 1980s, the federal income tax treatment          of property-casualty        insurers   and their

policyholders     underwent    several important   changes,   the most significant    of which came in 1986

A priori reasoning      suggests   that the income tax treatment    of insurance     companies     should affect


equilibrium     prices of insurance.   In this article we develop theoretical predictions for how these

changes should have affected the equilibrium prices of property-casualty              insurance policies, and

we explore the extent to which the theoretical predictions are reflected in the available data on

industry underwriting experience.

        One initial challenge presented by our study is conceptual:           In the case of property-

casualty insurance, it is not clear what one means by “price” or “quantity.”             The annual premium

received by an insurance company in exchange for the sale of a single one-year occurrence-based

policy (that is, a policy that covers losses arising out of insured events that occur during the one-

year period in which the policy is in force) can be understood as the product of a unit price for

that type of coverage and the quantity of insurance embodied in the policy. But neither the price

nor the quantity is directly observed.       We take as a measure of the quantity of insurance contained

in such a policy the total value of all the loss indemnity payments and loss expenses (such as

attorneys’ fees) that the insurer expects to pay in comection with that policy. The price of the

policy, them is the ratio of the premium to this measure of quantity. Our analysis thus addresses

the role of taxes in the determination of this ratio.

        For purposes of relating the predictions of theory to industry experience, we suffer from a

lack of information about what insurance companies actually expect to pay, What we have
                                                    3


instead are the companies’ reported premiums earned and their reported estimates         of what they


expect to pay in the fiture as a result of policies they have written as of the date of the report,

These estimates are provided amually both to state regulators and to the public on forms called

“annual statements. ” Annual statement (or “statutory”) accounting data are also used by insurers

in calculating their federal income tax liability, which, of course, is reported to the Internal

Revenue Senice.     Our discussion of insurance accounting, of which there will necessarily be a fair

amount, draws primarily horn Mooney and Cohen (199 1) and Troxel and Bouchie (1990).

        We divide the paper into four parts, In Part I we set forth a precise, albeit stylized,

description of a property-casualty   insurance policy and a detailed taxonomy of insurance prices

and quantities.   Understanding    this taxonomy will require a measure of patience and perseverance

of the reader, but, in our view, it is worth the effort; and that taxonomy, in any event, will be used

throughout the remainder of the paper as well as in the appendices.      In Part 11we use this

taxonomy to describe two methods of accounting for the financial results of a property-casualty

insurer: statutory or annual statement accounting and nominal-economic-income           accounting,        In

Part 111we summarize the federal income tax treatment of property-casualty        insurance companies,

with an emphasis on certain important changes that were made as part of the Tax Reform Act of

1986 (“TR486”),     (The most important changes made by the TR486 for our pu~oses             were the

introduction of the loss-reserve discounting requirement and the inclusion of 20 percent of

unearned premiums.)     In Part III we also discuss briefly the tax treatment of liabilities that are not

funded through property-casualty     insurance, and we describe a significant change in those rules

that was enacted in 1984. In Part IV, we develop the theory of how income taxes affect the

break-even prices of insurance (with special attention to the changes made by the TM86).              In
                                                     4


Part V, we present calculations    of break-even   prices based on the theory from Part IV, and we

compare those calculations with the historical record of the industry. The data consist of the

losses incurred and loss-adjustment-expenses       incurred (i.e., estimated loss payouts on existing

policies) and the premiums earned by U. S. property-casualty        insurers during the period from 1976

to 1993. The source of the data is the aggregated annual statement information published in

Best’s Aggregates   & Averages: Proper~-Cawalty          Edition.   Various details of our procedures are

described in appendices.

        Our predictions regarding the effect of the TRA86 changes can be summarized as follows:

(1) For all tax years aher 1986 we would expect to see some increase in the break-even price of

insurance, and we would expect the size of the increases to be positively correlated with the level

of market interest rates and with the length of the “tail” of the given line of insurance,     When we

take a look at the data, however, although the predicted impact of the changes in the tax rules

enacted in 1986 translates into a tax on premiums (net of the cost of acquisition) of up to 13

percent (on medical malpractice, the longest-tail line of insurance), the predicted change still is

small relative to the variability of the actual loss experience,    As a result, it is not possible to draw

statistically valid conclusions from the historical time series about the effect of tax reform on

prices, (2) For the 1986 tax year, owing to a special transition rule in the TRA86 called the “fresh

start,” we would expect a one time reduction in premiums, as the fresh-start essentially provided

property-casualty   insurers in 1986 with an extra incentive to issue policies during that year. This

effect too, however, does not appear in the data.
                                                          5


Part I. Describing an Insurance Policy

         We begin our detailed description of a theoretical insurance policy by introducing the

concept of a spot policy: an insurance contract that covers the policyholder for the stream of

fiture loss payments that will arise out of a single specified loss event that has already occurred.

A standard policy is our term for a group of spot policies sold by an insurance company to a

single insured as a package for a given policy period, typically one year. Thus, under a standard

policy, in exchange for a premium payment horn the insured, the insurer agrees to issue individual

spot policies for any insured loss event that occurs during the policy period.’ We treat the

premium for a standard policy as being paid to the insurer on the date that the policy is written.

This premium can be understood as a foward purchase of a package of spot policies. With a real

insurance contract, the stream of loss payments associated with a covered event will not be

known with certainty,        Since the tax law changes we consider have related solely to the treatment

of the timing of cash flows and not to the treatment of risk, we focus on the special case in which

the loss profile is known with certainty to the insurance company.’

         We describe the losses covered by a spot policy or standard policy in terms of the policy’s

cumulative loss payments, L(.), where L(I) specifies the cumulative cash outflow of loss




‘ The standard policy is the formalization, of a typical insurance policy, such as a one-year occurrence-based
commercial general liability policy, Such a plicy, when issued, in effect obligates the insurer to issue what we call
spt policies during the year to “fund” losses as they occur. Insurers rarely issue individual spot policies outside of
the context of a standard pliq, although something approximating such policies do exist. For example,
retroactive insuance policies, which are issued after a loss event has occurred as a means of funding the liability
through a property <asualty insurer, are relatively rare but not unprecedented. Such a policy approximates the
economics of a spot policy, although a retroactive policy can still entail a fair amount of uncertainty regarding the
total amount and the timing of loss payments. For the sake of simplicity, our amlysis assumes away such
uncertainty.

2For discussions of the pricing of the risk associated with loss and unearned premium resemes, see Butsic ( 199 1),
D’Arty (1988) and Kraus and Ross (1982),
                                                     6


payments made by time Z,measured from the date of writing the policy. (Except where we

speci~ otherwise, the term 10SSpayment should be understood as gross of the insurance

company’s allocated loss adjustment expenses. ) We use the term loss profile to refer to the

finction that describes the increases in L over time, that is, the finction   that describes the actual


cash outflows.      We denote the path of such payments, 1(~, as a finction of time elapsed since the

moment of writing. This may be a continuous finction that expresses the rate of payment per unit

time (so that the payment during the short time, dl, after t is given by the product, l(~dt) or, more

typically for our application, may consist of a sequence of payments at specified time points. (The

loss profile bears the same relationship to the cumulative loss payments as does a density or

probability finction to a cumulative distribution finction.)

Insurance Ouantity Defined: S~ot Policies

        L(m) is the sum of all the loss payments on the policy, which, if the meaning is clear from

the context, we denote as simply, L, Then the normalized loss profile, /(t)/L, sums to 1. If two

different policies, characterized by loss profiles l*(fl and ?(O, have the same normalized loss

profiles, we say they are in the same line of insurance policies. This terminology is intended to

capture the idea that a line of insurance (such as medical malpractice) consists of policies with

similar anticipated time profiles of payouts (with the same length’ of tail, for example).    We refer

to the loss profile in a line that sums to 1 as the unit profile for that line; and a policy that has the

unit profile is a unit policy in a line. The loss profile of any policy in a line is then a multiple, L,

of the unit profile, and so it is meaningful to speak of L as the quantity of insurance embodied in a

policy in a line.
                                                      7


        Any given spot policy can be understood as a quantity of unit policies in the relevant line.

A unit policy in a line, such as automobile liability, pays a total of $1 over time, with the time

pattern characteristic of the line. For example, the industry average unit loss profile for an auto

liability spot policy in the period we are studying is shown in Table 1. (But for rounding, the total

in the table would be 1,00,)


                               Table 1, Loss Profile, Automobile Liability


                                           Time           Payment
                                        Relative to        During
                                         Accident           Year
                                           Year
                                         AY+()             0.34
                                         AY+ 1             0.31
                                         AY+ 2             0.15
                                         AY+3              0.09
                                         AY+4              0.05
                                         AY+ 5             0.03
                                         AY + >5           0,02

                                           Total           0,99

                         Source: Authors’ calculations based on
                         Best’s AwreRates and Averages, various years

Insurance Prices Defined: SDot Policies

        Let P stand for the premium received by the company (net of selling costs) at the moment

of writing a spot policy with a particular loss profile, /(),     The single premium buys a whole

profile of loss payments.   (When we want to emphasize that the premium pays for losses that have

already been incurred as of the date of writing, we refer to it as a spot premium, in contrast with

the premium paid on a standard insurance policy.) Just as it is meaningful to speak of the quantity
                                                    8


 of insurance in a spot policy within a given line, so we can speak of the price of insurance implicit

 in the policy: It is simply the ratio of the premium to the total anticipated losses:




In our terminology, the premium on a given policy is not the price, It is like the amount paid for a

quantity of potatoes, the product of a per-unit price and a number of units purchased,        The price

of a policy in a line of insurance is the premium on a unit policy.

        A unit single-payment     policy in a line pays off exactly 1 at the payoff time characteristic

of the line, which, by analogy with bond terminology, we refer to as the policy’s maturity.        In

fact, we shall make a great deal of use of the analogy, noted by others, of the sale of a policy by

an insurance company with a loan from policyholder to company, the premium being loaned

against repayment in the form of policy payoffs (see, for example, Cummins and Grace, 1994).

The unit single-payment policy that pays off at T corresponds to a discount one dollar bond

maturing at T, Each unit policy, in turn, can be understood as composed of a sum of quantities of

single-payment unit policies.

Standard Policies: Prices and C)uantities

        Just as a spot policy can be understood as a package of single-payment policies, as

discussed above, a standard policy can be understood as a package of spot policies. Thus, for

example, under an auto liability policy written on September 1, 1987, a company might have

expected to accumulate $40 in incurred losses for each passing day, or $40x365 = $1,460 in

incumed losses during the policy year. We can think of the premium as a foward           purchase of the

package of spot policies. The parties to a standard policy are generally uncertain about the size of

the spot policies that will come into being as a result of events during the policy year (for
                                                  9


example, a fire that damages a factory), and, for each of those spot policies, they will generally be

uncertain about the amount and time profile of the loss payments and expenses (it takes time to

determine the amount of the covered damages, which maybe paid out over a course of years). Of

course, the company has a good idea of what those losses are going to be, and we might express

this idea in probabilistic terms, As was the case for the description of a spot policy, however, it

eases exposition and analysis to assume it known that each day (or moment) during the policy

year will add one identical spot policy to the company’s liabilities, And each of those spot

policies involves a known and certain profile of loss payments.

       Thus a standard policy can be built up from unit spot policies, which can in turn be built

up from unit single-payment spot policies, By direct analogy with a spot policy, we define as a

unit standard policy in a line one on which the losses over the policy year aggregate to 1,


Part 11. Accounting for Insurance Policies

       To understand the taxation of an insurance company and to interpret the available data, we

need to express the ideas just discussed in terms of the financial, regulatory, and tax accounting

for the company.   Our eventual goal is to be able to account for a standard policy, but we will

begin with the accounting of a spot policy and build from there.

Accounting for a St)ot Po]icv

       Thus we start with the simplified example of an insurance company that issues a spot

policy characterized by loss profile, 10. At that moment, the insurer will add to its balance sheet

a new asset, the premium receivable, P, and a new liability, the obligation to pay out /() over

time. In terms of statuto~   accounting, the balance-sheet ent~ corresponding to this new liability

is the unpaid losses account, sometimes referred to as the insurer’s loss reseme.    If the sole
                                                      10


purpose of the insurer’s reported loss reseme were to reflect the market value of the new liability,

                                                                                                w

the reserve would presumably be carried as the discounted value of the loss payouts, ~ l(t)e-tidt,
                                                                                     o

where r is the going interest rate (for simplicity, assumed constant in this formula).        As we discuss

below, that amount also represents the break-even spot premium for this policy in a system

without taxes. Therefore, when an insurer writes a break-even spot policy under these

assumptions, it would have no net effect on the insurer’s balance sheet, as the values of the new

liability and the new asset would be directly offsetting.     More generally, the discounted loss

reserve associated with a policy represents the discounted value of the payments remaining to be

made as of any particular time in the life of the policy,

        Note, however, that the rules of statutory accounting applied by state regulators require

the use of undiscounted      loss reserves for regulatory reporting purposes.      Thus, when reporting

the loss resewe for a given spot policy as of time t‘(relative to the date of the loss) on its

regulatory balance sheet, the insurer must use the simple sum of all anticipated fiture loss


payments associated with that policy, ~ I(i)di,       The value of this undiscounted loss resene will
                                      t’

exceed the value of the discounted loss reserve, and the amount of the difference will depend

upon the applicable interest rate and the length of the tail of the spot policy in question.        As we

show in considerable detail below, at interest rates that are high but within historical precedent

and for a long-tailed policy (such as medical malpractice), the difference can be substant ial.3




‘ If we let R(f) stand for the amount remaining to be paid on a policy, then writing the policy increases the
company’s net worth according to regulatory accounting rides by P-R@). Time-value of money considerations lead
us to expect R@) to be greater than P, so the effect of writing a plicy is expected to reduce net worth under
statutory accounting. In order to meet statutorysolvencyrequirements,the companymust have somecapital of its
                                                        11



          An insurance company’s loss resewe is a stock concept; it is a liability, the value of which

can be measured at any given time. The income calculation of a company, corresponding to this

balance sheet accounting, is obtained by taking year to year differences. Thus, the premiums

taken in during the year will be added in, and the increase in outstanding loss reserves will be

deducted.    This the conceptual basis for the loss reserve deduction in the calculation of taxable

income.

          An insurance company’s total annual income is the sum of its underwriting              income and

investment income.       Investment income is simply the amount earned by the insurer on invested

premiums and reinvested earnings, net of investment expenses. Underwriting income is calculated

by taking the difference between premiums earned and underwriting expenses incurred during the

year, And typically one of the largest underwriting expense deductions, the loss reserve

deduction, is the increase in outstanding loss resetves during the year.

Accounting for a Standard Insurance Policy

          When we move from the accounting for a spot policy to the accounting for a standard

policy, things get more complicated,        The sale of a standard policy is, in essence, the advanced

sale of a series of spot policies to be issued as time passes. Thus, at the precise moment the

standard policy is issued to the insured, assuming the premium is paid at the moment of issuance,

the insurance company for a brief time has an asset (in the form of the premium) with no

offsetting loss reserve liabilities. Those liabilities are incurred only as time passes and as the




own to balance Mlciently the negative effect of writing a plicy. Thus, the conservative accounting conventions
imposed by regulation, coupled with accounting net worth restrictions, have the effect of obliging companies to
hold collateral against their more distant obligations to pay out under the policy. In this simple model,
contributing own capital to a company need not be particularly costly, since it may be held by the company in a
form that earns a competitive rate of return.
                                                   12


implicit (or hypothetical) spot policies are issued over the course of the policy period (which,

again, is typically one year), Therefore, at the moment the standard police is issued, the offsetting

liability is the obligation to provide the implicit spot policies over time. Statutory accounting

deals with this obligation through a balance-sheet entry called the unearned premium resene.

        By convention, the premium on a standard insurance policy is treated as earned, and the

unearned premium reserve is correspondingly reduced, pro ra[a during the policy year. During

that time, spot-policy loss liabilities are incurred, giving rise to loss payments and loss reserves for

unpaid losses. In arriving at its amual underwriting income, an insurer deducts from premiums

earned (in addition to the amual increase in loss reserves) the year-to-year increase in the

company’s unearned premium reserve.


From SDot Prices to Earned Premiums and Incurred Losses by Accident Year

        Statutory accounts present reports on an insurance company’s earned premiums and

incurred losses, categorized by accident year, The term accident year refers to the calendar year

during which losses were incurred under policies issued by the company, The premiums earned

during an accident year consist of the allocated fractions of the premiums on standard policies that

cover any part of the calendar year in question.   Because of the convention of assuming that a

premium is earned at an even rate over the policy year, the premiums earned during an accident

year are not exactly the same as the sum of implicit spot premiums charged for the coverage.

(The way we deal with this in our calculated prices is detailed in Appendix B,)

Accounting and Economic Income Concer)ts

       As mentioned above, under the insurance accounting rules that govern the calculation of

annual income for regulatory purposes, property-casualty     insurers take loss-reseme deductions on
                                                            13


 an undiscounted      basis.    Accordingly,   statutory   accounting   has the effect of accelerating


deductions    when compared         with nominal     economic    accounting,     As we define the term, the

 nominal economic income of a company is the sum of all cash payments to the company’s

owners and the increase in the market value of the company’s assets net of liabilities during the

year. For a company that makes no distributions to its owners, the nominal economic income is

simply the year-to-year change in its net worth when all assets and liabilities are accounted for at

their current market value, Nominal economic income may be contrasted with economic income,

as the term is often used in discussions of tax policy. As applied to a firm, economic income

means the sum of distributions to owners and the annual change in the firm’s net wotih, corrected

jor inflation--that    is, with all the elements measured in constant-purchasing            power units,    For our

purposes, nominal economic income is the relevant concept, since all ordinary borrowing and

lending transactions are accounted for in the tax law according to nominal economic income

rules.’

          The effect of the inconsistency between nominal economic income accounting and

statutoty accounting can be seen in the following simple example, Imagine an insurance company

that issues one identical insurance policy every year, that invests all cash inflows at the going

constant rate of interest, and that, contrary to the regulatory requirements, has no capital of its

own other than accumulation born premiums and earnings on premiums (that is, the insurer

maintains no surplus),         If we then look at the balance sheet of this company at the end of any

given year, we will see a stock of assets consisting of the accumulations from past and current




4 When other transactions are accounted for on other bases, tax arbitrage will give rise to biases in the portfolios of
m~payers in different situations and to differences in the market yields on various financial products according to
the tax circumstances of the holder (Bradford, 1981).
                                                          14


premium receipts, plus interest earned on those invested premiums, net of loss (and loss expense)

outlays,       In a competitive   market,   the assets on hand will just equal the discounted   value of the

unpaid losses on the stock of policies.          Thus, the market value of this package    of assets and

liabilities     will be zero every year. What’s more, the company’s nominal economic income (the

annual change in the market value of its assets and liabilities; the company is paying out nothing to

its owners) will also be zero.

              In contrast, the net worth of the company understood in statutory-accounting        terms will

be negative        Indeed, under the assumptions of the example, it will be the same negative amount

each year (since the company issues identical policies each year). Moreover, afier the start-up

years, the statutory annual income of the insurer will also be zero. (During the start-up years, the

statutory income would be negative, ) If the insurer were then to stop writing these hypothetical

yearly policies, statutory accounting and nominal economic accounting would diverge.                 Under

nominal economic accounting, the value of the insurer’s portfolio of assets and liabilities would

remain at zero, and the insurer’s nominal economic income would continue to be zero from year

to year as the old policies were paid off, Under statutory accounting, however, the insurer’s

income would be positive, since it would have earnings on its assets and any loss payment would

be associated with an offsetting reduction in the stock of unpaid losses, with a corresponding

addition to statutory income at that point, Conversely, if the company started expanding its

business, its nominal economic income would remain zero, but its statutory income would be

negative,

           The inconsistencies between nominal economic accounting and statutory accounting are

especially significant because, before the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (“TW86”),                the federal income
                                                          15


tax treatment of property-casualty         insurance companies essentially replicated statutory

accounting,     Part III summarizes the federal income tax treatment of property-casualty             insurance

companies, and it emphasizes how that treatment was changed by the TW86.                      Part III also

discusses briefly a change that took place in 1984 in the tax treatment of liabilities not finded

through property-casualty         insurance policies.


Part LII. The Federal          Income   Tax Treatment      of Property-Casualty        Insurance


The Tax Treatment          of ProDerty-Casualtv   Insurance    Companies

           The federal income tax treatment       of property-casualty     insurance   companies   is governed by

a special set of rules that are collected in subchapter L of the Internal Revenue Code. Under

subchapter L, insurers are generally required to calculate their taxable income using the same

statuto~     accounting conventions required by state regulators, which we described above in Part

11, As mentioned in that Part, statutory accounting requires an insurer to calculate its annual

income by taking into account both its net underwriting profit (or loss) and its net investment

income (or loss) for a given reporting year, that is, the year for which the annual statement

report is filed--which coincides with the insurer’s tax year. Consistent with statuto~               accounting,

an insurer’s year-end underwriting income is determined roughly as follows:

           1) Start tith    premiums written during the reporting year (in our model, these

               are the premiums received upon issuance of a standard policy) less


           2) premium acquisition expenses incurred during the reporting year (these are

              the up-front costs of selling the policy such as commissions) less
                                                         16


         3) the increase in the insurer’s unearned premium account during the reporting

             year less


         4) the increase in the insurer’s unpaid losses account during the reporting year

             (this is the Ioss-reseme deduction mentioned in Part II, i.e., the net increase

             during that reporting year in the insurer’s estimate of its fiture claim payments)

             less


         5) any actual paid losses that occurred         during the reporting    year that did not

             correspond to a reduction in the unpaid losses accounts


The result of this calculation--the     insurer’s net underwriting income--is then added to net

investment income (which is simply the difference between investment earnings and investment

expenses) to get taxable income.


         Until the enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, subchapter L permitted propefiy -

casualty companies to calculate their loss-reserve deductions on an undiscounted basis, just as

they have always been required to do for regulatory purposes.              That is, for tax purposes an insurer

simply deducted the difference between the beginning balance and ending balance in its unpaid

losses account, without taking into account the fact that those liabilities represented payments to

be made in the fiture.      This rule had the effect of giving property-casualty         insurers the benefit of

the inconsistency between statutory accounting and nominal economic income accounting

described above.




‘ The sum of 4 and 5 for a given reporting year is referred to in statutory accounting as the losses incurred.
                                                       17


         In the early and mid 1980s, in various repotis to Congress it was argued that, as a result of

this inconsistency between statutory accounting and nominal-economic-income                accounting, (a)

the property-casualty    industty had for years been paying less in federal income taxes than it should

have been and (b) a bias in favor of finding risks through property-casualty          companies had been

created.’ At least in part on the basis of such arguments, Congress included in the TW86               a

requirement that, for all tax years after 1986, all loss-reseme deductions must be calculated in a

discounted basis, For any post-86 tax year, the loss-reserve deduction is determined by taking the

difference between the discounted value of the beginning balance in the unpaid losses account and

the discounted value of the ending balance in that account,

        Thus the post-86 treatment of loss reserves approximates the treatment required by

nominal-economic-income        accounting.   Differences remain, however. For example, the TRA86

and the Treasury regulations that have been promulgated under it contain fairly specific rules

limiting how the discounting requirement may be implemented.             The insurer must use discount

factors that are published periodically by the Treasury department,          (Those discount factors may

diverge from the actually prevailing rates.) Artd the insurer must, with some exceptions, use the

“loss payment patterns” (or, to use our terminology, the loss profiles) that are also published

every few years by Treasury.      Those loss profiles--there is a separate prodle for each line of

insurance--are calculated by Treasury using data from previously filed amual statements for the

entire industry.   Under some circumstances an insurer can elect to use its own historical loss




‘ This argument was made, for example, in a very influential repofi to Congress issued by the General Accounting
~lce, (GAO 1985). The rewrvediscounting requirement ultimately enacted by Congress (discussed below in the
text) essentially adopted the GAO proposal.
                                                          18


experience    in calculating   the profile for purposes of discounting;        however,   many insurers     camot

quali~   for that option,’

         In addition, a special transition rule--called theflesh start--was inserted in the TRA86.

This rule essentially permitted insurers a second deduction (spread out over a number of years)

equal to the difference between the discounted value and the undiscounted value of the total year-

end 1986 loss reserves.        In the absence of the fresh-start rule, the introduction of the reseme-

discounting requirement would have produced a large lump-sum tax on property-casualty                        insurers

for the 1986 tax year. When total year-end reserves were required to be discounted to present

value, instead of a fresh start there would have been a large loss-reserve inclusion in gross income

equal to the amount of the discount.’ However, Congress chose to permit insurers to exclude that

amount from gross income.

         In addition to the loss-resewe discounting requirement, TM86                  also made a number of

other changes in the tax treatment of property-casualty            insurers. Prominent among these for our

purposes was the change in the treatment of the unearned premium reserve.’ Before TRA86,




‘ In applying the Treasury’s discount factors to its statutory loss reserves, the insurer is allowed to take into
account the extent to which the reserve were already discounted on the annual stalement. As we have already
noted, however, most state regulatog authorities do not permit discounting of reserves for annual-statement
pupses.
‘ This inclusion would have been required by Internal Revenue Cede section481 (a). When there is a change in
accounting methods that would otherwise permit doubledeductions, section 48 l(a) provides a method by which the
effect of the second deduction can k eliminated or at least reduced, Therefore, absent the fresh-start rule in the
86-Act, section 481 (a) would have required all proprty+asualty insurers either to include the amount of the
discount in income in 1986 or, at least, to include the amount of the discount over a period of years. The fresh-
start rule essentially trumped the effect of section 48 l(a).
9 One change that we will not deal within this paper involved insurers’ tax-exempt income. The ~86         required
property-casualty insurers to include 15 percent of what was previously interest income from state and local
government bonds and from untaxecl dividends. Other major m changes in 1986 that fiected propew-casualty
insurers were the reduction in co~rate rates (from 46% in 1986 to 40% in 1987 and to 34°A in 1988) and the
introduction of the alternative minimum tax.
                                                   19


subchapter L permitted insurers to deduct the fiJll value of the amual increase in their unearned

premium reserve, thereby excluding from income revenue that had not yet been accrued.             In both

committee    reports   accompanying   T~86,   it was contended     that this ability to exclude unearned

premiums, coupled with the allowance of an up-front deduction for premium acquisition expenses,

resulted in a mismatching of income and expenses.’” Therefore, in an effort to produce a rough

matching of income and expense, a provision was included in TRA86 in effect reducing the annual

uneamed-prernium-reseme        deduction by 20 percent.

         We would expect, a priori, that both of these changes in the tax treatment of property-

casualty insurers--the loss-reserve discounting requirement and unearned premium inclusion--to

have effects on break-even prices in the property-casualty       market. In Part IV below, where we

discuss the effect of taxes on break-even prices generally, we also set forth specificallyy our

predictions regarding the effects of these changes. (In general, we could expect a decrease in

prices in 1986--due to the fresh start--and an eventual increase in break-even prices in the years

thereafter owing to the switch to discounted reserves. ) Then in Part V we explore the extent to

which the actual industry-wide aggregate data--taken from Bes[ ‘.sAg=egules          and Averages--


matches our predictions.

        Before turning to Part IV, however, we briefly summarize another interesting change in

the tax laws that occurred in 1980s--specifically in 1984--which we would expect to have some

(albeit small) effect on equilibrium property-casualty    prices, although we do not attempt to model

this effect in Part IV.




‘0 Joint Committee (1986),
                                                      20


The Tax Treatment Of Liabilities Not Funded Throuqh Propertv-Casualty              Insurance Comuanies

           Thus far we have been discussing the economics and accounting of how a business or an

individual   might find certain types of liabilities through a property-casualty    insurance policy. And

in the previous section we explained how the pre-TRA86 tax rules for property-casualty

companies created a bias in the direction of finding risks in that manner (at least as compared to

the incentives that would have existed under a nominal economic income tax). In this section we

explain how a fundamental change in the tax treatment of liabilities accrued by noninsurance

companies--that     is, liabilities /lot finded through a propefiy-casualty   company--that was enacted

in 1984 should have itzcreased, if only temporarily, that bias in favor of property-casualty     risk

finding,

           Before the enactment of the Tax Reform Act of 1984, businesses that used the accrual

method of accounting for federal tax purposes could, in a veiy rough way, approximate the

accelerated deductions available to property-casualty       insurance companies.    This acceleration of

deductions resulted horn the application of the traditional “all events test, ” which determines

generally the timing of deductions taken by accrual method taxpayers. Under the pre-TRA84

version of this test, an accrual method taxpayer could deduct a liability in the year in which (a) all

events necessary to fix the liability had occurred and (b) the amount of the liability could be

determined with reasonable accuracy, Thus, for example, whenever the taxpayer entered into a

binding contract to make a fixed payment in the fiture, the taxpayer could--in the year of

contracting--deduct     the undiscounted face value of the fiture payment, even if the payment was

not to be made for several years.
                                                        21


          To illustrate the effect of this rule, consider the following example of a structured-

settlement     arrangement   that might have occurred    before the TRA84:   An individual   is injured on

January      1 in Year 1 by a product manufactured by Company X. Assume that the company and

the individual agree to settle the claim for $823 to be paid by the company to the individual on

December 31 of that year, Assume firther, for the sake of the example, that the before-tax rate of

interest on all investments is 10 percent, that all investments (of both the company and the injured

individual) are subject to income tax, and that the marginal tax rate for all taxpayers is 50 percent.

Thus the after-tax interest rate of return on all investments is 5 percent.

          Under the all-events test (as it was applied before the enactment of the 84Act), these facts

would given rise to the following tax-planning opportunity:        The parties could agree that, instead

of the $823 cash payment in Year 1, the company would pay the injured party S1OOOfour years

later, at the end of Year 5. Provided that the company was solvent and likely to remain solvent,

the injured party would be indifferent as between these two payment options because they have

the same present value, discounting at the after-tax interest rate. If the parties agree to this

deferred-payment      arrangement, the company could then take the fiJll $1000 deduction on its Year

1 tax return.

          Assuming the company has income in Year 1 against which to offset the deduction, the

deduction would save the insurer $500 in taxes in that year. The company then combines this

$500 with $323 of its own money and invests the sum at the afier-tax rate of 5% per year. By the

end of Year 5, the money will have grown to $1000 under the current assumptions, the amount

necessary to satisfi the company’s obligation to the injured party, Thus, the out-of-pocket         afier-

tax cost to the taxpayer of this liability would be only $323.
                                                     22


        Under the nominal-economic-income         treatment of this structured-settlement   transaction,

the company would be permitted a deduction of $683 on its Year 1 tax return ($1000 discounted

for four years at the 10 percent before-tax interest rate) and an additional deduction each year

(through Year 5) equal to the annual increase in the present value of the liability resulting from the

passage of time, The discounted present value of the tax saving amounts to $458 in Year 1. Thus,

by investing these tax savings and S365 of its own money in Year 1 (at 5% after tax), the

company could generate the necessary $1000 by the end of Year 5, Thus, one measure of the

tax-deferral effect of this particular structured-settlement   agreement is the difference between the

afier-tax cost to the taxpayer under nominal-economic-income        taxation ($365) and the afier-tax

cost to the taxpayer under the pre-84 Act all events test ($323)--the difference being $42 in this

example.

        The structured-settlement      represents an extreme example of the tax deferral available

under the old all events test. To achieve the degree of tax deferral described in the example

above, however, it was necessary for the company not only to be aware of the liability but also to

enter into the structured-settlement    contract with the injured party. Such contracts probably

accounted for a relatively small portion of the total amount of risk finding in the pre-84 Act years.

Note, however, that a structured-settlement      was not the only means of accelerating deductions

under the pre-84 Act all-events test. In addition, there was a considerable amount of pre-84Act

caselaw that had the effect of allowing accrual-method taxpayers to deduct certain liabilities that

called for the taxpayer to make payouts far into the future,

        For example, one court held that the all-events test was satisfied--the liability was fixed--

with respect to a company’s self-insured workers’ compensation liabilities in the year in which the
                                                        23


injury occurred, provided that those liabilities were uncontested, ” Moreover, courts have

generally held that the length of time between accrual and payment does not affect whether the

deduction could be taken or for how much. As will be discussed below, this result approached

(without quite equaling) the treatment available to insurers under the pre-TRA86 subchapter L.

(The main difference was that an insurer could have deducted the workers’ compensation                    liability

even if the claims had been contested. )

        Thus for workers’ compensation liabilities, to a lesser extent for tort liabilities, and for

other liabilities as well, taxpayers before the TR484 could exploit the old all-events test and defer

taxes by taking deductions years in advance of payments.’*

         In 1984 Congress introduced the economic performance requirement, which largely

eliminated the tax-deferral opportunities described above in connection with the old all-events

test.” The economic performance requirement, found in Internal Revenue Code section 461(h),

altered the timing of large classes of deductions under the old all events test. Section 46 l(h)

provides generally that an accrual method taxpayer can deduct an expense no earlier than the

year in which economic performance occurs with respect to that expense, ” With respect to the




“ Crescent Wharf& Warehouse Co, v. Commissioner, 518 F.2d 772 (9th Cir. 1975), Generally, a taxpayer may
not deduct amounts set aside as a self-insurance reseme for expected future costs. The deduction can be taken ordy
when the all events test is satitiled,
“ Joint Committee (1984),
“ Under IRC section 468B, companies who have tort liabilities can still generate tax benefits by making qualified
payments 10a “designated settlement fund. ” However, the companies must comply with set of complicated and
restrictive regulatory requirements, and the size of the m savings of a designated settlement fund are considerably
smaller than the tax savings that were possible under the old all events test.
‘4 The general rules for determining when economicperformancewcurs are straightforward: Lfthe taxpayer’s
expensearises out of the provisionof servicesto (or by) [he taxpayer,economicperformanceoccursas the services
are rendered. If the expensearises out of the provisionof propertyto (or the use of propertyby) the taxpayer,
economicperformancewcurs as the property is provided to (or used by) the taxpayer.
                                                            24


timing of deductions        for tort liabilities, workers’ compensation liabilities, and breach-of-contract

liabilities specifically,   however,    the economic     performance      requirement     essentially   placed all

taxpayers    on the cash-receipts-and-disbursements            method    of accounting.      Thus for post- 1984 tax

years, liabilities arising out of tort claims, workers’ compensation              claims, or contract     claims can be

deducted only when payment is actually made by the taxpayer to the party to whom the liability is

owed: A tort liability, for example, may be deducted no earlier than the year in which the

taxpayer actually pays the tort award (or settlement amount) to the tort plaintiff..

         Note that under the economic performance rule, the company in the structured-settlement

example above would been required to delay the $1000 tax deduction until the year of actual

payment--Year       5, In that case (holding all other assumptions the same), the after-tax cost to the

self-insurer of the structured-settlement         arrangement would have been $411. This is because the

present value in Year 1 of the delayed tax deduction would be $411, and, as noted above, a total

of $823 is needed in Year 1 to find the $1000 payment in Year 5,

         Finally, consider how the manufacturer in the structured-settlement                  example above could

have firtded its tort liability through a property-casualty            insurance company rather than through

self-finding,    Make the following assumptions:            (a) Just before the occurrence of the injury (at the

end of Year 1), the manufacturer purchased an occurrence-based                   Commercial General Liability

insurance policy from a property-casualty           insurance company, (b) The injury (caused by the

manufacturer’s     product) is covered under the policy. (c) The insurer estimates that the covered

injury will give rise to a single $1000 payment to be made four years later, at the end of Year 5.”




“ Perhaps it will take five years for the litigation to run its course; or, in some cases, it make take five years for the
victim to discover the injury
                                                     25


(d) The premium charged by the insurer is equal to $645, the break-even premium, given statutory

accounting for insurance company income. ” (e)) The insurance premium is deductible as an

ordinary and necessary business expense on the manufacturer’s Year 1 tax return. Under these

assumptions, the $645 deduction would save the manufacturer $322 in taxes, Thus the afier-tax

cost to the manufacturer of finding the liability through the property-casualty      policy is $323

Under these assumptions, then, the after-tax cost of finding the liability through the property-

casualty insurer and the afier-tax cost of self-finding it (in the event a structured settlement could

be arranged) were the same.

        Because of the changes made by the TRA84 (which were made effective for deductions

that would have been allowable afier July 18, 1984 under the prior rules), we would expect the

cost of self-finding certain types of liabilities (especially tort, workers’ compensation,     and breach-

of-contract liabilities) to have increased in 1984 and subsequent years. Likewise, the relative cost

of finding such liabilities through property-casualty     insurance policies should have decreased

around that time. Therefore, we would expect to see an increase in the quantiy          of liability

insurance (especially in the General Liability and Workers’ Compensation lines) that was supplied

and demanded in 1984, 1985, and 1986,

        That quantity effect, however, might be de minimis, because of the relatively small

magnitude of the change, That is, it maybe that the discussion above overstates the extent to

which non-insurance-company        taxpayers were, pre-TR484,     able to accelerate the deduction of




“ In Part IV we explain how the insurancepremium de~nds upon the tax treatment of the insurance company;
the example applies the pre-TRA86 rules.
                                                     26


accrued liabilities. Also, the quantity effect may be offset to some extent by the price effects

caused   by the changes    in the TRA86,   which will be discussed below in Part IV.


Part IV. The Effect of Taxes on Break-Even Prices

         As mentioned     in Part III, one would expect generally that tax rules will influence   both the

break-even   spot prices of property-casualty    insurance (where the treatment of loss reserves is

critical) and the relationship between break-even spot prices and break-even standard premiums

(where the main issue is the treatment of unearned premium reserves).         We treat the two pieces

separately, starting with the effect of taxes on break-even spot prices, Note one critical

assumption of this Part and of the article as a whole: We assume throughout that in setting their

reported loss   reserves and unearned premium reserves insurers show no systematic bias. That is,

we assume they are not influenced in any direction by the possible effects of these reported

numbers on their tax liabilities, their likelihood of regulatory review, or their financial status in the

capital markets.   In fiture work, we hope to isolate the discretionary element in loss-reserving

decisions and to measure the direction and extent of various biasing factors, such as taxes and

regulatory concerns,      But for now, an absence of bias is assumed.

Break-Even SDot Prices

         Break-Even SDot Prices with No Taxes

         By a simple arbitrage argument, the break-even premium on a on a spot policy with

known loss profile is simply the discounted value of the losses. Let r(~ be the yield curve in the

bond market at the time of writing a single-payment policy, understood as the average amual

yield on a zero-coupon bond that pays off t years in the fiture.      Then, the break-even condition is
                                                          27



                                              P(I( )) = ~l(t)e-r(f)fdt
                                                        o

This condition expresses the effect of a time-varying discount rate, Note that there is no question

of predicting    fiture   interest   involved. The valuation of the cash flow of losses is based on the

interest   rates at the time of writing the policy,

           Provided the time shape is fixed, in this simple model, the price of a spot policy at any

given time is determined by the yield cume at that time. The framework permits analysis of the

effects of changes in the yield cume on different standardized time shapes (e. g., Medical

Malpractice, Worker Compensation),             as well as variation in the time shape of policies, for

example, a lengthening of the payment tail on some line. If the discount rate in the market is the

same, r, for all maturities, the break-even condition is


                                                   P(l( )) = ~l(t)e-ndt
                                                             0

For the special case of a unit “single-payment” spot policy, that is, a policy that pays off at exactly

one point in time, maturing at T (measured from the time of writing), the break-even premium

(the unit price for that line) is


                                                    P(T) = e-rT.


           Break-Even SDot Prices with Taxes

           In the calculation of the company’s taxable income, gross underwriting income consists of

premiums earned. A deduction is allowed on account of any increase in the liabilities for future

loss payments; that is the loss reserve deduction.          We may start by considering the case in which
                                                     28


taxable income is the same as nominal economic income, as defined above.          We then consider

significant   deviations   in the rules from the nominal economic income standard,


          Trees with Nominal Economic Income Accolmting

         When we introduce an income tax, we must translate       the analysis of cash flows in a single-

payment spot policy to net-of-tax terms, If the income tax were actually based on nominal

economic income, then the insurance company that issued a policy on break-even terms in the

absence of taxes, and filly hedged its position by buying a portfolio of bonds with maturities

matching its payment obligations, would not have any income at any point, and would not pay any

tax. So, under those circumstances, the tax would not affect the equilibrium price of insurance

(except possibly indirectly, through an effect on the level of interest rates). Translated into the

terms of gross income and deductions, the premium, P, would be included as gross income and

the addition to loss reserves of an exactly equal amount (because it is a break-even policy) would

be taken as a deduction.      Over time, there would be additional deductions for successive loss

payments, but they would be matched by equal and opposite changes in the level of loss reserves.

In addition, there would be deductions as the value of discounted loss reserves increased by virtue

of the approach to fiture payout points. These deductions would give rise to negative

undenvriting    income. They would be matched by the yield on the use of finds up until the time of

payout, which would give rise to positive investment income, offsetting underwriting losses. So

the company’s net taxable income would be zero throughout the life of the contract.         (In

Appendix ~ we provide firther discussion of the discount rate appropriate for use in setting loss

resewes, drawing on the analogy between a single-payment spot policy and a discount bond. )
                                                        29


           Taes with Statuto~    Accounting for Loss Reserves

          With statutory accounting for loss reserves, the stow is different. The premium comes in

as gross income when received,          but the simultaneous   deduction   is of the undiscoz(nted reseme

The increase in liability on a discounted       basis that takes place as the time of future payment

approaches     has no tax consequences.       As with nominal economic       income accounting,      loss

payments     give rise to a deduction    when made, offset by a simultaneous        reduction   in the deduction

for loss resemes    as the stock of undiscounted      liabilities for losses incurred   is reduced   by the

amount paid out. So with statuto~           accounting used for tax purposes, writing what would be a

break-even insurance policy in the absence of taxes results in a stream of changes in tax liabilities

with positive discounted value to the taxpayer.

          In working out the details, we need to take account of the fact that the company will

evaluate cash flows on the basis of their after-tax consequences, using the after-tax discount rate,

In the case of a constant tax rate, T,the after-tax discount rate applicable to a cash flow t years in

the fiture is (1-~r(t).

          With statuto~    accounting, there is a deduction for the undiscounted loss reseme at the

time of writing the policy, R(O) = L. The cash flow associated with the policy is thus (1- r~ + rL

at time of issue, followed by the flow, -1(1),at subsequent time, t,consisting of the actual loss

payout,    Since the payout is deducted and the corresponding increase in loss reserves is included

in taxable income, there are no tax consequences at payout time. Denoting the break-even

premium under statutory accounting by P , it must satis~ the break-even condition


                                    (1- ~)P’ + rL = ~l(f)e-(l-r)’(’)dt.
                                                    o
                                                                 30


             Two important       characteristics      of the impact of taxes using statutory   accounting    can be

inferred      from this break-even       condition.      First, the tax rate matters.   As we show next, the higher

the tax rate, the lower the break-even                premium,   given the term structure   of before-tax   interest

rates,     Second, the time patter of tax rates matters. For example, other things equal, the lower is

the tax rate anticipated in the fiture, relative to the time of writing the policy, the lower is the

break-even premium.          Conversely, an anticipated increase in the rate of tax will result in an

increase in the break-even premium.

             We may contrast this break-even condition with the one that would apply under nominal

economic income accounting, which would involve an initial deduction of the discounted value of

the anticipated loss, followed by a stream of deductions for any increase in that discounted value

due to the approach of the payment date, (There is a firther stream of deductions for the

payments themselves that is offset by exactly equal reductions in the stock of reserves.)                     Letting

~   stand for the discounted value of loss resetves, the cash flow at the time of writing the policy

would be (1- ~P+ Z(O),             or


                                                   (1 - r)P + r~l(t)e-tidt.
                                                               o

Under our assumption that the losses on the policy are known at the outset, the discounted value

of losses remaining to be paid at a time, t‘,subsequent to the date of issue would be given by


F(t)     =   ~l(t)e ‘r(f-f’)dl       The change in discounted reserve is a deduction in calculating nominal
             t’

economic income, so would induce a stream of tax savings under a system of nominal economic

income taxation,        The rate of cash flow at t‘would then be
                                                     31



                                             -l(t’)+   rRd(t’)     ,

where we have used the fact that, net of payouts, the stock of discounted resemes will grow

instantaneously    at the rate of interest. Denoting the break-even premium under nominal economic

income accounting by ~ , it must satisfi the break-even condition


                        (1 - r)Pe + rRd(0)    = ~(l(t’)     - rr Rd(l’))e-(l-rJti’dt’.
                                                o

Relying on the discussion in Appendix A we know that this break-even condition implies


Pe = Rd(0) .

           The relationship between the two break-even premium levels can be expressed in simple

form in the case of a single-payment policy. The afier-tax cash flow from the break-even

premium under statuto~      accounting must have a discounted (at the afier-tax discount rate) value

of zero:

                                    P’ - r(Ps - 1) - e-( ’-r)rT = O


                                      (1- r)Ps = (e-(l-r)rT            - r)

                                                  ~-(~-rJrT _ ~
                                         P’=(                      )
                                                          l-r

A somewhat startling implication of the calculation is that the break-even loan proceeds to justi@

a repayment of 1 after a time period T could actually be negative for large enough values of T, r,

or r. The insurer could afford to pay the policyholder to accept coverage, taking its return in the

form of tax savings.

           This may be contrasted with the corresponding break-even premium, P , under nominal

economic income accounting for tax purposes,
                                                                        32


                                                                P’ =e-rT.

The ratio of the two

                                                                      -(1-r)rT      _ ~

                                                         P’      (e                       )
                                                      —=                   l–r
                                                                              -rT
                                                         P’               e

                                                          P’          errT-rerT
                                                          7=              l–r


depends upon the tax rate, the discount rate, and the time to maturity (length of the tail for an

insurance     policy).        If the tax rate is zero or the discount               rate is zero, or the time to maturity            is

zero, the two amounts             are the same.      Increasing         the tax rate, the discount        rate, or the time to

maturity lowers the ratio, that is, lowers the break-even amount under regulatory relative to that

under nominal economic income accounting.                             For high enough discount rate, tax rate, or time to

maturity, the competitive premium level is negative, whereas the premium is always positive under

nominal economic income accounting


       Table 2. Break-Even Premiums, Statutory vs Nominal Economic Income Accounting

                                             Ratio of Break-Evenpremiumsfor Sin~e.Pa~enL Policy
                                          Regulatory Relaliveto Nominal fionomic IncomeAccounting
     Tax Rale                       0.1                                     0.3                                       0.5
  InterestRaw        0.05       0,1     0.15      0.2       0.05     0.1        0,15    0.2       0,05         0.1          0.15          0.2
      Maturity
                 1   1.00       1.00     1.00     1.00         1.00       I.00       1.00     0.99     1.00    1.00          0.99     0.99
               3     1,00       0.99     0.99     0.98         I.00       0.98       0.96     0.93     0.99    0,97          0.94     0.88
              10     0.98       0.93     0,79     0.54         0.95       0.76       0.32     -0.36    0.92    0.58          4.25     -1.95
             20, 0,93           0.54    4,73      4.41         0.76       4.56       -5.09    -18.66   0.58   -1,95         -11.12   -39.82


            Source:         Authors’ calculations.

         The relationship between the various parmeters                              (tax rate, discount rate, time to maturity)

and the ratio between break-even premium levels under statutory and financial economic income

accounting is highly nordinear. Table 2 shows that, with a tax rate of 30 percent, the impact
                                                          33


increases     dramatically   as the interest rate goes above 10 percent     and the time to payoff goes

beyond      10 years.   Since the relevant   discount   rate is the nominal interest   rate, it is clear that the

recent history of interest     rates in the United States includes periods in which the premiums            on

long-tailed    lines of insurance   might have been significantly affected by tax factors,

            Aside on Tax-Exempt Interest

            In the analysis thus far we have assumed that the rate at which the company discounts

after-tax cash flows is the afier-tax interest rate, In practice, an important feature of the tax

landscape is the option to hold state and local tax exempt bonds. We propose not to explore in

any depth the maximizing financial portfolio choices by insurance companies.                 However, to the

extent that tax exempt interest applies at the margin to financial choices by the company, it would

be substituted for the afier-tax interest rate in our analysis. Essentially, the effect is to substitute

for the actual marginal tax rate the, lower, implicit marginal tax rate embodied in the difference

between tax exempt and taxable bond yields. So, for example, if the tax exempt interest rate is 8

percent and the taxable interest rate is 10 percent, the tax rate implicit in the tax exempt yield

would be 20 percent.         If the relevant margin for the insurance company is the tax exempt bond,

then the formulas above should employ the implicit marginal tax rate of 20 percent (as applied to

the taxable interest rate), rather than the statutory tax rate.

            An insurance company that is well-managed from a tax point of view will, however,                try to


assure that the marginal source of finds for the insurance business is fully taxable income. Note

that, whereas the insurance company’s tax rate does not enter the determination of the break-even

premium level under nominal economic income accounting, it does enter under regulato~

accounting.      In the latter case, the higher the tax rate, the lower the break-even         premium,    other
                                                                 34


things equal,     It is characteristic      of situations     in which the yield from an investment             according    to

taxable    income measurement            rules incorporates      deferral relative to nominal economic              income

rules, that the taxpayer       with the higher marginal tax rate will be willing to pay the higher price for

a given investment        opportunity       (Bradford,      1981).    In those situations,      there will be a tendency for

higher-marginal      rate taxpayers       to drive exempt or low-rate             taxpayers    out of activities.    In the case

of insurance    companies,      with regulato~           accounting     used for tax purposes, the same tendency is

present.     To the extent that an insurance business can be arranged so that the marginal

underwriting loss comes out of filly taxable income, the company will be able to take fill

advantage of the deferral effect of the regulatory accounting.                       (For a thorough treatment of these

issues, in particular the financial portfolio choices of insurance companies, see Cummins and

Grace, 1994.)

           Taes with Statutorily Prescribed Discounted Reserves

           As described    in Part III, since the T~86,               insurance    companies     have been required      to use

discounted     reserves    in calculating     taxable income,         As far as spot policies are concerned,           it would

be reasonable to describe the post-TRA86 rules as taxing companies roughly on a nominal

economic income basis. As described above, however, the rules limit the flexibility of insurance

companies to vary the loss profile assumed in calculating income, and they incorporate an

assumed interest rate that may be different from the one actually prevailing. To illustrate, suppose

the prescribed profile were “too long,” T’ instead of T for our single-payment example, and the

interest rate “too low,” r‘ instead of r. Then, unlike the case of consistent nominal economic

income accounting, the tax rate and interest rates would influence the break-even premium, P. As
                                                   35


a consequence, it is necessary to model the determination of break-even premiums using an

explicit specification of the Treasury discount factors.


From Break-Even SDot Prices to Earned Premiums

         The theoretical analysis developed above relates to the economics of a spot policy, A

standard policy incorporates   a year’s worth of spot policies, paid for at the beginning      of the year.

To get from spot policy prices to standard    policy prices requires   discounting   the anticipated   spot

policy amounts.    The income tax also affects the relationship   between    break-even   spot prices and

break-even   standard   policies, via the treatment of unearned premium resemes (which was changed

in 1986).

         Industry data on premiums take the form of amounts earned during the reporting year

The amount earned during a reporting year constitutes the pro rafa portions of premiums on

standard policies that commenced during the previous year or that extend into the next accounting

year. These amounts may be differentially affected by changes in the rates of tax during these

years.

         Appendix B describes how we deal with these and many other details in the process of

developing the figures presented in the next part, which describes the empirical results.


Part V. Empirical Results

Profiles, Tax Rates. Discount Rates. ~S Reserve Discount Factors

         To implement the formulas derived above we require data on loss profiles, discount rates,

IRS discount factors (for incurred loss resewes) and taxes.
                                                          36


           Profiles

           A unit loss profile in a line of insurance s assumed to take the form of a sequence            of

discrete   payments,     ~,, occurring   at times, f,, measured   from the time of writing.   Since this is a unit

profile, the payments      sum to 1. The specific profiles we use are based on those promulgated               by

the Internal Revenue Service of the U.S. Treasu~ Department in connection with the

development of reseme discount factors. Those profiles are derived by the Treasu~                  in a

somewhat ad hoc manner from data on the percentage of incurred losses paid by the end of the

reported accident year and successive years, using the historical record as an approximation to the

forward-looking        profiles one would actually like to know.

           We distinguish five unit spot policy loss profiles, based on the aggregation of industry data

by the lines of insurance as they were defined by the industry until 1989 (at which point data

began to be reported in somewhat finer detail, and the lines were disaggregated into more

categories).     The pre-89 lines are “Auto Liability,” “Other Liability,” “Workers’ Compensation,”

“Medical Malpractice,” and “Farmowners, Homeowners, and Commercial Multiple Peril, Ocean

Marine, Aircraft (all perils), and Boiler and Machine~.”

           Table 3 presents the Treasu~        profiles as specified in connection with deriving the reserve

discount factors applicable fier         1986. We have extended the profiles to sixteen years, assuming

all losses are paid by the end of the fifteenth year after the accident year.
                                                                     37


                                Table 3, Unit Loss Profiles Based on Treasury Data


                                       Unit Spot Policy LOSSProfks Derived Erom Treasury Data
                                                               @ercent)


                                                                                                                       FarrnowneTs,
                                                                                                                   , Homeowets,     and
                                                                                                                    Commercial Mdtiple
                                                                                                                    Per~ Ocean Marine,
                                                                                                                    Aircraft (All Perils),
                                                                       Workers’                                        and Boiler and
Tax Year       Auto Liability              Other Liability           Compe=tion             Medieal Malpractice          Mactiery

AY+I)      ~                34,32                        9.20                     25.92                     3,02                     55.74
AY+l                        30.88                       16.19                     28.61                     9.%                      23.39
AY+2                        I 5.03                      14.69                      13.33                   10.45                      7.33
AY+3                            8.82                    1513                        7.74                   12.15                      4.75
AY+4                            4.76                    10.99                       4.47                    9.%                        3.05
AY+5                            2,73                         8.92                   350                     8.27                       2.43
Ay+6       I                    1,24                         5.11                   1.88                    7.03                       1.05
Ay+T                            O.a                      4.28                       I ,73                   6.47                       0.38
Ay+a                            0.23                         2.16                   1.50                    5.13                       0.68
Ay+9                            0.32                         I .02                  0,62                    2.74                       0.32
Ay+lo                           0.32                         1.02                   0.62                    2.74                       0.32
Ay+ll                           0.32                         1,02                   0.62                    2.74                       0.32
Ay+12                           0.32                         1.02                   0.62                    2.74                       0.25
Ay+13                           OK                           1.02                   0,62                    2.74                      0.00
Ay+14                           O.m                          I .02                  0.62                    2.74                      0.00
Ay+ 15                          0.00                         7,23                   7.58                   11.20                       0.00

Totals                     lW.00                       Iol),oo                    lm.oo                   10COO                     1000o


Source: Derived from Bests’ Averages and Ae~re~ates, 1988. (file: payment.xls)

           As discussed in Appendix B, we translate these profiles into assumed spot policies by

treating the first payout as occurring as a discrete amount exactly three months after the time of

writing, and the successive payouts as discrete amounts occurring on the annivers~                                        dates. So a

typical profile in this application involves a payout at the .25, 1, 2, ,,., etc. -year points. It is

immediately apparent from the table that there is considerable variation in the length of the tails of

the different lines. Based on our assumed timing, the average times to payout implicit in the data

are shown in Table 4. Referring to Table 2, showing the effect of the difference between
                                                       38


statuto~      and discounted-reserve    accounting for tax purposes, we can see that the only line for

which we might look for a significant effect is medical malpractice.


                                 Table 4, Average Time to Payout, by Line


                                                              Average Time to Payout
                                       Line                           (years)
                               Auto Liability                            1,57
                               Other Liability                           4.38
                           Workers’ Compensation                         3,12
                            Medical Malpractice                          6.34
                             Farmowners, etc.                            1.17



           Source:   Authors’ calculations on data from Best’s Aggregates and Averages, 1988,




           Anticit)ated Tax Rates

           Tax rates have changed from time to time,          The break-even    premium   under statutory

accounting      depends   upon the company’s   anticipation     of future tax rates.   Sometimes   tax

legislation    specifies the fiture course of tax rates. For purposes of this exercise, we assume that

companies know the tax rate that will, in fact, apply to the year of writing the policy (the first of

two accident years that will be touched by the policy) and for fiture years believe the tax rates

specified in legislation as of the end of the accident year. (We also assume in this paper that

companies do not manipulate their loss reserves. ) Table 5 specifies the tax rates used in our

calculations for each year. The rates shown on the diagonal are the ones that actually applied in

the years in question.      The last column, for 1993, is repeated for all fiture years required in the

calculations.
                                                                                           39


                                                            Table 5, Federal Income Tax Rates

Falaal      Lnwme   TU Rai= Usul in Calculating Break-Evm Premiums                      @ote:       State lax rnk        have kcn         ignmd.)                                    ,
                                                 ]Tax Rnl- inl     I                            I          I         I         I          I          I         I          I
                    I            I 19761 19771 19781 19791 19801
                    I     1976      .48/        ,48   .48    ‘“.48        “-,48
                          1977                  ,48   .48 .48 48
                          1978             ~          .48 .46 ,46 .til                   .+
                          1979             i                  .46           46    .Ui    ,L          .-
                          1980                                             .46    .&’    .46         .46
                          1981             I                                      .46    .46         .46
                          1982             ~                                             .46         .46       ---       ..v       -v         ..-        ---        ..-
&ticipled      in         1983                                                                       ,46       .46       .46       .4.5       .46        .46        .46
                          1984                                                                                 .46       .46       .46        .46        .46        .46       ,..,        ..-,      ,.-,      .
                          1985                                                                                           .46       .46        46         .46 .46              .-16i       .46       ,46    46
                          1986                                                                                                     .46          ,4       .34        .34       .341        .34       .34    .34
                          1987                                                                                                                  .4       .34        .34       .34          34       .34    .34
                          1988                                                                                                                           .34        .34       .34         ,34       .34    .34
                          1989                                       I                                                                                              .34       .34         .34       .34    .34
                          Im                                         ,,                                                                                                       ,34         ,34       .34    .34
                          1991                                                                                                                                 Ii                         .34       .34    .34
                         1592                                                                                                                                  1                                    ,34    ,34
                                                                                                                                                                          I
                          1993                                                                                                                                 I                                           .35



Source:         C,omrnerce Clearing House, Standard Federal Tax ReDorter vol. 1,13265,0’                                                                                                 29-.0139
                (1996)


              Discounting

              In determining the spot price at any time, discounting is at the then-current term structure

of interest rates. The interest rate data that we use are in the form of yields on Treasu~                                                                                                       securities

of different maturities.                       Although such a yield is derived as an internal rate of return on securities

that make periodic coupon payments between issue date and maturity, we treat the rates as

applying to zero-coupon                         bonds with various maturities.                                 So, if the five-year yield is reported as 7

percent, we assume one dollar payable in five years can be bought for e“”’”~=e-j~. The after-tax

interest rate applicable to a 40 percent bracket taxpayer would be 4.2 percent. We use the

notation r(fl to designate the interest rate applicable to a zero of maturity r. Where the relevant

maturity does not correspond exactly to one available in the data (for example, 4 years), we use a

linear interpolation of the rates reported for the nearest adjacent maturities.
                                                              40


            We calculate spot prices for policies written on April 1 and October 1 (more precisely, the

first business day of the 2nd and 4th quarters) each year. The applicable term structures are

derived as a simple average of the term structures, compiled on a daily basis by the Federal

Reserve Board, during the first and second half of the year. Figure 1 shows the term stmcture at

selected     dates (the turning   points in the 10-year yield in the constructed                time series).


                         Figure 1. Term Structure of Interest Rates, Selected Dates



                                   Average Bond Yields for Various Maturities, Selected Dates
                                        Dates Correspond to ExiTerMin Tm-Yenr Yield

        16.00



        14.00                                                                                                   I



        12.00

                                                                                                                    +411177
        10.00                                                                                                       +    10/1/81
                                                                                                                    +4/1/83
   ;                                                                                                                +    41Y84
   .-      8.00
   ;                                                                                                                +    10/1/86
                                                                                                                    +    10/3/88
        6.00
                                                                                                                    +    10/1/93


           4.00


           2.00

        0.00
             lyear        2year          3 year           5 year          7 yw             10 year        30 year
                                                        Maturities


            Source:   Federal Reserve Board and authors’ calculations.

           We use the notation a(r) for the afier tax discount factor applied to a cash flow at time

point t after the date of issue of a spot policy,           These discount        factors vary with the date of issue,

in part because the term structure of before-tax interest rates varies and in part because the tax

rates vary. The applicable tax rates for purposes of determining the break-even premium at any
                                                      41


time are those anticipated at that time, Because the discrete payment profile that we use is an

approximation    to a continuous profile, the applicable tax rate is obtained by averaging over the

intewal   from zero to the time midway to the next discrete      payment    point,   So, for example, if

T=6, and the tax rate is 46V0 for the first year, and 40% for the next five and a half years, the afier

tax discount factor applicable to a cash flow at the 6-year point is

                                           _rf6)((l-.46)   + 5,5(1-.40))6
                                a(6) = e                   6.5


Note that for this model we assume that the relevant tax rates are not the ones that actually

prevailed in all instances, Rather, they are the tax rates that were expected to prevail at the date

for which the afier-tn   discount factor is being derived.


          Reserve Discount Factors

          The resetve discount factors applied to undiscounted loss reserves for income tax

purposes afier 1986 are those promulgated by the U, S. Treasu~         in 1987 and 1992. The factors

provided in 1992 are for the post-1989 definition of lines. For our analysis, we use five of the six

lines for which data are available before 1989. For the post- 1989 period we have aggregated the

more narrowly defined lines into the same five broader lines (auto liability, etc. ). The resewe

discount factors applied in 1992 and thereafter are obtained by averaging the published IRS

factors, using aggregate incurred losses in the disaggregated lines for the year as weights.


Calculated SDot Premiums. 1976-1993

          Table 6 to Table 10 show the calculated break-even spot premiums in each line of

insurance from 1976 through 1993 based on our model in Pan IV. The figures shown are simple

averages of the April 1 and October 1 spot policy premiums that we use in the derivation of
                                                   42


break-even standard and break-even earned premiums. The tables also show the break-even spot

premiums that would have been implied based on statutory accounting (undiscounted            10SS

reserves) and nominal economic income accounting for tax purposes throughout the series of

years. For the years up to 1986, the applicable tax law is based on statuto~       accounting for loss

reserves.   After 1986, reserves are discounted   for tax purposes.   The special fresh start rules

applied in 1986,   The column headed “Ratio of P(ATL) to P(NEI)” indicates the irdluence on the

break-even spot premiums of the deviation of the applicable tax law accounting from the nominal

economic income accounting applied to ordinary borrowing and lending, Mer             1986, this   ratio


also indicates how closely the Treasury’s rules replicated nominal economic income accounting.

The column headed “Ratio of P(ATL) to P(SA)” indicates the impact of the change in rules in

1986,
                                                43


                        Table 6. Break-Even Spot Premiums, Auto Liability


I                              Break-Even Sr)ot Premiums. 1976-1993                              I
                                          Auto Liability

                                                                     P under
                                                                    Statuto~        Ratio of
                                                                   Accounting      P(ATL) to
      Year                                                          (P(SA))          P(SA)

      1976                                  0.901           0.99            0,90          1.00
      1977                   0.91           0.90            0,99            0,90          1.00
      1978                   0.89           0,88            0.99            0,88          1.00
      1979                   0.87           0.86            0.99            0.86          1.00
      1980                   0,851          0,84!           0,99            0,84          1.00
      1981                   0.821          0,801           0.98            0.80          1,00
      1982                                                                  0.82          l,OC
      1983                                                                  0.85          1,00
      1984                                                                  0.84          1.00
      1985        -                                                         0.86          1,00
      1986                   0.901          0.81 I          0.90            0.88          0.92
      1987                   0.901          0,901           1,00            0.88          1,02
      1988                   0.891          0.89]           1,00            0.88          1,01
      1989                   0,881          0.88!           1.00            0.88          1,01
      1990                   0,891          0.891           1,00            0.88          1,01
      1991                   0,91           0,91            1.00            0.90          1.01
      1992                   0.93           0,93            1.00            0,92          1.00
      1993                   0.94           0.94        -   1.00            0,93          1.00


Source:   Authors’ calculations.
                                                  44


                        Table 7. Break-Even   Spot Premiums,   Other Liability


                              Break-Even Spot Premiums, 1976-1993
                                           Other Liability
                   I  P under                     ~                                   ~
                      Nominal    I                                P under             ~
                   ~ Economic         P under     )   Ratio of ~ Statutory            ~ Ratio of
                      Income       Applicable Tax    P(ATL) to I Accounting           ~ P(ATL) to
      Year         ~ (P(NEI))    , Law (P(ATL))        P(NEI)  I  (P(SA))             ~   P(SA)

      1976                   0.761            0,73             o,96i             0.73          1,00
      1977                   0,76             0.73             0,96              0.73          1.00
      1978         I         0,73             0.68             0.93              0.68          1.00
      1979                   0,70             0,65             0.94              0,65          1,00
      1980         I         0.66             0,60             0.91 I            0,60          1,00
      1981                   0,611            0.53             0.87              0,53          1.00
      1982                   0.63             0.56             0.89              0,56 ,        1,00
      1983                   0.681            0.62             0,92              0.62          1,00
      1984                   0.65             0.58             0.90              0.58          1.00
      1985                   0,69             0.64             0.92              0.64          1.00
      1986                   0.76             0,55             0.73              0,68          0,81
      1987                   0.741            0,73             0.99              0,69          1,07
      1988                   0.73             0.72             1,00              0.70          1,04
      1989                   0.721            0,72             1,00              0.70          1.04
      1990         ~         0,73             0.73             1,00              0,70!         1.04
      1991         ~         0.76             0.76i            1.00              0.73          1.03
      1992                   0.79             0,79             1.00              0.77          1.02
      1993                   0,82             0,81             1.00              0,80          1,02

Source:   Authors’ calculations.




               .
                                                            45


                  Table 8. Break-Even Spot Premiums, Workers’ Compensation

                                                                                                                                1
                                 Break-Even Spot Premiums, 1976-1993
                                         Workers’ Compensation
                                                                                   1

                      P under                                I

                     Nominal                                                           P under
                    Economic               P under           I    Ratio of             Statuto~           ~    Ratio of
                     Income            Applicable    Tax         P(ATL)    to      ~ Accounting               P(ATL)    to
     Year           (P(NEI))           Law (P(ATL))          ~    P(NEI)           ~   (P(SA))            ~     P(SA)
                                                                                   !
      1976                   0.83                    0.81                  0.971                  0.81                  1.00
      1977                   0.84                    0,81 I                0.97                   0.81                  1.00
      1978                   0,81                    0.78                  0.96                   0.78                  1,00
      1979                   0.79                    0.75                  0.96                   0.75                  1.00
      1980                   0.76                    0.721                 0.94                   0,72,                 1,00
      1981                   0.73                    0.67~                 0.92                   0.67                  1.00
      1982                   0.75                    0.69                  0.93                   0,69                  1.00
      1983                   0,78                    0,74                  0.95                   0,74                  1.00
      1984                   0,76                    0,711                 0.94                   0,71                  1.00
      1985                                           0,75                  095                    0.75                  1.00
      1986                      0,83                 0,67                  0.81                   0,78                  0,86
      1987                      0.82                 0,82                  1.00                   0,78                  1.05
      1988                      0.81                 0.81                  1.00                   0.79                  1.02
      1989                      0.81                 0,81                  1,00                   0.79                  1.03
      1990                      0,81                 0.81                  1,00                   0,791                 1,03
      1991                      0.83                 0.83                  1,00                   0.81~                 1,02
      1992                      0.8(                 0.86                  1.00                   0.84                  1,02
      1993                      0,87                 0.871                 1.00                   0.86                  1,02,


Source:   Authors’ calculations.
                                                   46


                     Table 9, Break-Even Spot Premiums, Medical Malpractice


                                  Break-Even Spot Premiums, 1976-1993
                                           Medical Malpractice
                      P under
                    Nominal                                                P under             ~
                 ~ Economic              P under      ~    Ratio of        Statutory           ~
                    Income           Applicable Tax       P(ATL) to       Accounting           !   P:;yL~[
      Year         (P~I))            Law (P(ATL))          P(mI)           (p(SA))             ~     P(SA)


      1976       I           0.66              0,611             0.92                  0.61                  1
                             0,67              0.621             0,92                  0,621                 1
      1978       I           0.63              o.55~             0,88
      1979       ~           0,59              0,52!             0.87
                                                                      ~
      1980       ~           0.55              0.45 i            0,82                  0,451                 1
      1981       i           0,49              0,361             0.73                  0,361                 1
      1982       I           0.51              0.401             0.77                  0.401                 1
                                                                                       0,47!                 1
                                                                                       0.42                  1
                                     *                                                 0.49                  1
=
      1986       ~           0.66              0,39              0.59                  0.55                  0
      1987                   0.64              0.63              0.98                  0.56                  1
      1988       I           0.62              0.62]             0.99 =                0,58                  1
                             0.63              0,621             1.00                  0,581                 1
      1990       1           0,63              0.63 I            1,00                  0.58i                 1
      1991       I           0,66                                                      0.621                 1
      1992                   0.69                                                      0.661                 1
      1993                   0.73                                                      0.701                 1

Source:   Authors’ calculations
                                                   47


                       Table 10, Break-Even Spot Premiums, Farmowners, etc.


I                              Break-Even SDot Premiums. 1976-1993
I                                  Farmowners. Homeowners. Etc.
                                                                ~
                       P under    I
                       Nominal        :                                   P under
                      Economic        ~  P under     I  Ratio of     ~  Statutory        ~ Ratio of
                       Income         Applicable Tax   P(ATL) to     ; Accounting        ‘ P(ATL) to
      Year        ~   (p~l))         ~Law (P(ATL)) I     P(NEI)      ~ (P(SA))           I   P(SA)

      1976                       0.93          0.93             1,00                0.93 I            1 Oc
      1977                       0,931         0.93             1,00                0.93 i            1.OC
I     1978        I              0.921         0.91 I           0,991               0.91 I            1.0(
I     1979        1              0.901         0.891            0.991               0.891             1,0(
I     1980        !              0,89[         0.881            0,991               0,881             l,OC
      1981        I              0.86]         0,851            0,98~               0,85              1,0(
      1982                       0.881’        0.871            0.991               0.87              1 0(
I     1983        ~              0.901         0.891            0.991               0.891             1 0(
I     1984        ~              0.891         0.881            0.991               0.881             1.0(
I     1985        I              0.91 I        0.901            0,991               0.901             1.0(
I     1986        I              0.93 i        0.84]            0,91 I              0.911             0.92
I     1987        I              0.921         0.93 I           1,011               0.911             1.02
I     1988        I              0.921         0.921            1.001               0.91 i            1.01
I     1989        I              0.91 I                         1,001               0.91 I            1,01
      1990        I              0,92          0.92~            1001
                                                                -.   1
                                                                                    0911 1            101
      1991                       0,93          0.931            1.001               0.93 I            1.0(
I     1992        I              0.951         0,95 I           1.001               0,941             1.OC
I     1993        i              0.95 I        0,95 I           1.001               0.951             l,OC

Source:    Authors’ calculations.

          Referring to Table 4, we see that the calculated break-even spot premiums have the

expected relationship to the length ‘ofthe tail in a line. In 1978, for example, the break-even

premium under the applicable tax law was .91 in the Farmowners, Homeowners,             etc., line (the

line with the shortest tail) and .55 in the Medical Malpractice line (the line with the longest tail).

The differences were more pronounced in the early 1980’s when interest rates were very high by
                                                    48


historical standards.     In 1981, the break-even price in the Farmowners, Homeowners,       etc., line

was .85 and ,36 in the Medical Malpractice line.

        The difference between break-even prices under statutory accounting and applicable tax

law accounting afier 1986 also corresponds with the expectations based on the average length of

the tails. As expected, the case where the difference is most pronounced is medical malpractice,

where the change from undiscounted to discounted loss reserves accounts for a difference of 13

percent in the break-even price in 1987, declining to a roughly 4 percent difference in 1993. The

impact of the fresh-start rules in 1986 (that gave an extra tax boost to loss reserves established in

1986 and earlier) meant that for that year the tax law change reduced the break-even price below

what it would have been under statutory accounting.       The particularly large effect of the tax law

change in 1987 reflects in part the impact of the declining rate of tax from 1986 to 1988. Under

statutory accounting for tax purposes, a declining rate of tax between the receipt of premium and

the policy payout results in a lower break-even premium. The pattern of declines in the impact of

tax reform on break-even premiums after 1987 presumably results from declining interest rates (at

a zero rate of interest the two should be the same), since there were no major changes in the tax

rates after that point,

        Comparing the columns of break-even prices under nominal economic income accounting

for tax purposes with the effect of the actual tax law in the period from 1987 onwards (i.e., after

the fresh-start rule had ceased to have any influence), we see that the two are very close. The

ratios are essentially 1 throughout,   for all lines, suggesting the Treasury succeeded in

implementing the presumed objective of the 1986 shift to discounted loss reserves
                                                   49


Calculated Standard Policy Premiums. 1976-1993

        In getting to the break-even earned premiums, we calculated break-even standard policy

premiums ineachline     ofinsurance   for April land October lfrom      1976 through 1993, The

difference between these premiums and the spot premiums presented above is that the standard

policy premiums incorporate the effect of changes in the treatment of unearned premium reserves

(a minor effect) and bring to an earlier time point the effect on premiums of changes in interest

rates and tax rules. Thus, a premium on a policy written on October 1, 1986, incorporates the

effect of tax changes manifested in break-even spot premiums during most of 1987,

Predicted Break-Even Premiums vs. Actual Earned Premiums. Accident Years 1977-1993

        Under competitive conditions, the opportunity for profit from all sources, including tax

saving, will tend to be driven to zero. Thus we assume that the tax saving is “passed along” to

the buyer of the policy in the form of a reduced premium. To make the comparison of the

calculated break-even premiums with industry data, we make use of the break-even earned

premium concept discussed above. Table 11 presents these premiums, for accident years 1977

through 1993 (1976 is lost in the derivation of earned premiums), together with t he unit earned

premiums implicit in indust~ data for these accident years, interpreted as the inverse of the loss

ratio reported at the end of each accident year, For each line of insurance, there are two columns,

one showing the break-even earned premium (“B-e Earned P“) calculated from our model and

one showing the ratio of earned premiums per dollar of losses incurred (“I/industry      loss ratio”)

registered in data for the industry for the year in question,   So, for example, our calculated

average of the break-even premiums for the unit standard policies contributing to earned

premiums in the Other Liability line in 1985 was ,61, The ratio of earned premiums to losses
                                                                                                        50


incurred in that line in that year was .81. The obsemed average “price” was higher than would be

predicted by our calculation.


                 Table 11, Break-Even Earned Premiums and Observed Loss Ratios, by Line

                                                                    B~-EvuI      Em        Rm’nunn A         Ima     of Lu     P.aorn, 1977-93
                                                     1
                                                                                                                                                                                                    i F~wn~
                                                                                                                                                                              F-w=                  ; Howma.
                                                                                                                                                                              HorrmJwa,             ‘ md CO~ad
                                                                                                                                                                             md Comad                 Mulnple pc~
                                                                                                                                                                             Mulnple k~             !ti         -
                                                                                                                                                                             ti         -                 Alra-ao (Au
                                                                                                                                                                                  ha        (M            Peti ), md
                                                                                                                       Workm,                                 Medid               w),       and           mlla      d

                               I   Auto Lutiry                                mu    LlahlIly    Warkad               Comwn                   Mdd              M~um           mud                        M*ly
              Auto LISIhlIV        //mdu8y    Iou        Olha LIF,tity        l/uidm8y 10,, , Common                 I/mduay      10,,    Mdp~a       B-    l/mdu~    IOJJ M~rj               B-,     l/mduq            10,,
   tie       i B+ EarmdP               rano              B., E-dP                 r.llo          ~ B-, E-d     P         ,,Yfla            , furnd   P         mno                Eared      P              rut,.

   1977                 087                   1.361                  0.70                 I 50                0,78                I 30               059              I 19                   O.m                        170
   1978                 0.85                  1.34                   0.66                 157                 0.75                139                034              098                    O.m                        1.72
   I 979                082                   I 29                   0.62                 I 45                0.72                I 41               049              082                    0.85                       1.52
   I 980                079                   1.26                   056                  I 20                0,6U                 I 39              042              068                    0,83                       I 37
   1981                 076                   1 18                   051                  I 01                064                 I 17               035              060                    Ow                         I 43
   1987                 077                   I 15                   053                  0.82                065                 I 22               038              0,59                   081                        121
   I 983                Om                    IC9                    O 58                 068                 069                 I@                 043              058                    084                         120
   Iw                   O.w                   1.01                   057                  059                 068                 093                0.41             Oa                     084                         1.19
   1985                 081                   1.02                   058                  0.81                069                 o%                 0.43             0,83                   084                        1.25
   1986                 081                   1.12                   059                  1.57                0.69                1,05               O.a              123                    084                        l.@
   1987                 086                   1.15                   069                  I 77                077                 I 10               0,57             I 39                   0.89                       1.73
   19=                  O.m                   1.13                   070                  161                 0.79                108                060              L33                    0.89                       1.60
   1989                 0.85                  I 10                   0.69                 144                 0.77                106                060              123                    0.=                        1.31
   Im                   OM                    Ill                    0.70                 135                 078                 107                061              102                    0s                         136
   1991                 O,=                   I 16                   0.73                 130                 O.w                 1 12               063              089                    O,w                        127
   1992                 Ow                    I 16                   077                  I 27                083                 1 17               068              om                     092                        095
   1993                 091                   I 12                   Oen                  I 23               0.86                 I 23               071              080                    094                        125




Source:       Authors’ calculations and Bests’ Aggregates andA verages, various years,

            In evaluating these figures, one needs to keep in mind that our calculations are highly

stylized, neglecting risk premiums in the discount rates, for example. We would hope to see a

relationship between the calculated and the obsemed prices, not necesstily                                                                                       ‘equality. One

important itiuence                   on the empirical ratios is the fact that industry data relate to premiums earned

~oss       of the cost of acquiring the policies, whereas our calculations would apply to premiums net

of acquisition costs. Best’s repofis the following figures for “other underwriting expenses”

incurred, as a ratio to premiums earned, in the reporting years: 1990 (26.360/0), 1989, (26.250/o),

1988 (25 ,97Yo), 1987 (25,95%), 1986 (26,77Yo). Data disaggregated by line, available for 1990,

are shown in Table 12,
                                                       51


                        Table 12. Other Underwriting Expenses, by Line, 1990


        I                   Other Underwriting Expenses, by Line, 1990                               1
                                                                             I
                                            Ratio of “other
                                                               Premiums              Other
                                             underwriting
                                                                written in       underwriting
                    Line                expenses” incurred to
                                                                  1990             expenses
                                         premiums written in
                                                              (thousands)        (thousands)
                                                 1990

                   Auto             I           23.9           60,042,447          14,374,550
              Other Liabilitv       I           26,3           17,217,566           4,528,220
              Workers’ Comp                     17,6           30,957,411           5,448,504
            Medical Malpractice                 15.5            4,014,622             622,266
                                    I
             Farrnowners’, etc.                 34,1           44,032,383          15,002,167
                                                                             I
                                                                                                     I
        ISource: Bes/’s Ag gregates & A verages: Property-Casualty       Wition,      1991

        To permit more ready comparison of the relationship between calculated and empirical

prices, we present in Figure 2 to Figure 6 plots of normalized break-even prices and unit earned

premiums in the data for the five lines. For each line four lines are shown, plotting:           the break-

even earned premium (“Break-Even Premium”, our calculated amount), the break-even earned

premium with statutory accounting (“Break-Even Earned Premium, SA”, also calculated, showing

what the break-even premium would have been under continuation of the pre-1986 tax law), the

estimated average unit premium in the industry data (“Inverse Loss Ratio”) and the same average

unit premium deflated by the acquisition cost, represented by the ratios of “other underwriting

expenses” to premiums written in 1990, assumed to hold as a constant throughout              (“Y/o       of

Inverse Loss Ratio”).     The two key lines from the point of view of assessing the predictive power

of the calculated break-even prices on the industry results are the Break-Even Premium and the

“X?! of Inverse Loss Ratio” lines. For the short-tailed lines (auto liability and farmowners-

homeowners),    the two lines arguably track reasonably closely, For the longer-tailed lines, for
                                                    52


which the discount rate is much more important, the industry data display large variation, relative

to the path of the calculated break-even prices, and generally lie above the calculated levels.

Taking the industry 10SSreseme data at face value, they reveal the highly risky nature of the long-

tailed insurance lines. Except for the ve~ longest tailed line, medical malpractice, the variation in

the calculated prices (due, mainly, to variation in interest rates) is very small, relative to the

variation in the industry results.

        Finally, the comparison of the two calculated price lines (“Break-Even Premium” and

“Break-Even Earned Premium, SK’) allows an assessment of the importance of changes in the tax

rules as an explanatory factor in the time series of indust~ results, The graphs suggest that the

impact of the changes in the tax law in 1986 was small, relative to the other factors that influence

the average level of industry prices.
                                                      53


           Figure 2. Break-Even Earned Pretium           and Inverse Loss Ratio, Auto Liability


                           Break-Even Esrnd Premiumsand Inverse of hss Mtios, 1977-93
                                                 AUIO Liabib&




                                                                                +       Break-Even Earned Premium

                                                                                +       Inverse Loss firio

                                                                                +       76”/o   of Inverse Loss Rstio

                                                                                +       Brenk-Even Earnd Premiums, SA




                                      Time




Source:   Authors’ calculations and Best’s Aggregates and Averages, various years.
                                                    54


          Figure3.   Break-Even Earned Pretium        and Inverse Loss Ratio, Other Liability


                          Break-EversEared PremiumsmdInverw of bss Ratios, 1977-93
                                                Other Liabili~




Source:   Authors’ calculations and Best’s Aggregates and Averages, various years
                                                               55


        Figure 4. Break-Even Earned Premium and Inverse Loss Ratio, Workers’ Compensation


                                   Brenk-Even Earned Premiumsand Inverse of bss Wtios, 1977-93
                                                      Workers’ Compen=tion

        1.60



        1.40

  “;    1.20
   :0          4


  ;     1.00
   b
  &
   <    0,80
  ,-
   i
  ~     0.60                                                                             =,
                                                                                         *    Br4-Even   EsunedPremiums SA
  j 0,40

        020

        000
               I
Source:            Authors’ calculations and Best’s Aggregates and Averages, various years.
                                                     56


      Figure 5. Break-Even Earned Premium and Inverse Loss Ratio, Medical Malpractice


                         Br~-Even   Esrned Premiumssnd Inverse of Loss Wtios. 1977-93
                                              Medical hfalpr.sctice




                                                                             +    Break.Even Esmd     Premium

                                                                             +    [nvm   bss Wtio

                                                                             +    84% of Inverse Loss fitio

                                                                             *    Br4-Evers   Earned Premiums, SA




                                    Time




Source: Authors’ calculations and Best’s Aggregates and Averages, various years.
                                                             57


Figure 6. Break-Even Earned Premium and Inverse Loss Ratio, Farmowners, Homeowners,                                      Etc.



                                 BrA-Even   Earned Rernium snd Inverse of Loss Wtios, 1977-93
                                               Farmowers,   HoMeomers,      Etc.




     1.s0

     1.60




                                                                                       +   Brti-Even   Esmed Prerruum
                                                                                                                             I
            +\.                                                                        +    Inverse Loss Ratio
                                                                                   1

            L                                                                      h
                                                                                       +   66°A of Inverse Loss RnIio

                                                                                       +   Br&-Evers   Earned Premiums, SA




     0.20




Source:      Authors’ calculations and Best’s Agyegates                  and Averages, various years,




Conclusion

          One bottom-line conclusion of our investigation is that the effect of changes in the tax law

is small relative to the other forces that bear on variation in the average price of property-casualty

insurance.        The other major conclusion, taken from the tables of break-even spot premiums, is

that the 1986 reforms could account for an increase in the predicted price of insurance ranging

from next-to-nothing        for the very short-tailed lines to 5 or 6 percent in the longest tailed line,

medical malpractice,        If the 1986 reforms are understood as an excise tax increase on long-tailed
                                                    58


property-casualty    insurance, perhaps the size of the predicted price effect is not a negligible

amount, even if it is not large relative to the annual variation in the industry’s results.


References

        Bradford, David F., “Issues in the Design of Savings and Investment Incentives,” in

Charles R. Hulten, cd,, Depreciation. Inflation and the Taxation of Income from CaDital,

Washington, DC: The Urban Institute, 1981, pp. 13-47,

        Butsic, Robert P., “Determining the Proper Interest Rate for Loss Reserve Discounting,”

in J. David Cummins and Richard A. Derng, eds., Mana~in~ the Insolvency of Insurance

Companies, Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1991.

        Commerce Clearing House, Standard Federal Tax Re~orter Vol. 1,73265,0129-,0139,

1996,

        Cummins, J. David, “Multi-Period Discounted Cash Flow Ratemaking Models in

Property-Liability   Insurance,” The Journal of Risk and Insurance, (LVII) 1990, pp. 79-109.

(~      P&C Insurance Project)

        Cumrnins, J. David, and Elizabeth Grace, “Tax Management and Investment Strategies of

Property-Liability   Insurers,” Journal of Banking and Finance, XVII, 1994, pp. 43-72.

        (AAA)

        D’Arty, Stephen P,, “Use of the CAPM to Discount Property-Liability          Loss Resewes,”

The Journal of Risk and Insurance, (LV-3) September 1988, pp. 481-491.

        General Accounting Office, “Congress Should Consider Changing Federal Income

Taxation of the Prope~/Casualty       Insurance Industry,” (GAO/GGD-85-10),        March 25, 1995
                                                   59


         Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of the Revenue Provisions of the

Deficit Reduction Act of 1984.

         Joint Committee on Taxation, General Explanation of the Tax Reform Act of 1986.

        Kraus, Alan, and Stephen A. Ross, “The Determination of Fair Profits for the Property-

Liability Insurance Firm,” Journal of Finance, (~1-4)           September 1982, pp. 1015-1028.

(M      P&C Insurance Project)

        Mooney, Sean, and Lany Cohen, Basic Conceuts of Accounting and Taxation of

Pro~ertv/Casualtv    ComDanies, NY: Insurance Information Institute Press, 1991.

        Myers, Stewart C., and Richard A. Cohn, “A Discounted Cash Flow Approach to

Property-Liability   Insurance Rate Regulation, “ in J. David Curnmins and Scott E. Barrington,

eds., Fair Rate of Return in ProDertv -Liability Insurance, Boston, MA: Kluwer Nijhoff

Publishing, 1987, pp. 55-78. (~        P&C Insurance Project)

        Troxel, Terrie E,, and George E. Bouchie, Accounting and Finance, 3rd cd., Malvem, PA:

American Institute for Property and Liability Unden.vriters, 1990
                                                   60


Appendix A. Loss Resene        Discounting with Taxes

        In the presence of taxes, the appropriate discount rate for the company to use in

evaluating afier-tax cash flows is the after-tax rate of interest in the market. This is because the

after-tax rate of interest expresses the opportunity available to the company to exchange dollars in

one period for dollars in another. The discount rate applied to the anticipated losses in deriving

the resenes   used in calculating nominal economic income is, however, the before-tax interest

rate.

        To explain why this is so, consider the analogy to a company’s writing an insurance

policy: floating a zero-coupon bond. The proceeds of the borrowing are analogous to the

premium on the insurance policy. The single payment on the bond at maturity corresponds to the

payoff on a single-payment insurance policy. The analogy of the sale of a policy by an insurance

company with a loan from policyholder to company has been noted by others (see, for example,

Cummins and Grace, 1994).

        The analogue to treating the premium as “gross income” of the insurance company would

be treating the proceeds of the borrowing as gross income, There would, however, be an

immediate deduction of the discounted value of the payment anticipated at maturity.

Subsequently, as the time for the company to repay the loan approached, its liability, the

discounted value of its repayment obligatio~ would grow. In the income calculation, this growth

in liability would be allowed as a deduction (it is simply accruing interest). Finally, at maturity,

the company would pay off the loan, taking a deduction for the amount paid, but taking into

income the value of the liability, in equal amount, that it takes off its books at that point.
                                                       61


           Keeping the analogy with the unit single-payment spot policy, let the face value of the

discount bond bel,      payable attime Tafierthe       date ofissue, time O. Letrbethe   rate of interest,

and r the tax rate. Finally, let A be the amount received by the issuing company, The cash flow

of the company at the moment of issuing the bond consists of the proceeds received, A, less the

tax on A, treated as gross income, and plus the tax saving due to the deduction of the discounted

(at r) value of 1, payable T years in the fiture.      (Note: In general, in this paper we treat taxes as

though assessed and paid continuously, ) Subsequently the company obtains a deduction for the

growth in value of its repayment obligation under the bond, so there is a stream of tax savings. At

maturity, the company pays 1, and takes a deduction of this amount in the calculation of income

for tax purposes (corresponding      to the inclusion as gross income of the premium).      This deduction

is, however, balanced by an equal inclusion in income of the elimination of the accrued value of

the liability for payment, corresponding to the write-down of loss reserves in the insurance

context.     So there is no tax consequence of payoff at maturity, This three-part after-tax cash

flow, a lump sum received (net of tax), a flow of tax savings, and a lump-sum paid, will be

discounted by the company at the after-tax interest rate. It remains to show that the break-even

value of A, is simply the payoff, 1, discounted to time O at the before-fux rate of interest.

           The break-even condition is that the stream of net afier-tax cash flows have a discounted

(at the ufter-fm    rate of interest) value of zero:

                                             T
                                               -(T- f)r)e-(l-r)rl~l    _ e-(l-x)rT = o
                       (1 - r)A + W-”T + r~r(e
                                          0

This simplifies to


                             (1- r)A + Z-’T + rre-”T\emdf        -e-~l-r)’T   =O
                                                            0
                                                       62


We can explicitly integrate to get

                                                            trT
                          (1- r) A+m-rT        +zre-rT(e      ~- l)_e-f~-’j’T   =0,


This, in turn, simplifies to


                                       (1- r) A-(1-         r)e-rT = O,

or


                                                   A = e-rT,

Mer a bit of work, we get the expected answer: Under nominal economic income taxation, the

value of a discount bond, taking into account tax effects, is obtained by discounting the cash flow,

exclusive of taxes, at the before-tax interest rate.


Appendix B. Details of the Calculations

        In this appendix we add details to the description in the body of the paper of the

calculation of premiums for empirical implemental ion.

Calculating Break-Even Spot Prices

        ~g


        Under nominal income accounting, the tax rate does not enter the determination of break-

even spot prices. The break-even spot premium is simply the discounted value of the loss

payments, using the before-tax discount rate, So the break-even spot premium for a general

policy with loss profile specified by the sequence, ~,, is given by

                                                              -r(t,   )t,
                                        ‘f’{lj})   = ~lje
                                                      J
                                                    63


         Break-Even Spot Prices under Statutow Accounting for Tax purposes (Dre-TRA86)

         The break-even spot premium for a single-payment spot policy, with maturity, Z in the

pre-1986 tax regime is given by

                                    (1- r) P(7’)+ r(0) = e-( ’-’)r(r)r

provided there is no anticipated change in the tax rate, If a change in tax rate is anticipated, the

exponent in the discount factor on the right-hand side is modified, as discussed in the body of the

paper.

         The break-even spot premium for a general policy with loss profile specified by the

sequence, ~,, (to simplifi, again assuming no change in the applicable tax rate) is given by

                                  (1- r) P({lJ}) + r = ~l,e-(’-r)’(”)”
                                                       J

         Break-Even Sr)ot Prices with Discounted Loss Reserves (Dost-TR486)

         For policies written after December 31, 1986, prescribed reserve discount factors are

applied to loss reserves at year end, the factors depending upon the line of insurance,   As we have

done in the analysis of break-even prices with statutory accounting, we assume that tax liabilities

are calculated continuously, so that the gross premium income and initial loss reserve deductions

are effectively realized immediately upon writing a new spot policy, In the case of discounted loss

resemes, there is a sequence of additions that result from the passing of time.

         To illustrate the way the discount factors enter the break-even conditions, let the reserve

discount factors applied at the moment of writing, on the first anniversary, and so on, be denoted

fi,~l, A, etc. For a single-payment spot policy, the factors are increasing, as the undiscounted loss

reserve remains constant until the moment of payment. The discount factors thus reflect the

approach in time of the single payment, For a more general policy, the discount factors may
                                                      64


decrease, as the effective length of the remaining tail of payments may increase as the early

payments are realized. In the case of a unit single-payment spot policy with maturity, T (taken to

be an integer), assuming a constant tax rate, the break-even condition is

            (1- r) P(T)+   r f. +r(f, - fo)e -(1-r )r(l) + ~ (f2 _ f,)e-(1-r)r(2)2         +.+.+.
                                _(l-r )r(~-l)(~-l) + ~ (l - fT_, je -(1-r )r(T)T = e-(l-r)r(T)T
            +7 ~f~-1 – f~-z~e

On the left hand side are included the tax savings due to the successive additions to loss reserves

owing to the passing of time. The last term on the lefi is the tax saving due to any divergence of

the last value of the discounted reserve from unity. On the right hand side is the discounted loss

payment.

         If the tax rate is varying over time, the value of the deductions and the after-tax discount

factors will be affected in the manner discussed in general terms above and spelled out in detail

below.

         Using Line-Specl~c    Reserve Discount Factors

         If we were provided with the appropriate discount factors for each possible single-

payment policy, we could calculate the break-even premium for a general spot policy, with loss

profile specified by a sequence of loss payments, by treating each separate payment as a single-

payment spot policy and using the formula above. Then add the premiums together,

         For our purposes, there are two problems with the discount factors provided by the

Internal Revenue Service (~S).       First, they are designed to apply to an aggregation of policies

over a one-year period, rather than spot policies. Second, they apply to a given line, rather than

to single-payment spot policies.




               .,
                                                  65


        The first reserve discount factor specified by the IRS is to be applied to the reserve in the

relevant line on the company’s books at the end of the initial accident-year   Conceived of in terms

of an aggregate of spot policies, this reserve includes amounts remaining to be paid on policies

ranging in age from one year (written on January 1) to zero years (written on December 3 1). The

IRS reserve discount factor is based on a spot policy written on July 1. It is thus “too close” to

the loss payout (i.e., too high) compared to the factor appropriate for the actual payout pattern

associated with a newly-written spot policy. Compared with the policy written a year earlier, the

IRS factor is six months “too far” from the actual payouts (so, too low). As an approximation,

we apply this factor to the undiscounted loss reseme (equal to 1 for a unit policy) associated with

a newly written spot policy, That is, we allow an immediate deduction of this first factor at the

time of writing a unit spot policy.

        The development of the fitiher reserve deductions, associated with the gradual increase in

the reserve discount factor as the payout time approaches, is complicated by the fact that the IRS

reserve discount factors are specified by line of insurance, rather than by timing of single

payments.   As will be discussed, because of the way cumulative loss data are reported, we

approximate the loss profile in a given line as involving discrete loss payments at the three-month

point from the date of writing a spot policy, followed by payouts on the annivers~      dates. In our

treatment of the payout profi!es as known with certainty, an equal reduction in the (undiscounted)

unpaid loss reserve corresponds to each loss payout.

        The taxable income calculation brings info income the decljne in discounted resemes

during the year, and allows a deductjon of the loss payments during the year, Using the notation,

L(fl, for the cumulative payments up to and including t,the path of undiscounted reserves for a
                                                       66


unit policy is given by 1, (1- L(l)), (l - L(2)), etc., at the outset and at successive anniversaries.

The path of discounted reserves, is thus given by~o,JI(l - L(l)), j2(l - L(2)), etc. The taxable

income associated with a unit policy is thus    P-jo    at the moment of writing, ~o-.l(l - L(l)) -L(l) in

the first year, ~1(1-L(l)) -.2(1- L@))-&@)- L(l)) in the second year, and so on. In the last year, the

taxable income will bej~.l(l -L(T- 1))-(1 - L(T- 1)),

        The IRS cumulative loss profiles specify amounts regarded as paid as of 6 months from

the time or writing the policy in a line, 1,5 years, etc., through an assumed “last year, ” Let the

cumulative amount paid out at these successive points be denoted           Fo,   FI,   etc., through Fr. For a

unit policy, the last one is 1. We think of these cumulative payouts as derived from constant

payout rules over the interval in question.    So the rare of loss payout would start at 2*F0 for the

first six months of the policy life (the factor of 2 comes from the fact that the interval to the first

cumulation point is just half a year). The loss payout would continue at the rate of FI-FO for the

period horn .5 years to 1,5 years, at the rate of FZ-FJ for the period from 1.5 years to 2,5 years,

etc.

        The constant rates are in turn converted to discrete payments at the midpoints of the

various intervals.   So the first loss payout is taken to be   FO   at the .25-y ear (3-month) point, The

second payout is FI-FO at the midpoint between .5 years and 1.5 year, that is, at the 1-year point

And so on. The last payout is FrFr.l=l      - Fr.l at the T-year point.

        The formulas above assume constant tax rates, In the calculations, as summarized in

Table 13, the afier tax discount factors, a(f), are based on the actual anticipated tax rates, which

are also used to detetine     the projected tax consequences of fiture cash flows.
                                                                67


        Table 13, Unit Spot Policy Cash Flows, Post TRA86 Rules


  Time                  Payments/Receipts                     Taxable Income                 Applicable           Applicable
(relative                Other Than Taxes                                                    Tax Rate          Discount Factor
to issue             (subscripts of subscripts
  date                 shown on same level)
 of spot
 policy)

    o                            P                                      P-.                     ~o)                      1

  ,25                           -FO                                       0                    ~.25)                a(,25)

    1                        -(F,-F,)                          fi<l(l-FI)-F,                    {1)                  a(1)

   2                         -(F,-F,)                fi(l    -F1)#2(l     -   ~2)-(F2-FI)       7’(2)                a(2)




    T                        -( 1-FT.,)                     JT.,(l-FT.,)-(l -FT.,)              40                  a(~




                  Break-Even Spot Prices ~ost-TRA86:          The Transition

                  These descriptions apply to spot policies written in worlds governed entirely by either the

        pre- or post-TW86       rules. It remains to detetine           the break-even price for a policy that crossed

        the boundary,    Consider, for example, a single-payment spot policy written on April 1, 1986. An

        immediate deduction of the undiscounted loss reseme would apply at the moment of writing.

        Then, as of Janu~      1, 1986, it would begin to accrue additional deductions for the accruing value

        of its discounted reserve as of that date. These deductions would continue until the maturity date,

        at which point, ideally, the discounted reseme would equal the payoff amount.                  The tu effect of

        the loss deduction would, as usual, be offset by the write-down of the reserve associated with the

        policy.
                                                               68


        The fresh start rule meant that, in effect, companies received tax deductions of more than

100 percent of the amount of the losses. For policies that had already been written, this meant a

gain to the companies, but had no incentive effect, no effect on the break-even prices, But to the

extent a company could anticipate the fresh start rule, there would be a downward effect on the

break-even price,

        For purposes of this exercise, we assume that the fresh start rules were built into break-

even premiums starting January 1, 1986. As will be discussed below, in application, we calculate

spot prices as of the first day of the second and fourth quarters each year. So the fresh stafi rules

need to be taken into account for the two prices calculated for 1986.

        For the single-payment spot policy with maturity, T, written on April 1, 1986, the fresh

start rule meant an immediate deduction of 1, and then a stream of deductions, which we treat as

occurring on the anniversa~          dates, along the lines just discussed for the policy entirely in the

post-TW86        regime. For the case of a constant tax rate, the break-even condition is then

            (1- r) P(T)+         r + r (fl - fO)e-(l-r       “(~) + r (J2 - fl)e-(’-r “C2)2 +,+.+.
                                        _(I-r   )r([T])[T]   + ~ (1 – f[T])e -(1-r   )r(T)T = e-(l-r )r(T)T
            ‘r   (f[T]   ‘f[T]-l)e



The difference from the previous formula is that the first resewe deduction is worth r, instead of

q,.


        Summin~ UD the Cases

        In all we calculate break-even spot prices under three sets of assumptions about taxes:

Under statutory accounting, the unit loss is deducted at the moment of writing the policy. In

terns of Table 13, the effect is to setj=l               for all i. Under applicable tax law, the same is true until

1986. From 1987 onward, the discount factors, j , prescribed by the Internal Revenue service
                                                         69


apply. For 1986, the same discount factors apply for cash flows in 1987 and later, but taxable

income ~n the 1986 of wrifing the policy (but not on the anniversa~)                 is based on~o=l.      Under

nominal economic income the price is          based   on the   cash   flow   of premium   and   payments   only,



without   regard       to taxes, using the discount factors based on beJore la interest rates.


Calculating Standard Policy Premiums

          Accounting for the Time Structure of an Insurance Policy

          In order to calculate break-even premiums to compare with data we need to take account

of the fact that the usual insurance policy covers events that occur during a specified period,

usually a year, commencing with the date of issue. The premium is generally payable at the

beginning of the policy year. At the moment of writing, there will have been no losses incurred,

and so no addition to the loss reserve. As time passes, losses accumulate, and the company books

incurred losses, basing its accounts on actual information (for example, claims actually filed) and

experience with similar insurance polices in the past, At the moment of writing the policy the

company does acquire an asset, the premium paid or receivable, to which corresponds the liability

to provide coverage for the period covered. At the moment of writing, the coverage for which

the premium is payment has yet to be delivered, so the liability to provide that coverage is carried

on the books as an “unearned” premium reserve. By convention, the premium on a policy is

treated as “earned” ratably over the policy period.

          The significance of these accounting details is, in part, the necessity they reveal of dealing

with the distinction between premiums written, which are taken into income for both tax and

regulatory purposes, and the set-aside for premiums not yet earned, which is allowed for in tax




                   ,
                                                  70


and regulatory accounting.    The tax rules with respect to unearned premium resewes were

changed in the reform act of 1986, and we need to incorporate this change to our calculations.

        A second reason for undertaking an explicit analysis of the timing of premiums received

and earned is that the premium determined in our calculations will actually be earned over a

period of time which will generally include more than one taxable year. Since tax rules generally

apply to whole calendar years, the price of a policy that will span January 1 will need to

incorporate the changing rules on the income as well as the deduction (loss reserves) side,

        A third reason is that indust~ data we examine relate to premiums earned, reported by

accident year. Those premiums earned will be in part the playing out of policy years that began

the year before the accident year in question and in part the initial phase of policies written during

the accident year. If premiums were separately calculated and reported for coverage within a

particular calendar year (so that a typical one-year policy, written on September 1, 1987, would

have a premium for the period though     December31,     1987, and a premium for the period,

January 1, 1988 through August 31, 1988), this would not create problems for us. But the

convention that premiums are earned ratably over the policy period means that data on earned

premiums may show a different pattern than year by year calculations would imply.

       To illustrate, suppose that the theory tells us that in some isolated year, say 1983, the tax

rules imply a very high spot premium, relative to all other years. A company writing a one-year

policy on September 1, 1982, could be thought of as writing two policies, a low-priced one for

the last four months of 1982, and a high-priced one for January-August     1983. There will be just

one price, however, intermediate between the two, which will be reported (and taxed) partly in

1982 and partly in 1983. Premiums earned for accident year 1982 will thus include some of the
                                                    71


effect of the 1983 tax rule changes (and thus be higher than would be predicted, based just on

1982 tax rules), while the premiums earned in the 1983 accident year will include a residual

influence of the pre-1983 rules.

        The analysis thus far of break-even spot premiums assumed that, at a given moment, the

insurance company acquires a liability to make a known sequence of loss payments over time, and

inquired into the up-front payment that would make this a break-even proposition, taking into

account the tax implied tax payments. The fact that, in actuality, the company typically sells a

whole year’s worth of spot policies at once influences the way we need to interpret data on loss

reserves and earned premiums and, because of the details of the treatment of the premium

payment under the tax law, it affects the break-even formulas as well,

        For example, when an insurance company sells a medical malpractice policy for a term of

one year, commencing on September 1, 1988, it knows that on September 1, with certain

probabilities, an event will occur that will give rise to a claim, and that the result will be a certain

series of loss payments and expenses in the fiture,      It knows the same for September 2, and so on.

The premium it charges for this one-year policy is to pay for these 365 one-day policies. For

present purposes, we continue to dispense entirely with the risk aspect of this situation, and we

imagine the company as taking on 365 known liabilities. Thus, one of the liabilities, incorporated

in the premium as of September 1, is to provide a stream of payments, starting December 6, with

the characteristic medical malpractice profile.

        In the absence of taxes, this nicety would not matter much, The one-year premium would

simply be the discounted value of the 365 spot premiums on the daily policies. With taxes, the

nicety could matter, because the spot prices may themselves va~ over the year as the result of
                                                   72


variation in the interest rates or in the tax rules themselves. But the tax system, in effect, treats

the spot price as uniform throughout the policy year. (The single amual premium is treated as

“earned” in propofiion to the fraction of the policy year that has elapsed. )

        To explore this issue, consider the case of a loss payment profile on the spot policy

whereby the first loss payment occurs ,5 years afier the covered day, Mer that, payments occur

at one-year intervals. The loss reserve is set up on the date the policy is written.   The new

question to be considered is how tax law changes as of January 1 affect the analysis.

        For a policy written after July 1, the loss payments are shified by one year, in terms of the

applicable tax law, compared with the policy written before July 1. So if interest rates are

unchanged, for the case of spot premiums (implying no unearned premium problem), there will be

one premium pre-July 1 and another one post-July 1. In going from the second half of one year to

the first half of the next, there may be a difference in spot premium (even given constant interest

rates), owing to the taxation of the premium, net of loss reseme. This is why we calculate two

spot prices for each year, using the interest rate conditions as of the beginning of April and

October.


        Calculating Break-Even Standard Policy Prices

        The break-even premium on a standard policy is the amount the company must receive to

finance the flow of premiums on the embedded implicit spot policies over the year. So the

starting point for calculating it is the calculation of spot premiums.

        We assume that, looking forward from April 1, the company correctly anticipates the spot

premiums that will prevail on October 1 of the current year and on April 1 of the next year. Our

calculated break-even standard premium on April 1 is based on the approximation of a single spot
                                                     73


policy issued on July    of the current year and January 1 of the next year, The JUly 1 spot

premium is the average of the spot premiums on April 1 and October 1. The January 1 spot

premium is the average of the October 1 spot premium and next year’s April 1 spot premium.

These hypothetical spot premiums (July 1 and January 1) are discounted to April 1.

        The analogous procedure is used to derive the October 1 standard premium each year.

        The detail to be resolved is the discount rate to apply to these spot premiums in getting to

the standard premiums.

        Stan&rd   Policy Prices with No Trees

        In the absence of taxes, the break-even premium on a standard policy starting at a

particular time, would simply be the discounted (at the before-tax rate of interest) value of the

flow of spot premiums over the year. In the case in which the unit spot premium is, P, and taxes

and interest rates are constant, this will simply be


                                          ~pe.ti=p        l-e-r
                                         J

                                         o
                                                             r


Typical values of the multiplicative factor are ,975, .952, and ,906, for r = .05, ,10, and .20,

respectively,

        Stan&rd   Poiicy Prices pre-TM86

        Taxes complicate the story. Consider the question: what payment must the company

receive on October 1, 1983, to deliver a commitment to provide a unit spot policy on September

30, 1984 (i.e., the last day of the policy year)? In the pre-TRA86 regime, the October 1, 1983

payment, regarded as gross income, would have been offset by an addition to the unearned

premium resewe, so there would be no tax consequences at that point. On September 30, 1984,
                                                    74


the unearned premium reseme would have been debited by the amount of the unearned premium

reserve, resulting in an inclusion in taxable income. So if x is the October 1, 1983, payment, and y

is the September 30, 1984, spot premium then the after-tax cash flows that need to be equated in

value are summarized in Table 14.


                           Table 14, Discounting from Spot to Standard Premium


                      After-Tax
                     Cash Flows              October 1, 1983          September 30, 1984

                      Up Front                      x                    -<9/30/84)   “X


                        spot                                            y- <9/30/84) *Y



Carrying out the calculation for equating the values of the two cash flows, using the after-tax

discount rate, yields (assuming constant tax rate):




or




The implicit discount from spot to the element of the standard premium that buys the last bit of

spot coverage in the policy year is found by taking the negative of the natural log of the right hand

side. For example, for r = 10 percent and T= 40 percent, the implicit discount rate is 9.8 percent.

       The example suggests that for the pre-TRA86 rules, one could safely derive standard

premium prices from spot prices by discounting at the before-tax rate of return. We adopt this

approximation.


                 ●
                                                    75


       Stan&rd    Policy Prices afler December 31, 1986

       In the post-TRA86     regime, the company would be allowed a deduction from the October

1, 1988 payment of only 80 percent of the addition to unearned premium reserve account, so

there would be taxable income at that point, On September 30, 1989, the reduction of the

unearned premium reserve account by the amount of the spot premium would give rise to an

inclusion in taxable income of 80 percent of that amount.      So if x is the October 1, 1988, payment,

and y is the September 30, 1989, spot premium, then the after-tax cash flows that need to be

equated in value are as shown in Table 15.


                     Table 15, Discounting horn Spot to Standard, post-1986


                After-Tax
               Cash Flows                   October 1, 1988              September 30, 1989

                 Up Front                   x-r(lo/l/88)*,2x               -~9/30/89)   *.8x

                   spot                                                    y-~9/30/89))*y



       Using subscripts to indicate the timing of the tax rates, the value of x is given by

                            x(l–.2~1–.8rz   e -(1-t2)’) = Y(I _ ~z)e-(1-r2)r    ,


                                      x    (1 - ~,)e-(’-”)r
                                      —=
                                      Y l–.2~, -.8T2 e-(l-rz)~

       As Table 16 shows, the effect of the TR486 change was to reduce slightly the implicit

discount rate applicable to the end-of-year spot premium in determining the beginning-of-year

standard premium (i. e., raise the break-even standard premium).      The effect was enhanced by the

pattern of tax rate changes in effect in 1987 and 1988. (For calendar year taxpayers, the rate was

40 percent in 1987 and 34 percent in 1988.) As a simplification, we ignored the effect of the
                                                       76


changed treatment oft he unearned premium reserve except for 1987, when we based the

discounting on one half of the market rate.


                            Table 16, Implicit Discount from Year-End
                           Spot to Beginning of Year Standard Premium

                       I      Imulicit Discount from End-of-Year Suet
                       [      to Be~innin~-of-Year Standard Premium
                       I                  Post-TRA86 Rules



                                                                         Ratio of
                                                                         implicit
                                                                         to market
                           tau 1        tau2      [    r         rhat   ~discount
                           34%          34%       I   5%     I     4.6VOI 0.93
                       I   340/o    I   34%       I   10VO I      9.2%1    0,92
                       I   34%      I 34%         I   20%    I   18.2%1    0,91
                       I   46%      I 40%         I    5%    I    2.6%1    0.52
                       ]   46%      ] 40%         ]   10%    I    7,1%]    0,71
                           46°A       40%         I   20%        16,0701   0.80
                           40’?/0     34%              5%         2,870i 0.56
                       I   40%      1 34%         I   1070   i    7.4YOI 0.74
                       I   40%      I 34%         I   20V0   I   16.4%     0,82

                       Source: Authors’ calculations.

       The Transition from Pre- to Post-TW86           Rules

       Just as special transition rules were enacted in comection with the change in the treatment

of unpaid losses effected by the ~86,          special rules also applied to the change in the treatment

of the unearned premium reseme, As has just been discussed, according to the TRA86, ody 80

percent of the end-of-year stock of unearned premiums is allowed as a deduction            The effect is to

exclude 20 percent of the beginning of year stock from taxable income, Applied at the transition,

January 1, 1987, the new rule would have implied forgiveness of tax on 20 percent of the then-
                                                   77


outstanding stock of unearned premiums. Under special transition rules, that 20 percent was

brought into income over a six year period, 1/6 each year,

        Looking ahead from 1986, the transition treatment of unearned premiums for that year

was actually more favorable than the pre-existing regime, since the return of unearned premiums

to taxable income was slightly deferred, and the tax rates at which the deferred premiums were

included was lower than that at which they had been deducted,     We decided to neglect this

transitional effect in our calculations.

Modeling the Annual Statement Data on Earned Premiums

        One more step is needed in getting to a break-even premium figure that can be compared

to company or industry data on premiums earned during a particular year, Let P(fl, temporarily,

stand for the total of standard policy premiums written (by a company or for the industry) at time

[, representing prepayment of coverage over the next year, where the current year begins at time

0, P(t) will give rise to a quantum ( 1-t)P(~ of premiums earned in the current year and tP(~ in

the neti year. With a constant flow of new policies, an average of 1/4 of the new premiums

written in the first half of the year will show up the next year, An average of 3/4 of the new

premiums written in the second half of the year will show up the next year. If the premiums

written in the successive halves of calendar years are Pl, P2, P3, P4, the premiums reported as

earned in year 2 will be

                                           PI +3P2 +3P3 + P4
                                                  4

        This is motivation for what we term the break-even earned premium,        The break-even

premium earned premium is a weighted average of unit stan~rd      premiums.    It corresponds to the

level of premiums earned during an accident year in the case of a company writing policies at a
                                                 78


constant rate, Reinterpret PI, P2, Pj, Pf as the unit standard premiums in the respective half years

(rather than totals of premiums written), thought of as centered in each half year (April 1 and

October 1). The normalized break-even earned premium in year 2 is then

                                        PI +3P2 +3P3 + P4
                                                 8

This is the formula used in calculating the break-even earned premiums.
