NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY AND
CREDIT SUPPLY AND DEMAND

Reint Gropp
John Karl Scholz
Michelle White

Working Paper 5653

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996
We gratefully acknowledge Alyssa Kendell for legal assistance and the work of Robert Avery and
Arthur Kennickell for developing the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances and providing extensive
documentation.
We also thank Len Burman, Roger Gordon, Tom Holmes, John Pepper, an
anonymous referee, and seminar participants at Berkeley, Dartmouth, Michigan, Syracuse, Tilburg
(Netherlands), Wisconsin, the Board of Governors at the Federal Reserve, the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis, the ~F, and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments. Scholz and White
are grateful for research support from the National Science Foundation through grants SES-9211 553
and SBR-93 19960. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Public Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the executive board of the IMF or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Reint Gropp, John Karl Scholz and Michelle White, All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5653
July 1996

PERSONAL BANKRUPTCY AND
CREDIT SUPPLY AND DEMAND

ABSTRAC

T

This paper examines how personal bankruptcy and bankruptcy exemptions affect the supply
and demand for credit. While generous state-level bankruptcy exemptions are probably viewed by
most policymakers

as benefiting

Survey of Consumer

Finances

less-well-off borrowers, our results using data from the 1983
suggest they increase the amount of credit held by high-asset

households and reduce the availability and amount of credit to low-asset households, conditioning
on observable characteristics.
asset households

We also find evidence that interest rates on automobile loans for low-

are higher in high exemption states. Thus, bankruptcy exemptions

redistribute

credit toward borrowers with high assets.

Reint Gropp
International Monetary Fund
700 19th Street, NW
Washington, DC 20431

Michelle White
Department of Economics
Lorch Hall
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220

John Karl Scholz
Department of Economics
La Follete hstitute of Public Affairs
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1393
and NBER

Over the last decade, increasing numbers of individuals and married couples have filed for
personal bankruptcy

in the United States.

personal bankruptcy

filings.

In 1983 (the year of our data set), there were 313,000

An upper bound estimate of the resulting loss to creditors that year was

about $12.5 billion (1983) dollars.l

Since 1983, the number of personal bankruptcy

has risen steadily and it peaked in 1992 at 900,000.
5,300,000

In total over the decade 1983-1992, about

individuals or married couples filed for bankruptcy,

U. S. households experienced

a personal bankruptcy

Households that file for personal bankruptcy

which implies that nearly 6 percent of

filing during this period.z

under Chapter 7 of the United States Bankruptcy

Code are required to give up any assets that exceed the applic~ble, state-specific
are not required to devote any of their fiture
non-exempt

income to debt repayment.

assets, they receive a discharge from most types of debt.

bankruptcy

Bankruptcy

levels, but

Thus, even households with
as long m their assets

Debtors can ofien increase their financial benefit from

by shifting assets from non-exempt

Personal bankruptcy

exemption

In return for giving up

both high income and high assets can avoid repaying their debts in bankruptcy
are below the applicable exemption level.

filings per year

to exempt categories before filing.

law became much more favorable to debtors following the passage of the

Reform Act of 1978 (BRA78).

Prior to 1978, bankruptcy

the states and tended to be very low. The Commission

exemptions were specified by

on the Bankruptcy

Laws of the United States

‘This figure equals the number of personal bankruptcy filings in 1983 times the mean debt level in
Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook’s [1989, p. 64] sample of personal bankruptcy filings, which was
$38,000 in 1981 dollars or $41,600 in 1983 dollars. The estimate is an upper bound because it assumes
that no debt is repaid in bankruptcy. In practice about one percent is repaid in bankruptcy [White, 1987;
Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook, 1989, Chapter 12].
‘The figure of 5,300,000 is overstated to the extent that debtors have made repeat bankruptcy filings.
According to Sullivan, Warren and Westbrook [1989], the repeat rate is about 8 percent. Since 1992, the
number of bankruptcy filings has fallen slightly. Data on number of personal bankruptcy filings and
number of U. S. households are taken from Statistical Abstract of the U, S. 1994, tables 865 and 65.
1

[1973] argued that a high and uniform bankruptcy

exemption would be beneficial to less-well-off

households.

The argument was that with the rise of the consumer credit industry and its aggressive

advertising

and sales techniques, households tended to accumulate substantial debt but little savings,

and therefore were vulnerable to unexpected events such as illness, layoff, or wives quitting work due
to pregnancy.

Given harsh collection practices by creditors, debtor households ofien found it difficult

to recover from these setbacks and would suffer firther

adverse consequences

strain, divorce, and job loss, unless a generous exemption in bankruptcy
for a “fresh start.”
bankruptcy

Thus the Commission

such as ill health, family

Iefi them with adequate assets

advocated the adoption of a high and uniform Federal

exemption on the grounds that it would help households whose financial situation was

marginal before bankruptcy

and who would otherwise have difficulty recovering from financial

setbacks
While the House adopted the Commission’s

populist view, the Senate preferred to continue

allowing the states to set their own bankruptcy exemptions.3
uniform bankruptcy

exemption

property, with the exemption values doubled when married

exemptions.

By 1983, all states had done so, although

debtors to choose between the state and the Federal bankruptcy exemptions.

exemption

principal

However, the Act permitted states to opt out of the Federal exemption

by adopting their own bankruptcy

bankruptcy

the BRA78 specified a

of $7,500 for equity in “homesteads” (owner-occupied

residences) and $4,000 for non-homestead
couples filed for bankruptcy.

In a compromise,

12 allowed

Many states raised their

exemptions when they passed opt-out legislation, but they adopted widely varying
levels.4 At the two extremes, Iowa’s exemption as of 1983 was $500 for homestead equity

and $5,000 for non-homestead

property, while Texas’ exemption was unlimited for homestead equity

3Commission on the Bankruptcy Laws of the United States [1973] and House of Representatives Report
[1977].
‘See Duncan [198 1] for discussion of the legislative history of the Bankruptcy Reform Act and of the
opt-out legislation adopted by Nebraska.
2

and $30,000 for non-homestead

property (see below).

Because U. S. households tend to have few financial assets and are not required to use their
incomes to repay debt in bankruptcy,
bankruptcy

more households could benefit financially

by filing for

In addition, Congress recently made filing for bankruptcy even more

than actually file.’

attractive by doubling the Federal bankruptcy exemption.G This suggests that in the future, the practice
of fi Iing for personal bankruptcy

could become much more common as households become

increasingly

knowledgeable

about the bankruptcy

system.

bankruptcy,

the subject has been almost completely

But despite the importance

neglected by economists.

In this paper we begin to address the issue of how personal bankruptcy
exemption

affect credit markets.

demand for credit.

Bankruptcy exemptions

As the bankruptcy

and repay less in bankruptcy,

and the bankruptcy

are likely to affect both the supply and

exemption rises, debtors are more likely to file for bankruptcy

holding other factors constant.

partial wealth insurance and the higher the exemption

Also the bankruptcy

exemption

Even

level, greater wealth insurance

makes risk averse debtors better off and causes their demand for credit to rise.

But higher bankruptcy

also reduce the amount that creditors receive in repayment of debt and may make them

more likely to refuse to lend in the first place.
reduce credit supply.

Thus, higher bankruptcy

We estimate a model of the effect of bankruptcy

exemptions
exemptions

are predicted to
on credit supply

and demand, using data from the 1983 Survey OJ Consumer Finances and information
exemptions

provides

level, the greater the insurance coverage.

when lenders raise interest rates to offset increases in the exemption

exemptions

of personal

on bankruptcy

in each state.

We find that state personal bankruptcy exemptions have a significant,

positive effect on the

5White and Petropolous [1996] estimate that between 15 and 50 percent of U. S. households would
benefit financial] y from filing for bankruptcy as of 1992, with the range depending on what strategies
households are assumed to pursue before tiling in order to increase their financial benefit from bankruptcy.
‘This provision was part of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994.
3

probability

that households will be turned down for credit or discouraged

from borrowing.

find that the amount of debt held by households in the top half of the asset distribution
related to state bankruptcy
credit in high-exemption
generous bankruptcy

is positively

exemptions, suggesting that high-asset households have higher demand for
states.

Households with large amounts of assets have the most to gain fi-om

exemptions,

effects to be greatest.

We also

hence it is these households

This result is reversed for households

for whom we would expect demand
in the lowest quartile of the asset

distribution,

where the amount of debt held is negatively related to the level of the bankruptcy

exemption.

For these households,

completely

or loan smaller amounts.

with high exemptions
exemptions.
households

supply effects appear to dominate and lenders either deny credit
This raises the possibility that low-income

receive less credit than otherwise equivalent borrowers

We also present evidence that interest rates on automobile

in states with low

loans are higher for low-asset

in states with higher bankruptcy exemptions than they are in states with low exemptions.

Thus, while generous state-level bankruptcy exemptions
benefiting

households in states

less-well-off

asset households

borrowers,

are probably viewed by most policymakers

as

our results suggest they increase the amount of credit held by high-

and reduce the availability of credit to low-asset households,

i.e., they redistribute

credit toward borrowers with high assets.

I. Background Literature
Previous empirical papers on personal bankruptcy have focussed on the effect of the BRA78 on
the number of filings over time. Shepard [1984], Peterson and Aoki [1984], and Boyes and Faith
[1986] find evidence that the BRA78 increased the number of bankruptcy filings relative to what
would be predicted based on time series patterns prior to 1978, but Domowitz
that the BRA78 had no effect,

Boyes and Faith also suggest that risky borrowers

excluded from the credit market by BRA78.
bankruptcy

and Eovaldi [1993] find
may have been

White [1987] found that the number of Chapter 7

filings in 1981 was positively and significantly

4

correlated with the level of the state

bankruptcy

exemption.’

There is a large theoretical

literature on credit markets with asymmetric

information

that explores

when credit rationing occurs, how it is reduced by borrowers pledging collateral, and whether low-risk
or high-risk borrowers are affected when credit rationing occurs.s
borrowers
exemptions
corporations

are corporations

Because these models assume that

rather than individuals, they do not consider the role of bankruptcy

on credit markets because there is no equivalent of the bankruptcy

exemption for

in bankruptcy.g
II. Legal and Institutional

Background

When debtors file under Chapter 7 of the U. S. Bankruptcy Code, they receive a discharge from
unsecured debt in return for giving up assets in excess of the relevant state’s bankruptcy exemption.
Several provisions of the Bankruptcy

Code prevent debtors from waiving their right to benefit from

the Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemption

and hence make it impossible to use private contracts as a means

of voiding statutory bankruptcy exemptions.

Creditors may not enforce claims against debtors’ assets

if the assets are covered by the Chapter 7 bankruptcy

exemption.

This provision prevents creditors

from taking a blanket security interest in all of debtors’ possessions. 10 Creditors can only enforce

‘Also see Luckett [1988] for an overview of economic aspects of personal bankruptcy; Sullivan,
Warren, and Westbrook [1989] for discussion of the characteristics of a sample of bankruptcy filers from
the earl y 1980s; and White [1991] for discussion of sociological versus economic approaches to
bankruptcy. Paxson [1986], using a sample of households from 1951, 1957, 1962, and 1967, provides
evidence that state laws such as interest rate ceilings can affect credit market behavior, but she does not
examine bankruptcy provisions.
‘See Bester [1985, 1994], Besanko and Thakor [1987], and Boot, Thakor and Udell [1991].
9Another strand of the literature on credit markets with asymmetric information derives from Stiglitz
and Weiss [198 1]. In their model, lenders cannot observe the riskiness of the investment project that
borrowers engage in. They show that changes in the interest rate alter the riskiness of the pool of
borrowers, which causes lenders to deny loans to some borrowers and to charge less than the market
clearing interest rate. Mankiw [1986] explores a similar model of the student loan market and emphasizes
that a small increase in lenders’ opportunity cost of funds may cause the loan market to collapse.
’011 U.S.C. $$ 522(e) and (f).

secured claims against debtors’ assets if creditors provided the money to finance a particular asset’s
purchase.

(See below for further discussion of Chapter 7 bankruptcy exemptions).

There is a second U. S. personal bankruptcy

procedure,

Chapter 13 of the U. S. Bankruptcy

Code, and debtors may not waive their right to choose between Chapters 7 and 13. ” Under Chapter
13 bankruptcy,

debtors are not obliged to give up any assets, but they must propose a plan to repay a

portion of their debts from future income over several years.

Debtors have an incentive to choose

Chapter 7 rather than Chapter 13 whenever their assets are less than the bankruptcy
doing so allows them to avoid repaying debt horn either assets or future income.
states’ exemption

exemption,

since

Because many

levels are high relative to the assets of typical households that file for bankruptcy,

around 70 percent of all personal bankruptcy filings occur under Chapter 7 [White 1987].

Even when

households file under Chapter 13, the amount that they are willing to repay is strongly affected by the
Chapter 7 bankruptcy

exemption.

a state whose exemption

For example, suppose a household with assets of $20,000 living in

level is $10,000 considers filing for bankruptcy.

Because the household

would have to give up $10,000 in assets if it filed under Chapter 7, it would be willing to pay
creditors no more than $10,000 (in present value) from future income if it filed under Chapter 13. As
a result of this close relationship

between Chapter 7 and Chapter 13 bankruptcy

filings, we ignore the

distinction between them. 12

‘‘11 U.S.C. $ 706(a) provides that cases filed under Chapter 7 may not be converted to Chapter 13
unless the debtor requests such a conversion. In 1986, an amendment to the Bankruptcy Code (11 U.S.C. $
707(b)) was adopted that allows bankruptcy judges to dismiss Chapter 7 personal bankruptcy tilings if
discharge of debt would be a “substantial abuse” of Chapter 7. However this provision was not in effect
during 1983, the year of our data set, and in any case has rarely been used.
‘zOther reasons why debtors might choose to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 13 are that certain types
of debts, such as those incurred by fraud, are dischargeable only under Chapter 13. In some Bankruptcy
Courts, judges encourage debtors to file under Chapter 13 and this leads to many plans being filed that call
for only token repayment of debt. Another reason that debtors sometimes file under Chapter 13 is that
they have filed under Chapter 7 within the past few years. Debtors who file under Chapter 7 are barred
from filing again for 6 years, but there is no limit on the number of filings allowed under Chapter 13. See
Elias, Renauer, and Leonard [1993].
6

Household
mortgages,

debt can be divided into secured and unsecured loans.

home equity lines of credit and automobile

loans.

Secured loans include

These loans allow lenders the right to

foreclose on the house or repossess the automobile if the debtor defaults, regardless of whether the
debtor files for bankruptcy.
debtors file for bankruptcy,
exceed the exemption
Unsecured
loans.

Unsecured loans include credit card and other consumer loans.

When

they are only obligated to repay unsecured loans if they have assets that

level and are not subject to creditors’

Iiens.

loans would seem more likely to be affected by bankruptcy

exemptions

than secured

In practice, however, the distinction is blurred and households are ofien able to arbitrage assets

and debts across categories and thereby increase their financial benefit from bankruptcy.

For example,

debtors might borrow on their credit cards or obtain new consumer loans in order to reduce their
mortgage debt.
dischargeable

These transactions convert non-dischargeable

in bankruptcy.

property exemption
addition, bankruptcy
repossessing

secured debt into unsecured debt that is

Or debtors might sell personal property that is in excess of the personal

and use the proceeds to reduce their mortgages or to buy exempt property. 13 In
undermines

the value of collateral to lenders, since lenders may be delayed in

it or may be unable to repossess it at all. Lenders also incur extra legal costs because

they must obtain the permission of the bankruptcy trustee in order to repossess collateral.
reasons we examine the effects of bankruptcy

For these

exemptions on total debt, rather than distinguishing

between secured and unsecured debt.
While debtors may arbitrage assets and debts across categories,

in the empirical work that

follows, we assume that debtors do not make interstate moves before filing for bankruptcy.
typical debtors contemplating

bankruptcy, the cost of such moves are prohibitive,

For

since moving usually

‘]Debtors may have to wait 90 days before filing for bankruptcy if they use these strategies, since the
transfers may otherwise be considered “preferences” that the bankruptcy trustee can set aside. 11 U.S.C. $$
547(b),(c)(7). Debtors may also conceal assets or transfer them to relatives, but if discovered, there is a
small risk their bankruptcy filings may be dismissed on grounds of fraud.
7

requires paying a moving company in cash and making a cash deposit to a new landlord, in addition to
leaving friends and family and finding a new job.
and there have been some well-publicized
homestead
Bankruptcy

For affluent debtors, these costs are less prohibitive

cases of debtors moving to states that have unlimited

exemptions. 14 But the practice is uncommon

because of transactions

Courts have occasionally dismissed bankruptcy

costs and the fact that

filings by debtors who used this strategy

[Elias, Renauer, and Leonard 1993, p. 2/21].

IV. Empirical Hypotheses
Suppose in period 1 consumers borrow some amount B at interest rate r.
wealth, denoted

Consumers’ period 2

Wz, is unknown as of period 1 but is distributed according to the distribution fl~z).

The overal 1 bankruptcy

exemption in the borrower’s

that assets are fungible across categories.

state of residence is denoted E, where we assume

In period 2, the loans come due, consumers learn their

period 2 wealth, and they must decide whether to repay the debt in full or default and file for personal
bankruptcy.
wealth.

If consumers file for bankruptcy,

their obligation to repay the loan depends on their

They are obliged to repay nothing if Wz s E and to repay an amount

E < Wz < E+B(l +r).

If wealth Wz exceeds E+B(l +r), then consumers must repay their debts in fill

and cannot benefit by filing for bankruptcy.
bankruptcy

Wz - E if

Borrowers therefore

benefit financially from filing for

whenever their wealth WJ turns out to be below E +B(I +r), 15

Borrowers’

period 2 wealth distribution

can be divided into three regions of no repayment

(a),

‘“For example, Martin Siegel, an investment banker, purchased a $3.25 million dollar home in Florida
when investors filed a civil lawsuit against him demanding $2.75 million in damages. See “Rich Debtors
Finding Shelter Under a Populist Florida Law,” New York Times, July 25, 1993.
‘sWealth W2 and the distribution of wealth flWz) are resumed to be measured afier debtors have
pursued any strategies that they use to conceal or reduce their wealth before filing for bankruptcy (moral
hazard).
8

partial repayment (b), and fill repayment (c), as shown in figure I. The level of the bankruptcy
exemption affects the sizes of the three repayment

regions.

A higher exemption causes the boundaries

between regions (a) and (b) and regions (b) and (c) to shifi to the right.
probability

that debtors file for bankruptcy

bankruptcy

and repay in full falls.

Thus, as E rises, the

and repay nothing rises and the probability

that they avoid

Also, debtors repay an amount WZ-E if their period 2 wealth falls

into region (b), so that they repay less as E rises.
If the exemption rises, lenders will raise the interest rate.
that expected repayments
insurance.

If borrowers

remain the same.

provides borrowers with partial wealth

are risk averse, an increase in the exemption raises expected utility because

the amount of insurance has increased.
exemption

Bankruptcy

Suppose the interest rate rises enough

When borrowers’

period 2 wealth falls into region (b), the

increase raises their wealth, which makes them better off.

When borrowers fall into region

(c), the increase in the interest rate that offsets the exemption increase lowers their wealth, which
makes them worse off. But these changes make borrowers

better off ex-ante, since the wealth increase

occurs when their marginal utility of wealth is high and the wealth decrease occurs when their
marginal utility of wealth is low.

Thus a higher exemption level in bankruptcy

borrowers better off, which increases their demand for loans.
rises with the bankruptcy exemption

makes risk averse

The hypothesis that demand for loans

is examined below. ‘c

An increase in the interest rate that fully offsets the increase in the default rate when the
exemption

level rises must leave lenders equally well off. In this case, the supply of loans would be

unaffected as long as lenders are risk neutral.

But if borrowers are heterogeneous,

it may become

“Creditors may not be able to raise interest rates enough to offset the effect of the increase in the
bankruptcy exemption. In this case they may stop lending-completely or, if they can distinguish among
borrowers, ration loans to the least credit-worthy. Rea [1984] and Dye [1986] discuss the insurance effect
of bankruptcy exemptions.
9

worthwhile

for lenders to adjust the supply of credit in response to changes in the exemption

As an example, suppose some borrowers are opportunists,

while others are not.

level.

Assume that it is

too costly for lenders to attempt to distinguish between types when borrowers apply for loans.
Opportunistic

borrowers file for bankruptcy whenever their period 2 wealth falls into regions (a) or

(b) in figure I. In contrast, non-opportunistic

borrowers file for bankruptcy only if illness or job loss

occurs and their period 2 wealth falls into regions (a) and (b).
therefore,

increases the probability

increases the probability

that opportunistic

that non-opportunistic

exemption

level may make it worthwhile

borrowers

in advance.

debtors will fi Ie for bankruptcy

debtors file for bankruptcy.’7

by more than it

The increase in the

for lenders to invest in efforts to identi~

opportunistic

credit histories and, as a result, they may be more likely to turn down

The hypothesis that otherwise similar borrowers are more likely to be turned down

for credit in states with higher exemption levels is also examined below.
from opportunistic

behavior by borrowers

In addition, increased losses

in high exemption states may cause lenders to reduce the

amount they lend or charge higher interest rates to otherwise similar borrowers
cannot directly identi~
high exemption

exemption,

Thus, as the exemption level rises, lenders may devote more resources to

checking potential borrowers’
loan applicants.

A rise in the bankruptcy

in these states.

We

credit demand and supply, but we examine whether the negative effect of a

on the supply of credit is larger or smaller than the positive effect of a high exemption

on the demand for credit.

We also examine whether lenders charge higher interest rates in high-

exemption states.

V. Data, Identification, and Descriptive Evidence
We use data from the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) to examine the empirical

“For simplicity we assume that the probability of illness or job loss occurring is less than perfectly
correlated with the period 2 wealth distribution.
10

hypotheses. 1’ For a sample of 3,706 households, the SCF gives detailed information
amounts of credit held by households, their assets, sources of income, demographic

on the types and
characteristics,

credit market experience, and state of residence. 19
We supplement the 1983 SCF with information

on states’ bankruptcy

states have separate exemptions for equity in homesteads,

exemptions

in 1983. Most

equity in motor vehicles, personal property,

tools of the trade, the cash value of life insurance and pensions, household goods and clothing, and a
miscellaneous
exemption
used.

(“wildcard”)

catego~.

and the (uniform)

Some states allow debtors to choose be~een

the state’s

Federal exemption, while the rest require that the state’s exemptions

Some states also allow married couples who file for bankruptcy

be

to double the exemptions.

Table I lists the homestead exemption and the combined value of the personal property, tools of the
trade, automobile

and wildcard exemptions in each state in 1983.20 The table also indicates whether

each state allows its residents to use the Federal bankruptcy

exemption (listed at the end of the table)

and whether the state allows married couples to double the exemption.
The exemption values vary widely across states and there appears to be no strong geographic
pattem.21

Seven states have unlimited homestead exemptions,

while three states and the District of

Columbia have zero homestead exemptions (although they allow their residents to use the Federal

“See Avery and Elliehausen [1988] for details about the data and Juster and Kuester [1991]; Curtin,
Juster, and Morgan [1989]; and Avery, Elliehausen, and Kennickell [1988] for a discussion of the 1983
SCF’S good data quality.
“Later SCFS do not identify state of residence, so we are unable to use them for this paper. The 1983
SCF includes data on a subsample of high-income households, but because state of residence is not
provided for this group, we drop these households.
‘“We exclude the pension and life insurance exemptions because in many cmes they involve specific
conditions, such as requiring that the insurance only benefit dependents. We also exclude the exemption
for household goods and clothing since it is generally not subject to a dollar limitation.
2’Exemptions change infrequently, which increases our confidence in treating the cross-state variation in
exemptions as exogenous to credit market behavior.
11

exemptions).

The combined value of non-homestead

exemptions

range from $0 in Connecticut to

$30,000 in Texas and is unlimited in two states.
For each household in the SCF, we compute a value for the homestead plus non-homestead
exemptions

in bankruptcy.

exemptions.z2
non-homestead

Because assets are fungible, for the empirical work below we combine

The overall exemption is assumed to be unlimited if either the homestead or
exemption in the relevant state is unIimited.

If the state allows its residents to choose

between the state or the Federal exemption, then households are resumed to choose whichever
exemption

is greater.

We also double the exemption

if the SCF household is married and the relevant

state allows doubling for married couples.
The SCF contains a set of questions that ask whether respondents have been turned down for
credit in the three years prior to the survey or whether they were discouraged
because they thought they would be turned down,
these questions as indicating that a borrower

from applying to borrow

While it is common in the literature to interpret

is credit constrained

(see, for example, Jappelli [1990]),

people could, in principal, be turned down because they asked for inappropriately
credit.

large amounts of

Cox and Jappelli [1993] and Duca and Rosenthal [1993], however, show that the observed

level of credit for SCF households who were turned down or discouraged

from borrowing

is roughly

$10,000 lower on average than would be predicted, where the predictions come from a selection model
of credit demand estimated using the characteristics
turned down or discouraged

from borrowing.

This result supports the idea that SCF households who

were turned down or discouraged from borrowing
Perraudin and Sorensen [1992]).
borrowers

in high-exemption

of the sub-sample of households who were not

are in fact constrained

by credit supply (also see

These questions allow us to examine the empirical hypothesis that

states are more likely to be turned down for loans than observationally

22Elias, Renauer, and Leonard [1993, p. 2/20] gives this advice on asset substitution: “If you have an
asset that is not exempt, you may want to sell it before you file for bankruptcy. You can use the proceeds
to buy exempt property.”
12

equivalent borrowers

in low-exemption

states.

For households that are not supply constrained, observed levels of credit reflect some mix of
supply factors, which should decrease the amount of credit made available to borrowers
exemption

in high-

states, and demand factors, which should increase the amount of credit held by borrowers

in high-exemption

states.

Thus, an increase in the bankruptcy

priori effect on the amount of debt held by unconstrained
unconstrained

households

states, controlling

in high-exemption

for other characteristics,

stimulate demand for credit.

exemption will have an ambiguous

households.

a

However, if we observe that

states hold more debt than households in low-exemption
then we can infer that higher bankruptcy

exemptions

Thus, the SCF data on debt held by households can be used to make

inferences about the effects of bankruptcy

exemptions on demand for credit.

Additionally,

this

discussion implies that credit should be more expensive in states with high exemptions.
Two figures help illustrate our hypotheses.
for credit or discouraged
and asset quartiles.23
exemption distribution.

from borrowing

Figure 11 plots the probability

of being turned down

afier we split the sample into bankruptcy

exemption

quartiles

Households with “low” exemptions are in the bottom quartile of the combined
Households with “unlimited” exemptions are located in states that have either

an unlimited homestead exemption or an unlimited non-homestead
quartiles, households in unlimited-exemption
are households in low-exemption

states.

exemption.

In each of the asset

states are more likely to be turned down for credit than

The increased probability of being turned down or

23The combined bankruptcy variable is discrete, hence the “quartiles” include uneven shares of the
population. The first quartile (up to $12,700) includes 27.1 percent of the population, the second (up to
$25,400) includes 31.5 percent and the third (up to $70,400) includes 22.7 percent of the population. The
remaining households live in states with unlimited exemptions (the top quartile, equalling 18.7 percent of
the population), We refer to this breakdown as quartiles throughout the rest of the paper. The results are
not sensitive to alternative, sensible specifications of the exemption variable.
Total assets are composed of financial and real assets. Financial assets are the sum of checking
accounts, money market accounts, saving accounts, IRAs and Keoghs, CD’s, saving bonds, bonds, stocks,
mutual funds, and trust accounts. Real assets are net equity in the home plus net equity in other assets
such as cars and art work. The quartile breakpoints for the total asset distribution are $7,855, $48,535, and
$109,637.
13

discouraged

from borrowing

in a unlimited-exemption

bottom quartile of the asset distribution

state ranges from 1.2 percentage points in the

to 8.7 percentage points (or 54 percent) in the second quartile.

The effect of the bankruptcy exemption on households’
nonlinearly

on assets.

from $30,000.

To illustrate, suppose the bankruptcy

demand for credit should depend
exemption in a state increases to $40,000

This change should increase the demand for credit by a household having $35,ooo in

assets, since the increase in the exemption level lowers the household’s

expected cost of borrowing,

but it would have little or no effect on the demand for credit by a household having $10,000 in assets.
In the extreme case of households that will never have assets, the bankruptcy

exemption

will not affect

demand for credit because there is (and will be) nothing for these households to shelter in bankruptcy.
Figure III graphs median total debt against quartiles of the distribution
bankruptcy

exemption.

the asset-exemption

of total assets and the

The figure shows the importance of accounting for potential nonlinearities

relationship.

For households in the bottom half of the asset distribution,

holdings of debt change little across exemption

levels.

median holdings of debt generally increase with the size of the exemption

relationship

is not monotonic).

The figures display patterns that are consistent with the empirical hypotheses.

exelnption

within asset quartiles.

high exemptions
exemptions.
characteristics,

from borrowing

of

is positively related to the bankruptcy

appear to have stronger demand for credit than their counterparts

in the following

(although the

The probability

Households in the top half of the asset distribution

We measure the size, significance,

median

For households in the top half of the asset

distribution,

being turned down for credit or discouraged

in

in states with

in states with low

and robustness of these effects, conditioning

on other

section.

VI. Regression Analysis
Our first hypothesis is that the higher a state’s bankruptcy exemption, the more likely that lenders
turn down credit applicants or that applicants will be discouraged from borrowing.

14

We examine this

hypothesis using probit regression.
Probability

of Being Denied Credit

The central variable of interest in the empirical model is the bankruptcy
dummy variables to represent quartiles of the exemption distribution,
excluded category.

exemption.

with the lowest quartile being the

A number of other factors are also likely to affect the probability

gets turned down for credit or is discouraged from borrowing.

Income affects households’

Consequently

we include age

access to credit and may affect their

demand for credit, so income and income squared are included.”
assets affect households’

that a household

The life-cycle hypothesis suggests that

younger households are more likely to borrow than older households.
and age squared in the regression.

We use

In a manner similar to income,

access to credit and may also affect their demand, so we include the level of

total assets in our analysis.

We use several additional variables to proxy for tastes:

family size,

education of the household head, and dummy variables for whether the household head is married or
is nonwhite,
There may be geographic variation across credit markets that could spuriously influence our
exemption

variables.25

We include the Herfmdahl

proxy variable for the competitiveness

index for financial institutions in the area as a crude

of the local lending market, and dummy variables indicating

whether branch banking was allowed state-wide and whether multi-bank
prohibited
households,

in the state.

We include the county unemployment

holding companies were

rate in 1992, a dummy variable for rural

and three dummy variables for the region of the country (the west is the excluded

category) to account for potential geographic variation in credit markets.

24For example, income tends to be positively correlated with tax rates. Households with high marginal
tax rates may find it profitable to borrow because the after-tax interest rate on borrowing is lower than the
after-tax rate of return on investments (recall that in 1983, interest on all loans was tax-deductible).
“One potential source of geographic variation in credit markets might be state usury laws, but they had
been abolished by 1983.
15

We also include additional observable characteristics
financial institutions.

that enter the credit scoring finction

used by

Following Boyes, Hoffman, and Low [1989], we include the mean income of

the profession of the household head (also see Cox and Jappelli [1993]) and years working at the
household head’s current employer.2b

Descriptive

statistics for the variables used in the analyses are

given in Appendix Table 1.
Table II shows the results of a probit regression examining the factors correlated with being
turned down for credit or discouraged
Huber’s method [StataCorp
level.

from applying to borrow.

1995] to account for potential correlation

We find that the exemption variable for households

and significantly
borrowing.

Standard errors are computed using

related to the probability

in the error terms at the state

in unlimited exemption states is positively

of being turned down for credit or discouraged

from

This result is consistent with the descriptive evidence presented in Figure II. The fourth

column of the table shows the effect of a marginal change in a given covariate on the probability
not receiving credit.

It shows that the economic significance

of the bankruptcy variable is substantial.

In the sample, 17.3 percent of households were denied credit or discouraged from borrowing.
exemption variables suggest that the probabi Iity of being turned down for credit or discouraged
borrowing

of

The
from

is 5.5 percentage points higher in states with unlimited exemptions than in states in the

bottom quartile of the exemption distribution.

The other two exemption dummies are not significantly

different from zero, but the point estimates show a roughly 2.7 percentage point difference.27
As expected, the magnitude of all the estimated exemption coefficients

increases if the sample is

restricted to households with low assets. If we restrict the sample to households in the bottom half of

2’Boyes, Hoffman, and Low [1989] had access to confidential credit history information (especially
credit bureau reports) when estimating their score function of being turned down for a credit card,
27The results are robust to a large number of alternative specifications and the inclusion of additional
geographic characteristics. Dropping the regional dummies increases the magnitude of the exemption
variables by roughly one percentage point, makes the second exemption dummy significant at the 7 percent
level, and the others significant at all usual levels of confidence.
16

the asset distribution,
points.

the marginal effect for the unlimited exemption increases to 7.9 percentage

If we restrict the sample firther,

to households in the bottom quarter of the asset distribution,

the marginal effect increases to 10.2 percentage points.
specification.
probability

It is statistically significant

in each

Thus, it appears that the bankruptcy exemption is strongly correlated with the
of being turned down for credit or discouraged from borrowing,

particularly

for low-asset

households.
estimates conform to intuition and previous empirical estimates (for

The other coefficient
example, Jappelli [1990]).

The probability

of being denied credit or discouraged

at an increasing rate with age and falls at a decreasing rate with income.
variables suggest that households

zero.

The banking market

are less likely to be turned down for credit or discouraged

applying in more highly concentrated
companies.

from applying falls

financial markets and states that prohibit multi-bank

from
holding

All the binary covariates are interpreted as the effect of switching the variable to one from

The largest economic effects are that nonwhite households are 8,7 percentage points more likely

to be denied credit and married households are 5.7 percentage points less likely to be denied credit,
relative to baseline characteristics

evaluated at the mean.

Household Debt2’
We write households’

desired level of debt, D as

D = X~l + alE + Cl,

where E is the bankruptcy
other factors influencing

exemption

in the household’s state of residence and X denotes a vector of

the demand for debt.

may be turned down for credit or discouraged

We do not observe D, however, because the household
from applying and therefore the observed level of debt,

28The selection model of household debt is similar to Cox and Jappelli [1993] and Duca and Rosenthal
[1993]. Neither previous study examines the effect of bankruptcy exemptions on credit markets.
17

D*, may be less than D.

In addition, the distribution

of D * is truncated at zero.

Therefore,

we

define two indicator variables

1:=1

if D”=D

1:’o

otherwise

and

where Ild distinguishes

and Zzddistinguishes

I;=l

if D *>O

1:=0

otherwise,

households that are not turned down or discouraged

households with positive observed amounts of debt.

from applying for loans,

We parametrize

the

indicator functions using a bivariate probit model,

Zld= xTp T +

&T

12d = Xzpz + Cz ,

where XT represents a vector of factors influencing the decision of banks to deny credit to applicants,
Xz represents a vector of factors affecting the incidence of positive debt, and E~ and Cz are

18

distributed

bivariate normal.z9

The empirical model of the demand for debt is

where, under the assumptions of normality,

formulas for the two selection terns

are straightforward

extensions of the usual Mill’s ratio in selection models, calculated from the bivariate probit model, and q ~
is a normally distributed error tern.
Because the distribution

of household debt is highly skewed, we use the natural logarithm of total

household debt as the dependent variable in our primary specification.
nonlinearities
exemption

between the bankruptcy exemption

and assets, we treat the combined bankruptcy

as a continuous variable for states whose exemptions

exemption variable with asset quartile dummies,

To account for potential

are not unlimited and interact this

leading to four asset-exemption

(where states with unlimited exemptions are coded as zeros).

interaction variables

Because any specific coding of the

unlimited exemption states is arbitrary, we also add a second set of four variables that interact the
dummy variable for states with unlimited exemptions with the four asset quartile dummies.

We also

include an age spline (defined in Appendix I) for the age of the household head to capture life-cycle
patterns in the use of debt, and a series of dummy variables measuring the educational
the household head (where the omitted category is no high school diploma).

attainment of

Otherwise the covariates

29Estimates for the bivariate probit model are given in Appendix Table II. The specification for the
denied or discouraged from borrowing portion of the model is identical to Table II, with the coding of the
dependent variable reversed. The covariates for having positive amounts of credit differ by dropping one
of the variables included as part of the bank’s credit scoring function (average income in the household
head’s profession) and by adding a dummy variable for “attitude toward credit.” The latter variable comes
from an SCF question that asks whether respondents think “it is a good idea or a bad idea for people to
buy things on the installment plan.” Three answers are possible: “good idea”, “good in some ways, bad in
others, ” and “bad idea. ” We expect households answering the question that credit is a “bad idea” are less
likely to apply for credit and therefore more likely to have zero debt without ever having been turned down
for credit, making this a useful exclusion restriction.
19

are the same as in the probit equation for positive debt.
Table III gives estimates for the amounts of debt held by households that were not denied credit
or discouraged

from borrowing.

As in Figure III, debt holdings are positively and significantly

correlated with the bankruptcy exemption

for households in the top half of the asset distribution.

effects are larger for almost all households
in states without unlimited exemptions.
the personal bankruptcy
coefficient

in states with unlimited exemptions than similar households

This result is consistent with the hypothesis that increases in

increase demand for debt by high-asset households.

The estimated

on the exemption for households in the bottom quartile of the asset distribution

and significant,

is negative

indicating that households with no or few assets hold less debt in high-exemption

states than observationally
considerably

exemption

The

equivalent borrowers

larger for households

in low-exemption

states. The mean effects are

in states with unlimited exemptions.

Thus, the evidence suggests

that the demand effect exceeds the supply effect for high-asset households in high-exemption

states,

whi Ie the supply effect exceeds the demand effect for low-asset households in high-exemption

states.

We find a life-cycle pattern of debt in which households under age 35 have higher levels of debt,
and debt declines almost monotonically

for older households.

Debt increases with education,

(though at a decreasing rate), assets, being married, family size, and living in the west.
negatively related to the concentration

income

Debt is

of the financial market and the number of years that the

household head has worked at the current employer.
The selection term for the probability

of being credit constrained

is negative and significant.

This

result implies that unobserved factors that increase the probability

of being denied credit are negatively

correlated with the unobserved factors that affect credit demand.

This selection result is similar to

Cox and Jappelli [1993].
Selection models of the type described above impose stringent distributional
error terms and, when violated, can generate misleading

20

inferences [Goldberger,

assumptions
1983].

on the

To examine

the robustness of our results, we also estimate the debt equation using median regression. This

alternative specification provides a usefil check for the sensitivity of our analysis to distributional
assumptions

and outliers.30 The results are given in Table IV, where the dependent variable is defined

as the log of total household debt (adding $1 to total household debt to avoid taking the log of zero).
Standard errors are bootstrapped.
the bankruptcy

exemption

The sign, size and significance of the central variables of interest –

interacted with assets – are consistent across the two specifications.31

In Table V we examine the economic significance of the coefficient
selection model of log debt.

estimates from the double

Our baseline household is defined as having the following

characteristics:

gross assets of $100,000 (3rd quartile), 45 years old, coIlege degree, income of $75,000, married,
family size of four, white, male head of household, living in the midwest,
living in an area with a county unemployment
market concentration

of 1.377.

with a combined bankruptcy

10 years of job tenure, and

rate of 9.64 percent and a Hefilndahl

index of financial

We estimate that this household would have $31,014 of debt in a state

exemption of $6,000 (such as Maryland or West Virginia).

If the

household lived in a state with an exemption of $50,000 (roughly the size of California’s
we estimate that the household would have debt of $49,725.
effects, particularly

for households in high exemptions states.

Other characteristics

exemption),

also have large

Thus, state bankruptcy

exemptions

appear to have a substantial effect on households’ debt levels.
VII.

Do Interest Rates Adjust?

Creditors may respond in a number of ways to the phenomenon of bankruptcy relative to a
situation where borrowers never default:
for loans, increase collateral requirements,

raise interest rates, set higher minimum standards to quali~
or screen loan applicants more vigorously.

In this section

‘“The largest value of debt in our sample is $1,247,000.
3’The other covariates generally retain their patterns and significance, with the exception of the age
spline, assets, and several of the indicator variables.

we examine whether households who live in states with higher bankruptcy

exemptions

interest rates on loans than households who live in states with lower bankruptcy
sample is households

exemptions.

Our

in the 1983 SCF who purchased new or used cars during 1982 or the first

quarter of 1983 and financed their purchases with loans, which gives us a homogeneous
loans.

pay higher

sample of

We further limited our sample to households who obtained their loans from commercial

savings and loans, or credit unions.32 This process yields a sample of310

banks,

households.

Because the sample consists only of households who purchased cars with credit, we estimate a
standard Heckit selection model.33 All other independent

variables are defined as above, but we also

include quarterly dummy variables that allow for quarterly variation in the level of interest rates.
exemption

variables are defined exactly as in Tables III and IV.

Results for the interest rate model are presented in Table VI. Bankruptcy
significantly

The

exemptions

are

and positively related to the interest rate for households in the two lowest asset quartiles.

In order to quanti~

the magnitude of the effects, we again use the baseline household defined in Table

V, with the exception that the household owns only $30,000 in assets, which would put it in the
second quartile of the asset distribution

(effects are insignificant

in the top two asset quartiles).

In a

state with a $5,000 bankruptcy exemption, this household would pay an interest rate of 17.8 percent
on its car loan.

In a state with a $50,000 exemption,

percent, or 230 basis points higher.

the household would pay an interest rate of 20.1

This 13 percent increase is well within the range of rates observed

32We eliminated households who obtained credit from friends, dealers and automobile financing
companies, since interest rates on these loans clearly would reflect a host of other factors. For example, a
car dealer can offer a lower interest rate by adjusting the purchase price of the car.
331naddition to functional form, the selection model is identified using the attitudinal variable whether
the household thinks that it is a “good idea” to borrow. As before, households who think it is not a good
idea to borrow are less likely to be in the selected sample. The probit results are given in Appendix Table
111.
22

in the sample during this high-interest-rate

sample period.34

This result is consistent with the results found in previous sections of the paper.

It appears that

low-asset households do not demand more debt in high exemption states, because they pay higher
interest rates than they would pay in low exemption
pay significantly

states.

higher interest rates in high-exemption

because they have assets greater than the bankruptcy

However, high-asset households do not

states than in low-exemption

exemption

states, probably

level or they offer lenders greater

collateral .35

VIII. Conclusions
In this paper we find a number of empirical results that are consistent with simple hypotheses
about the effects of the bankruptcy exemption on credit markets.

We find that the size of the relevant

state’s bankruptcy

significant, positive effect on the

exemption

has a statistically and economically

probability that potential borrowers in the state are denied credit or are discouraged
borrow.

We also find that households in the lower half of the asset distribution

from applying to

have less debt and

face higher interest rates on car loans in states with high bankruptcy exemptions than borrowers in
low-exemption

states, afier conditioning

upper half of the asset distribution

on observable characteristics.

In contrast, households in the

have more credit in states with high bankruptcy exemptions,

suggesting that these households have higher credit demand that lenders are willing to accommodate.
Thus, while generous state-level bankruptcy exemptions would probably be viewed by most

34Most other variables conform to expectations. Even controlling for differences in market structure,
some regional variation in interest rates remains, as households in the northeast face lower interest rates
than anywhere else in country. Interest rates varied considerably even during this short time frame of 15
months, reflecting the volatility of interest rates during the 1982-1983 sample period.
35We also ran a similar regression for the term to maturity of loans. The thought was that loans with
shorter terms to maturities would be considered “safer” by banks. Indeed, using the exact same model w
before we find that high bankruptcy exemptions appear to reduce the term to maturity by about 12 months
for low asset households. Again we find that car loans to high-asset households are not significantly
affected by changes in exemption levels. The results are available from the authors upon request.
23

policymakers

as benefiting

less-well-off

borrowers,

our results suggest they increase the amount of

credit held by high-asset households and reduce the availability
they redistribute

of credit to low-asset households,

i.e.,

credit toward borrowers with high resets.

Given the explosion in the number of personal bankruptcy filings (to roughly 900,000 in 1992,
from roughly 300,000 in 1983), we suspect that the empirical magnitudes documented
conservative

estimates of the current economic effects of personal bankruptcy

credit markets.

Moreover,

in 1994 Congress passed the National Bankruptcy

which, among other provisions,

in this paper are

exemption

levels on

Review Commission

doubled the Federal personal bankruptcy exemption and, therefore,

increased the number of households who would benefit financially from filing for bankruptcy.
personal bankruptcy

International

Act,

Thus,

may become an even more important influence on credit markets in the future.

Monetary Fund

University of Wisconsin – Madison
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

24

References
Avery, Robert B., and Gregory E. Elliehausen, “1983 Survey of Consumer Finances: Technical
Manual and Codebook,” mimeo, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 8,
1988.
Avery, Robert B., Gregory E. Elliehausen, and Arthur B. Kennickell, “Measuring Wealth with Survey
Data: An Evaluation of the 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances,” Review of Income and Wealth,
XXXIV (1988), 339-369.
Besanko, David and Anjan V. Thakor, “Collateral and Rationing: Sorting Equilibria in Monopolistic
and Competitive Credit Markets, ” International Economic Review, XXVIII (1987), 617-689.
Bester, Helmut, “Screening vs. Rationing In Credit Markets with imperfect Information,”
Economic Review, LXXV (1 985), 850-855.
Bester, Helmut, “The Role of Collateral in a Model of Debt Renegotiation,”
and Banking, XXVI (1994), 72-86.

American

Journal of Money, Creditl

Boot, Amoud W. A., Anjan V. Thakor, and Gregory F. Udell, “Secured Lending and Default Risk:
Equilibrium Analysis, Policy Implications and Empirical Results, ” The Economic Journal, CI
(1991), 458-472.
Boyes, William J. and Roger L. Faith, “Some Effects of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978,” Journal
of Law and Economics, XXIX (1986), 139-149.
Boyes, William J., Dennis L. Hoffman, and Stuart A. Low, “An Econometric
Credit Scoring Problem,” Journal of Econometrics, XL (1989), 3-14.

Analysis of the Bank

Commission on the Bankruptcy Laws of the United States, Report, House of Representatives
Document Number 137, 93rd Congress, first session, part 1, 1973, 33-59.
Cox, Donald and Tullio Jappelli, “The Effect of Borrowing Constraints on Consumer Liabilities, ”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, XXV (1993), 197-213.
Curtin, Richard T., F. Thomas Juster, and James N. Morgan, “Survey Estimates of Wealth: An
Assessment of Quality,” in The Measurement of Saving, Investment, and Wealth, Robert Lipsey
and Helen Tice, eds, (Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1989), pp. 473-551.
Domowitz, Ian and Thomas Eovaldi, “The Impact of the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978 on
Consumer Bankruptcy,” Journal of Law and Economics, XXXVI (1993), 803-835
Duca, John V. and Stuart S, Rosenthal, “Borrowing Constraints, Household Debt, and Racial
Discrimination in Loan Markets,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, III (1993), 77-103.
Duncan, Richard F., “Through the Trap Door Darkly: Nebraska Exemption Policy and the
Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1978,” Nebraska Law Review, LX (1981), 219-275.

25

Dye, Ronald A., “An Economic Analysis of Bankruptcy
417-428.

Statutes,” Economic Inquiry, XXIV (1986),

Elias, Stephen, Albin Renauer, and Robin Leonard, How to Declare Personal Bankruptcy
CA: Nolo Press, 1993).

(Berkeley,

Goldberger, Arthur, 1983, “Abnormal Selection Bias, “ in Studies in Econometrics, Time Series, and
Multivariate Statistics, Samuel Karlin, Takeshi Amemiya, and Leo Goodman, eds. (Stamford, CT:
Academic Press, 1983), pp. 67-85,
House of Representatives

Report No. 595, 95th Congress, first session, (1977), 116-118.

Jappelli, Tullio, “Who is Credit Constrained
CV (1990), 219-234.

in the U. S. Economy,” C)uarterly Journal of Economics,

Juster, F. Thomas and Kathleen A. Kuester, “Differences in the Measurement of Wealth, Wealth
Inequality, and Wealth Composition Obtained from Alternative Wealth Surveys,” Review of
Income and Wealth, XXXVII (1991), 33-62.
Luckettj Charles A., “Personal Bankruptcies,”

Federal Reserve Bulletin, (1988), 591-603.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, “The Allocation of Credit and Financial Collapse,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CI (1986), 455-470.
Paxson, Christina H., “A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation of the Effects of Interest Rate
Ceilings on Borrowing, ” manuscript, Princeton University, 1986.
Perraudin, William R, M., and Bent E. Sorensen, “The Credit-Constrained Consumer: An Empirical
Study of Demand and Supply in the Loan Market,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics,
X (1992), 179-192,
Peterson, Richard L. and Kiyomi Aoki, “Bankruptcy Filings Before and Afier Implementation
Bankruptcy Reform Law, ” Journal of Economics and Business, XXXVI (1984), 95-105.
Rea, Salmuel A., “Arm-breaking,
XXII (1984), 188-208

Consumer Credit, and Personal Bankruptcy,”

Shepard, Lawrence, “Personal Failures and the Bankruptcy
Economics, XXVII (1984), 419-437.
StataCorp,

Stata Statistical Software:

of the

Economic Inquiry,

Reform Act of 1978,” Journal of Law and

Release 4.0 (College Station, TX:

Stata Corporation,

1995).

Stiglitz, Joseph and Andrew Weiss, “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect Information,”
American Economic Review, LXXI (1981), 393-410.
Sullivan, Teresa A., Elizabeth Warren, and Jay Lawrence Westbrook,
Bankruptcy and Consumer Credit in America, (New York, NY:

26

As We Forgive Our Debtors:
Oxford University Press, 1989).

White, Michelle, “Personal Bankruptcy Under the 1978 Bankruptcy
Indiana Law Journal, LXIII (1987), 1-53,

Code:

An Economic Analysis,”

White, Michelle, “Economic Versus Sociological Approaches to Legal Research:
Bankruptcy,” Law and SocieW Review, XXV (1991), 685-709.

The Case of

White, Michelle J., and Wendy Petropolous, “What Proportion of Households Would Benefit
Financially from Bankruptcy?” Working paper, Department of Economics, University of
Michigan, 1996.

27

Table I

State Bankruptcy Exemptions in 1983
Other provisions=

Homestead

Nonhomestead

Use Fed.
exemp?a

Doub. for
spouse?b

5000

3000

no

yes

Alaska

27000

1500

no

yes

Arizona

50000

7600

no

no

Arkansas

nolimit

950

no

no

California

45000

2500

no

no

Colorado

20000

5000

no

no

Connecticut

0

0

yes

yes

D.C.

0

1200

yes

yes

5000

75

no

no

Florida

nolimit

1000

no

yes

Georgia

5000

4500

no

no

Hawaii

20000

1000

yes

no

Idaho

1200

4000

no

yes

Illinois

7500

2750

no

yes

Indiana

7500

4100

no

no

500

4000

no

no

nolimit

500

no

no

Kentucky

5000

6000

no

no

Louisiana

15000

nolimit

no

no

Maine

7500

2300

no

yes

Maryland

2500

3500

no

no

*d

Mass.

60000

3500

yes

no

$200 month for rent

Michigan

3500

1000

yes

no

Minnesota

nolimit

9500

yes

no

Mississippi

30000

8000

yes

no

Missouri

8000

3500

no

no

Montana

40000

200

no

no

Nebraska

6500

5500

no

no

90000

9000

no

no

State

Alabama

Delaware

Iowa
Kansas

Nevada

all furniture/two

systems

books, clothing

if over 65, $30000 homestead

total exemption

<$10000

if over 60, $60000 homestead

business partnership

exempt

$1000 if mobile home

business partnership

exempt

Table I: continued
New Hamp

5000

5500

no

no

New Jersey

0

1000

yes

no

New Mex

20000

6500

yes

yes

New York

10000

5600

no

yes

N. Carolina

7500

8500

no

no

N. Dakota

80000

10000

no

no

Ohio

5000

3700

yes

no

Oklahoma

nolimit

5000

no

no

Oregon

15000

2650

no

no

300

0

yes

no

0

1800

yes

no

S. Carolina

5000

3750

no

no

S. Dakota

nolimit

2400

no

no

Tennessee

5000

4750

no

no

Texas

nolimit

30000

yes

no

Utah

8000

3000

no

no

Vermont

30000

nolimit

yes

no

Virginia

3500

5000

no

yes

Washington

30000

6750

yes

no

W. Virginia

5000

1000

no

no

Wisconsin

25000

900

yes

no

Wyoming

10000

3000

yes

yes

Federal

7500

4000

na

yes

Penn.
R. Island

Source:

Individual

state bankruptcy

homestead

$20000 for couples

homestead

$7500 for couples
*.
*C

pers. prop. incl. all clothes and
furn.

homestead

unlimited

in some cases

codes.

‘A “yes” means that a household may use the Federal exemptions if they are more generous.
bExemptions levels are doubled for married couples.
CMost states also allow exemptions for automobiles and life insurance.
See Elias, Renauer, and Leonard
(1993) for additional detail on current exemptions.
‘If debts only by one spouse, homestead may be exempt
‘Car and insurance are included under the personal property exemption.
‘Can add $2000 for a spouse and $500 per dependent to the homestead exemption.

Table II
Probability of Being Turned Down for Credit or Discouraged

from Borrowin#

Variable

Coefficient

Std. Error

Constant

-0.100

0.241

0.41

0.133

0.107

1.25

0.0277b

0.126

0.144

0.87

0.0264b

0.249

0.081

3.06

o.0550b

0.058

0.821

0.07

0.0118

Age squared (in 10,000)

-3.052

0.986

3.10

-0.6166

Education

-0.003

0.010

0.33

-0.0007

Income (in $10,000)

-0.158

0.026

6.08

-0.0320

0.003

0.001

5.74

0.0006

Total resets (in $1,000,000)

-0.164

0.331

0.50

-0.0331

Married dummy

-0.272

0.075

3.62

-0,0570’

Family size

0.049

0.018

2.72

0.0099

Nonwhite

0.375

0.091

4.13

0.0869’

0.016

0.058

0.28

o.oo33b

-0.033

0.114

0.29

-0.0065b

-0.171

0.135

1.26

-o.0330b

South dummy

-0.011

0.128

0.08

-0.0021’

Rural dummy

-0.137

0.072

1.92

-0.0273b

(in

0.013

0.019

0.69

0.0027

in the

-0.092

0,026

3.51

-0.0186

-0.019

0.006

3.21

-0.0038

0.068

0.061

1.12

0.0139’

-0.176

0.079

2.23

-0.0330’

0.002

0.001

3.09

0.0005

Second exemption
Third exemption
Unlimited

quartile
quartile

bankruptcy

exemption

Age (in 100)

Income squared (in $1 00,000,000)

dummy

Male dummy
Northeast
Midwest

Average

dummy
dummy

income of household’s

profession

Huber TStatistic

dF/dX

$10,000)
Herfindahl index for financial
area (in 1,000)

institutions

Years working at current employer
State-wide

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

in state

rate in 1982 x 10

Pseudo R’ = .1880
‘In the sample 642 households out of 3,706 repofi being turned down or discouraged from borrowing.
bSimulated derivative (evaluated at the means of the independent variables) is for a discrete change of the
dummy variable from O to 1

Double Selection

Table III
Model of Log Debt, Estimated with the Unconstrained

Sample with Positive

Std. Error

Debt.

VariabIe

Coefficient

Constant

6.465

1.487

4.35

Combined bankruptcy exemption (in $10,000) x dummy
variable for first quartile of the total asset distribution

-0.534

0.047

11.39

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

-0.223

0.041

5.43

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd reset quartile dummy

0.084

0.038

2.22

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

0.156

0.040

3.93

T-Statistic

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 1st asset quartile dummy

-1.157

0.213

5.43

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

-0.168

0.195

0.86

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd reset quartile dummy

0.578

0.175

3.30

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th reset quartile dummy

0.750

0.179

4.20

0.130

0.055

2.38

Age spline 25-34

-0.006

0.016

0.39

Age spline 35-44

-0.044

0.014

3.01

Age spline 45-54

-0.042

0.017

2.48

Age spline 55-64

-0.051

0.023

2.24

Age spline over 65

-0.055

0.037

1.47

High school diploma dummy

0.121

0.100

1.21

Some college dummy

0.395

0.116

3.41

College degree or more dummy

0.516

0.129

4.02

Income (in $ 10,000)

0.141

0.052

2.73

Income squared (in $100,000,000)

-0.004

0.001

2.65

Total assets (in $ 1,000,000)

0.284

0.102

2.79

Married dummy

0.023

0.166

0.14

Family size

0.121

0.034

3.53

Nonwhite

0.146

0.159

0.92

Male dummy

0.147

0.089

1.65

Northeast

-0.673

0.137

4.92

-0.426

0.170

2.51

South dummy

-0.582

0.161

3.63

Rural dummy

0.020

0.088

0.23

Age spline under 24 (See Appendix

Midwest

dummy

dummy
dummy

Table 1)

-0.104

0.044

2.36

at current employer

-0.020

0.006

3.37

for “thinks credit is a bad idea”

0.023

0.113

0.20

-0,009

0.104

0.09

-0.022

0.131

0.17

0.001

0.001

0.57

Lambda-Unconstrained

-1.544

0.614

2.51

Lambda-Positive

-0.245

0.591

0.41

Herfrndahl

index for financial

Years working
Dummy
State-wide

institutions

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

in state

rate in 1982 x 10

Debt

Adjusted R’ = .434
Sample size = 2,118

in area (in 1,000)

Median Regression

Estimates

of hg

Table IV
Debt, with Bootstrapped

Standard

Errors

Variable

Coefficient

Std. Error

T-Statistic

Constant

-1.029

4.109

0.25

Combined bankruptcy exemption (in $10,000) x dummy
variable for first quartile of the total reset distribution

-0.655

0.121

5.41

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd reset quartile dummy

-0.155

0.077

2.01

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd asset quartile dummy

0.171

0.058

2,95

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

0.243

0.057

4.23

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 1st asset quartile dummy

-1.203

0.287

4,18

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

-0.024

0.235

0.10

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd asset quartile dummy

0.736

0.204

3.61

Unlimited bankruptcy exemption x 4th asset quartile dummy

0.813

0.299

2.72

Age spline under 24 (See Appendix Table 1)

0.360

0.173

2.08

Age spline 25-34

0.010

0.023

0.42

Age spline 35-44

-0.059

0.015

3.86

Age spline 45-54

-0.008

0.023

0.34

Age spline 55-64

-0.567

0.049

11.66

Age spline over 65

-0.073

0.027

2.66

High school diploma dummy

0,293

0.191

1.54

Some college dummy

0.524

0.156

3.35

College degree or more dummy

0.801

0.169

4.73

Income (in $10,000)

0.276

0.055

5.03

Income squared (in $100,000,000)

-0.006

0.002

2.91

Total assets (in $1,000,000)

0.033

0.285

0.12

Married dummy

0.891

0.165

5.41

Family size

0.104

0.040

2.58

Nonwhite

-0.256

0.144

1.77

Male dummy

-0.063

0.100

0.63

Northeast

-0.765

0.139

5.52

-0.571

0.146

3.92

South dummy

-0.477

0.134

3.56

Rural dummy

-0.003

0.100

0.03

Midwest

dummy

dummy
dummy

Herfindahl

index for financial

institutions

in area (in 1,000)

-0.023

0.054

0.43

Years working at current employer

0.004

0.009

0.48

Dummy for “thitis

-0.361

0.124

2.92

-0.030

0.142

0.21

-0.240

0.171

1.40

0.001

0.001

0.78

State-wide

credit is a bad idea”

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

in state

rate in 1982 x 10

Pseudo R2 = ,334
Sample size = 3,706

Estimates

Table V
of Median Total Debt Implied by the Double Selection

Model of hg

DebF

Median Total Debt
Low Exemption

($6,000)

High Exemption
($50,000)

Baselineb

34,303

49,725

Assets = $47,000 (second quartile)

28,105

10,551

Assets = $150,000

36,316

72,076

Income = $30,000

21,823

31,641

Income = $250,000

44,387

64,354

Age = 65

13,390

19,413

28,119

40,768

No High School Degree

20,466

29,672

Family Size = 2

26,906

39,010

Live in Northeast

31,014

44,966

Characteristics

(highest quartile)

Years with Current Employer

= 20

‘The baseline is defined as a household with gross assets of $100,000 (3rd quartile), 45 years old, college
degree, $75,000 income, married, family size of 4, white, male head of household, living in the Midwest, with
10 years on the current job, in an area with a Herfindahl index of financial market concentration of 1.377 and
county unemployment rate of 9.64 percent. The remaining rows of this table alter these characteristics.
bThe rows show the effect on total desired debt of altering the listed characteristic relative to the baseline
characteristics.

Selection

Table VI
Model of the Interest Rate Paid on Car Loans

Coefficient

Variable

Std. Emor

T-statistic

20.196

9.403

2.15

Combined bankruptcy exemption (in $10,000) x dummy
variable for first quartile of the total asset distribution

0.874

0.359

2.43

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

0.510

0.290

1.76

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd =set quartile dummy

0.088

0.249

0.35

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

0.287

0.324

0.89

Constant

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 1st asset quartile dummy

5.724

1.821

3.14

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

2.833

1.419

2.00

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd reset quartile dummy

-0.086

1.461

0.06

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

-0.024

1.692

0.01

-0.288

0.153

1.88

0.003

0.002

1.94

High school diploma dummy

-0.650

0.841

0.77

Some college dummy

-1.548

0.972

1.59

College degree or more dummy

-0.036

1.034

0.04

0.217

0.488

0,44

-0.029

0.044

0.66

2.410

3.090

0.78

-1.339

0.867

1.54

0.475

0.208

2.28

-1.395

0.791

1.76

Male dummy

-0.128

0.540

0.24

Northeast

-1.627

0.887

1,83

-1.093

0.985

1.11

South dummy

0.186

1.045

0.18

Rural dummy

-0.850

0.644

1.32

0.478

0.272

1.76

-0.043

0.039

1.09

-0.836

0.877

0.95

Age (in 100)
Age squared (in 10,000)

Income (in $ 10,000)
Income squared (in $100,000,000)
Total assets (in $1,000,000)
Married dummy
Family size
Nonwhite

Midwest

Herfmdahl

dummy

dummy
dummy

index for financial

Years working
State-wide

institutions

at current employer

branch banking

in the area (in 1,000)

No multi-bank

holding companies

in state

-0.251

0.871

0.29

-0.014

0.081

0.18

-0.346

1.400

0.25

-2.007

1.153

1.74

0.907

1.201

0.76

1982: fourth quarter dummy

-1.193

1.123

1.06

Lambda - Auto loan?

-3.136

1.522

2.06

County unemployment
1982:

rate in 1983 x 10

first quarter dummy

1982: second quarter dummy
1982: third quarter dummy

Adjusted R’ = .21
Sample size = 310

Sample

Appendix I
Statistics Tables II - VI, n = 3,706

Mean

Variable

Std. Dev.

Minimum

Maximum

1.00

0.173

0.378

0.00

log of total debt

6.186

4.350

0.00

14.04

Dummy variable for positive debt

0.701

0.458

0.00

1.00

Second exemption

0.315

0.465

0.00

1.00

0.227

0.419

0.00

1.00

0.187

0.390

0.00

1.00

Age (in 100)

0.458

0.172

0.16

0.98

Age squared (in 10,000)

0.240

0.173

0.03

0.96

12.168

3.250

6.00

17.00

2.562

2.898

-2.41

53.04

14.962

83.373

0.00

2813.24

Total assets (in $1,000,000)

0.112

0.375

0.00

17.41

Married dummy

0.616

0.486

0.00

1.00

Family size

2.716

1.530

1.00

13.00

Nonwhite

0.170

0.376

0.00

1.00

Male dummy

0.517

0.500

0.00

1.00

Northeast

0,200

0.400

0.00

1.00

0.280

0.449

0.00

1.00

South dummy

0.351

0.477

0.00

1.00

Rural dummy

0.401

0.490

0.00

1.00

(in

1.529

1.939

0.00

50.61

in the

1.378

1.007

0.00

4.92

Years working at current employer

5.525

8.131

0.00

55.00

State-wide

0.445

0.497

0.00

1.00

0.144

0.351

0.00

1.00

96.391

36.232

25.00

Dummy variable
Natural

Third exemption
Unlimited

for credit constrained

quartile
quartile

bankruptcy

exemption

Education
Income (in $10,000)
Income squared (in $100,000,000)

Midwest

dummy

dummy
dummy

Average income of household’s
$ 10,000)
Herfindahl index for financial
area (in 1,000)

profession

institutions

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

in state

rate in 1982 x 10

224.00

Combined bankruptcy exemption (in $10,000) x
dummy variable for first quartile of the total asset
distribution

0.472

1.185

0.00

7.04

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

0.453

1.103

0.00

7.04

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd asset quartile dummy

0.508

1.222

0.00

7.04

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

0.556

1.301

0.00

7.04

Unlimited bankruptcy
quartile dummy

exemption

x 1st asset

0.055

0.228

0.00

1.00

Unlimited bankruptcy
quartile dummy

exemption

x 2nd asset

0.043

0.203

0.00

1.00

Unlimited bankruptcy
quartile dummy

exemption

x 3rd asset

0.043

0.204

0.00

1.00

Unlimited bankruptcy
quartile dummy

exemption

x 4th asset

0.045

0.207

0.00

I .00

23.832

0.753

16.00

24.00

Age spline 25-34a

8.011

3.446

0.00

10.00

Age spline 35-44a

5.780

4.600

0.00

10.00

Age spline 45-54a

4.027

4.635

0.00

10.00

Age spline 55-64=

2.547

4.069

0.00

10.00

Age spline over 65a

1.624

4.337

0.00

34.00

High school diploma dummy

0.325

0.468

0.00

1.00

Some college dummy

0.200

0.400

0.00

1.00

College degree or more dummy

0.191

0.393

0.00

1.00

Dummy for “thinks credit is a bad idea”

0.238

0.426

0.00

1.00

Total debt (in $ 10,000)

1.631

4.181

0.00

124,67

Age spline under 24’

‘The
age 1
age2
age3
age4
age5
age6

age spline is
= age
= min(age-24,
= min(age-34,
= min(age44,
= min(age-54,
= age-64

defined in the following manner:
if age < 24;
age 1 = 24 otherwise;
if age > 24;
age2 = O otherwise;
1O)
10)
if age > 34;
age3 = O otherwise;
10)
if age > 44;
age4 = O otherwise;
1O)
if age > 54;
age5 = O otherwise;
if age > 64;
age6 = O otherwise.

Bivariate

Probit Estimates

Appendix H
for Double Selection

Variable

Model in Table III

Coefficient
Probability

of Not Being Credit Constrained

Std. Error

T-Statistic

(3,064 out of 3,706)
0.092

0.325

0.28

-0.133

0.083

1.60

-0.126

0.124

1.01

-0.250

0.097

2.58

Age (in 100)

-0.057

1.093

0.05

Age squared (in 10,000)

3.063

1.168

2.62

Education

0.003

0.011

0.33

Income (in $10,000)

0.159

0.039

4.07

Income squared (in $100,000,000)

-0.003

0.004

0.74

Total assets (in $1,000,000)

0.170

0.112

1.53

Married dummy

0.273

0.080

3.40

Family size

-0.050

0.022

2.27

Nonwhite

-0.377

0.070

5.39

Male dummy

-0.018

0.060

0.31

Northeast

0.034

0.115

0.29

0.173

0.150

1,15

South dummy

0.013

0.139

0.09

Rural dummy

0.139

0.067

2.07

-0.012

0.019

0.64

0.093

0.034

2.70

Years working at current employer

0.019

0.005

3.90

State-wide

-0.068

0.079

0.86

0.177

0.102

1.73

-0.002

0.001

2.67

Constant
Second exemption
Third exemption
Unlimited

Midwest

Average
Herfindahl

quartile
quartile

bankruptcy

exemption

dummy

dummy
dummy

income of household’s
index for financial

profession
institutions

(in $1 0,000)
in the area (in 1,000)

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

in state

rate in 1982 x 10
Have Positive Amounts

of Debt (2,599 out of 3,706)

Constant

-0.767

0.282

2,72

Second exemr)tion auartile

0.026

0.074

0.35

0.137

0.103

1.33

0.203

0.089

2.30

Age (in 100)

5.697

0.932

6.11

Age squared (in 10,000)

-8.523

0.943

9.04

Education

0.019

0.009

2.21

Income (in $10,000)

0.161

0.020

8.22

Income squared (in $100,000,000)

-0.004

0.001

6.57

Total assets (in $1 ,000,000)

-0.116

0.088

1.32

Married dummy

0.368

0.069

5.35

Family size

0.067

0.019

3.48

Nonwhite

-0.184

0.067

2.73

Male dummy

-0.214

0.055

3.91

Northeast

-0.160

0.099

1.61

-0.122

0.128

0.96

South dummy

0.040

0.118

0.34

Rural dummy

-0.048

0.062

0.78

-0.017

0.030

0.57

Years working at current employer

0.006

0.003

1.91

Dummy for “thinks credit is a bad idea”

-0.328

0.058

5.65

State-wide

0.003

0.074

0.04

-0.109

0.091

1.19

0.001

0.001

0.96

-0.045

0.040

1.14

Third exemption
Unlimited

Midwest

quartile

bankruptcy

exemption

dummy

dummy
dummy

Herfindahl

index for financial institutions

branch banking

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment
Correlation

rate in 1982 x 10

of Error Terms

Log-likelihood

in state

= -3102.1

in the area (in 1,000)

Probit Estimates

Appendix III
for Selection Model in Table VI

Variable

Coefficient

Std. Error

T-statistic

Constant

-2.058

1.212

1.70

Combined bankruptcy exemption (in $10,000) x dummy
variable for first quartile of the total asset distribution

-0.068

0.046

1,49

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd reset quartile dummy

0.005

0.038

0.14

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd asset quartile dummy

0.064

0.034

1.92

Bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

-0.061

0.043

1.42

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 1st asset quartile dummy

-0.334

0.215

1.56

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 2nd asset quartile dummy

0.023

0.189

0.12

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 3rd asset quartile dummy

-0.287

0.183

1.57

Unlimited

bankruptcy

exemption

x 4th asset quartile dummy

-0.283

0.204

1.39

-0.027

0.017

1.63

Age squared (in 10,000)

0.014

0.014

0.97

High school diploma dummy

0.178

0.102

1.75

Some college dummy

0.155

0.115

1.35

College degree or more dummy

0.140

0.124

1.13

Income (in $10,000)

0.081

0.051

1.57

Income squared (in $100,000,000)

-0.005

0.004

1.06

Total assets (in $1,000,000)

-0.827

0.365

2.26

Married dummy

0.260

0.102

2.55

Family size

0.033

0.027

1.21

-0.068

0.104

0.65

0.015

0.072

0.21

-0.073

0.117

0.63

0.001

0.128

0.00

South dummy

0.011

0.135

0.08

Rural dummy

0.168

0.080

2.10

0.002

0.004

0.57

Years working at current employer

0.010

0.005

2.12

State-wide

0.097

0.108

0.90

Age (in 100)

Nonwhite

dummy

Male dummy
Northeast
Midwest

Hertindahl

dummy
dummy

index for financial

branch banking

institutions

in the area (in 1,000)

No multi-bank

holding companies

County unemployment

rate in 1983 x 10

1982:

first quarter dummy

1982:

second quarter dummy

1982:

third quarter dummy

1982:

fourth quarter dummy

Dummy

in state

for “thinks credit is a bad idea”

Log-1 ikelihood

= -1816.9

-0.166

0.112

1.48

-0.020

0.010

1.94

0.089

0.135

0.66

-0.072

0.110

0.65

0.078

0.094

0.83

-0.071

0.088

0.81

-0.183

0.083

2.20

Figure
The

Relationship

(a)

Between

Bankruptcy,

Wealth

I

and Debt

Repayment

(b) Bankruptcy,

Repay zero

Under

Bankruptcy

Bankruptcy,
Repay B(l+r)

(C) No

Repay Wz - E

w~

E

E+B(l+r)

I

\

\
v
*

—

u
m

x

u

u

\

II

Q
,,.
,.:..,
.
Q
‘“. ‘“. ‘“. ‘“. “.
.“34:

; ~,;:

\

\

