                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL EDUCATION
                         IN THE WORKPLACE: EVIDENCE FROM
                               A SURVEY OF EMPLOYERS




                                        Patrick J. Bayer
                                     B. Douglas Bernheim
                                       John Karl Scholz




                                      Working Paper 5655



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996



We are grateful to the National Science Foundation (Grant Number SBR94-09043 and Grant
Number SBR95-1 1321), as well as to Merrill Lynch, Inc. for financial support. We would also like
to thank KPMG Peat MarWick LLP, and in particular Martha Priddy Patterson, for making available
the data used to conduct this study. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Aging and
Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by Patrick J. Bayer, B. Douglas Bemheim and John Karl Scholz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                               NBER Working Paper 5655
                                                                                             July 1996


                              THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL EDUCATION
                               IN THE WORKPLACE: EVIDENCE FROM
                                     A SURVEY OF EMPLOYERS



                                                ABSTRACT



         We examine the effects of education on financial decision-making            skills by identifying an

interesting    source of variation in pertinent training.        During the 1990s, an increasing number of

individuals    were exposed to programs of financial education provided by their employers.             If, as

some    have       argued,   low saving   frequently   results    from a failure   to appreciate   economic

vulnerabilities,     then education of this form could prove to have a powerful effect on rates of

behavior. The current paper undertakes an analysis of these programs using a previously unexploited

survey of employers. We find that both participation in and contributions to voluntary savings plans

are significantly higher when employers offer retirement seminars.             The effect is typically much

stronger for non-highly        compensated   employees than for highly compensated         employees.    The

frequency of seminars emerges as a particularly important correlate of behavior.           We are unable to
detect any effects of written materials, such as newsletters and summary plan descriptions, regardless

of frequency.       We also present evidence on other determinants of plan activity.



Patrick J. Bayer                                                      B. Douglas Bemheim
Department of Economics                                               Department of Economics
Stanford University                                                   Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                                               Stanford, CA 94305-6072
                                                                      and NBER

John Karl Scholz
Department of Economics
University of Wisconsin-Madison
1180 Observatory Drive
Madison, WI 53706
and NBER
1. Introduction

      Since the early work of Becker ( 1967), economists studying the returns to education have traditiomlly

focused on the relation between education and wages.            From the perspective of the associated literature,

education creates value by conferring skills that are of use to employers.         Clearly, however, this is not tie

sole economic objective (It’education,        In addition to labor market skills, education may also confer

decision mding    skills.     Apart from any affect on labor market performance,       tiese decision making skills

may improve an individual’s ability to weigh alternatives, exploit opportunities,         and achieve personal

objectives.

      Some of the most complex decisions undertaken by ordinary individuals concern financial issues, such

as the determination    of retirement income needs, or the allocation of resources among alternative

investments.   Most individuals make these decisions on the basis of their own judgement,           rather than with

the help of experts, in Iargt part because the market for financial expertise is imperfect (see Bernheim

1994a, 1996 b), It is thertifore conceivable that appropriate forms of education may improve the quality of

personal tinancial decision-making.

     Existing evidence cc)ncerning the relation between education and financial choices is quite limited.

Correlations   between an individual’s general level of educational attainment and his or her rate of saving

have been documenttcl by Bernheim ancl Scholz (1993) and Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1995).

However, as in the literature on returns to education in labor markets, these correlations may be

attributable to other related factors.     For example, individuals with greater patience presumably tend to

remain in school longer, and to save at higher rates.        As noted by those studying the relation between wage

and schooling (see e.g. Card, 1995), causal inferences about the effects of education are potentially

misleading unless they are derived from sources of variation in education that are plausibly exogenous.

     One particularly       pertinent source of variation in education concerns the availability of financial

education in the workplace,        According to one recent survey, as of 1994, 88 percent of large employers


                                                            1
offered some form of financial education, and more than two-thirds had added these programs after 1990. L

Typically, employers provide information and guidance on a range of topics related to retirement planning.

While nearly all such programs cover principles of asset allocation, sizable majorities treat retirement

income needs (73 percent) and retirement strategies (88 percent). g If, as argued by Bernheim ( 1994a,

1995a), low saving frequently results from a failure to appreciate economic vulnerabilities,             then education

of this form could prove to have a powerful effect on rates of saving.

      It is doubtful that the availability of employer-based        retirement education is entirely unrelated to

workers’ underlying predispositions       to save,   However, there are a variety of reasons (discussed below) to

believe that employers adopt these programs as remedial measures in instances where employees are

disinclined to save.    [f this is the case, then cross-sectional     estimates of the relation between saving and

education may provide lower bounds on the causal effects of education.              In addition, since many of these

programs have been adopted quite recently, it may be possible to control for an unobsemed predisposition

to save by contrasting the behavior of the same individuals before and after educatioml             interventions.

      In this paper, we study the behavioral effects of tinancial education in the workplace using survey

data collected from employers who sponsor pension plans,              Our analysis is based in part on estimates of

the cross-sectional    relations between various forms of education and plan activity.        Since the data contain

repeated observations on many tirms, they also permit us to evaluate the direction of the probable bias in

cross-sectional   estimatts by testing the hypothesis that educational is remedial (through an examination of

the circumstances     under which programs are adopttd or expanded).            Moreover,   the Iongitudiml data allow

us to control explicitly for unobserved (firm-level) fixed effects.

     Despite the growing importance of employer-based               retirement education, existing evidence on this




  “’Employeesgelting rnorc Investment education, planning help on the increase,” Pensions     & Investn~ents,   January 23,
1995, p. 74.

   ‘See Employee Benctit Rcse:lrch Ins[itute ( 1995, p. 15).

                                                               2
topic is largely confined to qualitative   surveys and case studies (see e.g. Employee Benefit Research

Institute, 1994, 1995, A. Foster Higgins & Co., Inc., 1994, Borleis and Wedell, 1994, or Geisel, 1995).

One exception is Bernheim and Garrett (1996), who use a novel household survey to study the effects of

these programs.      Their analysis is complementary   to the current paper; we discuss the relations between

these studies in greater depth below.

      The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.       After describing our data (section 2), we

provide an analysis of the circumstances     under which employers offer retirement education (section 3).

While certain kinds of education are more common at organizations          that offer self-directed pension plans

(such as 401(k)s and 403(h) s), tven employers that offer defined benefit plans (and nothing else) frequently

provide some form of financial education,       For 401(k) plans in particular,   the data indicate that low

participation   among non-highly compensated employees is a strong predictor of the adoption and/or

enhancement of educational offerings.       At least in the context of 401(k) plans, education therefore appears

to be remedial, in the sense that it is macle available to those who are least inclined to save. In part, this

may be a consequence of’ non-discrimination      requirements,   which limit contributions of highly

compensated employees as a function of contributions by non-highly compensated employees.              Based on

this finding, one would expect cross-sectional    estimates of the relation between participation (contributions)

and education to he biased against the conclusion that education enhances participation       and contributions to

self-directed plans.

     In section 4, we examine factors correlated with participation in and contributions to 401(k) plans.

We find that both measures of activity are significantly higher when employers offer retirement seminars.

The effect is much stronger for non-highly compensated employees than for highly compensated

employees.      The frequency of seminars emerges as a particularly     important correlate of behavior,       We are

unable to detect any effects ot’ written materials, such as newsletters and summary plan description,

regardless of frequency.     We obtain silmilar results based on longitudinal patterns, as well as for an



                                                          3
assortment of estimation methods.      In light of the likely bias mentioned in the previous paragraph and

discussed in more detail in section 3, these findings are strongly consistent with the efficacy of retirement

seminars, and they do not rule out the possibility that other forms of education are also effective.

      In studying the relation between 401(k) activity and education, we control for a variety of plan

features.   The effects of these features are, of course, of independent interest, and have been the subject of

several prior analyses (s~e Poterba, Venti, and Wise, 1994, Papke, Petersen, and Poterba,             1993, Papke,

1995, Andrews,       1992, Kusko, Poterba, and Wilcox, 1993, and Scott, 1994). Generally, we find that the

existence of an employee match is strongly related to 401(k) contributions,       and especially to participation,

in cross-sections.    However,   this effect is not readily apparent in longitudinal data.   There is relatively

little indication that any measure of 40 l(k) activity is significantly related to loan provisions.    Investment

options have no detectable effect on participation,    but contributions tend to be a bit higher when greater

flexibility is offered.

      The paper CIOSLSwith a brief conclusion.



2. Data

      The data for our anal]sis come from the 1993 and 1994 versions of the KPA4G Peat Mat-wick

Reriremenf BeneJ/s .$~fmey, [n 1993. KPMG Peat Manvick selected approximately                1100 employers at

random from a list of all the prit’atc and public employers in the United States with at least 200 employees.        If

they were willing to participa[c again, these same employers were retained for the 1994 survey. Any

employers }vho decl incd LOparticipate in 1994 w’erc replaced with a randomly selected employer from the

same indust~, region, and emplo}er-size catego~.

     In each year, these employers were questioned by telephone about the administration,         features, and

employee utilization of their retirement plans. Some basic employer data, such as total employees, sales, and

industry, are a~ailablc for all respondents.   In addition, those employers who have a retirement plan (910 in



                                                          4
1993 and 861 in 1994) provide some general information about their plan, including the number of

employees co~crcd b> the plan, [he t>pcs of plans offered, and the extent to which financial education and

guidance is provided by [he cmplo~cr to help employees invest for retirement.              Furthermore, for each type of

retirement plan that a [Irm offers, the survey contains detailed questions about its features, eligibility

requirements, and emplo!”ec activity.

      Those emplo}ers \\”ho offer401 (k) plans (596 in 1993 and 566 in 1994) report the features of their

plan, including the availability of an employer match, the matching rate provided, whether hardship

withdralvals and loans arc pcrmi[tcd, and lhc number and type of investment options available to a participant

in the plan, The sunc> also allo\\s us to determine \vhich employee groups, such as union, salaried, or part-

time employees. arc eligible to pafiicipate in the plan. In addition, participation and contribution rates are

provided for the cmplojccs eligible for the 40 l(k) plan, Thus, for a large sample of over 500 firms each year,

the survey pro~ides a rich set of plan characteristics and utilization rates.           The variables that we focus on in

this study fall into Lhrcc catcgorics:    basic firm characteristics (where the firm is the unit of analysis for the

study); general plan characteristics, cncompnssing all retirement plans offered by the firm; and 40 l(k) plan

characteristics.

      With respect to the first catcgo~, \ve experimented with a number of basic firm characteristics

(including sales and dummy \ariablcs        for indust~ and region), but generally found that they had very little

effect on our rcsul[s, For most of [he results presented in this paper, we have retained only one general firm

characteristic: the total number of cmplo!’ces,3

      The second group of \ariablcs includes general features of the firm’s retirement programs.                The most

important of these describe the extent to which the firm provides financial education to its employees,

Specifically, the survey asks each respondent ho\v often the firm provides summary plan descriptions,

employee nelvslettcrs or other periodic publications, investment seminars for all employees, seminars for



   3Since the data \\’cre provided 10 us ivithou[ film identities-s, we were limited to information collected by the survey.

                                                              5
employees over age 50. and seminars for emplo~ees \vithin a year or two of retirement.                 Each respondent was

aslicd \vhcthcr the firm used lhcse dc~iccs of[cn, sometimes, rarely, or never. To incorporate the qualitative

nature of these responses into our analysis. \\e use these responses to create three dummy variables for each

educational dcvicc. The first indicates \vhcthcr the device is used often, the second indicates whether it is

used sometimes or rarely, and the third indicates it is never used.           We combine the responses “sometimes”

and “rarely” because Lhedata have Iimitcd ability to identi~ educational parameters, and since the subjective

distinctions bet~veen these responses secm the most likely to differ across respondents.4

      Other pertinent characteristics of an clmployer’s overall retirement program covered by the survey

include information on Lhccomposition of rc[ircmcnt plans (e.g. 40 l(k)s, defined benefit, profit sharing, and

so forth), and lhc fraction of cmplo!ccs who arc covcrcd by a retirement plan. Unfortunately,                  the smey

collects coverage information on a firm-\\idc basis, rather than plan-by-plan.

      The final catego~ of \ariablcs includes characteristics of 40 l(k) plans. These include dummy variables

for wrhelhcr loans arc pcrmiltcd and \\hclher an employer match is provided.               We also calculate a measure of

the number of diffcrcnl kinds of in~cslmcnt oplions (employer stock, guaranteed income contracts, equity

mutual funds, corporate bond funds. go~crnmcnt funds, and other funds) available to plan participants.                    Other

survey questions allo~v us to determine if certain employee groups, such as union, part-time, or salaried

employees,    are eligible for the plans

      For 40 l(k) plans. \vc construct participation and contribution rates for eligible employees.              The survey



   ‘The results in (his paper do nol change quali(u(ively \vhen we use other groupings of the responses to these questions.
In ol-der to veril) (he I-obus(ness ot’our rcsLIIIsand to reduce SIIIIfullher the number of parameters, we also occasionally
define a single variahlc rncosunng [he intcnsi(y OFthe educational oilkring. The variable is set equal to 3 if the device is used
often, 2 if it is sometimes used, I if It is rarely used, and O if it is never used.

   ‘The sm~’ey also pl-o~’ides]nfc)lma(ion about other potentially usefil plan features, such as hardship withdrawals and the
actual matching l-ateprovided by the ti[m. Unfollunatelv the usefulness of these variables is diminished by data limitations
and w’e thel-efore do not include lhem in our specifications. For example, in each year of the survey over 94 percent of
employers allow ha]-dship liithdl-awals, so tbcre is no[ enough variation in (he data to examine their effect on plan activity.
Also, fewer than 40 percent of lhc employers ~vho oftkr an employer match report the actual matching rate. Therefore,
incorporating ~he actual l-ate in(o ouI- speciticztions \vould severely limit the sample size available for estimation.



                                                                6
provides measures of 40 I(k) plan acli~ily for three categories of employees: all, highly compensated (HC),

and non-highly compcnsalcd (NHC). All eligible employees are classified as either HC or NHC according to

specific rules set forth ill the opplicablc non-discrlrnination       provisions.   These rules \vere Instituted to ensure

an equitable distribution of benefits from pension plans. In the context of 40 l(k)s, they operate by limiting

the amounts that highly compensated employees can contribute as a function of contributions by non-highly

compensated emplo>ccs. An individual is classified as highly compensated if he or she meets any of a

number of specific criteria (c,g. earnings of roughly $100,000 or more, ownership of more than 5 percent of

the company, or earnings of roughly $65,000 or more if this amount is in the top quintile of the firm’s salary

distribution).   In addition to participation rates. [hc suncy also provides contribution rates as a percentage of

salary for plan participants. ~ Once agoin, these fig~lres are provided separately for all employees, HC

employees, and NHC employees.           Taking Lhcproduct of participation rates and average contribution rates

conditional on parlicipalion, we obtain average contribution rates conditional on eligibility,

       Summa~     statistics for 40 l(k) participation and contribution rates are provided in Table 1. Mean

participation rates arc sli.ghll! Icss than 60 percent for NHC employees, roughly 80 percent for HC

employees, and just over 60 pcrccnt o~crall in both 1993 and 1994. The distribution of participation rates for

HC employees is highl! slictvcd (\\ilh oullicrs on the lo\ver tail), causing the median participation rates to be

about 10 pcrcentogc points higher than [he mean rates. Participating employees generally contribute between

5 and 7 percent of their salaries, ~vith HC employees contributing approximately one percentage point more

than NHC employees. In both }cars. contribution rales for eligible employees averaged just under three

percent for NHC cmplo}ccs. o~er five pcrccnt for HC employees, and between three and four percent overall.



   ‘While the survey asks foI-the a~cl-age contribution as a percentage of compensation, it is not completely clear from the
wording whether it means the average OVCI-contl-ibutors, or the average over eligibles. The designers of (he survey suggest
the former is tic nahu-al intcl~retation, Given the data, this interpl-etation appears to be colTect. We calculated the average
contribution for companies that lrepolled pallicipation rates from O to 25 percent, 25 to 50 percent, 50 to 75 percent, and
75 to 100 percent. There I\LISno evidence of systcm:~tic variation in contributions over these categories, If companies were
repolting the average o\ ’cI-eligibles, then dle a~’clage would (as a purely mechanical matter) have to rise steeply across these
catego]-les.

                                                                7
3. The Availability         of Retirement        Education

      As a first step in our anal>sis. we prolidc descriptive information concerning the availability of different

kinds of retirement cducalion in the \vorkplace. Overall, in 1993 nearly 74 percent of pension plan sponsors

provided summn~ plan descriptions, roughly 65 percent distributed newsletters, and just over 44 percent

offered rctircrnent scrninars LOall cmplo>ccs. When firms are weighted by total employment, summary plan

descriptions and nc~vslcttcrs appear to bc somc~vhat more common (roughly 80 percent in each case), but the

frequency of seminars is essentially unchanged (44 percent). The fraction of firms providing summary plan

description \vas some]tha[ lo\\cr in 1994 than in 1993, but the fractions providing newsletters and seminars

rose slightly.

      Since our ullimatc objccti~c is to c~alualc Lherelation between education and behavior, it is important to

develop an understanding of [he sources of variation in educational offerings across firms. Plan sponsors are

presumably more Iikcly to pro\ide information when participants are required to make decisions. It is

therefore natural to spcculatc that [he growlh of educational offerings results in large part from the rising

populari~   of self-dircc[cd plans sLIchas 401 (k)s and 403(b)s (see EBRI, 1995, or the extended discussion in

section 3 of Bcmhcim and Garrett, 1996). Yet the KPMG Peat Mamvick smey              data reveal that seminars,

newsletters, and surnman plan dcscrip[ions arc nearly as common among firms with defined benefit plans

(43,8 percent, 68.9 pcrccnt. and 73,1 percent, respectively for 1993) as among firm with 40 l(k)s (44.4

percent, 71.2 percent. and 80 I pcrccnt. respectively for 1993).

      The preceding finding roiscs Lhcpossibility lhat many employers provide retirement education to

address general concerns aboul cmplo>ces’ preparation for retirement, rather than to equip them with plan-

spccific decision-making   skills. One need not construe this as necessarily altruistic.   Education may help

employees to appreciate Ihc values of lhcir pension plans. By promoting adequate preparation for retirement,

an employer may also hope to avoid subsequent conflicts (e.g. over demands for more generous pension

benefits) with older, poorly prepared ~vorkers. Assistance \vith financial plaming may also enhance employee


                                                         8
loyalty, improve labor relations, and boost morale.

     Of course, comparisons based on ra~v frcqucncics, such as those described above, maybe misleading,

For example, it is common for empto~ers to offer both a defined benefit plan and a supplemental 401(k), It is

therefore possible thnt the frequency of cducaliona! offerings at organizations with defined benefit plans in

part reflects the prcscncc of sccondav     401(k) plans. Also, it is conceivable that educational offerings may

differ systematically by company characteristics that are related to the presence of defined benefit plan.

     To investigate this possibility, we estimate probit models explaining the availability of seminars for all

employees, seminars for cmplo>fees over 50 years of age, seminars for employees nearing retirement,

summa~ plan descriptions. and ncljslctlcrs or periodicals.      Results are contained in table 2. Explanatory

variables include variables measuring the l!pcs and varie~ of plans (where the omitted catego~ is “only a

defined bcnefil plan-’), cmplo!mcnt.     plan co~cragc, and year. The data are pooled across years, and the

standard errors arc corrcctcd to account for potential correlation across obsemations from the same

organization.

     Focusing attcn[ion on organizations \vith a single plan, it is evident that seminars of all kinds are most

common among non-profit institutions \\iLh 403(b)s.       Companies with 40 l(k)s are more likely to offer

seminars to all emplo~”ccs thnn companies iiith defined benefit or other kinds of plans, but less likely to offer

seminars specifically for older cmplo>ccs. Written materials of all kinds are most commonly used among

companies with 401 (k)s. but there are no significant differences between the likelihoods that sponsors of

other kinds of plans pro~idc such materials.     Thus. \vhilc the rising popularity of self-directed plans may have

promoted the groi~lh of ccrtoin Educational offerings, the impetus for this growth appears to be much more

general. This is consistent w“iththe findings of Bcmhcim and Garrett (1996).

     Table 2 also indicates that educational offerings are significantly more common among organization

with multiple plans. Emplo\’ment and coverage are positively correlated with seminar offerings, but not with

the availability of ]*TiLtcnmaterials. This may reflect the presence of economies of scale in the provision of



                                                          9
seminars.    Generally, the f’rcqucncies ofcducational    offerings did not change appreciably between 1993 and

1994.

      When analyzing the relation bctwccn education and behavior, we must necessarily restrict attention to

organizations wilh plans Lha(permit cmplo>ces to make choices. We therefore focus our attention on

401(k)s.    Since Lhcdeterminants of education offerings relate to the selection process determining the

incidence of “treatment,” it is important to reexamine the determinants of these offerings specifically in the

context of 40 l(k)s.   If, for example, education tends to be offered in response to a demand for information by

employees who are naturally inclined to save at high rates, then positive cross-sectional correlations between

education and 401 (k) ac[i~’it} could rctlcct selection, rather than the influence of employer-based        education on

employee behavior.     If, on [hc other hand. companies tend to provide education as a remedial measure to

employees \Fho arc o[hcm\isc disinclined to save, then the nature of selection could obscure an underlying

relation bclwccn education and bcha~ior.

      Analogously to lablc 2. table 3 provides estimates of probit models explaining the availability of various

educational offerings in the pooled 1993/94 sample, In this instance, however, we have confined attention to

companies i~ith 40 I(!i)s. Wc ha~’c OISOadded sc~cral nc!v explanato~          variables, including the number of

categories of invcstmcn[ options (e.g. cmplo!er stock, guaranteed income contracts, bond funds, equity

mutual funds, and so forth) atailablc to participants. and dummy variables indicating whether the plan covers

union employ ees,” \vhcthcr it provides for an employer match, and whether loans are permitted.

      As in table 2, seminars for older workers are more Iikcly when companies offer plans other than

40 I(k)s, and the likelihood of seminar offerings generally tends to rise with employment.         Notably, education

does not appear to be more common among plans [hat cover union employees.               Since employees presumably

have greater Ic\erage iihen the! are unionized. this casts doubt on the hypothesis that education is provided




     ‘Unfortunately, this val-iable is not available for defined benefit plans, and therefore could not be Included in the
recessions of table 2.

                                                            10
in response to emplo>ce demand. [t is also notable that the correlation between seminars and employer

matching provisions is ncgati~c (though not siyificant     at conventional levels). This is consistent with the

view that education and matching are substitutable methods of encouraging participation        in situations where

employees sho~~-insufficient interest in [hc plan. Not surprisingly, education of all forms is si~ificantly     more

likely when employers offer participants more int-cslment options. There is also some indication that

seminars and loan provisions are positively correlated.

      Thus far, we ha}e not exploited the longitudinal features of our data. Doing so permits us to examine

the circumstances under \\hich employers establish or expand educational offerings.        Specifically, we regress

the change in seminar offerings bet~tecn 1993 and 1994 on a variety of “initial” (1993) company and pension

plan characteristics.   For the purpose of [his analysis, we measure the change in seminar offerings as the

difference bct\\ccn the ‘-intcnsit}” of seminars (measured on a scale of O to 3) in 1993 and 1994 (see footnote

4),

      Results appear in table 4. Separate results are presented for each of our five educational categories.

The most striking feature of this [able is the pattern of negative coefficients for the initial participation rate of

NHC employees in [hc spcci Iicotions explaining changes in seminar offerings.        In the case of seminars for all

employees, the cocflicicnt is highl! significant: it is marginally significant (i.e. with slightly less than 95°/0

cent’idencc) for lhc other t\\o seminar variables.   This implies that low participation among NHC employees

is strongly associated \\]th subsequent increases in employer-sponsored       seminars. This result does not,

however, carry over to \vrillcn materials. No other variable consistently passes tests for statistical

significance at con~’entional ICVCIS.The coefficients of the initial HC participation rate are also negative for

the seminar variables. but their magnitudes and levels of si~ificance     are smaller. With low confidence, the

estimates indicate that cducotiona] improvements were more likely among fu-ms with pensions plans that

covered larger fractions of employees.    Improvements in age-specific seminars were also less common among

larger firms and among unionized firms, There is little if any relation between initial pension plan



                                                          11
characteristics and subsequent changes In educational offerings.

      The paltem documcnlcd in table 4 supporLs the h~~othesis                  that, in the context   of 40 l(k)s, retirement

seminars are remedial. These offerings appear to be motivated by low participation among NHC employees.

This is consistent Iiith Lhcview that non-discrimination              requirements provide a powerful impetus for the

provision    of retirement   cducalion among 401 (k) sponsors,           However, it is doubtful that this is the only

motivation.     If it \vcrc. lhcn high Initial HC participation would also correlate with subsequent increases in

education, which is not (I1ccase, The small negatit’c effect of initial HC participation probably reflects the

offsetting effects of two separate considerations:          first, that employers are inclined to offer education as a

remedial measure \\hcn 40 I(k) activit? is loii- (regardless of HC or NHC status), and second, that employers

also use education LOaddress binding non-discrimination                constraints (which tend to arise when HC

participation is high). These findings arc consistent \vith the indirect evidence on selection offered by

Bemhcim and Garrett ( 1995),



4. Evidence on Participation                      in and Contributions                to 401(k) Plans

     In this section \vc use (hc KPMG Peat Manvick plan-level                   data to examine   factors associated with

participation in and contributions 1040 l(k) plans. We use cross-sectional data on all the firms in our sample

and also examine changes for the same firm over 1993 and 1994. While we focus on the role employer-based


education plays in these dccislons, \vc cxfiminc several other plan and firm characteristics that may be related

to participation and contributions.



     A.     Factors   affecting   participation    in self-directed     plans


     The first step in our anal>sis of401 (k) activity is to examine cross-sectional OLS regressions of plan-

Ievel participation rates. Since there arc sirong similarities between the data for 1993 and 1994, and since we

are not interested in in~cstigatin.g an! specific hypotheses about the differences between these years, we pool

the t~vosumeys. We include a year dummy to account for any systematic factors that might influence


                                                                12
participation    or Conlribulions   diffcrcn[l:   through lime As in the previous section, pooling the data raises one

important empirical issue: since nlan> of the same fimls were surveyed in both years, it is doubtful that the

error terms are indcpcndcnt across all observations.         While OLS estimates are still consistent under these

conditions, the conkenlional mclhod of computing standard errors is inapplicable.          In our reported estimates,

we again correct our standard errors to rcllect clustered sampling.

      Since nondiscrimination       rules arc binding for many employers (Garrett, 1996), education programs may

be designed to encourngc participation b! NHC employees.             Moreover, since HC and NHC households start

out with different levels of financial sophistication, we would expect financial education to affect their

behavior diffcrcnlly.      For both reasons, Ire estimate separate regressions for these groups as well as for the

combined sample.

      Results arc con(aincd in lhc first panel of table 5. The dependent variables for these regressions – the

plan participation rates – va~ [rem I to 100 pcrccnt. The estimated effects of the key explanatory variables

are described beloiv.

      i, The role oJseminor.s

      For our base-case cstlmatcs. \ve usc dummy variables to measure the intensity (frequency) of

educational offerings.      In this ~vn~.wc a~oid imposing assumptions on the fmctional relation between

participation and an arbitrarily scaled rncasurc of education (as discussed in section 2, we do, however, use

the same dummy variable 10 represent the responses “sometimes” and “rarely”).             In subsection D, we also

present results based on a single scalar measure of educational intensity. We also focus exclusively on

seminars for all employees, rather than on seminars targeted at employees over 50 or employees near

retirement.     In practice. Lheseminar variables are highly colinear, and it is difficult to identi~ their separate

effects ~vith precision.

      Reading ncross [he firsl [\vo ro\\s of ihc first panel of Table 5, it is apparent that frequent seminars have

a consistently positive and significant cffccl on participation in self-directed plans. For non-highly



                                                               13
compensated employees, frequent seminars arc associated \vith participation         rates that me 11.5 percentage

points higher than plans ~vith no seminars. The corresponding figure for highly compensated employees is

6.4 percentage points. TIICSCare economically large estimates given mean participation rates – 60 to 80

percent – in the sample. The occasional seminar indicator variable is, however, insignificant in each

specification.

        The results in tnblc 5 may obscure lhe relation between education and participation among HC

employees.       Although censoring at Lhcplan Ic\el (at either O percent or 100 percent) is relatively rare for “all”

employees and for NHC clmployees. it is much more common for HC employees,               Specifically, for 32 percent

of the sample, the HC participation ralc is 100 percent. Obviously, increases in seminars and changes in

other   plan characteristics cannot be associated with higher participation rates for companies that achieve 100

percent HC participation. Wc investigate Lheeffects of censoring in section D, below, where \ve estimate

Tobit specifications.

        These results arc consistent \\-ith the h>pothcsis that seminars stimulate 40 l(k) participation generally,

and especially among NHC cmplo!ecs            This implies that retirement seminars may be an effective response to

non-discrimination      rules. Ho\\cvcr, there is no indication in the pooled results that seminars matter unless

they are conducted frcqucntl}.

        ii: Other Jtirtns ofedlicall<)n ond in[ormotion dissemination

        We include sclcral additional cdl]cation \ariables (newsletters and summary plan descriptions) to

examine \vhcthcr all educational and inromlational efforts are equally effective. Summa~ plan descriptions

typically amount to disclosure of plan characteristics, and contain very little (if any) recognizable education,

While it is perhaps conceivable that employees \vould be unwilling to trust (and therefore to participate in)

their pension plans ~vithout disclosure, tvc \\ould nevertheless be surprised if the use of these materials had a

measurable effects on plan acti~il>. [n contrast, nclvsletters often serve the same function as seminars, but

provide infomlation throllgh printed, rather that audio-visual media, According to a survey by the Employee



                                                            14
Benefit Research Institute. 92 pcrccntof401       (k) participants say that they read these materials, and 33

percent say that thcj con~ributc more [o Lhcirplans as a result. One might therefore expect newsletters to

have an effect on behavior similar to thal of seminars, Altcmativcly, individuals may exaggerate their

responses to nc\vslcttcrs in response to survey questions, particularly      if they perceive this to be the

“appropriate     response, ”

      Notably, in the regressions of table 5. aside from seminors, no other medium of providing information

and education to emplo!ccs – either through nclvslcttcrs or summary plan descriptions – has any significant

association with participation rates. This is consistent }vith the hypothesis that these media have no effect on

participation.    In principle. selection bias could mask a behavioral response. However, in contrast to

seminars, there is little indication in lhc results o[scction 3 that the provision of written materials is

motivated by low participation.

      iii, I)Ion chclrocterlstics

      There is mixed c~idcnce in LhcIitcraturc on the effect of matching rates on participation in self-directed

plans, despite the fact that matching is ]cn common. According to a 1990 Hewitt and Associates survey, 79

percent of 944 major US. corporations matched employee contributions.             Papke (1995) finds a strong,

positive relationship bct]tccn match rates and participation in cross-sectional regressions using data from

Form 5500,s The cffccl disappears in hcr prcfcrrcd, fixed effects specification,         Andrews (1992) uses data

from the Current Population Sune\       and finds a positive relationship between the presence of a match and

participation ralcs. KLISkO. Po~crba. and Wilcox ( 1994) examine data from a single firm over several years,

where the match rate \aricd rrom O to 139 percent of employee contributions (up to six percent of salary).

They found little varialion in participation ralcs across years, \vhich lead them to conclude that their results

suggest “a relatively small elasticity of participation with respect to the match rate, and cast substantial doubt



    8Folm 5500 is filed annuolly wi[h (I1cIRS by all sponso]s of pension plans wilh more [ban 100 participants.   The data
include plan eligibility, pal~lcip:ltion, emplol!mcnt, administrative cost, distributions, and contributions.



                                                            15
on the view that emplo}cr matching is a Iicy factor in explaining the rapid expansion of 40 l(k) plans. ”

However, the 401 (k) sponsored by Lhefirm examined by Kusko, Poterba, and Wilcox was part of a profit-

sharing plan, and hcncc had unusuatly \olatile mntch rates         It is not clear that one can generalize from

participation responses in profit-sharing plans to more common plan types, where match rates change much

less frequently.   In principal, we expect matching rates to exert a positive effect on participation since they

provide a pure substitution effect at the extensive margin,

      In all the cross-sectional recessions    wc have examined, there is a positive and significant correlation

between the exis[cncc ofa match find participation. 9 The regression results in table 5 imply that plans with

matches have participolion rates [hat arc 14.6 to 16.9 percentage points higher than plans without matches,

      Loan provisions alloi( families to borrow against contributions made to the self-directed plan.

Conventional reasoning suggests that eligible w’orkers will be more likely to participate in plans with loan

provisions since they \\”ill ha}e access to funds in the event they need to borrow. An alternative view holds

that loan provisions \\”ill be ncgati~c]y correlated \vith participation because they exacerbate “self-control”

problems \\illl saving (SCCc.g, ShclTrin and Thalcr, 1988). We find that the correlation between the existence

of loan provisions and participation arc positive but insiqificant       in the regressions for all employees, and

negative but insignificant in the separale regressions for HC or NHC employees.

      Having a broad range of investment options presumably increases the attractiveness of participation,

The number of options in these plans is not particularly large, with a mean of 2.8 in 1993 and a mean of 3.7

in 1994, A single investment option can bc narrow (say stock in the employee’s company, or a guaranteed

life insurance contracts), or broad. like the Fidelih family of mutual finds,        Although we expect investment

options to be positively correlated \vith participation, this effect is not significant in any specification.

Conceivably, (his finding may be attributable to the coarseness of our measure for the number of options




    %ecall fi-omsection 2, (hat dalti on lhe Icvcl ofmtltch is missing for a large number of observations so we use only an
indicator variable [or whc[her [hc liml tll~crsa mntch.

                                                            16
(e.g., the vast family of Fidelity equi~ mutual funds \vould be considered one option).

     iv. Firm chorocterlstics

     An obvious concern ~vith cross-scclionol estimates of the kind considered here is that the variables of

interest may bc corrclntcd \vilh unobserved lirm-spccitic characteristic.    In that case, the correlations that we

attribute to seminars may in ffict reflect other factors. In addition to the plan characteristics already

mentioned, we thcrcforc include a set of firm-specific variables to try to account for other pertinent factors.

     The existcncc ofothcr pension plans should matter for two distinct reasons. First, other pension plans

may be positi~el? correlated Ivi[h participation in a self-directed plan. There is extensive evidence that the

existence of a 40 l(k) is posi Li\cl! correlated \\ith employees’ tastes for saving (Engen, Gale, and Scholz,

1995; and Bcrnhcim 1996a). It is likely that the same is true for other pensions. Thus, the presence of

pensions may be positi]cly correlated \\itll participation in self-directed plans. Second, other pension plans

may reduce the likelihood of participation in a self-directed plan because the pension may provide households

with sufficient rctircmcnt sa~ing.

     As \vould bc cxpcctcd i[ pcnslons and self-dircctcd plans are initiated in response to employees’ wishes,

participation rates arc higher in self-dircctcd plans \vhen the sponsoring firms offers at least one other

pension plan, The effect for all employees is significant at conventional levels.

     There may bc systematic differences in self-directed plan offerings depending on the size of the firm,

and on the number of cmplo!’ccs co~.ered b!’ the plan. These differences might, for example, arise from

economies of scale in plan administration. or from correlations between size and other variables, such as plan

age, unobserved dimensions of plan gcnerosih,       or the nature of peer goup effects, We include the number

of employees in the firm to capture variations in participation that may be associated with firm size, and the

fraction of employees covered to capture variations in participation that maybe related to plan size. We find

that firm size is nega[ivcll associated \\-ilh participation, but that participation rises significantly with the

fraction of emplo>ees co~crcd.



                                                          17
      The unionization indicator variable is consistently insignificant across specifications.

      v. Sllmrnoty

      In pooled cross-scclional     rc.gressions. there are a number of factors that are significantly associated with

participation,    inc]uding match rates and certain characteristics of the company. The effect of frequent

seminars is economical]> Iargc, positi~c, slatisticall}’ significfint. No other educational variable significantly

affects participation.    [n light of the sclcclion issue documented in section 3, there is reason to believe that

these estimates understate the behavioral impact of retirement seminars, but may accurately reflect the impact

of\\Tittcn matcrinls.



      B. Factors     related   to contributions   in self-directed    plans


      As indicated in table 1. the sunc~ COIICCIS
                                                information on average contribution rates for plan

participants,    Multiplying the aicrage contribution rate times the participation rate gives the average

contribution rate across all eligibles. We use this as our dependent variable to examine contributions.

Because the data arc aggregated across plans, (here is no obvious way to use information on the fraction of

nonparticipants    and lIIc conditional mean among participants separately without making strong ad hoc

assumptions on the data. Since the conditional mean among participants is of limited intrinsic interest, we

therefore use the transfom~cd contribution variable.

      Obviously, our contributions variable may inherit some of the properties of our participation variable.

Even so, there is no compelling reason (o expect. p priori, that contributions will vaty with education in the

same way as participation.      To scc Ivh>. consider the follo~ving example.       Suppose a firm’s employees differ

in lheir taste for sa~in.g Those \\ith a high taste ~vill participate in self-directed plans when available and,

due to the tax subsidy (and possibly employer match), devote a relatively high fraction of sala~ to these

plans. Employees \\ith low tastes for saving \vill choose not to contribute.         Now suppose frequent seminars

induce employees \vith lo\v tastes for sa~ing to contribute,         If they contribute at low levels, the mean

contribution, conditional on participation, may actually fall, unless education also encourages high savers to

                                                             18
save even more. It is conceivable. ho~lc~cr, that education might actually reduce saving among those \vho

would othenvise   put atva~- “’too much” relati~c to standard      rules of thumb.   Thus, even the unconditional


mean of the contribution    ra[c might fall \\ith education


     As is clear from the second pnncl of Table 5, the frequent seminar variable is positively and significantly


associated \vith contributions for lhc regressions involving all employees and non-highly compensated

employees.   The cffccl is quite Iargc. Mean (unconditional) contribution rates are around 3.4 percent of

salary, so the estimates imply that contributions are nearly 20 percent larger in firms offering frequent

seminars. This result is consistent \\ilh the hypothesis that retirement education – and frequent seminars in

particular – positivcl! affect (I1csize of contributions to self-directed plans.

     In the specification for fill cmplo!ccs. bo[h match rates and loan provisions are positively and

significantly associntcd ~iith contribution rates. Larger firms have lo~ver contribution rates (the effect is

significant for highl!-compensated      cmplo}ecs).      The larger the fraction of employees covered by a self-

directcd plan, the higher arc contribution ra[es (the effect is si~iticant      for non-highly compensated

employees and the all cmp]oyccs specification).



     C.   Longitudinal     evidence   on participation     and contributions


     The specifications displa>cd in table 5 use pooled data from 1993 and 1994. To control for spurious

factors that might generate an apparent cross-sectional relationship bet~veen seminars and participation or

contributions, \ve included a number of plan- and firm-specific variables. Nevertheless, a skeptical reader

might question these rcsul[s on the grounds lhat seminars are correlated \vith other firm-specific

characteristics, such as lhc dcyce of interest management takes in their employees, and that these other

characteristics arc responsible for lhc obscned       correlation \vith behavior (perhaps through plan generosity,

\vhich is only impcrfcctl} accounted for in our specification).

     As discussed earlier. \vc ha~e observations in both years for nearly 300 firms, Thus, it is possible to

repeat our analysis, diffcrcncing Lhcdata for our short (2-year) panel. While differencing removes time-

                                                              19
invariant plan-specific characteristics, it also exacerbates any measurement error problems that might be

present, making it more difficult to estimate correlations that arise from behavioral relationships.

      The first panel oflablc 6 examines participation, repeating the same specification as sho~~n in table 5,

but using the firsl-diffcrcnccd   data. Allhough the statistical si~ificance   of the results is not quite as striking,

this is probably to be cxpcclcd because lhc sample size is considerably smaller and because of the problems

arising from diffcrcncing short panels. Nevertheless, we find that instituting seminars on a frequent basis is

associated with a 7,7 pcrccnlagc point increase in participation rates, and the effect is significant at the 11

percent level for the all-employee sample. For non-highly compensated employees, the effect is 12.1

percentage points. and it is significant nt the 7 pcrccnt level. It is worth noting that the estimated effects of

occasional seminars appear s~rongcr in the diffcrcnccd estimates.      Indeed, the effects of frequent and

occasional seminars no~~appear 10 be roughly proportional.

      We ~icw this as fllrthcr support for the h}vothcsis that retirement education – and frequent seminars in

particular - influence lhc saving bchalior of employees.       Naturally, we cannot resolve the question of

causality \vith onl~ t~~-o!cars of daln: it is. for example, conceivable that employees might agitate for

seminars once Lhc} start participating (though it is doubtful that their employer would respond over such a

short lime frame).

      Our resulls on match rates follo\v [he pattern observed in the literature.   Although we find that match

rates appear to ha~c a strong, posilive correlation ~vith participation and contributions in cross-sectional data,

the effect disappears \vhcn one follo\vs the same firms over time. Because actual changes in match rates are

infrequent, it is possible that “obscmcd” changes arc dominated by measurement errors, in which case the

panel estimates of Lhcmatching effect maybe highly misleading.         Satisfactory resolution of the role played by

matching on participation   in self-directed plans requires better data, In general, very few other variables are

si~ificant   in Lheparticipation rate specifications (and none are significant in the highly-compensated




                                                          20
group) .’”

      The second panel of Table 6 examines contributions, repeating the same specification as shown in Table

5, but using the first-diffcrcnccd dala, The frequent seminar variable is again significant for the non-highly

compensated group, and it is marginall} significant in the specification for all employees.              The only other

significant cocfticicnts (al contcnlional      Ic\cls) are the occasional seminar variable (for HC employees) and

the unionization variable (for all cmploJccs and HC employees).



      D. Robustness


      The resull.s prcscntcd in the previous sections depict a strong correlation between frequent seminars and

401 (k) activit>, cspcciali! nmong NHC cmplo}ces.            In order to verify the robustness of these results we

examine the scnsitivit! of our results to a different method for measuring the intensity of education.              We also

employ several alternate cs[inlation tcchniqucs:        median, robust, and Tobit regression.

      In the pret’ious section. there \verc ccL-taincases (most notably difference          specifications for

participation) \~hcre the effects of frequent seminars were only marginally significant.             This may occur, at

least in part, bccausc !JC arc asking the data to identify too many parameters.           In these same cases, the point

estimates for Lhecffccls of occasional seminars arc roughly half of the corresponding point estimates for the

effects of frcqucnl seminars (SCClnblc 6). 11is therefore natural to consider an alternate specification based

on a scalar measure of educational intensity that allows us to summarize the effects of education through a

single parameter.    Tnstcrid ofconslnlcting    dummy \’ariables based on the frequency of educational offerings,

we simply measure frequency on a scale of zero to three, depending on whether education is offered never,

rarely, sometimes, or of[cn.     This specification forces the effects of an increase in the frequency of education

to be the same \\hcn mo~ing from each qualitative response to the next. That is, it assumes that an increase




    ‘~n table 6, the occasional pl-o~ision of summaly plan descriptions appears to have a positive and si~ificant effect on
participation, Ho\\eveI-, this I-csult is apparently driven by outliers; it vanishes when more robust estimation techniques are
applied (as in the next section).

                                                              21
from never to rarely has the same c[fcct on participation and contribution rates as an increase from rarely to

sometimes or sometimes to oflcn. While restrictive. it is more parsimonious than our original procedure, and

is generally not rejected by the data.

      We estimate median and robust regression models to reduce the potential influence of outlying

observations.’ 1 The slandard errors reported for the median and robust recessions            (as well as for the Tobit

estimates) using the pooled data arc not adjusted for the fact that the same firm may appear in the pooled

sample t\vice. As the standard errors ivcrc similar \vith and without this correction in the OLS specifications

sho~vn in Table 5, we do not vieiv this as a major shortcoming.

      We use Tobit regressions to account for right and left censoring of participation rates at O and 100

percent. While censoring occurs in the data for all three employee categories, it is particularly prevalent for

HC cmployccs.       In the pooled dala. Ihc participation rate equals 100 percent for all employees in 29 of 1027

obsewations     and for NHC cmplo!ccs in 27 obscmations out of 805. For HC employees this number jumps

to 267 of 824 obscnatiolls,     or approximatcl:    30 percent of the sample. Left-censored observation (i.e., those

for \vhich the participation rate is O pcrccnt) arc not nearly as prevalent.      There are no such observations for

all employees and NHC cmplo}ccs, and OIIIJ 12 cases for HC employees,               We estimate Tobit models only for

participation rates using pooled cross-sectional data. While censoring is also present in the difference

versions of these models. ns \\ell as in models for contribution rates (both because of the censoring of

participation and bccausc of limits on contributions),      the Tobit model is inappropriate in these contexts.

      We report the cocflicienls of Lhescminnr variables for these alternate specifications in Table 7 and

Table 8. We omit the coefficients of other explanatory variables to conserve space. Each of these

spccihcations    employs the same additional covariates as the earlier OLS recessions;          results for these other

covariates arc similar LOLhosc reported in ptcvious subsections and are available on request.



   1lMedi,an repression accomlllishcs [his by minimizing the sum of the absolute values of the residuals rather than the sum
of squal-ed residuals.  Robust I-cp-ession iil-st eliminates gloss outliers and then perfoms Huber iterations followed by
biweight iterations in orctel-to ~fc]ght obscnations more evenly in the loss function.

                                                            22
      i, An alternative tneosure oj-senlinar \ntens]ly

      For even specification contained in tables 5, 6, 7, and 8, we present results based on an analogous

specification in ~vhich lie usc a single scalar measure of educational intensity, as described at the outset of

this section. The rcsulling cocfllcicnts for seminars arc presented in tables 7 and 8 under columns labeled

“intensity.”

      Generally spenklng. for spccilications involving pooled (as opposed to difference)                data, the magnitudes

and statistical precision of educational effects are similar to the results obtained using separate dummies for

frequent and occasional seminars.      Ho\\cver, the usc of the seminar intensity variable sharpens the estimates

considerably for (he diffcrcnced data. For example, in the first column of table 6 (which concerns

participation rates). the cocflicicnt on frequent seminars for NHC employees is only significant at the 7

percent level. Ho\vc\cr. its magnitude is also roughly twice that of the occasional seminar variable, which

suggests that LISCof (I1cinicnsit> vnriablc ma! be appropriate.          Indeed, as indicated in the first column of

table 7, the cstlmnlcd cocflicicnt for [hc intcnsil}’ variable in an analogous specification is statistically

significant at lhc 1 pcrccnt Ic\cl. A similar obscnalion          applies to difference     estimates of participation rates

for all employees.   [n general. \\-ith diffcrcnccd data, the effects of seminars on participation (table 7) and

contributions (table 8) arc found to be significant at a higher level of confidence when a single measure of

educational intensity- is used.

      ii. Median and roh IIst regression.       robustne.~s of participation    results

      We present median and robust regression results for participation in the middle sections of Table 7. In

many respects, these results are qualitative}’ similar to the OLS estimates.              In the pooled data, the coefficient

on frequent seminars for NHC emplojccs drops from 11.5 in the OLS specification to 9.9 in the median and

11.2 in the robust regression.    Ho\\c\er.    both of [hese coefficients remain significant at the 1 percent level.

The coefficients of occasional seminars for NHC employees rise relative to OLS, but still fail to achieve

statistical significance at confcntional      levels. There is no indication that seminars – even frequent ones –



                                                             23
have a signiiicfint impact on Lhcporticipalion rates of HC employees.        It is therefore possible that the effects

of frequent seminars on HC cmplo!’ccs measured in OLS recessions            (as well as in the Tobit recessions

reported later) reflect lhe inllucncc of oulliers. For HC employees, the unexpected negative coefficient (from

OLS) on occasional seminars is reduced to a number much closer to zero in both the median and robust

recessions.   Finally, the effect of frcqucnl seminars on participation rates for all employees is a bit weaker in

median regession     and robust regressions than for OLS; hoivcver, the effect of occasional seminars, though

still smaller than the cf(cct or ~rcqucnt seminars. no~v achieves conventional levels of statistical si~ificance.

     For the diffcrcnccd data. both the median and robust recessions        reduce the size of the coefficients for

frequent seminars. but also incrcasc the precision \vith l~hich they are measured.       The coefficient on frequent

seminars for NHC cmplo!ecs drops from 121 in the OLS specification to 7.4 in the median and 8.6 in the

robust regression.   Ho\\c\cr.   \\hilc the OLS coefficient ~vas only significant at the 7 percent level, the median

regression cocflicicnt IS significant at lIIc 2 percent Ievcl and the robust regression at the 5 percent level.

Notably, \vhilc the cf[cct of occasional seminars on NHC participation was not significant in OLS estimates

with differcnced data. it is significant (and substantial) in both median and robust regression estimates.

Median and robust re~cssions       also ~icld more prccisc coefficients for HC employees.      For the median

reg~ession in particular, (IICcffccl is statistically significant, even though its magnitude is small. We suspect

that this result is attributnblc to the nature of the distribution of the difference   HC participation rates. Many

of the participation ra(cs for HC crnplo~ccs arc at or near 100 percent for both 1993 and 1994; consequently,

more than 30 percent of the firms in the sample cxpcricnce no change in the measured participation rate of

HC employees between 1993 and 1994. Since the median change is zero, and since there are so many zeros,

it is not surprising that our explanato~   variables are found to have very little effect on the median, or that this

finding is precise. The cffcci of frequent seminars on participation rates disappears in the median and robust

regression estimates of the diffcrcnccd specification for all employees; however, the impact of occasional

seminars emerges as signi ticant. Final I!, as noted earlier the use of the intensity variable also enhances the



                                                          24
statistical signilicancc of Lhc cdllcalional effect on NHC participation rates in both the median and robust

regession     cstimntcs thnt Make usc or dl ffcrcnced dala.

     iii. Median and robust regression: robustness of the contribution       results

     The median and robust regression results for contribution rates appear in Table 8. The top panel

contains results for regressions fvith pooled data. The results for the robust regressions are qualitatively

similar to the earlier OLS estimation. ~vith a slight drop in the coefficients on frequent seminars. For

example, in the specification for NHC cmplo~ccs, this coefficient drops from 0.81 to 0.69. The statistical

significance of the cstimotcs is colmparablc to Lhat of the OLS coefficients, with the coefficient on frequent

seminars for NHC cmployccs remaining significant at the 1 percent significance level. The effect of

occasional seminars is also sla[islicall} significant in the specification for all employees.   In contrast, the

median rcg~cssion results for contribution rates are \\-eakcr than the OLS and robust regression results. While

the signs 0[ the cocfficicnis arc [hc same. mnglliiudcs are generally Io\ver, and no single seminar dummy

achicvcs statistical signi ficancc al conl’cnlional Ic\rcls. Ho\vevcr, the seminar intensity variables approaches

statistical signi ficancc al the 95 pcrccnl confidence level in the specifications for NHC and all employees.

     The bottom panel of table 8 presents median and robust regression results for contribution rates using

difference     data. The effect of frequent seminars on NHC contribution rates is still reasonably strong, and

similar to that obtained using OLS. None of the olhcr seminar dummies depicted in this Io\ver panel achieves

statistical signi ficancc, The estimated effect of frequent seminars on the HC contribution rate is actually

ncgati~e and fairly Iargc in magnitude. but not vc~ precise. Ho\vever, as \vith the previous specifications,

\vhcn the seminar intcnsit> variable is used. median and robust regression estimates of the seminar effect for

NHC employees are similar in magnitude to the OLS results and statistically significant at the usual levels of

confidence.

     iv. Tobii regression re,slllls

     Tobit results for rates or participation appear in the last section of Table 7. The coefficients for both



                                                          25
frequent and occasional seminars increase in size (relative to OLS) for all three employee groups. The most

tiamatic change occurs in the coefficient for frequent seminars for HC employees, which increases from 6.4

to 10,5. This result is nol surprising gi~cn lhc fact that more than 30 percent of the HC observations are

right-censored,   Although precision is somclfhat lower for the Tobit estimates than for OLS, the coefficient

of frequent seminars for NHC employees remains significant at the 1 percent level, and the coefficient for HC

employees remains significant at the 5 pcrccnt Icvcl. These results suggest that censoring causes a downward

bias in the OLS cocfficicnts, and that HC and NHC employees respond to education more similarly than the

OLS results appear to indicate. Again, using the seminar intensity variable results in more precisely

estimated effects.



5. Conclusions

      In this paper, \vc ha~c cxnmincd Lhceffects of employer-based retirement education on 40 l(k) activity

using finm-level data. Ollr rcsulls indicntc [Ilo[ rclircment seminars are generally associated with si~ificantly

higher rates of participnlion and contributions. at Icast when the frequency of these offerings is high. The

effect appears to be particularly slrong for non-highly compensated employees.        Our findings reflect both

cross-sectional   and longitudinal pattcms in the data, and they are robust with respect to a variety of

estimation techniques.

      The current paper is complcmcnton’ to Bcmheim and Garrett (1 996) who use household survey data to

investigate the effects O( education on total saving, both inside and outside of pension plans. However, since

their data are cross-sectional,   the} are forced to make indirect inferences concerning the probable direction of

biases that might result from the inevitable failure to control for unobserved individual effects. With

household sumcy data, it is also difficult to distinguish bct~veen the effects of education on behavior, and the

effects of education on [hc \\ay that indi~’idua]s report behavior. In contrast, the employer survey data used

here allow us LOexamine bolh cross-sectional      and longitudinal patterns; moreover, there is relatively little risk



                                                          26
that the education ofemplo!ccs    ~vould affect the }vay lhat employers report rates of participation and

contributions.   The tradeoff. ofcoursc. is that cmplo!’er sumey data provide no information on assets held

outside of pension plans, ond thcrcforc do not permit us to investigate \vhether increased participation and

contributions reflect nc~t saving, rather Lhan asset reshuffling.

      Taken together, [he current paper and that of Bcmheim and Garrett ( 1996) suggest that financial

education in the \vorkplacc con exert a strong influence on personal financial decisions. More generally, these

studies raise the possibility [hat lhc cnhanccmcnt ofdccision-making    skills (as opposed to labor market

skills) may conslilutc a sigllificnnt economic rctum to education.




                                                         27
                                                References

A. Foster Higgins & Co., Inc. Sz[rvey oJEmplo}’ee Savings Plans, 1994, Report 2.-Plan Participation      and
Discrimination Test/rig. Princeton, NJ: A. Fosler Higgins& Co., Inc., 1994.

Andrc\vs, Emily S.. ‘-The Gro\\lh and Distribution of 40 l(k) Plans,” in J. Turner and D, Beller, eds., Trends
in Pensions 1992, Washington, D. C., U.S. Department of Labor, 1992.

Becker, Gary S.. Humcrn Copiicrl crnd [he Personcrl Distribution   oflncome,   AM Arbor: University of
Michigan Press: 1967.

Berg, Olena, “DOL to Launch Savings and Pension Education Campaign,” EBRINotes,           June 1995, p, 2,

Bernheim, B. Douglas, ~e      Vanishing Nes[ Egg: Reflections on Saving in America, New York: Priority
Press, 1991.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Persc~nal Savingl Information, and Economic Literacy: New Directions for Public
Policy, ” in Tu Po/icjJ\tir Economic Growfh in rhe 19WS, Washington, DC: American Council for Capital
Formation, 1994a, 53-78.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Comments and Discussion, ” Brookings Papers on Economic Activify (1), 1994b,
152-166.

Bernheim, B, Douglas, “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An Analysis of
Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy, ” Ta Policy and Economic Growth, Washington, DC: American
Council for Capital Formation, 1995a, pp. 1-30.

Bernheim,   B, Douglas, “The Merrill Lynch Baby Boom Retirement Index: Update ‘95,” mimeo, 1995b.

 Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Rethinking Saving Incentives, “ in Alan Auerbach (ed. ), Fiscal Policy: Lessons
from Economic Research, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996a, forthcoming.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Financial Illiteracy, Education, and Retirement Saving, ” in Living with Defined
Conrribuiion Plans, Pension Research Council, the Wharton School, University of Pemylvania,      1996b,
forthcoming.

Bernheim, B, Douglas ancl Daniel Garrett, “The Determinants and Consequences of Financial Education in
the Workplace: Eviclence t’r(~ma Survey of Households, ” mimeo, Stanford University, March 1996.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and John Karl Scholz, “Private Saving and Public Policy, ” Tm Policy and the
Economy 7, 1993, 73-110.

Borleis, Melvin W.. and Kimberly K. Wcdcll, “HOW to spark employee interest with employer matching
contributions,” Projl Sharing, Janua~ 1994, pp. 7-16.

Card, David, “Earnings. Schooling. and Abilily Revisited.” Research in Labor Economics       14, 1995, pp. 23-
48,


                                                      28
Central Council for Savings Promotion, Savings and Savings Prom?ion          Movement in Japan, Tokyo: Bank
of Japan, 1981.

Congressional   Budget Oftlc~, Baby Bootners in Retirement: An Early Perspective,     September 1993.

Employee Ben~tit Research Institute, R<’rir~’men[Conjdence in America: Getting Ready for Tomrrow,
EBRI Special Report SR-27, issue Brief Number 156, December          1994.

Emplo!ce Benefit Research Ins[itutc, ‘-Can We Save Enough to Retire? Participant Education in Defined
Contribution Plans,” EBJ/1 isslle Brief no. 160, April 1995.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “Do Saving Incentives Work?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity ( 1), 1994, 85-151.

Garrett, Daniel M., “The Effects of Nondiscrimination      Rules on 401(k) Contributions, ” mimeo, Stanford
University, 1995.

Geisel, Jcrn, “Communication    !iclds sLlcccss for XTRA 401(k),” Bllsiness lns~[rance,   April 10, 1995, p. 3.

Hubbard, R. Glenn. Jonnlhan Skinner. and Stephen P. Zeldes, ‘-Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance,”
Jollrnol of Political Economy: 103(2), April 1995,360-399.

Kusko, Andrea, James M. Potcrba. and David W. Wilcox, “Employee Decisions With Respect to 40 l(k)
Plans: Evidcncc from Indi\idLlal Level Data.-. Working Paper No. 4635, National Bureau of Economic
Research, 1994.     .

Papke, Leslie E.. .-Participalion in and Contributions to 401(k) Plans: Evidence from Plan Data,’’ JoZ(rna/ of
Hl[mcm Resotirces 30(2). Spring 1995.

Papke, Leslie, Milchc]l Pctcrscn. and James M. Polerba. ‘.Did 40 l(k) Plans Replace Other Employer
Provided Pensions’?.’ Working Popcr No. 4501, National Bureau of Economic Research, October 1993.

Poterba, James M.. Slc\cn F. Vcnli, and David A. Wise, “40 l(k) Plans and Tax-Deferred Saving,” in David
A. Wise, cd,, Sttldies in t~le Economics of Agi~g, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994,

Scott, Jason, .’The Compensation Value of 40 l(k) Pension Plans,” mimeo, Stanford University, 1994

Sheffrin, Hersh M., and Richard H. Thalcr. “The Behavioral Life-Cycle HWothesis,” Economic lnqui~
26(4), 1988,609-43,




                                                      29
Table 1: Mean and Medinn 401 (k) Ptirticipatif)n   and Contribution     Rates

                                                                                                        Employment-Weighted
                                                   Observations            Median            Mean             Mean



 Participation Rates                       NHC         415                 60.9              59.44               59.66
                                           HC          422                 92.5              82.59               82.34
                                           All         530                 70,0              63.08               64.32

 Conditional Contribution        Rates     NHC         395                 5.0               4.96                4.72
                                           HC          398                 6.0               6.75                6.09
                                           All         457                 5.0               5.15                5.14

 Unconditional    Contribution     Rates   NHC         349                 2.8               3.06                2.91
                                           HC          352                 5.7               5.79                5.16
                                           All         437                 3.4               3.39                3.46




 Participation   Rates                     NHC         392                 60.0              57.68               55.18
                                           HC          404                 92.0              78.56               82.69
                                           All         500                 70.0              61.23               60.77

 Conditional Contribution    Rates         NHC         357                 5.0               4.86                4.84
                                           HC          359                 6.0               6.66                6.05
                                           All         412                 5.0               5.34                5.32

 Unconditional    Contribution     Rates   NHC         311                 2.6               2.94                2.79
                                           HC          317                 5.4               5.44                5.07
                                           All         393                 3.3               3.41                3.55


Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Retirenienr       BeneJts   in tile 1990s: 1993 and 1994 Survey Da[a.
Table 2: me Effect of Retirenlent     Plun Type on Educatiort    - All Companies

                                                                  Dependent Variable



                                     Seminars        Seminars for       Seminars for     Summary       Newsletters or
                                      for All         Employees          Employees         Plan         Periodicals
                                    Employees          Over 50        Near Retirement   Descriptions

 Only 401(k) Plan                     0.251            -0.221              -0.343          0.727          0.464
                                      (. 129)          (.141)              (. 143)         (.134)         (. 129)

 Only 403(b) Plan                     0.759            0.503               0.325           0.185          0.104
                                      (.204)           (.205)              (.207)          (.202)         (.200)

 Only Another Plan                    0,107            -0.177              -0.092          0.059          -0.210
                                      (.151)           (.165)              (. 162)         (.148)         (. 148)

 Two or More Plans                    0,326            0.34                0.274           0.554          0.484
                                      (.113)           (,119)              (.119)          (.112)         (.111)

 Total Employment*                    0.255            0.352               0.322           -0.174         0.204
                                      (.181)           (.141)              (.141)          (.169)         (. 147)

 Fraction of Employees                0.0032           0.0047              0.0041          -0.0033        0.0001
 Covered by Plans                     (.0012)          (.0012)             (.0012)         (.0013)        (.0012)

 1994 Dummy                           0.093            -0.050              0.003           -0.134         0.077
                                      (.060)           (.063)              (.064)          (.065)         (.063)

 Intercept                            -0.647           -0.999              -0.951          0.431          0.016
                                      (. 142)          (.151)              (.151)          (.145)         (.141)



 N                                    1778             1773                1773            1771           1778
  *Coefficients for Total Employment are multiplied by 10s.
   Excluded Variable is Only Defined Benetits Plan.
   Standard errors are in parentheses.
   Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Retirenlent BeneJrs in tile 19WS: 1993 and 1994 Survey Data.
Table 3: me Effect of RetireInent   Pl:]n Type on Education - Companies with 401(k) Plans

                                                                Dependent Variable



                                 Seminars        Seminars for        Seminars for      Summary       Newsletters or
                                  for All         Employees           Employees          Plan         Periodicals
                                Employees          Over 50          Near Retirement   Descriptions

 Defined Benefits                   0.065           0.627               0.652            -0.090          0.072
 Plan                               (.106)          (.115)              (.118)           (.116)          (.111)

 Other Retirement Plan              -0.009          0.258               0.343            -0.020          0.082
 No DB Plan                         (.109)          (.120)              (,121)           (.118)          (.113)

 Total Employment*                  0.491           0.754               0.702            -0.389          0.397
                                    (.264)          (.292)              (.285)           (.267)          (.332)

 Fraction of Employees              0.0019          0.0034              -0.0029          -0.0049         -0.0017
 Covered by Plans                   (.0016)         (.0017)             (.0017)          (.0017)         (.0016)

 Union Eligibility                  -0.038          0.016               0.034            0.056           0.140
                                    (.093)          (.095)              (.096)           (.095)          (.096)

 Employer Match                     -0.165          -0.042              -0.123          0.203            0.054
                                    (.111)          (,111)              (.110)          (.119)           (.111)

 Number of Options                  0.166           0.179               0.186           0.132            0.179
                                    (.036)          (.039)              (.040)          (.041)           (,038)

 Loans Permitted                    0.213           0.147               0.120           0.013            -0.034
                                    (.090)          (.095)              (.093)          (,095)           (.091)

 1994 Dummy                         -0.015          -0.216              -0.203          -0.229           -0.026
                                    (.072)          (.080)              (.080)          (.084)           (.081)

 Intercept                          -0.773          -1.729              -1.724          0.737            0.044
                                    (.173)          (.188)              (. 190)         (.188)           (.176)



 N                                  1170            1169                1170             1162            1169
 *Coefficients for Total Employment are multiplied by 103; coefficients for 1994 Dummy are
   multiplied by 104.
  Excluded Variable is Only 40 l(k) Plan.
  Standard errors are in parentheses.
  Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Renrenzenr Benejrs in r}le 1990s: 1993 ad 1994 Suwey Data.
TahIe 4: Predictors   of Changes in Ed(lcatinn

                                                                Dependent Variable


                                  Seminars       Seminars for        Seminars for      Summary       Newsletters or
                                   for All        Employees           Employees          Plan         Periodicals
                                 Employees         Over 50          Near Retirement   Descriptions

 NHC Participation                   -0.0084        -0.0058             -0.0059          -0.0013         0.0020
 1993                                (.0038)        (.0031)             (.0032)          (.0047)         (.0046)

 HC Participation                    -0.0018        -0.0045             -0.0001          -0.0043         -0.0057
 1993                                (.0035)        (.0028)             (.0029)          (.0044)         (.0046)

 Fraction of Employees              0.0044          0.0031              0.0012           0.0041          0.0004
 Covered by Plan                     (.0030)        (.0024)             (.0025)          (.0038)         (.0037)
 Total Employment*                  0.091           -0.959              -0.448           -0,338          0.165
 1993                               (0,504)         (0.406)             (0.420)          (0.621)         (.609)

 Union Eligibility                  -0.083          -0.282              -0.196           -0.501          -0.057
 1993                               (. 182)         (. 148)             .(.152)          (.224)          (.220)

 Employer Match                     0.207           -0.058              -0.030           0.251           0.412
 1993                               (.227)          (.182)              (.189)           (.280)          (,274)

 Defined Benetits                   -0.339          -0.082              -0.069           -0.183          -0.285
 Plan -1993                         (.197)          (. 159)             (. 164)          (.243)          (.238)

 Other Pension Plan                 -0.094          -0.184              -0.069          0.107            -0.180
 No DB Plan -1993                   (.208)          (.16~               (.173)          (.256)           (.251)

 Loans Permitted                    0.059           -0.144              -0.005           -0.015          -0.045
 1993                               (. 169)         (. 136)             (.141)           (.209)          (.204)

 Investment Options                 0.058           0.071               0.027           0.003            0.079
 1993                               (.070)          (.057)              (.059)          (.087)           (.085)

 Intercept                          0.168           0.579               0.201           -0.049           -0.013
                                    (.416)          (.344)              (.346)          (.519)           (.502)



 N                                  244             243                 244             243              244
  *Coefficients for Total Employment are multiplied by 10s.
   All dependen[ variables are first difference.
   Standard errors are in parentheses.
   Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Retirertlent Bene$ts in the 1990s: 1993 and 1994 Survey Data.
Table 5: OLS ResulLs for Ptirticiputinn   tind Contribution         Rutes

                                                                          Dependent Variable

                                             Participtition Rates                                   Contribution    Rates
                                    NHC              HC             All                    NHC            HC            All

 Seminars                           11.52          6.37          8.17                      0.809          0.342         0.677
 Often                              (3,00)         (2.94)       (2.46)                     (.291)         (.417)        (.240)

 Seminars                           1.74           -2.98        1.43                       0.252          0.077         0.232
 Sometimes or Rarely                (2.07)         (2.37)       (1.75)                     (.171)         (.261)        (.142)

 Newsletters                        -0.58           1.09        -2.30                      0.183          0.149         -0.120
 Often                              (2.72)         (3.00)       (2.23)                     (.211)         (.380)        (.186)

 Newsletters                        -0.91          0.01         -0.83                      -0.088         -0.353       -0.248
 Sometimes or Rarely                (2.63)         (2.81)       (2. 12)                    (.210)         (.350)        (.183)

 Plan Descriptions                  0.35           -1.66       2.17                        -0.084         0.024         -0.137
 Often                              (2.79)         (3.16)      (2.24)                      (.196)         (.366)        (.182)

 Plan Descriptions                  2.16           -1.00       1.98                        0.282          -0.274        0.007
 Sometimes or Rarely                (2.83)         (3.07)      (2.32)                      (.220)         (.347)        (,197)

 Employer Match                     14.59          16.94       17.27                       0.389          0.732         0.566
                                    (2.55)         (3. 17)     (2.04)                      (.238)         (.413)        (.205)

 Loans Permitted                    -1.42          -2.34        1.78                       0.076          0.003         0.313
                                    (2.09)         (2.20)      (1.74)                      (.159)         (.258)        (.149)

 Investment Options                 -0.158         -0.237      0.712                       0.105          0.156         0.099
                                    (.819)         (.873)      (.720)                      (.066)         (.107)        (.062)

 Other Pension Plan                 4,41           3.39        5.02                        -0.203         -0.306        -0.035
                                    (2.36)         (2.53)      (2.06)                      (.198)         (.293)        (.171)

 Total Employment*                  -1.78          -0.29       -1,07                       -0.91          -1.71         -0.45
                                    (0.64)         (0.66)      (0.53)                      (0.56)         (0.59)        (0.46)

 Fraction of Employees              0.188          0.049       0.236                       0.0141         0.0020        0.0153
 Covered by Plan                    (.039)         (.042)      (!034)                      (.0032)        (.0047)       (.0029)

 Union Eligibility                   1.49          1.56        3.56                        -0.045         0.320         0.171
                                    (2.09)         (2.19)      (1.72)                      (.166)         (.273)        (. 149)

 1994 Dummy                         -2.30          -4.41       -3.24                       -0.184         -0.410        -0.102
                                    (1.82)         (2.10)      (1.48)                      (.145)         (.239)        (. 124)

 Intercept                          30.90          65.87       23.16                       1.313          4.870         1.386
                                    (4.47)         (5.09)      (3.64)                      (.341)         (.705)        (.344)



N                                   805            824          1027                       658            667            827
*Coefficients for Total Employment are multiplied by 104 in the participation specifications, and 105 in the
 contribution specifications.
 Huber standard errors are in parentheses.
 Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Rerirenlenr Bene$ts in tile 1990s: 1993 and 1994 Survey Data.
Table 6: OLS ReslllL$ for Changes in Ptirticiptiti{ln und Contribution             Rates

                                                                           Dependent Variable

                                             Participation   Rates                                   Contribution    Rates
                                    NHC              HC              All                    NHC            HC            All

 Seminars                           12.14           6.60         7.65                       1.106          -0.141        0.408
 Often                              (6.58)          (8.49)       (4.72)                     (.513)         (.772)        (.348)

 Seminars                           6.87            1.59         4.75                       0.533          1.044         0.214
 Sometimes or Rarely                (4.53)          (5.97)       (3.19)                     (.344)         (.540)        (.235)

 Newsletters                        -7.02          -5.80         -2.87                      -0.119         -0.912       -0.360
 Often                              (5.35)         (7.01)        (3.93)                     (.410)         (.624)        (.292)

 Newsletters                        -1.41          -3.33         -1.49                      -0.078         -0.557       -0.081
 Sometimes or Rarely                (4.85)         (6.30)        (3.65)                     (.384)         (.572)        (.279)

 Plan Descriptions                  6.32           6.62          3.18                       0.240          0.021         -0.224
 Often                              (5.30)         (6.69)        (3.76)                     (.411)         (.597)        (.272)

 Plan Descriptions                  I 1.34         11.60         6.29                       0.711          0.695         0.217
 Sometimes or Rarely                (5.49)         (6.97)        (3, 80)                    (.424)         (.624)        (.278)

 Employer Match                     -1.56          0.77          -0.22                      -0.072         0.270         -0.016
                                    (5.66)         (7.61)        (4.36)                     (,45T          (.695)        (.325)

 Loans Permitted                    1.31           1.30          2.54                       -0.683         -0.715       -0.603
                                    (7.63)         (10.52)      (5.93)                      (.617)         (1,02)        (.433)

 Investment Options                 2.44           2.76         0.18                        0.300          0.102         0.132
                                    (1.89)         (2.50)       (1.43)                      (.153)         (.226)        (.107)

 Other Pension Plan                 9.44           5.02         3.51                        -0.002         0.408         0.037
                                    (5.25)         (6.97)       (4.11)                      (.419)         (.629)        (.295)

 Total Employment*                  0.43           2.25          1.54                       0.083          -0.011        0.030
                                    (3.51)         (4,60)       (2.34)                      (.261)         (,389)        (. 168)

 Fraction of Employees              0.135          0.098        0.078                       0.0045         0.0131        -0.0041
 Covered by Plan                    (.089)         (,115)       (.067)                      (.0070)        (.0108)       (.0049)

 Union Eligibility                  -1.95          6.10         9.00                        0.055          1.465         0.786
                                    (4.92)         (6.28)       (3.82)                      (.402)         (.586)        (.272)

Intercept                           -7.81          -8.55        -4.38                       -0.360         -0.557       -0.213
                                    (2.88)         (3.89)       (2.10)                      (.239)         (.359)        (. 165)



N                                   188            196          291                         148             147          213
*Coefhcients for Total Employment are multiplied by 104.
 All variables, both dependent and independent, are first difference.
 Standard errors are in parentheses.
 Source: Derived from KPMG Petit Marwick’s Retirenlenr Benefits in tile 1990s: 1993 and 1994 Survey Data.
.
Table 8: Robustness of Ct)ntrihution   Results


                 OLS                             Median Regression                        Robust Regression



                Intensity                    Often     S/R     Intensity               Often     S/R       Intensity




 pooled:

 NHC             0.211                       0.475    0.186      0.155                 0.690    0.192        0.169
                 (.080)                      (.363)   (.219)     (,084)                (.254)   (.. 153)     (.070)

 HC              0.115                       0.119    0.118     0.068                  0.316    0.225        0.121
                 (,119)                      (.405)   (.247)    (.075)                 (.389)   (.231)       (.106)

 All             0.198                       0.484    0.249     0.124                  0.487    0.261       0.163
                 (,066)                      (.319)   (.192)    (.063)                 (.224)   (.135)      (.061)




 NHC             0.407                       0.929    0.206     0.201                 0.824     0.242       0.263
                 (.153)                      (.506)   (.338)    (.084)                (.426)    (.285)      (.123)

 HC              0.219                       -0.837   0.011     -0.084                 -0.518   0.663       -0.090
                 (.242)                      (.490)   (,338)    (,110)                 (.684)   (.478)      (.202)

 All             0.194                       0.248    0.038     0.105                 0.265     0.113       0.113
                 (, 104)                     (.268)   (.181)    (.105)                (.303)    (.204)      (.091)


  Each entry is the coefficient on Semintirs for that sl]ecitication of the model
  The abbreviation SIR indicates the Sometimes-Rarely Semintir variable,
  Standard errors are in l>arentheses
  Source: Derived from KPMG Peat Marwick’s Retitenlenr Benejits in tlze 1990s: 1993 and 1994 Survey Data,
