NBER WORKING

TECHNOLOGY
CHANGES

PAPER

SERIES

AND JOBS: SECULAR

AND CYCLICAL

DYNAMICS

Timothy Dunne
John Haltiwanger
Kenneth R. Troske

Working

NATIONAL

BUREAU

Paper 5656

OF ECONOMIC

1050 Massachusetts
Cambridge,

RESEARCH

Avenue

MA 02138

July 1996

This is a revised version of a paper prepared for the April 1996 Carnegie-Rochester
Conference on
Public Policy. All three authors are affiliated with the Center for Economic Studies. The views
expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of the U.S, Census
Bureau or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
We thank Olivier Blanchard, Mark Doms,
Robert Fairlie, Peter Klenow, Glenn MacDonald,
Bennett McCallum,
Allan Meltzer, conference
participants
at the April 1996 Carnegie-Rochester
conference and the May 1996 Society of Labor
Economists
conference,
and seminar participants
at the CES for helpful comments.
Haltiwanger
thanks the NSF for support and Dunne thanks the Census Fellows program for support. We thank
Lucia Foster and Catherine Buffington
for excellent research assistance.
This paper is part of
NBER’s research program in Economic Fluctuations
and Growth.
O 1996 by Timothy Dunne, John Haltiwanger
and Kenneth R. Troske. All rights reserved.
Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working

Paper 5656
July 1996

TECHNOLOGY
AND JOBS: SECULAR
CHANGES AND CYCLICAL DYNAMICS

ABS TRACT

In this paper, we exploit plant-level
explore the connections

between changes in technology

We focus on the nonproduction
the variable

of interest.

nonproduction
changes;

recessions;
fraction

labor share (measured

Our main findings

of labor

share at annual

(ii) the distribution

heterogeneity

data for U.S. manufacturing

alternatively

frequencies

and (iv) while observable
increase

indicators

in the average

of changes

of employment

(i) aggregate

are dominated

exhibits

plant

secular

and wages)

in the

by within

plant

changes

are concentrated

account

in

for a significant
factors

and most of the cross sectional

heterogeneity.

Kenneth R. Troske
Center for Economic Studies
Bureau of the Census
Washington,
DC 20233

as

changes

labor share, unobservable

account for most of the secular increase, most of the cyclical variation

Timothy Dunne
Department
of Economics
University of Oklahoma
Norman, OK 73019

and wages.

a spike at zero, tremendous

in technology

nonproduction

970s and 1980s to

by employment

as follows:

of annual within plant changes

and fat left and right tails; (iii) within

of the secular

and the structure

are summarized
and longer

for the

John Haltiwanger
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER

I. Introduction
Over the course of the past several decades there have been significant changes in the structure
of wages and employment

in the U.S. economy.

Rising wage inequality has been accompanied

by an

increase in the return to experience over the 1970s and 1980s and an increase in the return to education
over the 1980s. Conformable

changes in relevant quantities suggest that these price changes reflect

changes in the relative demand for skilled workers: employment,
workers in the upper half of the wage distribution
withdrawal
distribution.

and unemployment

for

have been relatively stable while unemployment

and

from the labor force have increased substantially

participation,

for workers in the lower part of the wage

These changes in the overall U.S. labor market are particularly

structure of the workplace

in U.S. manufacturing.

evident in changes in the

Relative to the 1960s, the typical manufacturing

worker in the late 1980s is more educated and is more likely to be a professional,

manager or technical

worker and less likely to be an operator or laborer.’
The most prominent

current explanation

that the adoption of new sophisticated

for the changing relative demand for skilled workers is

capital equipment and the introduction

of flexible manufacturing

“ methods has raised the demand for more highly educated and skilled workers.
explanation

An alternative

competing

is that there have been product demand changes towards goods requiring more skilled labor

(at least in part stemming from an increasingly

integrated world economy).

While there have been

numerous studies in the recent literature seeking to identify the sources of these labor market changes,
the verdict is still out since most of the evidence to date is indirect.
exploits household data which does not permit direct examination
technology
longitudinal

adoption or detailed product demand changes.
establishment-level

employment

of the alternative explanations

sector covering 1970s and the 1980s

about the changing characteristics

and wages by worker type (production

intensity, detailed indicators of advanced technology

of

In contrast, in this paper we exploit

data for the U.S. manufacturing

which contains a wealth of information

Much of the existing analysis

and nonproduction

of individual establishments:

workers), capital intensity, R&D

adoption, and detailed industry.2 These data permit

‘ Recent research investigating these changes includes Juhn, Murphy and Topel (1991), Davis and Haltiwanger
(1991), Katz and Murphy (1992), Juhn, Murphy and Pierce (1993), and Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994).
Note that the return to education fell during the 1970s but this has been attributed to the changes in the relative
supply of college educated workers over this period (see, e.g., Katz and Murphy, 1992 for extensive discussion of
these issues).
2 Several aspects of our study distinguish our analysis from the relatively few recent studies that exploit the
establishment-level data to investigate the comection between technology, wages and employment (see, e.g., Davis
and Haltiwanger, 1991; Dunne and Schmitz, 1995; Doms, Dunne and Troske, 1995; and Bernard and Jensen,
1

a much more direct examination

of the possible explanations

for the change in the relative demand for

skilled workers.
While our data has a wealth of information
information

on worker characteristics

and nonproduction

workers.

terms of employment

about employer characteristics,

are employment

Using this information,

and wages broken out separately for production
Figure 1 graphs the nonproduction

labor share in

and wage shares and illustrates two key features of the aggregate data. The first is

the striking upward trend in the nonproduction

labor share. This increase has been interpreted

recent literature (e.g., Berman, Bound and Griliches,

feature of the nonproduction

in the

1994; and Gold in and Katz, 1996) as an important

indicator of the overall changes in the structure of the workplace

in manufacturing.’

The second key

labor share series seen in Figure 1 is that it exhibits an asymmetric

over the business cycle. Sharp increases in the share of nonproduction
are only mildly offset by decreases during recoveries.
in nonproduction

the primary

Consequently,

pattern

labor during economic downturns
almost all of the long run increase

labor share that occurs over the 16 year period, occurs in periods that manufacturing

sector employment

is contracting,

The strong connection between the structural changes and the cyclical

patterns in the aggregate data has been neglected in the recent literature but is a fundamental

part of our

analysis.4
Throughout

this paper, we follow this recent literature and focus on the nonproduction

share (both in terms of employment
dictated by data limitations,

and in terms of wages) as our variable of interest.

labor

Although this is

we think the use of this variable for this purpose is appropriate

for a number

forthcoming, First, we provide a comprehensive characterization of the timing, heterogeneity and concentration of
plant-level changes in the employment and wage structure in the context of investigating the contribution of
observable changes in technology. As part of this, a key feature of our study is the documentation and analysis of
the strong connection between the low frequency structural changes in the employment and wage structure at the
plant with the cyclical dynamics. Second, we investigate the respective contributions of continuing plants and entry
and exit. Consideration of the role of entry and exit is important in this setting since many models of technology
adoption hypothesize that new technology will be introduced primarily by entering plants that in turn displace
exiting outmoded plants.
‘ The use of industry-level data on production and nonproduction workers to analyze the relative demand for
skilled workers has a long history in labor economics. Table 3.7 in Hamermesh (1993) lists over 20 studies using
such data for this purpose.
4 In this regard, our approach and analysis are in the spirit of the ideas stressed in the recent literature that
restructuring and reallocation are concentrated in economic downturns (e.g,, Davis and Haltiwanger, 1990; Hall,
1991; Caballero and Hammour, 1994; Mortensen and Pissarides, 1994; and Campbell, 1995. However, in this case,
we focus more on the nature of within plant restructuring at business cycle frequencies than on the between plant
reallocation of jobs that has been the focus of this recent literature.
2

of reasons.

First, as in the recent literature, we view the nonproduction

though admittedly
nonproduction

imperfect, measure of plant-level workforce

skill. It is well documented

1991; Bemdt, Morrison, and Rosenblum,

labor in manufacturing

1992). In addition, the growth in nonproduction

has been in the higher skill occupations

scientists, engineers, and computer programmers)

nonproduction

such as professionals

and managerial

labor has been primarily in lower skill occupations

and Haltiwanger,

1991; Berman, Bound and Griliches,

occupations,

(including

while the decline in

such as operatives and laborers

(Davis

1994). Second, we view changes in the

worker share as more broadly reflecting changes in the way plants produce goods,

and Katz (1996) document a variety of changes in the production
their effect of the types of workers used in manufacturing

change on workplace organization.

plant-level changes in the nonproduction

between technology

to team production and the impact of this
of

of the plant. In short, we recognize that

interpretations

into account in interpreting

our results.

in mind, this paper examines a number of issues

dynamics of nonproduction

and changes in the skill of the workforce.

whether the observed aggregate changes in the nonproduction

labor share changes and the relationship
The first issue we address empirically

is

labor share at high and low frequencies

reflects a general upward shifi in workforce skill (a within plant effect), a reallocation
from continuing

and Shaw

labor share may represent more than simply skill changes in the

workforce and we attempt to take this broader perspective

concerning both the macroeconomic

Similarly, Ichniowski

In addition, Kremer (1993) argues that changes in the complexity

goods produced in turn affects the workforce requirements

With these alternative

Goldin

process over the twentieth century and

production.

(1995) document and analyze changes from assembly-lines

of the employment

low skill to high skill plants (a between plant effect), or entering high skill plants

displacing exiting low skill plants (a net entry effect).
potentially

that

workers are more highly paid and more educated than production workers (Davis and

Haltiwanger,

production

labor share variable as a basic,

shed considerable

The results of such basic decompositions

light on a variety of competing hypotheses.

can

The hypothesis that trade and

other factors have generated a shift in demand towards products that are skill intensive implies that the
observed change should primarily be a be~een

plant phenomenon.

intensive products also potentially have implications
technical change hypothesis
their production

Demand shifis towards high skill

for the contribution

implies that the observed changes are driven by individual plants retooling

processes (a within plant phenomenon)

~ that new technology

plants that displace outmoded exiting plants (a net entry phenomenon).
new technology
fundamental

of net entry. The skill biased

is introduced by entering

Further, understanding

whether

is introduced via retooling of existing plants or via the entry of new plants is of

importance

in distinguishing

between alternative classes of technology
3

adoption models.

The second set of issues we address concerns the timing, heterogeneity
plant-level changes in the nonproduction

and concentration

of

labor share. We document the magnitude, concentration,

persistence, and cyclicality of the distribution

of the plant-level

nonproduction

share changes.

In

addition, we document the underlying job creation and destruction dynamics within and between plants
by worker type. While we know from recent studies of plant-level employment
tremendous

dispersion in the employment

in nonproduction
understanding

this need not translate into dispersion

share changes. More generally, the characterization

the underlying

characterizations

growth rate distribution,

of plant-level

forces driving plant-level

changes in nonproduction

is important for

share. Recent

in capital adjustment

costs. For our

in the adjustment costs for adopting new technology (which may be associated
in the presence of biased technical change in turn imply lumpy adjustment

worker mix at the plant level. In addition, we are interested in the respective contributions
and negative changes in nonproduction
aggregate changes.

and

1995b) document the importance of lumpy

investment spikes in a manner consistent with nonconvexities

with capital adjustment)

of the distribution

investment (e.g., Doms and Dunne, 1994; Cooper, Haltiwanger

Power, 1995; and Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger,

purposes, nonconvexities

dynamics that there is

in

of positive

labor share at the plant level in accounting for the observed

As will become apparent, the observation

changes in workforce skill, as measured by nonproduction

of very large positive and negative

labor share, raises a variety of questions

regarding the nature of the bias in technical change.
The last and most important issue we address is the comection
technology

adoption and changes in the employment

evaluate the contribution

concentration

technologies

suggested by the existing theoretical

to high and low frequency changes in the

The next section considers theoretical

The intent here is to characterize

literature.

addition, in this section we characterize

dynamics.

structures, R&D, and the

of the long run changes in economic downturns.

frame the empirical analysis that follows.

characterization

We

labor share. Of particular interest is whether these observable factors can account for the

The outline of the paper is as follows.

nonproduction

indicators of

structure at both high and low frequencies.

of observable factors such as changes in equipment,

adoption of advanced manufacturing
nonproduction

between plant-level

the relevant driving forces as

Section III briefly characterizes

the available evidence on the relationship

labor share measure and workforce

issues that help

the data we use. In
between the

skill. Sections IV, V and VI provide a detailed

of the high and low frequency plant-level production and nonproduction

Section VII reports the results from our examination

4

worker

of the connection between observable

indicators of technology

adoption and changes in the nonproduction

worker share. Section VIII

summarizes our main findings.
II. Theoretical

Considerations

A. Within Plant Chances in Workforce
In considering

the connection

Skill
between technical change and workforce skill, we focus on the

role of observable indicators of plant-level technology

adoption.

This focus is motivated by both recent

research and the popular perception that the demand for skilled workers has increased relative to that for
unskilled workers as manufacturing
perspective

plants have installed sophisticated

capital equipment.

motivates much of our analysis, we interpret the adoption/retooling

sense. Beyond considering

technology

decision in a very broad

adoption via the purchase and installation of sophisticated

equipment, we view technical change as encompassing

a broad range of changes in the production

organizational

structure of the plant. The broader interpretation

organizational

capital stressed by Hall (1991).

characterize the production

While this

Organizational

capital
and

is closely linked to the concept of
capital reflects the myriad of factors that

process of an individual plant including the amount and type of capital used,

the design and layout of the production process, and the organization

of the workforce

in teams of

managers, office workers, and production workers.
Given this broad definition for changes in “capital,” consider the implications

for changes in the

skill of the workforce at the plant. Treating skilled and unskilled labor as variable factors of production,
the optimal “skill mix” can be determined by short run cost minimization
state of technology

(where the latter is treated as a quasi-fixed

for given output and a given

factor for this purpose).5

producer i minimizes ~L;, + w:~, subject to yit = F(Zit,Q[,L~~. Production,
of three factors: the “capital” in which the adopted state of technology

That is,

~,, is an increasing finction

is embodied, Zi~)and two labor

inputs (skilled, L~~,and unskilled labor, L;,, --treated as variable factors of production).

F(”) is assumed to

~ This specification of short,run cost minimization is consistent with a fully specified dynamic profit
maximization model in which individual producers endogenously adopt new technologies. All we are doing here is
characterizing how the variable factors of production are determined for a given state of technology and output. In
a filly specified dynamic model determining Z (our index of the state of technology), incurring costs of adoption in
the current period would (perhaps with some probability) yield an updated Z in the subsequent period. The costs of
adoption may be proportional to current output so that times of adoption affect the scale of operations and in turn
the demand for skilled and unskilled labor. This is captured in the short run cost minimization since we are
controlling for the level of output. See the discussion below for alternative models of the dynamics of Z.
5

be strictly concave.b The producer takes wages of skilled workers, w:, and unskilled workers, WY,as
given.
Optimal skilled and unskilled labor inputs are determined

by the standard condition equating the

ratio of the marginal products to the ratio of the wages of skilled to unskilled labor, along with the
production

relationship

for given output and Z. For our purposes, it is useful to express the implied

optimal skill mix, Mi~,irr a form familiar in empirical analysis:
M,, = Li:/(Li; +L,;) = m(Z,t)w,’/w,”J,,)

(1)

While the skill mix is decreasing in the relative wages of skilled to unskilled workers, the sign and
magnitude of the Z-skill complementarily
adoption.

Short run nonhomotheticity

(m~ depends on the nature of the skill bias in technology

(mY) reflects changes in the skill mix induced by changes in the

scale of operations for given Z.
Given non-zero Z-skill complementarily,

a key question is, what determines the dynamics of Z.

A large recent literature is devoted to endogenizing

the technology

adoption decision,

One important

class of models are vintage capital models as in Solow (1960), Chari and Hopenhayn (1991), Cooper and
Haltiwanger
(1995).

( 1993), Cooley, Greenwood

and Yorukglu (1994), and Cooper, Haltiwanger

In these models, Z is characterized

embodied.
endogenous

as physical capital in which technological

A closely related but distinct class of models characterizes
innovation and imitation of technologies

and MacDonald,

progress is

the dynamics of Z via the

(e. g., Jovanovic and MacDonald,

1994; Andolfatto

1993). In all of these models, individual producers must incur costs (both direct and

indirect) to acquire and implement new technology.
idiosyncratic

and Power

In addition, individual producers are subject to

shocks (e. g., demand, cost, productivity

and possibly shocks in the success of adoption).

is the presence of adoption costs, along with idiosyncratic

It

shocks, that implies variation in technology

across producers.
A number of factors influence the frequency and timing of adoption at the plant level. First, as
noted in the introduction,

recent studies of plant-level

hypothesis that there are nonconvexities
(potentially

related) nonconvexities

investment dynamics provide support for the

in the adjustment

costs for capital.

In the presence of

in the costs of adopting new technologies,

plant level will be lumpy (i.e., infrequent and large changes will be observed).

technology

Fixed costs of adoption

6 The underlying assumption is that there is some additional fixed factor other than Z.
6

adoption at the

imply that even with steady improvements
only infrequently
demonstrate

in the leading available technology,

update their technologies.

individual producers

In this spirit, Cooper, Haltiwanger

in a model in which plants periodically

and Power ( 1995)

lock-in at a particular state of technology

installing a specific vintage of capital, the probability

will

by

of retooling will be increasing in the time since the

prior retooling.7
An additional source of lumpy technology
available technology.

Major technological

adoption is erratic improvements

breakthroughs

The presence of fixed costs in an environment

in individual industries may be infrequent.g

with erratic improvements

implies that individual producers may forego minor improvements
have sufficiently

in the leading

in the leading edge technology

(or at least delay until improvements

accumulated).

A second key factor influencing the timing of adoption is the nature and persistence
demand and cost shocks that generate fluctuations

in profitability

of the

for a given state of technology.

One

reason these shocks are important is that the adoption costs may take the form of lost output or
productivity

due to the disruption

interpretation

in activity during retooling and reorganization.9

of these disruption costs is that the plant (or parts of the plant) may need to be shutdown

during retooling.

Alternatively,

as the substitution

in interpreting

of managerial

reorganization/retooling

the problem more broadly, these costs could be thought of

talent (or other resources) away from production

activity,

activities to

The presence of such disruption costs provides a potential rationale for

retooling (and associated skill mix changes) to be concentrated
opportunity

The most natural

in economic downturns since the

cost from the disruption in activity induced by the retooling process is low at such times.’0

Even in the presence of such disruption costs, there still maybe

incentives for procyclical

technology

7 This prediction is derived in a setting with an exogenous constant pace of technological progress in the leading
available technology. Even in this setting, the adoption cycle will not be deterministic given that plants are subject
to idiosyncratic and common shocks. See Proposition 2 in Cooper, Haltiwanger and Power (1995) for a formal
derivation of this prediction.
u See Andolfatto and MacDonald (1993) for a discussion of large, infrequent technological improvements. In
addition, they incorporate a related source of discrete adjustment by speci~ing that the probability of successfully
innovating is less than one. Thus, individual producers may attempt to innovate for several periods prior to
achieving success.
9 Formally, this can be modeled as a cost of adoption that is proportional to current output.
10 Arguments

along the5e l~es

we

developed in Hall (1991), Cooper ~d Haltiwanger (1993)> ~d CooPer~

Haltiwanger and Power (1995) in terms of characterizing the response of retooling/reorganization to exogenous
aggregate shocks. Andolfatto and MacDonald (1993) make a related argument in a model with endogenous
aggregate fluctuations.
7

adoption if aggregate shocks to profitability

are serially correlated.

In the presence of positively serial]Y

correlated aggregate shocks, a high current shock to profits will imply higher future profits.
yield procyclical

retoolhg

have a new technology

if the disruption

costs are sufficiently

This can

small since a producer would prefer to

available when other factors are generating high profits .11

In short, plant-level

skill mix changes will reflect changes in the state of technology,

wages, and changes in the scale of operations (nonhomotheticity).
may be lumpy in the presence of nonconvexities
leading available technology,

Changes in the state of technology

in adjustment costs or erratic improvements

The timing of lumpy technology

relative

in the

adjustment (and associated skill mix

changes) will be influenced by a number of factors including the rate of advance of the leading
technology,

the rate of depreciation

of the installed technology,

the nature of the costs of adoption and

the nature and persistence of shocks.
B. Within Plant vs. Between Plant Chances in the Skill Mix
The discussion thus far has emphasized
variety of possible forces.

changes in the skill mix within a plant driven by a

In the aggregate (total economy or industry level), observed changes in the

skill mix will reflect within plant changes as well as changes in the employment

shares across plants.

That is, using the notation from the previous section, changes in the aggregate skill mix can be
decomposed

W,

as follows:

=

~

(Li,.,/L,_,)Mi,

+

x

+
entering

~

(M,,_, -Mt_,)A(Li/L,)

(~,/~,)(~,,-~t-,)

plants

+

~

A(Li/L)M,,

continuers

continuers

cont8nuer6

x

eritlng

(2)
(~i,-,/~,-,)(~,,_,

-~,-,)

plantJ

where (consistent with the notation used above) M, represents the aggregate skill mix in period t (in
practice, we use the ratio of nonproduction

worker employment

which follow), L, represents aggregate total employment
defined accordingly.

and the corresponding

in the exercises

plant-specific

terms are

The first term represents the within plant component for continuing plants between

period t-1 and t, the second the between plant component
covariance component

to total employment

for continuing plants, the third term a

for continuing plants and the last two terms reflect the contribution

‘‘ See Proposition 5 in Cooper, Haltiwanger and Power ( 1995).
8

of entry and

exit, respectively. 12 Much of our discussion thus far has referred to the first component
decomposition:

of this

the within plant component of changes in the skill mix.

The between plant component
and idiosyncratic

arises from the job reallocation

cost, demand, or productivity

between plant job reallocation

shocks. The above decomposition

makes clear that

is only relevant for changes in the aggregate skill mix if the underlying

forces changing total plant-level

employment

are correlated with the skill mix at the plant. Thus, for

example, if the demand for products produced by technologies
disproportionately

across plants induced by sectoral

that are skill intensive increase

then this can lead to an increase in the aggregate skill mix even if there are no changes

in within plant skill intensities.
shifted U.S. production

This may have arisen from increased international

competition

that

away from low skill intensive products to high skill intensive products.

The process of technology

adoption itself is a factor linking between and within plant changes in

the skill mix, For example, if adoption is skill biased and adoption leads to an increase in employment,
then these combined effects will produce a positive covariance.
of technology will have indus~
plant skill mix changes.
technical change.

and general equilibrium

First, consider the implications

More generally, however, the adoption

effects that generate both between and within
for changes in relative wages induced by biased

Suppose for the moment that most industries exhibit skill biased technical change.

This skill biased technical change will increase the demand for skilled labor and potentially
relative wages for skilled workers.

increase the

For plants in industries without skill biased technical change or for

plants that have not adopted the latest technology,

the change in the relative wages will induce a decrease

in the skill mix. For plants that are adopting new technology that is skill biased, the relative wage
change will dampen their skill mix change.
Another relevant industryl equilibrium
technological

effect to consider is that with stable industry demand,

progress will yield a falling industry price. Depending on the elasticity of industry

demand, this may yield a decrease in indust~

employment.

In terms of the within industry dynamics,

IZ ~is decomP~sition is closelY related to, but distinctly different from, the decomposition used by Be~anJ
Bound and Griliches (1994) among others. Their decomposition involves no covariance term since they used
average (across time) employment shares in the within component and average skill intensities in the between
component. We have chosen to represent the decomposition in this alternative fashion for two reasons. First, our
decomposition easily incorporates the role of entering and exiting plants while the alternative does not. Second, we
think it is interesting to consider separately the contribution of the covariance component. Note that in our
decomposition, for the between and the net en~ terms, each component is deviated from the overall initial average
skill mix. ~us, the increase in the employment share of a plant contributes positively to the overall change only to
the extent that it has higher than the average initial skill mix.
9

-

the impact is analogous to the between plant effects discussed above (e.g., plants that have not adopted
will decrease their employment

share).

In short, there will be an endogenous

evolution of the cross sectional distribution

(or equivalently,

a cross sectional distribution

class of models.

The presence of idiosyncratic

have adopted the latest technology
distribution

of idiosyncratic

of vintages of “capital”) within the same indust~

in this

shocks and adoption costs imply that not all plants will

in any given period.

Further, common aggregate shocks as well as the

shocks affect the evolution of the cross sectional distribution. 13 The

evolution of the cross sectional distribution

of technologies

in the presence of biased technical change in

turn generates rich dynamics in the cross sectional distribution
component)

of technologies

and employment

of skill mix changes (the within plant

shares (the between plant component)

which we attempt to characterize

empirically.
C. Entrv and Exit
Another potentially

important contributing

role of entry and exit. The contribution

factor that appears in the above decomposition

of net entry may reflect a variety of alternative factors.

large class of relevant models (e.g., Campbell,

1995; Caballero and Hammour,

point towards entry as being the primary way in which new technology

1994; Lambson,

is the
First, a
1991)

is introduced into the economy.

This class of models is similar in spirit to the within plant technology adoption models discussed above.
In this type of model, new plants incur a fixed cost to adopt the latest technology
with outdated technologies

are induced to exit. If technology

and in turn old plants

is skill biased, then skill mix changes will

be observed via the entry and exit process,
A second factor influencing the contribution
changes in product demand will imply differential

of the net entry component of equation (2) is that
patterns of net entry across industries.

If product

demand changes are correlated with the skill intensities of the production processes (e.g., demand for
high skill products increases), then this will yield a systematic contribution
skill mix change.

In our empirical analysis, we characterize

to changes in the skill mix and attempt to distinguish
contribution

of net entry to the aggregate

the respective contributions

between the various interpretations

of entry and exit
of the

of entry and exit.

D. Other Frictions

‘3Andolfatto and MacDonald (1993) emphasize learning externalities that may act to induce bunching of
technology adoption as another factor influencing the evolution of the cross sectional distribution.
10

The models discussed thus far emphasize one type of friction, retooling costs associated with
introducing a new technology
the implications

or fixed costs of opening a new plant.

of technological

adoption for job dynamics, it is important to emphasize other frictions

that may be relevant for these changes.
variable factors of production.

Since we are interested in exploring

The above discussion treats both skilled and unskilled labor as

This assumption

seems reasonable given that our data are at an annual

frequency but even at an annual frequency some labor adjustment costs (e.g., search, hiring, firing) may
still be relevant. 14 This is especially important to the extent that these frictions differ by the skill type of
workers.

Since it is often presumed that adjustment

costs are higher for skilled workers, any high

frequency changes that we observe in the skill mix may reflect these differential
costs rather than the factors we have emphasized.
a form of nonhomotheticity

employment

In terms of our analysis, these adjustment

in the high frequency fluctuations

we attempt to distinguish between these alternative explanations

adjustment
costs act as

in the skill mix.15 In our empirical work,
of changes in the skill mix at high

frequencies.
JII. Data Description,

Measurement

Issues and An Empirical Road Map

The data used in this study come from the Longitudinal
compilation

of the plant-level

Manufactures

Research Database (LRD) which is a

data from the Census of Manufactures

(CM) and the Annual Survey of

(ASM) for the period 1972 to 1988. For each plant-year observation,

detailed information

on production

and cost variables such as employment,

the data contain

shipments, and capital

investment.
A. NonDroduction

Labor Share as a Measure of Skill

As we briefly discussed in the introduction,
workforce skill. The data allow us to disaggregate
workers and nonproduction
processing, assembling,
maintenance,
Nonproduction
professional,

workers.

a key issue in this paper is how we measure
employment

into two types of workers -- production

Production workers include workers “engaged in fabricating,

inspecting, receiving, storing, handling, packaging, warehousing,

repair, record keeping, janitorial,

shipping,

and guard services up through the line-supewisor

level. ”

employees are all other workers including “sales, sales delivery, clerical, management,
technical employees and construction

employees.”

(U.S. Census Bureau

(199 1), p. A- 1).

‘4 Although the.empirical work on labor adjustment costs suggests they are most relevant for monthly and
quarterly data (e.g., Hamerrnesh, 1993; and Caballero, Engel and Haltiwanger, 1995a).
‘5 A closely related form of nonhomotheticity could arise if there is overhead labor that consists mainly of
nonproduction workers.
11

Given these worker classifications,
the ratio of nonproduction
nonproduction

we construct two different plant-level

workers to total employment.

workers to total payroll.

The second, is the ratio of wages paid to

This latter measure is of interest for a number of reasons.

the changes in the demand for more skilled labor maybe
among nonproduction

reflected in changes among production

workers rather than in shifis between production

Examining the nonproduction

workers to total employment
changes.

specific fictional

and nonproduction

worker wage share provides some perspective

shift in demand towards skilled workers will be understated

employment

measures of skill. The first is

workers.

on this problem.

Second, a

in examining the ratio of nonproduction

Third, the cost share emerges as the relevant dependent variable when considering

forms (e. g., translog) of the cost function.

Since we exploit such specifications

the skill mix changes from this perspective

One obvious question is whether these two alternative measures (employment
based) of the nonproduction

in the

as well.

and cost share

labor share are reasonable measures of skill. One piece of evidence that

suggests the production/nonproduction

worker distinction

is closely linked to skills is the wages paid to

To the extent that the labor market in U.S. manufacturing

can be viewed as competitive,

then workers with a higher marginal product (more skill) should receive higher wages.
Haltiwanger

and

given that the implied increase in the skill premium will dampen the

analysis in section VII it is usefil to characterize

these workers.

First,

Davis and

(1991), using data from the LRD from 1963 to 1986, show that the average wage of

nonproduction

workers is $12.86 per hour, while the average wage of production workers is $8.56 per

hour. Davis and Haltiwanger

also show that the difference between nonproduction

worker and

production worker wages rises by 29 percent between 1975 and 1986. These numbers suggest that, at
least based on wages, nonproduction
return to being a nonproduction

workers are more skilled than production workers, and also the

worker has increased over this period (which may reflect either an

increased skill premium or increases in the relative skills of nonproduction
A

alternative,

commonly used, measure of skill is education.

relatively more nonproduction
Worker-Establishment

workers).’b

To see whether plants with

worker labor also employ more educated workers, we use data from the

Characteristics

Database to examine the educational

distribution

of workers

16One factor that maY be fipofl~t in considering these wage differences is if workers use different means to
acquire human capital. For example, if nonproduction workers acquire most of their human capital by attending
school, while production workers purchase training from their firm through lower wages, then these wage
differentials may simply reflect the difference in how workers pay for human capital. However, evidence from the
training literature suggests that this is not the case. First, white collar workers are more likely to receive training
than blue collar workers (Amirault, 1995; Altonji and Spletzer, 1991). Second, even among production workers, it
is the most educated production workers who are the most likely to receive training (Lynch and Black, 1995).
12

within plants, The WECD is a cross-sectional

employee-employer

Census Bureau (see Troske (1995) for details).
in plants in the lowest nonproduction

matched database created at the U.S.

Using these data we find that only 7.4 percent of workers

share quartile have Bachelors degrees while 21.1 percent of

workers in plants in the highest nonproduction

share quartile have Bachelors degrees.

In addition,

Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994) using data from the 1987 CPS show that only 17 percent of blue
collar workers have more than a high school degree, compared with 35 percent of clerical workers, 70
percent of sales workers and 78 percent of managers and professionals.

Finally, Davis and Haltiwanger

(1991), using data from the CPS from 1973 to 1987 show that, in U.S. manufacturing,

the percent of

hours worked by individuals with less than a high school diploma falls from 33 percent to 20 percent,
while the percentage of hours worked by individuals with a college degree rises from 11 percent to 18
percent.
Another means of evaluating the link to skill upgrading is to consider the occupational
within these groups.

changes

Using CPS data for the 1970s and 1980s, Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994)

show that, both in levels and changes, the white collar share of total manufacturing
CPS is very similar to the nonproduction

employment

labor share generated from the ASM. The discrepancy

the white collar share and the nonproduction

in the
betieen

worker share is never greater than two percentage points

over the 1970s and 1980s. It is striking that asking establishments

to classi~

workers and asking

workers to classify themselves yields such similar results. 17 Given the tight link between the
production/nonproduction

and blue collar/white

show that within the white collar occupations
professional

collar distinctions,

Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994)

there was an increase in the percentage of managers,

and technical workers, and a decrease in the percent of clerical workers.

that within the blue collar occupations

there was an increase in the percentage of craft workers and a

decrease in the percentage of operatives,
blue collar workers that accompanied
skill upgrading on an occupational

They also show

laborers and service workers.

Thus, the shifis among white and

the overall shift towards white collar workers are consistent with

basis. ‘g

IT These results also somewhat alleviate concerns that it has become increasingly difficult for establis~ents
classify workers into production and nonproduction categories.

to

lE Davis ~d Haltiwanger (1991), also using CpS data, document that much of the secular decrease in blue collar
workers in the 1980s is accounted for by a shap decrease in operatives and laborers concentrated in the 1979 to
1982 period. This latter finding is significant given that much of the overall secular increase in the nonproduction
labor share depicted in Figure 1 is concentrated in the 1979 to 1982 period.
13

B. Data Sets
Our study uses three main subsets of the LRD. The first subset is the linked ASM which is an
unbalanced sample of manufacturing
Davis and Haltiwanger

(1 992) and Davis, Haltiwanger

is that it is a representative
The disadvantage

plants for the years 1972 to 1988. This is the same data set used in
and Schuh ( 1996). The advantage of this data set

sample of plants in U.S. manufacturing

including entering and exiting plants.

of this. data set is that the ASM is a five year rotating panel which makes longitudinal

analysis across ASM panels difficult.

Accordingly,

the second data set we use is a subset of the linked

ASM data and includes plants that appear in the ASM in all years. We refer to this data set as the
balanced panel. This data set has 11,239 plants and covers approximately
manufacturing

employment

in terms of employment
1988 period.

38 percent of average annual

over the period 1972 to 1988. Figure 2 shows the nonproduction

and payroll for total manufacturing

labor share

and the balanced panel over the 1972 to

In both graphs, the basic trend in the balanced panel is virtually identical to total

manufacturing.

The third data set is based on the 1972, 1977, 1982 and 1987 CM’S. It is a linked data

set of the universe of plants which appear in each census year. T’his data set is similar to that used in
Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989) and is used hereto
detailed explanations

measure entry and exit. Appendix A provides

and formulas for all variables used in the study.

In addition to the above data sets, we also utilize supplementary
development
employment.

expenditures

data on research and

(R&D), technology adoption, and central administrative

The R&D data come from the National Science Foundation’s

is a firm-level sumey of all major R&D performers

office (CAO)

Annual R&D Survey which

in the U.S. Using these data, we construct measures

of the change in the R&D stock of the firm and match this firm-level information to the plant-level
The information

on technology

use comes from the 1988 Survey of Manufacturing

survey contains data on the use of 17 manufacturing
computer-automated

design and flexible manufacturing

generate proxies for plant-level technology
composition,

technologies

on the employment

This

including robots, local area networks,

cells. Both of these data sources are used to

adoption that, combined with our data on workforce

output, and capital, are used to model capital-skill

contain information

Technology.

data.

of nonproduction

complementarily.

labor in nonmanufacturing

facilities that

support the manufacturing

establishments

development

and other nonmanufacturing

facilities.

labor share in manufacturing

plants are related to changes in the share of firm

laboratories,

changes in nonproduction
employment

of the firm. These include headquarters,

Finally, the CAO data

in CAOS.

14

research and

We use these data to examine whether

C. An Empirical Road Map
Our empirical analysis of the connection

between plant-level technological

adoption and

employment

dynamics proceeds in two stages. First (in sections IV-VI), we undertake a comprehensive

examination

of the time series evolution of the plant-level

worker types. Second

of employment

changes across

(in section VII), we investigate the connection between observable

plant-level changes in technology
is twofold.

distribution

and the nonproduction

First, the aggregate (industry-level)

changes in employment
dynamics.

of

for the first stage

across worker types may provide

a misleading

characterization

composition

at an individual plant is itself an index of a change in the state of technology

As such, we can potentially

of the plant-level

labor share. Our motivation

dimensions

Second, a change in the workforce

learn much about the dynamics of technology

at the plant.

adoption by focusing on the

within and between plant dynamics of workforce restructuring.
IV, Decomposition

of Nonproduction

Labor

Share Changes

In this section, we present basic decompositions
focusing on the relative contributions

labor share. The top half of Table 1 presents the results from

given in equation (2) for the 1972-87 long difference change in nonproduction

share using the Census of Manufactures
The largest component
in the nonproduction
maintained

in these two years as well as the intervening

labor

intercensal

changes.

is the within plant component which accounts for 43 percent of the total change
labor share from 1972 to 1987. The dominance of the within plant component

for each of the intercensal changes, although the between plant component

somewhat more important in the 1977 to 1982 period (accounting
contribution

labor share

of within plant changes, between plant changes, and net entry, to

the aggregate change in the nonproduction
the decomposition

of the changes in the nonproduction

becomes

for more than 25 percent). The

of the covariance is small and sometimes negative (less than 10 percent on average).

will become clear, underlying this relatively small covariance term is tremendous
nature of the covariation

between changes in nonproduction

heterogeneity

As
in the

labor share and changes in employment

shares. The net entry component exhibits a somewhat different pattern in the long difference
than in the five year changes.

is

(1972-87)

In the long difference, the impact of net entry is positive and substantial.

In contrast, in the five year changes, the contribution
entry is actually negative in the 1972-1977 period.

of net entry is much smaller and the impact of net
We provide a more detailed discussion of the role of

entry and exit below.
The lower half of Table 1 reports summary statistics for the decomposition
the nonproduction

of annual changes in

labor share over the period 1972-88 using the entire ASM sample and our balanced

15

panel of continuing plants. ‘9 The results for both the ASM sample and the balanced panel echo those
from the intercensal analysis.

Both the within and the between components

positively to the overall annual average change in the nonproduction
component dominating.

labor share with the within plant

The dominance of the within plant component

analysis using the entire ASM sample.
Turning back to the contribution

contribute on average

is especially dramatic for the

The covariance term is negative and relatively small.
of entry and exit, at an annual frequency, the net entry effect is

positive but very small. On average, entering plants tend to have a slightly lower nonproduction
share than the initial nonproduction

labor share for all plants in the year prior to entry (the average

difference is -0.0038) and exiting plants have a substantially
average nonproduction

lower nonproduction

contributes positively to the overall change.

labor share than exiting plants, net entry

and exiting plants only about 2.1 percent of employment

In the long difference,

at an annual frequency.

These

of net entry at an annual frequency is small.

however, entry and exit play a substantial role. To examine this issue in

more depth, Table 2 reports the employment

share and nonproduction

exiting plants for the three intercensal periods and the long difference.
in the three intercensal periods, the employment

labor share for entering and
Three main points emerge.

First,

shares of entering and exiting plants average about 12

However, in the long difference, these shares rise to above 30 percent.

nonproduction

is -

However, entering plants only constitute about 1.4 percent

small shares imply that the overall contribution

percent,

labor share than the

labor share of all plants in the year prior to exit (the average difference

0.0 119). Since entering plants have a higher nonproduction

of employment

labor

Second, comparing

the

labor share across entering and exiting plants, entering plants generally have a higher

‘gA recent study by Bernard and Jensen (forthcoming) has also analyzed plant-level changes in the
nonproduction labor share using a balanced panel of plants with somewhat different conclusions so it is worthwhile
to discuss the sources of the differences. Their methodology and data for calculating what they denote as between
and within effects are quite different from ours which makes comparisons difficult. To overcome these difficulties
of comparability, we have examined the Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994) (BBG for the remainder of this
footnote) type of decomposition for our balanced panel since the methodology used by Bernard and Jensen is closer
in spirit to the BBG type of decomposition (although not the same given their treatment of ASM sampling weights
and measurement of employment and wage shares). Using our balanced panel, the magnitudes and the time series
variation in the between and within effects are very similar across the two decomposition (whether one uses an
employment-based or cost-based measure). We have, however, noted some important sensitivity to the subperiods
over which one examines the decomposition. Bernard and Jensen focus on two subperiods: 1973-79 and 1979-87.
They argue that the between plant effect is particularly important for the latter period when one uses a cost-based
measure. We fmd a similar result for this subperiod and for the cost-based measure as well, although unlike their
results, we always find that the within plant component dominates. Over the entire 1972-88 period, we find that the
annual average contribution of the between plant component to the overall change is about 1/3 using the cost-based
measure and the BBG type of decomposition. For the 1979-87 period, the contribution of the between plant
component is about 40 percent using the cost-share measure and the latter decomposition.
16

nonproduction

labor share than exiting plants.

In the long difference, the nonproduction

labor share of

entering plants exceeds that of exiting plants by .0577. This fact combined with the fact that entrants
accumulate a substantial share over the 15 year period explains why the net entry component

is relatively

large in the long difference.
Third, as is true in the annual data, entering and exiting plants have a lower nonproduction
share than continuing plants.

labor

In the case of entering plants, this may be a bit surprising since, as

discussed in section 11.C, it is often conjectured
therefore should use more skilled workforces.

that entering plants will have the latest technologies

and

This hypothesis neglects the fact that entrants are much

smaller than continuing operations and small plants generally have a lower nonproduction

labor share

than large plants.

In results not reported here, we compared similarly sized entering plants to continuing

plants, controlling

both for industry and location. 20 In the case of large plants (more than 1000

employees),
particularly

large entrants had a higher nonproduction
evident in 1982 where the nonproduction

nonproduction

labor share of large entering plants exceeded the

labor share than smaller incumbents.

How do these findings relate to plant-level

technology adoption and workforce

discussed in section II, if the aggregate nonproduction

skill? As we

labor share change is being driven by

upgrading of plants either through the entry-exit process or through the

retooling/reorganization
component

This was

labor share of large continuing plants by .0456. However, smaller entrants still had a

lower nonproduction

technological

labor share than large incumbents.

of existing plants, then either the within plant component

should contribute heavily to the observed rise in the nonproduction

and/or the net entry

labor share. Over the

long run, the within and the net entry components jointly account for 80 percent of the nonproduction
labor share change.

However, it is important to look more closely at the net entry component.

difference in the nonproduction
concentrated
nonproduction

If the

labor share between entrants and exiters arises because entry is

in high nonproduction

labor share industries while exit is concentrated

in low

labor share industries, then changes in product demand (that induce entry and exit in this

particular fashion) could generate the net-entry effect.

To explore this possibility, we decomposed

change in skill due to entry-exit over the 1972 to 1987 period into a within industry component,

the

a

10We estfiate a sfiple descriptive regression of the nonproduction labor share with controls for four-digit
industry, state, whether the plant is in an SMSA, and size interacted with a dummy variable indicating whether a
plant is a recent entrant. The results of these regressions are available upon request.
17

between indust~

component

and a covariance term. 21 We find that the within industry component

accounts for 55 percent of the change while the between component accounts for 35 percent of the
change (the remainder is the covariance component).
plant component,

Given this result and the generally large within

it is tempting to conclude that the observed change in the aggregate nonproduction

labor share reflects skill-biased

technological

adoption.

However, as will become apparent in the

succeeding sections, while this conclusion may be appropriate,
complicated

once one considers the timing and heterogeneity

the story is considerably
in the nonproduction

more

labor share changes

across plants,
V. Cyclical Dynamics of Nonproduction

Labor Share Changes

A. Between vs. Within Decom~osition
We now turn our attention to investigating
changes.

We begin by investigating

components

the cyclical patterns of the nonproduction

the respective contributions

decomposition
component

of the between and within plant

to the aggregate cyclical changes in the nonproduction

3 depicts the annual aggregate changes and the components
for the balanced panel.”

is clearly evident.

nonproduction

labor share change exhibits sharp increases in

labor share at the begiming

countercyclicality

primarily a within plant phenomenon.

of the annual changes from the

The sharp increases in economic downturns are only partially

offset by mild decreases in the nonproduction
and 1984). Third, the pronounced

labor share. The top panel of Figure

Four results stand out. First, the dominance of the within plant

Second, the nonproduction

economic downturns in manufacturing.

of the nonproduction

Fourth, the most pronounced

labor share are concentrated

stages of recovery (e.g., 1976
labor share change is

positive increases in the

in the 1979 to 1982 period.

The lower panel of Figure 3 depicts the equivalent decomposition
nonproduction

labor share

but uses the ratio of

worker wages to total wages as the measure of the nonproduction

labor share. The results

for the cost-share measure are very similar to the employment-share

measure.

share based variable is somewhat higher than the employment-share

based measure but the time series

patterns are virtually identical.

21 sPeci~ca]]Y,

we

decOmPO~ed

Again, the within plant component

the difference in &e

The volatility of the cost-

of the nonproduction

labor share

nonproduction labor share between enter~g and exiting

plants in the long difference (1972 to 1987) into the within industry, between industry, and covariance components,
The unit of analysis for this exercise is a four-digit industry unlike the decomposition given in (2) where the unit of
analysis is the plant, Thus, for example, the within component is the difference in nonproduction labor share
between entrants and exiters at the industry level weighted by the initial exiters’ share.
“ Obviously, when we consider the balanced panel we miss the role of entry and exit. However, given the small
role that net entry plays in accounting for annual changes, this is not too great of a problem.
18

changes dominate the overall changes,

The pronounced

countercyclicality

and the key role that the

1979-82 period play remain evident.
One obvious explanation

for the countercyclicality

the well known result that production worker employment

of the nonproduction

labor share change is

is more cyclically sensitive than

nonproduction

worker employment,

As discussed in section 11.D, higher labor adjustment

nonproduction

workers are likely to be relevant in this context even though we are using annual data.

While this may be part of the explanation,
countercyclicality.

it is far from the complete explanation

This is already evident from the asymmetry

share over the cycle. To investigate the importance

costs for

of the

in the changes in the nonproduction

of transitory changes in the nonproduction

share more directly, we compute persistence rates for the annual within plant nonproduction
changes for one, two and three year horizons.

The persistence

labor

labor
labor share

rate for an individual plant over a one year

horizon represents the fraction of the change from year t- 1 tot that remains in year t+l .23 The two and
three year persistent measures are defined accordingly

although we require the two year (three year)

measure to be less than or equal to the one (two) year measure,
The average (across plants) annual one, ~o
based nonproduction
the plant-level

and three year persistence rates for the employment

labor share changes are depicted in the top panel of Figure 4. About 60 percent of

changes persist for one year, about 45 percent persist for 2 years and about 40 percent

persist for 3 years. Further, the persistence rates are relatively stable over time and do not exhibit any
systematic cyclical pattern, These high and relatively stable plant-level persistence

rates imply that a

large fraction of the overall within plant changes reflects relatively permanent changes in the
nonproduction

labor share at the plant. The lower panel of Figure 4 depicts the one, two and three year

persistent components

of the employment-weighted,

within plant, nonproduction

labor share changes.24

The important result that emerges is that the persistent component of the within plant changes exhibits
pronounced

countercyclicality.

This result indicates that the countercyclicality

of the within plant

changes does not simply reflect the within plant shedding of production workers in recessions and then
the same plant hiring production workers back in the recovery.

2’ The precise formulas for these persistence measures are presented in Appendix A.
24 These are generated by calculating the persistence rate at the plant level for each year and then multiplying the
persistence rate by the within plant change. The plant-level persistent components are then aggregated using the
relevant employment shares. Thus, these measures reflect the persistent components of the fust term in the
decomposition in (2).
19

Even though the persistent component

of the within plant changes are concentrated

the degree to which this is true varies across business cycle episodes.

in downturns,

In the lower panel of Figure 4, the

fraction of the large positive spikes in the within plant changes that persists is greater in the early 1980s
than in the mid 1970s recession.

This is consistent with the intercensal analysis which indicates that

most of the long run changes over the 1970s and 1980s is concentrated
B. Job Creation and Destruction.

in the 1977-82 period.

by Worker TvDe

In this section, we examine job creation and job destruction by worker type. By job creation for
a specific worker type, we mean the aggregate employment
expanding employment
employment

gains for the worker type by plants that are

of that worker type. Similarly, by job destruction,

losses for the worker type by plants that are contracting

we mean the aggregate

the employment

of that worker

type. We convert these measures to rates by dividing the relevant flow by the average aggregate
employment

for that worker type for the prior and current period .25 While the between plant job flows

based on total plant-level employment
been comparably

have been studied extensively

little analysis of the job flows by worker type. For current purposes, the latter flows

underlie not only the between plant total employment
nonproduction

in the recent literature, there has

flows but also the within plant changes in the

labor share.

Table 3 presents the job creation and destruction rates by worker type at annual and five year
frequencies.

The rates for the annual flows are reported for the entire ASM sample (for all years) and for

the balanced panel of plants. 26 The rates for the five year changes are based on the Census of
Manufactures.
tabulations

and other summary statistics are reported for the annual

in Table 4, Somewhat surprisingly,

nonproduction
workers.

Some key correlations

the rates of job creation and destruction

workers are roughly on the same order of magnitude as the equivalent rates for production

This finding holds at both annual and five year frequencies.

are very similar, the magnitudes

While the magnitudes

of the rates

of the time series volatility are quite different across worker types. At

an annual frequency, the time series standard deviations for both creation and destruction
substantially

for

higher for production than nonproduction

workers.

are

For both worker types, job creation is

25 Precise formulas for our measures of job creation and destruction are presented in Appendix A. Using the
average of employment in the current and prior period is consistent with the methodology used by Davis,
Haltiwanger and Schuh (1996). See the latter for motivation and further discussion.
‘b Unlike other measures reported here (e.g., those in Table 1) using the entire ASM sample, we are able to
report job flows for all years. For this purpose, we exploit the methodology developed by Davis, Haltiwanger and
Schuh (1996) to construct job flows for the fust years of each ASM panel.
20

procyclical, job destruction

is countercyclical,

creation, and the job reallocation

the variance of job destruction is about twice that of

(for the specific worker type) is countercyclical.

cyclical properties ofjob creation and destruction
nonproduction

worker employment.

for total employment

Thus, the well known

hold for both production

In addition, the average persistence rates (constructed

analogous manner to the persistence rates for the nonproduction

and

in an

labor share changes -- see Appendix A)

reported in Table 4 indicate that the job creation and destruction patterns largely reflect permanent
changes.

The persistent job flow dynamics underlie the persistent nonproduction

labor share changes

depicted in Figure 4.27
Within vs. Between Plant Job Reallocation
Decomposing
reallocation

job flows by worker type permits evaluating the contribution

to nonproduction

labor share changes. 28 That is, the extent to which nonproduction

share changes are undertaken via the simultaneous
decrease in employment

of within plant job

increase in employment

labor

of one worker type and the

of the other worker type within the same plant. Within plant job reallocation

can be measured directly at the individual plant level by summing the job creation and destruction
both worker types and then subtracting the absolute value of the net change in total employment
plant. Along with a measure of between plant job reallocation
total plant-level

employment),

total job reallocation

of
at the

(the sum of creation and destruction

using

is simply the sum of between and within plant job

reallocation.29
Table 5 presents estimates of between plant, within plant, and total job reallocation.

Results are

reported at the annual frequency for the entire ASM sample, our balanced panel and average intercensal

27Though we do not present the detailed analysis herein, we also examined the time series patterns of the
persistence rates for job creation and job destruction for both production and nonproduction workers. Our basic
finding is that the persistence rates are not strongly correlated with the cycle but are especially high in the 1980s.
Accordingly, the high persistence rates in the 1980s underlie the especially high persistent component of the
nonproduction labor share changes in the early 1980s.
2EIt is fipo~t
to avoid confis~g the between/within nonproduction labor share decomposition components
with between and within plant job reallocation. A plant can exhibit large within plant changes in the nonproduction
labor share with no within plant job reallocation. Similarly, a plant can contribute significantly to between plant
reallocation via a large change in total employment while making no contribution to the overall change in the
nonproduction labor share (e.g., if the plant has the average nonproduction labor share and makes no change in the
nonproduction labor share).
29 Between plant job reallocation is the job reallocation measure used in Davis and Haltiwanger (1992). For the
purposes of constructing measures of between, within and total reallocation, creation and destruction for all worker
types and total employment are measured as a fraction of total employment (again, using the average of the current
and prior period). See Appendix A for precise definition of these measures.
21

rates from the Census of Manufactures.

Annual between plant reallocation

employment,

within plant job reallocation

Surprisingly,

the relatively modest role for within plant job reallocation

is 2.7 percent, and thus total job reallocation

Plant-level changes that involve increasing the employment
employment

for 1972-88 is 19.2 percent of
is 21.9 percent.30

also holds for five year changes.

of one worker type and decreasing the

of the other worker type are relatively unimportant

in accounting for total job reallocation.

One issue that Table 5 does not directly address is the importance of within plant job reallocation
to changes in the nonproduction

labor share. Plants can change their worker mix by either swapping one

type of worker for another or by changing the scale of operations and simultaneously
decreasing production
nonproduction

and nonproduction

workers at differential

labor share into these two components

percent due to swapping, 3] This decomposition

worker type for another (swapping)

rates. We decomposed

weighted basis, about 30

labor share is accounted for by replacement

and 70 percent is accounted for by scale effects.

suggest, to the extent that the nonproduction

labor share changes reflect technology

typically does not simply involve the simultaneous

the change in

-- the percent due to changes in scale and the

shows, that on an employment

percent of the within plant change in nonproduction

increasing or

of one

These results
adoption, this

shedding of one type of worker and hiring of the

other type of worker but rather is more likely accompanied

by a change in the size of the establishment.32

C. The Connection Between Long Run Structural Change and Cvcl ical Dvnamics
In characterizing

plant-level

changes in the nonproduction

labor share thus far, we have explored

both long run changes and high frequency changes but we have not linked the two together.
section, we consider some simple empirical exercises to characterize

the connection

In this

between the long

run structural changes and the cyclical dynamics.

30 While we do not report the details of the results, we have also examined the cyclical behavior of within plant
job reallocation. Unlike the strongly countercyclical between plant job reallocation, the annual within plant
reallocation is essentially acyclical. The acyclical nature of within plant job reallocation implies that it plays little
role in the cyclical volatility of nonproduction labor share changes.
3’Of course, plants maybe changing scale and swapping workers simultaneously (e.g., increasing one type of
worker, decreasing the other type and changing scale simultaneously). Our calculations on the contribution of
swapping and scale changes are thus based upon the following decomposition. For plants with employment
changes of both worker types in the same direction, the swapping component is equal to zero. For plants with
employment changes of each worker type in opposite directions, the swapping component is equal to the fraction of
the within plant change due to pure swapping effects. The latter is calculated at the plant level from the minimum
absolute value of the two employment changes.
of within plant swapping of one worker type for another also implies that the within
plant changes in the nonproduction worker share that we observe are not associated with simple relabeling of
worker titles within the plant.
3Z The

small con~ibution

22

We begin our analysis by examining the heterogeneity

in the long run structural changes across

plants. For this purpose, plants are divided into four quadrants based upon their long run changes (from
1972 to 1988) in nonproduction
employment

labor share and long run changes in their share of manufacturing

(e. g., quadrant I includes plants that increased their nonproduction

share of total manufacturing

employment).

the balanced panel of continuing plants.
quadrant.

For all of the exercises considered in this section we use only
Table 6 presents summary statistics of the long run changes by

The last row of the table characterizes

total change based upon a modification

the relative contribution

of the decomposition

Plants that increased both nonproduction

labor share and employment

(almost 85 percent).

This result reflects

labor share. Plants that increased nonproduction

labor share but

share (quadrant II) accounted for another 52 percent of the aggregate change.

Even though quadrant II plants exhibit almost the same nonproduction
plants, quadrant II plants contribute
nonproduction

share (quadrant I)

labor share and the interaction of the large change in employment

share with a high initial nonproduction
decreased employment

of each of the quadrants to the

given in equation (2).33

accounted for almost all of the aggregate change by themselves
the large change in nonproduction

labor share and their

less to the total because of the negative covariance (rising

labor share but falling employment

than the total increase as their contribution

share).

Quadrants I and II together account for more

is offset by plants that decreased their nonproduction

share (quadrants III and IV). Quadrant IV’s negative contribution
large increase in employment

labor share increase as quadrant I

is muted somewhat since it exhibited a

share along with a relatively high initial nonproduction

labor share. The

sharply different patterns across quadrants along with the nontrivial fraction of employment
the quadrants highlights the tremendous
the covariation between nonproduction

heterogeneity

in the nonproduction

share changes helps account for the low contribution

in each of

labor share changes and in

labor share changes and changes in employment

finding of large scale changes (measured in terms of employment)

labor

share. The

that accompany nonproduction

of within plant job reallocation

labor

to total reallocation

reported in the previous subsection.
A primary motive for examining the behavior by quadrants is to understand the connection
between the long run changes exhibited by an individual plant and the cyclical patterns of the
nonproduction

33 we

~e-fom

labor share changes for the plant. Figure 5 depicts the annual nonproduction

the decomposition

~

labor share

equation (2) in which the unit of analysis is the aggregated data by quadrant.

The contribution of each quadrant to the total is given by the sum of the components of each of the three terms
(between, within and covariance) for each quadrant. Given that we are using the balanced panel for this exercise,
the contribution of net entry is zero.
23

changes and employment

share changes for plants in each of the quadrants.

figure is that quadrant I plants have positive nonproduction
positive employment

labor share changes in 15 of the 16 years and

share increases in all years. Even with this remarkable upward consistency,

quadrant I plants exhibit a pronounced
While there are some rough similarities
across quadrants, the experience
across quadrants.

A striking feature of this

countercyclicality

labor share changes.

in the cyclical patterns of the nonproduction

labor share changes

in the early 1980s recession and subsequent recovery is very different

Quadrants I and II concentrated

labor share in the early 1980s recession.
decrease in the nonproduction

in their nonproduction

much of their long run increase in the nonproduction

In contrast, quadrants III and IV concentrated

labor share in the post-1982 period.

plants accounting for the upward vs. the downward movements

much of their

Since there are distinct groups of

and the different groups exhibit different

cyclical patterns, these results reinforce the conclusion that the observed countercyclicality
changes in the nonproduction

of the

labor share are not driven simply by plants shedding production

recessions and then the same plants rehiring production

workers in

workers in booms.

The different cyclical patterns across quadrants prompt us to look even deeper at the nature of
the nonproduction

labor share job dynamics across quadrants.

destruction rates by worker types across quadrants.
in Table 7. The magnitudes

Summary statistics for these job flows are reported

and cyclical dynamics of the job flows vary dramatically

In quadrant I, on average, job creation for both production
exceeds job destruction.

Figure 6 depicts job creation and

and nonproduction

The substantial increase in the nonproduction

across quadrants.

workers substantially

labor share and employment

share in quadrant I is generated by very high rates of job creation for both types of workers with
especially high rates for nonproduction

workers.

The volatility of destruction

for creation for production workers in quadrant I and for nonproduction
relative volatility of creation.
the nonproduction

very high rates of job destruction
production workers.
concentrated
creation.

for ~

The job destruction

The substantial

decrease in the employment

increase in

share) is generated by

worker types with especially high job destruction

rates for

for both types of workers and especially production

in the early 1980s and overall there is much greater volatility of destruction

In quadrant III, the decrease in the nonproduction

employment

workers there is actually greater

In quadrant II, the picture is almost reversed.

labor share (and the accompanying

is about the same as that

labor share and accompanying

workers is

as compared to
decrease in

share is accounted for by high rates of job destruction for both worker types and enormous

24

rates of job destruction

for nonproduction

pronounced asymmetry

in the cyclical volatility of destruction relative to creation.

decrease in the nonproduction

workers in the 1980s.34 Quadrant III also exhibits a

labor share and the accompanying

In quadrant IV, the

increase in employment

share is

generated by high rates of job creation for both worker types and especially high job creation rates for
production workers.

The volatility of creation and destruction

Overall, then, two distinct patterns emerge.

are about the same in quadrant IV.

First, we see that the long run changes in the nonproduction

labor share are largely driven by individual plants increasing or decreasing both types of workers.
Second,

the overall cyclical asymmetry

destruction

in the volatility of job creation and destruction

is more volatile than creation) is mostly driven by long run downsizers.

(i.e., job

For long run

upsizing plants, the volatility of creation is about the same as the volatility of destruction.
D. Putting the Pieces Together
Decomposing

the aggregate changes in the nonproduction

labor share reveals that the cyclical

patterns are dominated by within plant changes in the nonproduction
results point towards an important component
level workforces being concentrated
nonproduction

labor share. Several aspects of the

of the latter reflecting permarient reorganizations

in downturns rather than the alternative hypothesis that the cyclical

labor share changes reflect a short run nonhomotheticity

of production worker employment.

of plant-

First, the changes are asymmetric

fraction of the increases in the nonproduction

over the cycle. Second, a large

labor share in downturns reflect persistent changes in the

within plant component of the aggregate change in the nonproduction
long run increase in the nonproduction

given greater cyclical flexibili~

labor share concentrated

labor share. Third, plants with a

their increase in the recession of the

early 1980s. In contrast, plants with a long run decrease in the nonproduction

labor share concentrated

their decrease afier 1982.
VI. The Concentration
A. The Distribution

and Timing of Plant-Level

of Plant-Level

Lumpy technology
technological

Changes in Nonproduction

Changes in the Nonuroduction

Labor Share

Labor Share

adoption models (like those discussed in section II) along with skill biased

adoption imply that plants will experience

large, abrupt changes in their nonproduction

labor share in periods when they retool and reorganize their production process.
hypothesis, the top panel of Figure 7 plots the distribution

To begin examining this

of annual plant-level changes in the

‘4 In evaluating these high rates, it must be emphasized that these rates are based on the balanced panel. Recall
from Table 3 that the balanced panel exhibits substantially lower rates of creation and destruction than the entire
ASM panel, Thus, the rates of job destruction of nonproduction workers for quadrant III in the 1980s are
astoundingly high.
25

nonproduction

labor share for all plants in the ASM from 1972-88 who have non-zero employment

adj scent years. 35 me distribution

is weighted by total employment

change so that each bar represents the fraction of employment
a given nonproduction

labor share change.

in

at the plant in the initial year of each

in the pooled plant-year observations

Summary statistics for the distribution

with

are reported in

appendix Table A. 1. There are three striking features of this figure. First, there is a very large spike at
zero.3d Plants with essentially no change in the nonproduction
about 23 percent of employment.

Second, while the distribution

the overall increase in the nonproduction
heterogeneity

in the distribution

labor share in a given year constitute
is slightly skewed to the right, reflecting

labor share over this time period, there is tremendous

of nonproduction

labor share changes.

The relatively small mean annual

change (0.0048) is generated by large annual positive gross changes (average equals 0.0231) in the
nonproduction

labor share by one group of plants and simultaneously

changes (average equals -0.0 183) in the nonproduction
distribution

large annual negative gross

labor share by another group of plants.

Third, the

exhibits fat tails (excess kurtosis is very high -- see Table A. 1) and the fat tails account for

most of the gross changes.

Plants with positive nonproduction

(evaluated at the average nonproduction

labor share changes in excess of 0.05

labor share this constitutes almost a 20 percent change) in a

given year account for more than 70 percent of the overall aggregate positive nonproduction
change, while plants with a negative nonproduction

labor share change of less than -0.05 account for

more than 70 percent of the overall negative nonproduction
The lower panel of Figure 7 depicts the distribution

labor share change.
of long differences

nonproduction

labor share for all plants with positive employment

Manufactures.

Not surprisingly,

no change in the nonproduction

labor share

in both the 1972 and 1987 Census of

a much smaller percent of employment
labor share (about 6 percent).

in the plant-level

is found in plants with little or

The most striking feature again is the

important role of both positive and negative changes in accounting for the overall change.
One possible explanation

for the changes in the nonproduction

labor shares, and in particular the

large negative tails observed in both panels in Figure 7, is that firms are shifting their nonproduction
employment

between their manufacturing

facilities and into central administrative

offices (CAOS). We

‘5 First ASM panel years, 1974, 1979 and 1984, are excluded from the tabulations used in constructing this
figure because of panel rotation. Note that the distribution for the balanced panel looks essentially the same as the
top panel, as does the distribution of annual nonproduction labor share changes measured by the share of
nonproduction worker wages divided by total wages.
36 me spike at zero is the fraction of employment with nonproduction labor share changes 1e55th~ 0.005 in
absolute value.
26

explore this possibility

by examining changes in nonproduction

facilities and CAOS of the same firms.”
changes in nonproduction

employment

in both the manufacturing

Overall, there is a negative, but quite weak, correlation

labor share in manufacturing

facilities and the change in employment

between
share of

CAOS (-.06). In addition, we examine whether firms with large negative changes (less than -.05) in
nonproduction
employment.

labor share in their manufacturing

facilities had large offsetting increases in CAO

If one factors in the change in CAO employment

labor share for firms experiencing

into the overall change in nonproduction

large declines in nonproduction

change is quite modest (the employment-weighted
CAO change and -0.09 with the CAO change).

labor share, the impact on the overall

average decline for such firms is -0.12 without the
Our conclusion

is that the large negative change in

nonproduction

labor share cannot be accounted for by firms simply shifiing nonproduction

manufacturing

facilities to CAOS.

B. The Timing of Large Plant-Level

Nonuroduction

labor from

Labor Share Changes

While the findings depicted in Figure 7 are consistent with lumpy adoption models, there area
number of alternative explanations
and lumpy technological
another explanation

for this lumpiness.

improvements

As discussed in section II, fixed costs of adoption

are two (not mutually exclusive) possible explanations.

is an extreme form of short run nonhomotheticity

associated with plants with large

changes in the scale of operations (induced by factors other than changes in technology).
help distinguish
nonproduction

among these hypotheses

Yet

One way to

is to examine the timing of large scale changes in the

labor share at the plant. As discussed in section II, one prediction of lumpy technology

adjustment models based upon a vintage capital specification
be increasing in the time since the last retooling.
examining whether the probability

is that the probability

We investigate this prediction in an indirect manner by

of having a large nonproduction

the time since the last large nonproduction

of retooling should

labor share change is increasing in

labor share change.

For this purpose, we divide plants into two groups in a manner similar to our quadrant analysis in
section V. Plants with long run increases in the nonproduction
with long run decreases in the nonproduction

labor share are in one group and plants

labor share are in the second group. The motivation

this grouping is that plants with positive long run changes in the nonproduction

for

labor share likely

37The analysis we undertake examines all multi-plant fins. Note, that the vast majority of manufacturing
establishments are single plant operations with no separate headquarters facilities, In addition, most multi-plant
operations also do not have separate headquarter facilities. Roughly, 90 percent of all manufacturing establishments
are owned by fms with no CAOS. However, those furns with CAOS are quite large and account for approximately
55 percent of total manufacturing employment over the 1977 to 1987 period.
27

adopted different types of technology

than plants with negative long run changes.

positive long run changes, we define a nonproduction

For plants with

labor share spike to be equal to one (zero

otherwise) in any year in which the change in the nonproduction
with negative long run changes, we define a nonproduction

labor share exceeds 0.05. For plants

labor share spike to be equal to one (zero

otherwise) in any year in which the change in the nonproduction

labor share is less than -0.05.39

We estimate variants of the following simple specification:
h,, =

Ui

+

apkit

~

+ ac*cYc,,

+

E,,

(3)

k

where hit = 1 (=0) if plant i has (does not have) a nonproduction
represents a possible plant-fixed
the prior nonproduction

labor share spike in period t, ~i

effect, Dtit represent “age” dummies reflecting the number of years since

labor share spike (e.g., D~il= 1 if the plant last had a nonproduction

spike k years ago, zero otherwise),
this purpose is a downstream

labor share

and CYCit represents a cyclical indicator. The indicator we use for

demand indicator specific to the four-digit industry to which the plant is

assigned (this measure is developed

in Bartelsman,

Caballero, and Lyons, 1994). The downstream

indicator is the change in an index of activity of other industries and service sectors which purchase
output from the industry in question.39
We consider two alternative
fixed effects.

specifications

of (3). First, we estimate (3) via OLS without any

We denote the results from this estimation as the Kaplan-Meir

absence of controlling
empirical hazard.
have systematically

for the cyclical indicator, the coefficients

Second, we attempt to control for unobsemed
high probabilities

estimates since, in the

on the age dummies reflect the simple
heterogeneity

that lead some plants to

of spikes while others have low probabilities

because failure to control for such systematic unobserved

heterogeneity

However, by taking first differences,

difference of the age dummies and the difference in the errors.

We do this

will bias the hazard downwards.

One method of addressing this problem is to estimate a first difference specification
eliminate fixed effects.

of spikes.

we induce a correlation

of(3) in order to
between the

To overcome this problem, we estimate

3SThese threshold values for spikes are arbitrary but from Figure 7 clearly represent very large changes relative
to the typical change. We have considered alternative thresholds (0,03 and O.10) and have obtained very similar
results for the hazards.
‘9The use of this downstream demand cyclical indicator is motivated by the arguments made by Shea (1993) that
downstream demand is arguably a good instrument for industry-level demand variation. Of course, as Shea argues,
the downstream demand indicator is a better exogenous instrument when the material share of the output horn the
upstream industry in the total costs of the downstream industry is relatively low.
28

the first difference specification

with instrumental

variables where we use twice (and greater) lagged

dependent variables and other twice (and greater) lagged plant-specific

variables as instruments.40

For this purpose, we exploit the balanced panel data from 1972-88.

In order to construct the age

dummies for several periods, we commence the estimation of(3) in 1978 and consider the variation
across 5 age groups,

Specifically,

the groups are plants that last had a large nonproduction

labor share

change in the prior year (age= 1), two years prior (age=2), three years prior (age= 3), four years prior
(age=4) and five or more years prior (age=5 -- the omitted group in the estimation).
positive long run nonproduction

For plants with

labor share changes, the average number of spikes is 1.75. The

equivalent mean for plants with long run negative nonproduction

labor share changes is 1.70.

The results from this estimation are reported in the panels of Table 8 and the hazards for plants
with long run positive nonproduction

labor share changes are depicted in Figure 8. In the latter, the line

labeled “boom” reflects the hazard that results by allowing the industry-specific

cyclical indicator to be

one standard deviation above its mean for each plant and then averaging across plants.

The line labeled

“recession” is the equivalent one standard negative deviation case. For the Kaplan-Meir

estimates, the

estimation yields not only the slope and cyclical sensitivity but also the appropriate
for the hazard.

For the first difference specification,

level (the intercept)

we obtain only the slope and cyclical sensitivity so

some caution needs to be used in comparing the results.
The results for both the positive and negative long run changes are qualitatively
focus our discussion on the positive long run changes,
hazard that rises initially but ultimately decreases.
hazards are upward sloping throughout.
that are qualitatively

For the Kaplan-Meir

similar so we

estimates, we observe a

Although the slope is not steep, the first difference

Thus, even this crude control for selection effects yield results

consistent with the prediction of an increasing hazard in a lumpy adjustment

Plants are more likely to experience a large positive spike in their nonproduction

model.

labor share the longer it

has been since the prior positive spike.
The results also indicate that positive spikes in the nonproduction

labor share are countercyclical.

This finding echoes the results reported in the previous sections regarding the pronounced
countercyclicality

of within plant nonproduction

labor share changes.

The additional result here is that

]agged dependent variables the instrument list includes mice lagged
capital growth (equipment and structures), output growth, indicators of changes in ownership and industry, and the
downstream industry demand indicator. The capital and output growth are interacted with two digit industry
dummies.
40 In addition

to the

mice

(and

greater)

29

this countercyclicality

is driven in part by the countercyclicality

of spikes in the nonproduction

labor

share.
The large spike at zero in the distribution
the distribution,

of nonproduction

labor share changes, the fat tails of

and the rising hazard, are all consistent with lumpy adjustment models.

countercyclicality

of the positive nonproduction

recessions may be good times to reorganize
low at suchtimes.41

Nevertheless,

raise a variety of questions.

labor share spikes is consistent with the idea that

and retool since the opportunity

these results on the distribution

labor share changes

The large positive and negative gross changes in the nonproduction

about the nature of bias in technical change.

labor

labor share raises questions

One obvious specific question is: What is occurring at

plants experiencing

large decreases in their nonproduction

the technology-skill

complementarily

If technology

cost of foregone output is

of nonproduction

share that are dominated by large (absolute) spikes in the nonproduction

technologies.

Further, the

labor share? One possible explanation

varies (in sign and magnitude)

that is primarily used in production

is that

across different types of

is complementary

with unskilled

workers then plants which adopt this type of technology will decrease their nonproduction

labor share.42

The challenge, then, is to find observable plant-level variables that can account for both the lefi and right
tails of the distribution

of nonproduction

labor share changes.

We turn to this challenge in the next

section.
VII. The Relationship
Nonproduction

BeWeen Obsenable

Measures of Technology

Adoption and the

Labor Share

We now turn to investigating

the connection between observable measures of technology

adoption and changes in the nonproduction
similar in spirit to Bartel and Lichtenberg

labor share at the plant level. Our empirical methodology
(1987) and Berman, Bound, and Griliches (1994).

assuming that firms minimize a cost function that contains both variable and quasi-fixed
case, we specify a translog cost function with two variable factors of production
workers) and a number of possible quasi-fixed

factors.

is

We start by

inputs. In our

(skilled and unskilled

Applying Shepherd’s Lemma and taking first

differences yields:

4’Although the results for plants with negative long run nonproduction labor share changes indicate that the
latter plants do not concenhate their changes in recessions. Based upon the magnitudes of the coefficients on the
cyclical indicator, the procyclicality of the latter group is less strong than the countercyclicality of the plants with
long run positive changes in the nonproduction labor share.
42 We explore this idea further in section VII when we look directly at the effect of different types of plant-level
technology adoption on the nonproduction labor share in the plant. See Dunne and Troske (1995) for further
evidence on this issue.
30

M,,

= a, + aoAln(w,’/w,”)

+ ~ ajAzU, + ayAln(Y,f) + Ei,
/

where in this case Mi[ is measured as the share of nonproduction
plant i in period t.43 The Zij~s include the quasi-fixed
possible nonhomothetic~.

workers wages in the total wage bill for

Real output, Yit, is included to capture

at captures a common time effect such as the common unobsemed

component of the bias in technological
change (including unobsemable

change and ~i, captures unobserved

ZO~s). For a particular quasi-fixed

represents the Z-skill complementarily.

based measure of the nonproduction

idiosyncratic

factor Z, the coefficient

on the Z

labor share and the change in the employment-share

labor share as the dependent variable.

emerge from the translog cost fictional,

While the latter does not

it is consistent with the general form of the nonproduction

in equation(1).

There are a number of issues that must be addressed before estimating the model.
determine the variables in Zijt. In all of our specifications,
equipment (beginning

biased technical

In what follows, we estimate (4) using both the change in the

cost-share based measure of the nonproduction

labor share characterized

factors.

(4)

Zijl includes plant-level

of period) and log of capital structures (begiming

First, we must

log of capital

of period).

In an attempt to

capture any change in organizational

structure, we also control for whether the plant changes ownership

or industry in the period in question.

In some specifications,

we include a firm-level measure of the log

of the stock of R&D as well as direct plant-level measures of the type of technology
from the 1988 Survey of Manufacturing

Technology.

adopted at the plant

In both of the latter cases, inclusion of such

variables restricts the sample andor the time period of the analysis in important ways (details below) and
thus these variables are not included in all specifications.”’”
A second issue is the treatment of relative wages.

There is likely little directly measurable

exogenous cross sectional variation in relative wages that we can exploit for this purpose.
is that wage changes for a given worker type are confounded

with unobserved

The problem

labor quality differences.

Extensive analysis of the plant-level wage variation (e.g., Davis and Haltiwanger,

199 1; Troske, 1994;

Doms, Dunne and Troske, 1995) indicates that much of the between and within plant wage variation by

43 This specification is formally derived in Brown and Christensen (1981) and Bartel and Lichtenberg (1987)
amongst others. Note also, that equation (4) closely resembles the relative factor demand equation (equation. (l))
derived in section II.
““ The details of the construction of these variables is discussed in Appendix A.
31

worker type reflects differences

in labor quality between and within plants.

Even though we cannot

directly measure changes in relative wages, to the extent that relative wages for skilled workers are
equalized across the economy, such economy wide variation in relative wages will be captured through
our time effects.
The region-time

We attempt to improve upon this by interacting the time effects with region dummies.
effects are included in all of the specifications

A third issue is endogenei~
measurement

discussed below.

bias for the various measures of the Zij~s. Abstracting

from

error for the moment, the error term in (4) reflects the current period idiosyncratic

biased technological

change.’s

so there are clear endogeneity

shock to

This shock is likely to be correlated with the current growth rate of output
problems here. Since the change in the log of capital in (4) represents the

change from the bezinning of the prior period to the beginning of the current period, at annual
frequencies

it is reasonable to argue that last period’s investment

technology

shock. However, in what follows, we consider not only one year differences

year and long differences

is not correlated with the current period

(1978 to 1988). In the latter cases, it is much more likely that the cumulative

changes in the capital stocks are correlated with the cumulative technology
A related issue is measurement
of the motivation
measurement

but also three

for considering

shocks.

error in the Zij~s. Following Griliches and Hausman ( 1986), part

three year and long differences

error (in addition, the longer differences

are interesting in their own right). However, as

just discussed, this in turn generates problems with endogeneity.
what follows we estimate our specifications

is to mitigate the effects of

Putting these concerns together, in

both via OLS (as a benchmark

and to compare to the results

of the recent studies that have used OLS in related settings -- e.g., Berman, Bound, and Griliches,
Bernard and Jensen, forthcoming;

Goldin and Katz, 1996) and via an instrumental

where we treat the changes in equipment,
Z measures as appropriate).

structures and output as endogenous

variables procedure

(as well as other relevant

We instrument for these variables using appropriately

measures. Given our concerns about measurement

1994;

lagged plant-level

error and again following Griliches and Hausman

(1986), for the difference between t-k and t we use plant level variables from period t-k-1 (and earlier) as
instruments.’b

In all of our specifications

the initial t-k is 1978 (e.g., the first one year difference

is 1978-

45 Since our specification is in fust differences, this is really the innovation to the current shock.
46 The precise instrument list for the difference between t-k and t are plant level variables dated t-k-1 (and
earlier) including linear, quadratic, cubic and quartics in the log of output, the log of capital equipment, and the log
of capital structures as well as quadratic, cubic and quartic terms in the growth rates of each of tiese lagged
variables. The motivation for including the nonlinear terms is based on the recent literature indicating that plantlevel dynamics in employment and capital exhibits significant nonlinearities (see, e.g., Caballero, Engel and
(continued...)
32

1979, the long difference is 1978 to 1988). Since much of the within plant changes occur over the 1978
to 1988 period, we are able to include the most interesting period of variation in our sample period.
estimate the instrumental

variables specification

We

via GMM to improve efficiency and to generate

consistent standard errors.
In all cases we prefer to estimate the model separately for plants in each two-digit
obvious advantage of using plant-level
dimensions

of differences

indust~.

An

data is the ability to let parameters vary across observable

in technology

such as industry.

for two-digit industry, we interact three-digit

Even in the specifications

estimated separately

industry effects with the time effects to capture differences

across industries within two-digit industries.
A. Base Specification

-- The Contribution

of Ca~ital-Skill

Table 9 presents estimated coefficients

Comulementaritv

for the pooled OLS and IV-GMM specifications.

While

we ultimately draw our inferences from results that are estimated separately for plants in each two-digit
industry, we present the results in Table 9 to provide a benchmark for comparison
specifications
mention.

and for comparability

with the existing literature.

First, there is clear evidence of capital-skill

between skill and equipment

Several aspects of these results deserve

complementarily

Second, the IV-GMM results generally yield higher absolute magnitudes

as opposed to the one year differences

our right hand side variables.

of coefficients

of the capital-skill

especially

in the

error in our Zij~’s.

complementarily

which is again consistent with measurement

in the long
error in

This pattern is less pervasive in the IV-GMM results which makes sense if

one interprets the one year differences

with IV-GMM as being purged of measurement

we find clear evidence of short run negative non-homotheticity
results.

between skill and structures.

This latter finding is consistent with measurement

Third, the OLS results yield generally higher magnitudes
differences

with the complementarily

generally stronger than the complementarily

one year difference specifications.

across alternative

However, this negative nonhomotheticity

diminishes

error.47 Fourth,

in the one and three year difference
in the longer differences.

Fifth, the change

in ownership and change in industry affiliation variables exhibit somewhat erratic patterns in these

(...continued)
Haltiwanger, 1995a, 1995b). We also include the contemporaneous and lagged downstream cyclical indicator used
in section VI as additional instruments in all specifications. For alternative specifications including additional Zij~s
(e.g., R&D), the appropriate t-k- 1 lags (and earlier) for these additional variables are included as instruments as
well.
47Our IV approach is much less successful in our long differences specification than in our one or three year
specifications. This is because, given the limited time dimension of our data, we are unable to construct instruments
which accurately predict the long run changes in the endogenous variables.
33

specifications.

However, in the long run it appears that both events are associated with increases in the

nonproduction

labor share.46 Sixth, the low overall R-squared’s

factors in accounting for the pooled cross-sectional

indicate the dominance of unobserved

and time series variation.

Given the inclusion of both

year effects and year effects interacted with industry and region, it is clear that there is tremendous
heterogeneity
or region.

in the nonproduction

labor share changes in a given year across plants in the same industry

Finally, the results for the employment-share

specification

are qualitatively

very similar.

based specification

and the cost-share based

This pattern holds throughout the remainder of the

subsequent analysis and for the sake of brevity we focus on the employment-share

based results for the

remainder of the paper.
As we stated above, one advantage of the macroeconomic
above model separately for each two-digit industry.
difference specification

using IV-GMM.

Table 10 reports these results from the one year

We report coefficient

weighted average plant- level growth rates for net investment
tremendous

differences

and the structures-skill

data is that it allows us to estimate the

estimates as well as the employment-

and output.

It is evident that there are

across two-digit industries in the nature and magnitude of the equipment-skill
complementarily

and in the short run nonhomotheticity.

equipment coefficient varies from -0.013 in Printing to 0.068 in Instruments.
negative equipment-skill

complementarily

of values across industries.
output across industries.

mere

are imprecisely

While the industries with

estimated, there is nevertheless

are also striking differences

Given the large differences

For example, the

in the grotih

in the coefficients

a wide range

rates of net investment

and the large differences

and

in the

growth rates of these variables across industries, there are clearly problems in using the pooled estimates
(which constrain the coefficients
contribution

to be the same across industries) to make inferences about the

of the relevant variables to the variation in nonproduction

labor share changes .49

Our main objective in this exercise is to understand the contribution

of our observable

the time series and cross sectional variation in the within plant changes in the nonproduction
For this purpose, we present a simplified version of the full distribution

~du5~

Chmge

ad

ownership

change

labor share.

accounting framework

Juhn, Murphy and Pierce ( 1993). That is, we decompose the employment-weighted

4E me

factors to

used by

distribution

of

indicators are much better predictors of changes in the absolute

nonproduction labor share than the nonproduction labor share itself. We estimated alternative specifications of (4)
with the same right hand side variables but with the dependent variable being the absolute change in the
nonproduction labor share. The coefficients on these two indicators (results not reported) increased substantially in
magnitude and statistical significance.
49 ~u5

s~die5

based

upon

aggregate

(industry-level)

data that constrain the

industries &e potentially misleading.
34

Coefficientsto be the same

across

nonproduction

labor share changes into the changes in the distribution

and the changes in the distribution

accounted for by the unobservables.50

predicted plant-level changes in the nonproduction
explanatory

accounted for by the observable
By observable,

labor share in each year based upon all of the

variables except the common year effect, By unobsemables,

changes in the nonproduction

residual.

We treat the estimated common year effect as

since it represents the unexplained

Decomposing

common bias in technological

annual employment-weighted

the annual employment-weighted

share from the observable

and the annual employment-weighted

labor share from the unobsemables,
standard variance decomposition)

change.

mean changes in the nonproduction

simply involves computing

changes into the contribution

we mean the plant-level

labor share in each year accounted for by the estimated common year

effect plus the estimated plant-level
unobsemable

we mean the

labor share

mean change in the nonproduction

mean change in the nonproduction

However, we expand the standard mean decomposition
by decomposing

the entire distribution

of the observable and unobservable

(or the

of nonproduction

factors.

labor share

Consider, for example, the

decomposition

of the difference between the 95th and 5th percentile of the employment-weighted

nonproduction

labor share change distribution.

observable

In a given year, we measure the contribution

as the difference between the 95th and 5th percentile of the distribution

predicted changes in the nonproduction

labor

labor share, The marginal contribution

of the

of plant-level

of the unobservable

is

then given by the difference between the actual 95-5 and predicted 95-5 percentile differences.51
Figure 9 depicts the decomposition
as well as the decompositions

of the annual mean changes in the nonproduction

of the annual 95th-5th percentile difference, the annual 95th-50th

percentile difference and the annual 50th-5th percentile difference.
from the actual distribution,
contribution

the contribution

from the observable

In each case, we present the statistic

to this statistic by the observable

to this statistic by the unobsemables.

present the contribution

labor share

For the contribution

and the marginal

of the observable,

we also

minus the effect of plant-level changes in output.

exercise we use the estimates from the IV-GMM one year difference specification

For this

estimated separately

for plants in each two-digit industry.

50 me

relevmt

emP]Owent

weights

h

each year are the initial(prior

year) employment shares. ~us, this

exercise decomposes the within plant component of equation (2).
“ Unlike the decomposition of the mean change or the analogous variance decomposition, the ordering of the
decomposition potentially matters in this context. That is, one could start with the contribution of the unobservable
to the 95-5 difference and then consider the marginal contribution of the observable.
35

The upper left panel of Figure 9 depicts the decomposition
mean nonproduction

labor share changes.

of the employment-weighted

Over the period, observable

the average annual change in the nonproduction

account for about 40 percent of

labor share. Excluding the contribution

output changes, the capital component of the observable

annual

of plant-level

accounts for about 30 percent of the average

annual change.
While the observable
observable

account for a sizeable fraction of the average annual change, the

(and in particular capital-skill

nonproduction

complementarily

effects) do not track the timing of the

labor share changes well. For example, in 1981 the observable

percent of the sharp increase in the nonproduction
for only 10 percent of the increase.
nonproduction

labor share and capital-skill

More generally, capital-skill

account for only 27
complementarily

complementarily

predicts a positive

labor share change in all years and relatively modest time variation.52

Changes in output account for some of the cyclical variation in the nonproduction
consistent with short run nonhomotheticity
production workers.
unobsemable

Nevertheless,

unobservable

factors dominate the cyclical variation.

factors account for most of the secular increase in the nonproduction

the nonproduction

for these cyclical patterns.

of

Further,

labor share. Putting

factors are generating most of the long run increase in

labor share and that the long run changes generated by these unobservable

in recessions.

nonproduction

labor share

induced (at least in part) by the greater cyclical flexibility

the two results together implies that unobservable

concentrated

accounts

It should not be surprising that capital-skill

complementarily

factors are

cannot account

There is an inherent tension in trying to account for sharp increases in

labor share changes in downturns with capital-skill

complementarily

since net investment

is procyclical.
Turning now to the decompositions
emerge.

of the percentile differences,

several interesting patterns

First, the actual 95-5 percentile difference indicates a secular increase in the dispersion

nonproduction
by unobservable

of

labor share changes over the 1980s. This secular increase is again accounted for entirely
factors.

In addition to the secular increase in dispersion, there is an increase in

dispersion in the cyclical downturn in the early 1980s that is again primarily accounted for by the
unobsemables.

Looking at the 50-5 and the 95-50 differentials

in the nonproduction

labor share change

52 In examining the precise timing of the contribution of capital-skill complementarily in Figure 9 it is important
to recall that it is beginning of period capital stock that affects the current period nonproduction labor share.
Accordingly, in fwst differences it is the change in the capital stock in the prior period that affects the change in the
nonproduction labor share from the prior to the current period. Thus, for example the equipment investment boom
in 1985 yields an increase in the nonproduction labor share in 1986.
36

distribution

shows that there is a greater secular increase in the dispersion in the left tail of the

distribution

(the 50-5 difference)

distribution

(the 95-50 difference).

but greater cyclical volatility in the dispersion in the right tail of the
Observable

account for very little of either the secular or cyclical

variation in the left tail or the secular change in the right tail. However, observable

account for a

relatively larger fraction of the cyclical volatility in the right tail.
B. The Contribution

of R&D Investment

We now consider the additional contribution
plant level. Essentially,

we follow a methodology

of net changes in the stock of R&D capital at the

similar to that used by Adams and Jaffe ( 1994) by

building stocks of R&D at the firm-level using a perpetual inventory method (details discussed in
Appendix A). The firm level R&D stocks are matched to individual plants using the firm identifiers
our plant-level

data set. We restrict our sample to those plants for which we have a continuous

in

series on

R&D, which reduces our sample by about 40 percent.
Table 11 reports the coefficient

estimates with the inclusion of the net investment

pooled OLS, IV-GMM and the employment-weighted,

in R&D for the

two-digit industry, for the both the one year and

three year difference specifications. 53 The results for net investment of equipment and structures are
largely similar to those reported in Tables 9 and 10. We find evidence of significant R&D-skill
complementarily

in the IV-GMM results for both the one and three year difference specifications.

The decomposition
observable and unobservable
are qualitatively

of the employment-weighted
components

average annual change.

labor share distribution

into

when we include R&D is presented in Figure 10.54 The results

similar to those presented in Figure 9. Observable

average annual change and observable

account for 45 percent of the

absent the output growth effect account for 42 percent of the

Including net R&D investment does not help in accounting for aggregate

cyclical changes in the nonproduction
nonproduction

nonproduction

labor share changes.

nature of R&D investment.

labor share or to the secular increase in the dispersion in the
This finding is again not surprising given the essentially

There is a modest improvement

in the contribution

acyclical

of the observable

to the

cyclical volatility in dispersion (especially

for the right tail). In short, however, the main conclusion

the prior section still holds:

factors account for most of the nonproduction

unobservable

of

labor share

53We treat changes in the R&D stock as endogenous in our IV-GMM specifications. Once again, we do not
report the long difference estimations because, given our small sample size, we do not feel we can use IV to
estimate the model.
~ The results in Figure 10 are based on the one-year difference IV-GMM specification estimated separately for
plants in each two-digit industry.
37

increases in cyclical downturns and the cyclical increases generated by unobservable
of the long run secular increase in the nonproduction
C. The Contribution

account for most

labor share.

of Indicators of Adoution of Advanced Technolo~v

We now consider the influence of direct measures of the type of technology
For this purpose, we exploit the 1988 Survey of Manufacturing

Technology

adopted at the plant.

(SMT).

As discussed in

section III, the 1988 SMT surveyed 10,590 plants in SIC industries 34 to 38 on their use of seventeen
recent manufacturing

innovations.

The innovations

include such technologies

the factory floor, local area networks, computer-aided

as robotics, computers

design and automatic sensors.

on

We match the data

from the SMT with our balanced panel of continuing plants which results in a sample of 1820 plants.
Following Dunne and Troske (1995), we divide the technologies

into two main groups -- information

technologies

including computer automated design (CAD), computers and lans, and production

technologies

including flexible manufacturing

between information

technologies

aid in the management

cells, lasers, and pick and place robots.

and production

technologies

The distinction

is that the former are technologies

that

and design of products and the production process while the latter aid directly in

production.
Our analysis exploiting the SMT data has a number of important limitations.
the information

at one point in time for our balanced panel (1988).

timing of adoption.
specification

First, we only have

Thus, we cannot exploit the precise

To get around this problem, we use the SMT variables in the long difference

and presume that if a particular technology

adoption of the technology

is present at an individual plant then the

occurred between 1978 to 1988. Second, we estimate the specification

OLS and IV-GMM both with and without instrumenting
instrument set as in the base specification.

for technology

adoption using the same

Since the need (at least for measurement

instrument in the long difference specification

by

error reasons) to

is limited and because we do not have any reasonable

instruments for the SMT variables, we have more confidence in the OLS results in this case and focus
our discussion on these results.

Third, the results are restricted to a narrow set of industries (SIC 34 to

38) which restricts the sample size and the relevance of the analysis for total manufacturing
comparisons

and makes

to the preceding analyses more tenuous.

The results for the long difference specification
Table 12. For both the information

including the SMT variables are reported in

and production technologies,

we break plants into two groups based

upon whether the plant is using at least one of the relevant technologies.
complementarity

and nonhomotheticity

that adoption of information

technologies

The results for capital-skill-

are quite similar to those generated in the base case. We find
yields a positive impact on the change in the nonproduction
38

labor share while the adoption of production technologies
the nonproduction

generates a negative impact on the change in

labor share. 55 Since these results reflect the influence of the type of technology

adopted after already controlling

for output and capital growth, these results do not necessarily

that plants that have adopted information

technologies

exhibit increases in their nonproduction

share or that plants that have adopted production technologies
labor share. Important

imply
labor

exhibit decreases in the nonproduction

in this regard is that plants that have adopted either type of advanced technology

generally have much higher net equipment investment rates. For example, the employment-weighted
mean net investment rate for plants that have adopted advanced production technologies
plants that have not adopted such technologies
In terms of the contribution

is 0.48 while

have a rate of 0.297 (both rates over the 10 year period).s’

of the observable

to the long run nonproduction

labor share change,

in a manner consistent with our above annual analysis we treat the constant as an unobservable.
actual employment-weighted

average nonproduction

labor share change for the 1820 plants over the

1978-88 period is .035. The predicted change in nonproduction
variables is .017, so the observable
share in this sample of plants.
technologies,

unobservable

change in the nonproduction

The

labor share when we include our SMT

account for about one-half of the change in the nonproduction

However, even after controlling

labor

for whether or not a plant adopts new

still account for 50 percent of the secular employment-weighted

average

labor share.

55Theresults reported in Table 12 should be viewed with some caution, First, the sample of plants is dominated
by very large producers and 91 percent of plants in the sample use information technologies. Second, Doms, Dume
and Troske (1995), using a larger sample of plants, a more recent SMT, and employing the number of technologies
used as their main index of technology adoption, fmd little correlation between technology use in 1993 and the
change in nonproduction labor share over the 1977 to 1992 period. In results not reported here, we estimated the
nonproduction labor share regression using a count-based measure and found little correlation between the number
of technologies used and the change in nonproduction labor share. Finally, Doms, Dunne, and Troske also estimate
a model similar to that reported in Table 12. They fmd a negative relationship between production technology use
and the change in nonproduction labor share (as we do), but fmd a much weaker positive correlation between
information technology use and changes in nonproduction labor share than we fmd in our more restricted sample.
5’ The employment-weighted aggregate change in the nonproduction labor share for plants that adopted
information technologies is 0.0353 while the aggregate change for those that have not is 0.0139. The predicted
aggregate change for those that have adopted information technologies is 0.0319 while the predicted aggregate
change for the other plants is 0.0256. The employment-weighted aggregate change in the nonproduction labor share
for plants that adopted advanced production technologies is 0.0333 while the aggregate change for those that have
not is 0.0434. The predicted aggregate change for those that have adopted production technologies is 0.0293 while
the predicted aggregate change for the other plants is 0.0461. Thus, we observe that on average plants in all four of
these groups exhibit substantial increases in their nonproduction labor share but particularly high changes for plants
that have adopted information technologies and have not adopted production technologies.
39

VfII. Concluding

Remarks

Our main empirical findings are summarized

as follows:

1. Aggregate changes in the nonproduction
frequencies are dominated
contribution

labor share at both annual and longer

by within plant changes in the nonproduction

of between plant changes in the nonproduction

(around 25 percent) in the 1977-82 period.
since the nonproduction

together, the contribution

labor share is relatively modest peaking

between entering and exiting plants is similar to the

labor share that we obseme for continuing plants.

2. The distribution

labor share.

of annual within plant changes exhibits a spike at zero, tremendous

and fat left and right tails. The aggregate net change in the nonproduction

driven by large gross positive and negative changes in the nonproduction
magnitude larger than the net change.

a large change in the nonproduction

large change in the nonproduction
3. Within
fraction

(between

changes in the within plant nonproduction
simultaneously

increasing

types of workers.

The probability

is small in magnitude

and accounts

accomplished
nonproduction

for only a small

plus within plant job reallocation).

Additionally,

labor share are driven by individual
workers

or simultaneously

Annually, the rate of within plant job reallocation
rate of about 20 percent.

decreasing

Most changes in within plant nonproduction
via employment

Plants that exhibit long run secular increases in the nonproduction

of one

labor share

through long run upsizing account for most of the long run secular increase in the
labor share. This group of plants accomplishes

group of plants that increase their nonproduction

accomplishes

both

This compares

this with large rates of job creation for

both skilled and unskilled workers and especially high rates of job creation for skilled workers.

significantly

most

plants either

is only 2.7 percent.

worker shares are accounted for by plants changing scale but disproportionately
type of worker.

of a plant

labor share is increasing in the time since the previous

both skilled and unskilled

to a between plant job reallocation

labor share that are an order of

labor share.

plant job reallocation

of total job reallocation

labor share is

Most of the large gross changes are accounted for by plants with

very large (in excess of .05 in absolute value annually) lumpy changes,
experiencing

Taken

of within plant changes and net entry jointly account for more than 80 percent

of the long run change in the nonproduction

heterogeneity

The

Net entry reinforces the effects of the within plant changes

labor share differential

within plant changes in the nonproduction

labor share.

labor share through long run downsizing

to the long run secular increase in the nonproduction
this with high rates of job destruction

Another

also contribute

labor share. This latter group of plants

for both worker types and especially high job

destruction rates for unskilled workers.
40

4. The long run secular increases in the nonproduction
recessions, particularly

labor share are concentrated

the recession in the early 1980s. The aggregate nonproduction

rises sharply in economic downturns and falls only mildly in economic recoveries.
component of within plant nonproduction

labor share concentrated

indicators of changes in technology

long run secular increase in the average nonproduction
cyclical variation.

Unobsemable

labor share account

aggregate nonproduction

account for a significant

labor share but account for little of the

factors account for most of the cyclical variation

the cyclical increases in the nonproduction

complementarily

adopted) and R&D-skill

labor share are closely linked to the
labor share in economic downturns.

(including detailed measures of the type of advanced technologies

complementarily

secular change in the nonproduction

contribute significantly

to the employment-weighted

labor share changes.

for plant-level net investment of physical capital, net investment

and output growth, the residual average within plant changes in the nonproduction
significant countercyclical

average

labor share. However, capital investment and R&D investment

account for little of the cyclical variation in the average within plant nonproduction
Even after controlling

in the

labor share. Putting these results together, the factors that are

the long run secular increase in the nonproduction

factors generating

fraction of the

factors account for most of the long run secular increase and the

changes generated by these unobservable

Capital-skill

Plants

much of their decrease after 1982.

5. Observable

generating

The persistent

much of their increase in the

recession in the early 1980s. Plants with long run decreases in the nonproduction
concentrated

labor share

labor share changes increases sharply in recessions.

with long run increases in their nonproduction

in

in R&D capital

labor share exhibit

ity. Further, the increases in the average within plant nonproduction

share generated by unobsemable

labor

factors in downturns are much larger than the modest decreases in

recoveries, so that the cumulative

effect is positive.

increase in the average nonproduction

Indeed, more than half of the long run secular

labor share is accounted for by these unobservable.

These results, in general, point to the conclusion that the aggregate change in the nonproduction
labor share reflects some form of technical change (broadly defined) inducing individual continuing
plants to retool and reorganize
plants.

and new more skill intensive plants to displace exiting less skill intensive

The results are consistent with models that predict that retooling and reorganization

lumpy and that the latter will imply similar lumpiness in nonproduction

labor share changes.

results are consistent with models that predict that retooling and reorganization
concentrated

in recessions since the opportunity

retooling/reorganization

41

Further, the

of the workforce

cost of the disruption from undertaking

is low during recessions.

will be

will be

Viewed from the broad perspective

of changes in the manufacturing

workforce,

indicate that there have been striking changes within individual manufacturing
of workers used at operating production
nonproduction

workers, the underlying

establishments.

product demand and related trade explanations

establishments

heterogeneity

for the change in the mix of jobs in U.S. manufacturing.

way they produce goods in terms of the mix of workers employed at production

changed the

establishments.

There are, however, more questions raised than answers provided by our analysis.

nonproduction

factors play in accounting

heterogeneity

The dominant

for most of the secular and cyclical variation in the

labor share raises questions about what these unobsenable

vein, the tremendous

in the

Our results do not provide much support for simple

Instead, our results are consistent with the view that individual plants have fundamentally

role that unobservable

in the type

While on average the shifi has been towards

plant level changes reflect tremendous

within plant changes in the structure of employment.

our results

factors represent.

in within plant changes in the nonproduction

In a similar

worker share (with large

positive and negative gross within plant changes) raise questions about the nature of the bias in technical
change.

We have argued that one label to put on the factors generating these patterns of plant-level

changes is organizational

capital.

Viewed from this perspective,

our results indicate that organizational

capital has on average been skill biased over this period and that permanent reorganizations
production process at the plant are concentrated

in recessions.

biased in general and indeed we find that unobsemable
sectional variation in plant-level

nonproduction

The dominant role of unobse~ables

Organizational

of the

capital need not be skill

factors account for most of the tremendous

cross

labor share changes.

is not inherently in conflict with the recent interpretations

from related aggregate analyses (e.g., Berman, Bound and Griliches,

1994) that the aggregate increase in

the nonproduction

However, our findings suggest that

labor share reflects skill biased technical change.

it will be difficult to find observable indicators of this skill biased technical change that account for the
observed strong connection

between the long run structural changes and cyclical dynamics.

At least it

will be difficult to find observable indicators from measures of investment in new capital goods (even
very detailed indicators of the type of capital investment that the plant is undertaking)
reason for this is that the latter indicators are procyclical
nonproduction

or R&D. The

and we find that the permanent

changes in the

labor share are countercyclical.

An alternative but related interpretation

of our results is that we have not fully captured the

complex dynamic interactions between plant-level

changes in the nonproduction

labor share and plant-

level changes in observable indicators like physical capital and R&D, For example, results from Dunne
and Troske (1995) indicate that the probability

of adopting advanced information
42

technologies

is

increasing in the initial nonproduction

labor share of the plant. We have not investigated

plants may find it optimal to change their employment
This latter possibility

structure prior to changing their

suggests that we may need a much richer characterization

interactions of the various components

of what constitutes the organizational

the idea that
technology.s’

of the dynamic
structure of the plant.

57 Note, however, that our long difference specifications relating long run changes in the nonproduction labor
share to long run changes in output growth, physical capital growth and R&D capital growth do not depend on such
precise timing considerations and these results still leave most of the aggregate and cross-sectional variation in the
nonproduction labor share unexplained,
43

Appendix A: Definition of Measures
This appendix provides precise definitions for various measures used in the paper.
To begin with we define our job creation and destruction measures.
Job Creation bv Worker Tvue

Where:
AL~, = Change in employment of worker type k at plant i in year t: (L:, - L:,., )
X!, = l/2(L!t + L!,.1 )
L+= the set of all plants with AL!, z O.
A = All plants
Job Destruction

bv Worker TvDe

Where:
L = the set of all plants with AL!, < O.
Job creation and destruction rates for total employment are calculated by letting L:, be the total
employment in plant i in year t.
Given these measure of job creation and destruction, between plant job reallocation is simply the
sum of total job creation and destruction:
BPR,

= C, + D,

_
iEA
—
~xi,
16A

Total job reallocation

(both within and between plant) is given by:

44

u

x,’

TR, = ~

Finally, within plant reallocation

(C,” + Dt”)

(C,’ + D,s) + ;
t

f

is given by

WPR,

=

—

Persistence Rate for NonProduction

Labor Share Change

Define:

e~(k)=max[minlz:+’e~(k-,)llo)fork

O~,(k) i’sthe k-year persistence rate for plant i in year t. Then the k year persistent component
employment weighted, within ‘plant nonproduction labor share change is given by:

W,(k)

= ~

(L,,.,lL,.,)O;(,)

iEA

Persistence Rate for Job Creation
Define:

45

w,,.

of

minlg::e(k-l)lo!forko

where again 0~~(0)=1 and calculated for plants with ALi>O. Then the persistent component
job creation is given by:’

Rates and components for job creation by worker type, for total job destruction
worker type are defined in an analogous fashion.

of aggregate

and for job destruction by

Capital Stock Measures
Our capital stock measure is:

where:
ks;l = total stock of type r capital in plant i in period t
~j, = depreciation rate for type r capital in industry j in period t (includes retirements).
1{,= Investment in type r capital in plant i in period t.
We construct capital stocks for t=l 972 to 1988. For 1972, ks~,is computed as:

ksj:,,
ksi:72 = bks,r72
, *—
bksj:72

where:
bks{.,, = the book value of type r capital in plant i in 1972
ksj,,, = the real value of type r capital in industry j in 1972
bksj,,z = the book value of type r capital in industry j in 1972.
The depreciation rate in period t along with the real and book value of capital for indust~ j in 1972 come
from BEA. j refers to a two-digit industry.

R&D Stock Measure
Our R&D stock measure is:
46

rdk,,

=

(1 -6)

*rdki,.,

+rd,,

where:
rdkit = the r&d stock of firm i in period t
6 = the depreciation rate for r&d
rdil = the investment in r&d by firm i in period t.
We set 6=.15 (Adarns and Jaffe, 1994). We compute r&d stocks for *1972
rd~~=rdil.

to 1988. In 1972 we set

Technolo~v Adoution Measures
Our plant-level measure of technology adoption come from the 1988 Survey of Manufacturing
Technology (SMT), The 1988 SMT surveyed managers of over 10,000 plants about their use of 17
different advanced technologies. ‘B We merge these data with our sample of continuing plants to create a
sample of 1820 plants, We then use the information from the 1988 SMT to construct our two measures
of technology adoption: information, which equals 1 if a plant adopts any of one of eight information
technologies, and production which equals 1 if a plant adopts any one of six production technologies.
The eight information technologies are: computer aided design (CAD), CAD controlled machines, digital
CAD, technical data network, factory network, intercompany network, programmable controllers,
computers on the factory floor. The eight production technologies are: flexible manufacturing
system/cell, materials working lasers, pick/place robots, other robots automatic storage/retrieval system,
automatic guided vehicle systems, automated sensor based inspection and/or testing equipment used on
incoming or in process materials, automated sensor based inspection and/or testing equipment used on
final product.
Changes in Ou~ut. OwnershiTJ and Indus~:
Change in output is simply the log of the real value of shipments of plant i in year t minus the log
of real value of shipments of plant i in year t-1. We deflate the reported value of shipments from the
plant using the four-digit industry shipments deflator in the NBER productivity database (Bartelsman
and Gray, 1995). In principle, the appropriate measure to use would be changes in value-added, or at
least changes in shipments minus changes in inventories. However, given measurement error problems
in the inventories and materials variables in the LRD and in the materials deflator, we feel that changes
in shipments is the better variable. Similar arguments are made by Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994)
and Bernard and Jensen (forthcoming) to justifi their use of this variable.
The change in ownership variable equals one if the firm identification variable in the LRD
changes between year t and year t-1. The change in industry variable equals one if a plant’s four-digit
SIC code changes be~een year t and t-1.

‘a See Dunne (1994) for a more complete description of the 1988 SMT.
47

References
Adams, James D. and Adam Jaffe, “The Span of the Effect of R&D in the Firm and Industry, ” Center for
Economic Studies Discussion Paper no. 94-7. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington D. C.,
1994.
Altonji, Joseph G. and James R. Spletzer, “Worker Characteristics, Job Characteristics and the Receipt of
On-the-Job Training,” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 45 (1991): 58-79.
Amirault, Thomas, “Training to Qualifi
(1995): 31-36.

for Jobs and Improve Skills, 1991,” Monthly Labor Review, 115

Andolfatto, David and Glenn M. MacDonald, “Endogenous Technological
Aggregate Fluctuations,” mimeo, Universi~ of Rochester (1993).

Change, Growth, and

Bartel, Ann P. and Frank R. Lichtenberg, “The Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in
Implementing New Technology,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 69 (1987): 1-11.
Bartelsman, Eric J., Ricardo J. Caballero and Richard K. Lyons, “Customer and Supplier Driven
Externalities,” American Economic Review, 34 (1994): 1075-84.
Bartelsman, Eric J. and Wayne Gray, “The NBER Manufacturing
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, (1995).

Productivity

Database,” mimeo, Board

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches, “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor Within U.S.
Manufacturing Industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 109(1994): 367-398.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, “Exporters,
International Economics (forthcoming).

Skill Upgrading,

and the Wage Gap,” Journal of

Bemdt, Ernst, Catherine Morrison, and Larry Rosenblum, “High-Tech Capital Formation and Labor
Composition in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis, ” Working Paper no.
4010, Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1992.
Brown, Randall S, and Lauritis R. Christensen, “Estimating Elasticities of Substitution in a Model of
Partial Static Equilibrium: An Application to U.S. Agriculture, 1947 to 1974,” in Ernst R. Bemdt
and Barry C. Fields (eds.) Modeling and Measuring Natural Resource Substitution, Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1981.
Caballero, Ricardo and Mohamad Hammour, “The Cleansing Effects of Recess ions,” American
Economic Review, 84 (1994): 1356-1368.
Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger, “Aggregate Employment
Dynamics: Building from Macroeconomic Evidence,” Working Paper no. 5042: Cambridge,
NBER, 1995a.

48

MA:

Caballero, Ricardo, Eduardo M. R. A. Engel, and John C. Haltiwanger, “Plant Level Adjustment and
Aggregate Investment Dynamics, “ Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no. 2 (1995 b).
Campbell, Jeffrey R. “Entry, Exit, Technology, and Business Cycles,” Rochester Center for Economic
Research Working Paper no. 407. University of Rochester, 1995.
Chari, V.V. and Hugo Hopenhayn, “Vintage Human Capital, Growth, and the Diffision of New
Technology” Journal of Political Economy,99(1991):
1142-65.
Cooley, T., J. Greenwood, and M. Yorukglu, “The Replacement Problem,” mimeo, University of
Rochester, Rochester, NY, (1994).
Cooper, Russell and John Haltiwanger, “The Macroeconomic Implications of Machine Replacement:
Theory and Evidence,” American Economic Review, 83 (1993): 360-82.
Cooper, Russell, John Haltiwanger, and Laura Power, “Machine Replacement and the Business Cycle:
Lumps and Bumps,” Working Paper no. 5260: Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1995.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation and Destruction: Macroeconomic Evidence
and Macroeconomic Implications,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual no, 5 (1990): 123-68.
Davis, Steve J. and John Haltiwanger, “Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S. Manufacturing
Plants, 1963-1986,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Macroeconomics, ( 199 1): 115-200.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger, “Gross Job Creation, Gross Job Destruction, and Employment
Reallocation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1992): 819-63.
Davis, Steven J., John C. Haltiwanger, and Scott Schuh, Job Creation and Destruction, Cambridge, MA:
MtT Press, 1996.
Doms, Mark and Timothy Dunne, “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing Plants,” mimeo,
Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington D.C., 1994.
Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne, and Kenneth Troske, “Workers, Wages, and Technology,” mimeo, Center
for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington D.C., 1995.
Dunne, Timothy, “Patterns of Technology Usage in U.S. Manufacturing Plants,” The Rand Journa/ of
Economics, 25, (1994): 488-99.

Dunne, Timothy and James Schmitz Jr,, “Wages, Employment Structure and Employer-Size Wage
Premia: Their Relationship to Advanced-Technology Usage at U.S. Manufacturing
Establishments,” Economics 62 (1995): 89-107.
Dunne, Timothy and Kenneth Troske, “Human Capital, Research and Development Expenditures and the
Adoption of New Technologies,” mimeo, Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the
Census, Washington D.C., 1995.

49

Dunne, Timothy, Mark Roberts, and Larry Samuelson, “plant Turnover and Gross Employment Flows in
the U.S. Manufacturing Sector,” Journal of Labor Economics, 7(1989): 48-71.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz, “The Origins of Capital-Skill Complementarily,” mimeo,
Harvard University, 1996.
Griliches, Zvi and Jerry A. Hausman, “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of Econometrics,
(1986): 93-118.

31

Hall, Robert E. “Labor Demand, Labor Supply, and Employment Volatility,” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual no. 6 (1991): 17-47.
Hamerrnesh, Daniel S., Labor Demand, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
Ichniowski, Casey and Kathryn Shaw, “Old Dogs and New Tricks: Determinants of the Adoption of
Productivity-Enhancing Work Practices,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~:
Macroeconomics,

(1995): 1-66,

Jovanovic, Boyan and Glenn M. MacDonald, “Competitive Diffusion,” Journal of Political Economy, 98
(1994): 24-52.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, “Wage Inequality and the Rise in the Return to
Skill,” Journal of Political Economy, 101 (1993): 410-42.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel, “Why Has the Natural Rate of Unemployment
Increased Over Time?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity no. 2, (199 1): 75-142.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and Demand
Factors,” Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, 107 (1992): 1-34.
Kremer, Michael. “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,” me Quarlerly Journal of
Economics,

108 (1993): 551-575.

Lambson, Val E., “Industry Evolution with Sunk Costs and Uncertain Market Conditions,” International
Journal of Industrial Organization,

9 (1991): 171-96.

Lynch, Lisa M. and Sandra E. Black, “Beyond the Incidence of Training: Evidence from a National
Employers Survey,” Working Paper no. 5231. Cambridge, MA: NBER, 1995.
Mortensen, Dale T. and Christopher A. Pissarides, “Job Creation and Destruction in the Theory of
Unemployment,” Review of Economic Studies, 61 (1994): 397-416.
Shea, John, “Do Supply Curves Slope Up?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108 (1993): 1-32.
Solow, Robert M., “Investment and Technical Progress,” in Kenneth Arrow, Samuel Karlin, and Paul
Suppes (eds.), Mathematical Methods in the Social Sciences, 1959, Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press, 1960.
50

Troske, Kenneth R. “Evidence on the Employer Size-Wage Premium from Worker-Establishment
Matched Data,” Center for Economic Studies Discussion Paper no. 94-10. U.S. Bureau of the
Census, Washington, D.C,, 1994.
Troske, Kenneth R. “The Worker-Establishment Characteristics Data,” Center for Economic Studies
Discussion Paper no. 95-10. U.S. Bureau of the Census, Washington, D.C., 1995.
U.S. Census Bureau, 1987 Census of Manufactures. General Summarv, MC87-S-1, Washington, D .C.:
Government Priinting Office, 1991.

Decomposition

Sample Used

~

Table 1
of Nonproduction Labor Share Changes, 1972-88
(Employment Share Based)

Within

Between

Covariance

Net Entrv

Census of Manufactures
1972-87

.0592

.0254

.0099

.0023

.0216

1972-77

.0108

.0096

.0015

.0004

-.0007

1977-82

.0434

.0282

.0108

-.0015

.0059

1982-87

.0049

.0059

-.0031

-.0002

.0023

-.0008

.00003

Annual Survey of Manufactures
Annual Average
for 1972-88
(excluding 74,79
and 84)

.0040

.0044

.0003

Balanced Panel of Continuing Plants
Annual Average
for 1972-88

,0036

.0031

.0009

-.0005

NIA

Employment

Flows and Nonproduction

Table 2
Labor Share of Entering and Exiting Plants

Emulovment Share

Nonuroduction Labor Share

Exiting Plants
(t-1)

Entering Plants
(t)

Exiting
Plants
(t- 1)

Entering
Plants
(t)

Continuing
Plants
(t- 1) (t)

1972-1977

.1145

,1225

.2311

.2260

.2522 .2655

1977-1982

.1157

.1170

.2314

.2779

.2644 .3075

1982-1987

.1461

.1015

.2817

,2896

.3079 .3112

1972-1987

.3336

.3111

.2291

.2868

.2602 .3190

Census
Period

Table 3
Job Creation and Job Destruction Rates for Production and Nonproduction
Annual and Five Year Rates

Annual Survey of Manufactures
Prod. Workers

Balanced Panel of Continuers

Nonurod. Workers
m

~

Workers,

N-

Prod. Workers
m

Non~rod. Workers

N=

6.9

12.3

8.5

10.0

3.3

~

4.3

1974

9.9

10.3

11.4

9.3

6.9

6.7

7.6

5.0

1975

6.9

19.5

8.9

12.7

4.0

15.6

5.6

8.0

1976

13.3

10.8

10.0

10.1

10.2

6.7

5.8

5.9

1977

12.2

9.7

12.5

10.5

7.7

4.5

7.4

4.9

1978

12.0

8.4

12.8

9.2

7.3

3.9

8.0

4.5

1979

11.2

7.7

12.5

8.3

7.5

3.9

8.3

4.3

1980

8.4

11.0

11.5

8.5

4.9

8.5

8.0

4.2

1981

6.9

13.3

9.1

10.7

4.4

8.7

6.2

5.6

1982

7.5

16.6

9.4

13.9

3.7

11.7

5.4

7.4

1983

9.2

17.8

10.5

14.4

4.8

13.1

4.9

9.1

1984

16.4

8.7

11,9

10.2

11.7

4.5

7.2

6.5

1985

8.4

13.1

11.1

10.9

5.5

7.3

7.0

5.6

1986

8.7

14.5

11.7

12.3

4.8

8.0

6.0

7.3

1987

9.6

8.6

10.9

10.0

5.0

7.3

5.6

8.6

1988

9.8

9.5

10.5

11,3

6.2

6.3

6.3

7.3

Mean

10.2

11.7

11,1

10,7

6.5

7.5

6.8

6.2

Std Dev

2.7

3.8

1.2

1.8

2.4

3.5

1.2

1.6

Five Year Changes from Census of
Manufactures:
1972-77

28.5

26.7

33.0

26.0

1977-82

27.0

32.1

36.5

24.9

1982-87

28.2

32.1

31.7

31.9

Notes: POS=job creation; NEG=job destruction.

Table 4
Summary Statistics on Annual Job Creation and Destruction

Measure

Corr(POS,NEG)

Corr(SUM,
NET(TE))

Var(NEG)/
~

Rates

Mean 2-year
persistence
rate for POS

Mean 2-year
persistence
rate for NEG

Annual Survey of Manufacturers
Production
Workers

-0.68

-0.49

2.02

NIA

N/A

NonProduction
Workers

-0.62

-0.36

2.19

NIA

N/A

Total
Employment

-0.69

-0.49

2.22

54.4

73.6

Balanced Panel of Continuing Plants
Production
Workers

-0.71

-0.52

2.09

52.6

61.3

Nonproduction
Workers

-0.91

-0.31

1.88

58.7

66.0

Total

-0.78

-0.52

2.11

55.8

63.3

Notes: NET(TE) = net employment growth rate for total employment (TE);SUM = POS + NEG = Job
Reallocation (for a worker type).

Table 5
Decomposition of Total Job Reallocation
(Between Plant and Within Plant Components)

Between Plant
Job Reallocation

Within Plant
Job Reallocation

Total
Job Reallocation
(Behveen+Within)

ASM plants,
Annual Average,
1972-88

19.2

2.7

21.9

12.2

Balanced panel,
Annual Average,
1972-88

12.0

1.7

13.7

12.3

Census of
Manufactures,
5 year averages
from 1972-87

54.8

4.2

59.0

7.1

SamDle Used

Percent of Total
Accounted
for bv Within

Decomposition

Measure

Table 6
of Changes in the Long Run Nonproduction
Quadrant
(Employment Share Based)

~

Labor Share, by Long Run

ouadrant I

Ouadrant II

C)uadrant 111

Ouadrant IV

Employment Share,
1972

1.00

0.24

0.39

0.22

0.15

Employment Share,
1988

1.00

0,38

0.24

0.13

0.25

Nonproduction
Labor Share, 1972

0.27

0,30

0.22

0.28

0.31

Nonproduction
Labor Share, 1988

0.33

0.42

0.32

0.20

0.26

Contribution to
Aggregate
Nonproduction
Labor Share Change

1.00

0.85

0.52

-0.21

-0.16

Note: This table is based on the balanced panel of continuing plants.

Table 7
Summary Statistics on Gross Job Flows, by Long Run Quadrant

Measure

Ouadrant 11

Quadrant III

Ouadrant IV

Production Workers:
Mean POS

6.5

7.4

5.2

5.6

8.7

Mean NEG

7.5

6.0

9.4

8.6

5.9

Std Dev POS

2.4

2.5

2.6

2.3

3.1

Std Dev NEG

3.5

2.8

4.4

3.9

3.3

Mean POS

6.8

8.5

5.6

4.9

7.0

Mean NEG

6.2

4.1

7.0

10.8

5.9

Std Dev POS

1.2

1.7

1.3

1.1

1.6

Std Dev NEG

1.6

1.0

2.5

4.7

1,7

Mean POS

5.8

6.8

4.6

4.6

7.4

Mean NEG

6.3

4.3

8.0

8,3

5.0

Std Dev POS

1.9

2.1

2.1

1.7

2.4

Std Dev NEG

2,8

2.0

3.7

3.4

2.6

Nonproduction Workers:

Total Employment:

Notes: POS=job creation; NEG=job destruction. This table is based on the balanced panel of
continuing plants.

Coefficient

ExD]anatow Variables

Estimates

Table 8
from Simple Hazard Models

Kau]an-Meir

First Difference. IV

Dependent Variable: Spike = 1 if Change in Nonproduction Labor Share >0.05, 0 otherwise
Sample: Plants with Long Run Positive Changes in Nonproduction Labor Share
Constant

.0955
(.0013)

.0014
(.0018)

Age = 1 Dummy

.0247
(.0036)

-.0447
(.0147)

Age = 2 Dummy

.0456
(.0037)

-.0157
(.0133)

Age = 3 Dummy

.0469
(.0039)

-.0141
(.0113)

Age = 4 Dummy

.0445
(.0042)

-.0066
(.0079)

Cyclical Indicator

-.5887
(.0260)

-.7375
(.0433)

Dependent Variable: Spike = 1 if Change in Nonproduction Labor Share <-0.05, 0 otherwise
Sample: Plants with Long Run Negative Changes in Nonproduction Labor Share
Constant

.0900
(.0016)

.0083
(.0021)

Age = 1 Dummy

.0209
(.0045)

-.0653
(.0170)

Age = 2 Dummy

.0319
(.0048)

-.0571
(.0154)

Age = 3 Dummy

.0419
(.0051)

-.0316
(.0131)

Age = 4 Dummy

.0336
(.0053)

-.0299
(.0096)

Cyclical Indicator

.3741

.2203

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.

Changes in Nonproduction

One Year Differences
Employment Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Table 9
Labor Share: Pooled Regressions

Three Year Differences
Employment Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Long Differences
Employment Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Change in
Equipment

,0075
(.0012)

.0228
(.0053)

.0108
(.0010)

.0165
(.0034)

.0099
(.0024)

.0100
(.0052)

Change in
Structures

.0050
(.0013)

.0148
(.0055)

.0067
(.001 1)

.0099
(.0033)

.0076
(.0024)

.0041
(.0045)

Change in
output

-.0361
(.0007)

-.0484
(.0068)

-.0343
(.0007)

-.0157
(.0053)

-.0212
(.0018)

.0242
(.0083)

Change in
Ownership

.0003
(.0008)

-.0001
(.0010)

-.0031
(.0008)

-.0023
(.0009)

.0044
(.0023)

.0077
(.0026)

Change in
Industry

-.0008
(.0012)

-.0005
(.0015)

.0023
(.0012)

.0030
(.0013)

.0039
(.0034)

,0084
(.0037)

Dep. Var.
Mean

,002

.002

.007

.007

.023

.023

R-square

.060

.055

.072

.063

.052

.014

109120

109120

87063

87063

10704

10704

n

One Year Differences
Cost Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Three Year Differences
Cost Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Long Differences
Cost Share Based
m

IV-GMM

Change in
Equipment

,0046
(.0014)

.0145
(.0063)

.0104
(.0012)

.0095
(.0039)

.0069
(.0027)

-.0023
(.0056)

Change in
Structures

.0014
(.0015)

.0109
(.0067)

.0023
(.0013)

.0095
(.0038)

.0036
(.0027)

.0071
(.0051)

Change in
output

-.0322
(.0008)

-.0417
(.0078)

-.0347
(.0008)

-.0157
(.0059)

-.0206
(.0020)

.0161
(.0095)

Change in
Ownership

.0016
(.0009)

.0015
(.0011)

-.0003
(.0009)

.0003
(.0011)

.0066
(.0026)

.0103
(.0029)

Change in
Industry

.0016
(.0013)

.0013
(.0018)

.0028
(.0013)

.0035
(.0015)

.0046
(.0039)

.0067
(.0040)

Dep. Var
Mean

.003

.003

.009

.009

.030

.030

R-square

.048

.046

.061

.055

.045

-.012

109120

109120

87063

87063

10704

10704

n

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 10
One Year Differences IV-GMM Two-Digit Regression Results:
Changes in Nonproduction Labor Share (Employment Share Based)

Net
Equipment
Investment

Net
Structures
Investment

Growth
in Output

-.0347
(.0140)

.0309

.0125

.0109

.0001
(.0084)

-.0215
(.0071)

-.0067

-.0082

.0047

-.0023
(.0138)

.0080
(.0121)

.0051
(.0124)

.0124

.0150

-.0014

Lumber (24)

.0107
(.0133)

-.0088
(.0144)

-.0359
(.0111)

-.0190

.0014

.0014

Furniture (25)

-.0048
(.0137)

.0122
(.0099)

-.0131
(.0134)

,0081

.0146

-.0075

Paper (26)

.0252
(.0113)

.0113
(.0073)

-.0685
(.0123)

.0235

-.0033

.0125

Printing (27)

-.0134
(.0123)

.0073
(.0129)

-.0153
(.0262)

.0399

.0226

.0071

Chemica!s (28)

-.0021
(.0168)

.0423
(.0163)

,0030
(.0132)

.0156

.0067

-.0026

Petroleum (29)

.0067
(.0112)

.0049
(.0149)

-.0340
(.0163)

.0454

.0145

-.0093

Rubber (30)

.0363
(.0152)

-.0047
(.0124)

-.0446
(.0136)

.0012

.0015

-.0024

Leather (31)

.0255
(.0128)

-.0034
(.0123)

-.0405
(,0072)

.0167

.0006

-.0159

Stone, Clay,
Glass (32)

.0045
(.0138)

.0193
(.0185)

-.0556
(.0116)

-.0047

-.0113

-.0167

Primary Metals
(33)

.0364
(.0166)

-.0068
(.0170)

-.0440
(.0114)

-.0043

-.0251

-.0527

Fabricated Metals
(34)

,0403
(.0154)

.0162
(.0089)

-.0680
(.0100)

.0253

-.0049

-.0171

Machinery (35)

.0245
(.0176)

.0381
(.0158)

-.1005
(.0163)

.0577

.0204

-.0022

Electronics (36)

.0249
(.0161)

.0179
(.0141)

-.0134
(.0123)

.0751

.0377

.0198

Industry

Equipment
Coefficient

Structures
Coefficient

output
Coefficient

Food & Tobacco
(20&21)

;0306
(.0131)

-.0056
(.0122)

Textiles (22)

.0100
(.0092)

Apparel (23)

Table 10 (Continued)

Net
Equipment
Investment

Net
Structures
Investment

Growth
in Output

-.0472
(.0085)

.0628

.0366

-.0049

-.0229
(.0248)

-.0399
(.0189)

.0569

.0167

-.0070

.0185
(.0199)

-.0089
(.0177)

-.0255
(.0147)

.0237

.0013

.0002

.0224

.0091

-.0410

.0370

.0143

-.0041

Equipment
Coefficient

Structures
Coefficient

output
Coefficient

Transportation
(37)

.0224
(.0118)

-.0050
(.0124)

Scientific
Equipment (38)

,0679
(.0249)

Miscellaneous
(39)

Industry

Employment
Weighted Means

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

Table 11
Regression of Nonproduction Labor Share Changes Including Change in R&D
(Employment Share Based )

One Year Differences
m

Three Year Differences

IV-GMM

Two-Di~it

u

IV-GMM

Two-Di~it

Change in
Equipment

.0087
(.0016)

.0116
(.0068)

.0223

.0124
(.0014)

.0030
(.0044)

.0050

Change in
Structures

.0049
(.0017)

.0200
(.0070)

.0039

.0065
(.0015)

.0114
(.0043)

.0076

Change in
output

-.0381
(.0009)

-.0444
(.0079)

-.0356

-.0342
(.0009)

-.0149
(.0062)

-.0279

Change in
R&D Stock

.0011
(.0012)

.0071
(.0033)

.0054

.0044
(.0009)

.0089
(.0024)

.0045

Change in
Ownership

.0014
(.0011)

.0007
(.0015)

.0007

-.0011
(.0012)

-.0000
(.0015)

.0014

Change in
Industry

.0009
(.0015)

.0001
(.0020)

.0013

.0026
(.0015)

.0033
(.0017)

.0048

Mean Dep.
Var.

.002

.002

.004

.007

.007

.010

R-squared

.085

.083

----

.094

.085

---

n

60690

60690

60690

48457

48457

48457

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

Regression

Table 12
of Long Difference (78-88) Nonproduction Labor Share Changes
Including Measures of Technology Adoption
(Employment Share Based)

m

IV-GMM
Instrumenting for
Technology

Not Instrumenting
for Technology

Change in Equipment

.0159
(.0064)

,0178
(.0119)

.0204
(.01 13)

Change in Structures

,0121
(.0057)

,0035
(.0088)

.0053
(.0084)

Change in Output

-.0259
(.0044)

-.0027
(.0121)

(.0114)

Adopt Information Technologies

.0218
(.0121)

-.0081
(.0429)

.0145
(.0106)

Adopt Production Technologies

-.0181
(.0064)

-.0214
(.0200)

-.0204
(.0065)

Change in Ownership

.0042
(.0058)

.0022
(,0064)

.0038
(.0055)

Change in Industry

.0029
(.0083)

.0036
(.0076)

.0031
(,0074)

Mean Dep. Var.

.032

.032

.032

R-squared

.070

.051

.048

n

1820

1820

1820

Note: Standard errors in parentheses.

.0000

Appendix Table A.1
Summary Statistics on Distributions of Nonproduction
(Employment-Weighted)

Labor Share Changes

Annual Nonproduction Labor
Share Changes,
1972-88 (ASM)

Long Run Nonproduction
Labor Share Changes,
1972-87 (CM)

Mean

.0048

.0396

Standard Deviation

.0830

.1586

Skewness

.3480

.5735

26.6311

6.2368

Interquartile Range

.0357

.1270

Fraction with “zero” change

.2264

.0575

Fraction in excess of 0.05

.1296

.4031

Fraction less than -0,05

.0981

.1844

Employment weighted average
positive change

.0231

.0728

Employment weighted average
negative change

-.0183

-.0333

Fraction of positive change
accounted for by changes in
excess of 0.05

,7192

.9271

Fraction of negative change
accounted for by changes less
than -0.05

.7156

.8805

Measure

Kurtosis

Notes: The ASM annual distribution statistics are based upon the employment-weighted distribution
for all plants in the period 1972-88 (excluding 74, 79 and 84) who have positive employment in
adjacent years. The CM long difference distribution statistics are based upon all.plants in the 1972
and 1987 Census of Manufactures who have positive employment in both years.

Figure

1:

Nonproduction

Labor

Share

in

Manufacturing

0.43

0

41

039

0.37

0.35

033

0

31

,.,

0.29
,,

,-----

--------

.,
,.-

----------

..-

----

----- . . . . . . . . . . . . . . __

.--’

.$
0.27

>. . ..,.,

‘---

,.-

--.--

------------------

,.-

.,”

,.-

0.25

----

------------

0.23
72

,
73

LEGEND
,
,
74
75

Cost–based
I
76

I
77

‘--------

1

78

,

79

,

80

al

Employment–based
I

r

!

1

1

,

1

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

Year
Source:

Published

ASM

data

from

Bartelsmon

and

Groy

(1995)

Figure
Emp

o

43

0

41

0

39

0

37

0

35

0

33

0

31

2:

Nonprodudion

Ioyment–

share

l-abor

Balanced

Share.

Panel

Published

Total

Based

~

..---- ------ ..-

/--------,,

0

and

29

-----0

27

0

25

0

23

---..---~..--

-.,

,,,

,,,

,, ,------

,.,

_- .-,

---------------------

,,, ,.

72

73

74

75

76

77

‘--------

Panel

LEGEND
78

79

80

81

Tots

82

I

83

84

85

86

87

8a

Year

Cos

t–share

o

43

0

41

0

39

Based

I

0

0

35

0

33

0

31

0

29

0

27

0

25

0

23i
72

1
73

1
74

I
75

I
76

LEGEND
r
77

dots

from

Ponel

1
78

I

1

79

80

---------

1
81

TOta

I
82

I

1

1
83

1

84

05

1
86

r

1

87

88

Year
Source:

Published

ASM

Bartels

man

and

Gray

(1995)

and

LRD

bolonced

panel.

Figure

3:

Employ

Decomposing

ment–shar

e

Change

in

Nonproduction

Share

Based

0 .025-

0.020

0

015

0.010

0.005

0.000

–0.005

LEGEND
–0.015
73

I
74

r
75

Between
Overall
I
76

r
77

,
78

79

.-Change
I
80

I
81

—-—-—

82

Covar:
Within
I
83

once
r
84

r
85

I
86

r
07

I
8a

Year

Cost–share

O

Based

025

0.020

0.015

0.070

0.005

0.000

–0.005

–0.010

LEGEND
–0.015

1
73

74

Between
Overall

I

I

75

76

1
77

Chanae

I

I

78

79

1

1

80

81
Year

Source.

LRO

bo

lanced

ponel.

Covor
Wlthlr

———–

1
82

I

83

ionce

1
84

1
85

I

86

I

1
87

88

Figure

4:

Within

Persistence

Plant

Changes

Nonproduction

in

Share

Rates

Rote
0.65

0.60

0.55

0.50

0

45

,,..
,.,

0.40

‘-.

-.

,,,

-.+

,/,
..-

..-

---

---

.-

.-

..-

~..

‘..
..

,.-.

--------------

-.

-.

,,
--------

,,

...

..
..>

,,

...
-------

-.

,,

,/,

----------./’

0.35

1
74

73

,
75

l–year

LEGEND
1
76

I

1
78

77

79

80

,

Z–year
1

,

‘-------I

3–

81

82

83

84

yeOr
,
85

86

1

,

87

8a

Year

Pers

is

tent

Components

Change
0.017
0.015
0.013
0.011
0.009
0.007
0.005
0.003
0.001

–0.001

–0.003
–0.005
–0.007
LEGEND
–0.009

I
73

1
74

I
75

1
76

Within
Within(2)

--------

1
77

1
78

1
79

y~;:+;[:]

. . -----

1

1
80

81

I

1

1
84

83

82

1

1

1

(

85

86

87

88

Year
Note:

Source:

W!

thin(i)

LRD

is
balanced

the
panel.

i—yenr

persistent

component

of

the

wi

th

I n

plant

change.

Figure 5: Change
Quodront

in Nonproduction Share, Quadrant Employment Share

I

0,030
0.025
0.020

o.020-

0.015

0.o15-

0.010

O.olo-

0.005

0,oo5-

0.000

O.ooo
-

-0,010

-o.oo5-.~..-...-.
.. ,,
-o.o1o-

-0015

-o.o15-

-0.005

,.,
!.
.,..........

-0,020
-0.025
-0. OJO

r

13

74

15

I

(

I

76

77

78

79

I

r

,

4

r

r

r

r

80

El

62

EJ

84

B5

86

81

00

73

14

75

76

77

78

79

80

Year

Quadrant

Ill

Quadrant

o 030

0.030

0.025

0.025

0,020

0.020

0.015

0,015

0.010

0.010

0.005

0.005

0.000

0.000

-0,005

-0.005

-0,010

-0,010

-0.015

-0,015

-0.020

-0.020

8J

84

B5

06

81

88

IV

-0.025

-0,030
lJ

1

,

I

74

75

76

I

77

1

1

1

I

7a

79

80

01

Yeor

Source:

82

\

-0.025

SOLIO
00TTEO

al

Yeor

line:
line:

Change
Chunqe

LRO balanced

jn
In

nonproduc
quadrant

panel.

lion
labor
employment

share.
share.

1
82

I

03

1

1

1

1

84

85

86

87

-0,030
88

73

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

74

75

76

77

78

79

80

81

82

83

84

Year

1
85

1
86

I

B7

88

Figure 6: Job Flows By Long Run Quadrant
(luod rant

I

Quadrant

II

Role

Rates

20

1

18

1

16

1

14

I

12

1

‘.

‘.:.
,.’,
., .

,. . ----

/’‘..

:

,!,:

10

, ‘.
‘, ‘.

‘.. .

!’
‘.

8

...

---

‘:
.-’.
..............

,,’
‘.

,,

,,’,
-..}..
>

‘.

r,
,,

‘..

‘,
‘,

-..
-.,

I

,:

.,

~.,

-.
-.

‘1
;
4

,,

‘!

,!

,’

I

,, ‘!,

‘.

;
,’
‘.,
.
.. ;
,“
-,,.- ,,

‘i
‘t,

6

,,”>

-..
.

~
..
........

..

... -’

/’
..,,

-..
. . . . . . . . ..~”

.-

“..
.....
.........”
.

...

~~

2

0
73

74

15

76

71

78

79

00

01

82

8J

84

85

86

81

13

80

14

75

16

77

78

19

80

Quadrant

Ill

Quadrant

Rotes
20

14-

14

12

12

10

10

B

8

6

6

4

4

2

2
N[C(NPW)

‘...
-. POS(NPW)
13

NfG(PW]
—
-------POS(PW]

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

1

74

15

76

77

78

79

f10

El

82

03

84

05

86

87

0

86

1
74

73

1

15

Year
Note: PW is

pfoduct,
bolonced

LRO

un

workers,
Danel.

NPW

is

85

U6

87

88

IV

LEGEND

1

Source:

84

In

16

—

8J

20

16-

LIGINO

82

Roles

r

18

0

81

Year

Yeor

nonproduc

1

I

76

1

—
.
1
70

N[G(NPW)
. Pas(NPw)
1
1
1
79

80

al
Year

lion

workers.

POS

is

job

creation,

N[C

is

job

destruction

—
N[G(Pw)
-------POS(PW)

1

1

1

1

1

1

82

83

04

85

86

87

89

Figure

7:

Nonproduction

Share

Change

Distribution.

Employment

— Based

Annual
Percent

of

employment

30

1
20

10

0
;
22
54

E E;;
222
32

; ;;;6
Z
1 0

i i
987

; ; 6 ; E ;;
i

i i
6543

i

i

i
2

;;;;;;;

i i 0000000
1 0 98
76
NOn

Sou

rce:

ASM

plants

Long–run

with

positive

0
2

production

000000000000
7890

share

5

Ooc
6

7

8

22222
1 2345

90

change

in

employment

lllllliiii2
1 2 34

adjacent

years

(1972–1987)

Percent

of

employment

RRRE

mmm~m

o
i
2
5

RRRRRHkmm
–o
o

6 i 6 i G E E E 5 G 6 5 G 6 8 i GGGEGGE
2 2
432

222
1 0

i i
987

1

i 1 i i
6 5 432

i

i
1

i 0000000000
0 98
76
543
Non

Source.

543

–00000000000
o
0000000000
0 0 1 23456
1

Census

of

Manufacturers

0

0

0

0

0

0000000000
1 2 3456
2

production
plants

o

0

00
1

7

890

0

0

0

1

i

1

2

i i i i
3 4 56

0

0

0

0

0 0

Oooooc

i i i z
78
90

2222
1 2345

1
share

with

0

pos

change
i

t

i ve

employment

in

1972

and

1987

2

Figure
Kaplan

for

H~ards

S:

Meir

I_arge

Positive

Nonproduction

Share

Changes

Hazard

Hozord
0.18

0.16

----

------ ..-

----

----

--- ----

---

~~..--__ - . . . . . . ..-. .-.-—.. ..

0.14

.. ...

~...+
...
.. -.>
...

-.

0.12

~...

0.10

0.00

1

‘--------

Boom

LEGEND

0.06

with

First

Prior

Since

Large

Differ

ence,

Ion
4

3

2
Years

Hazard,

Recess

Positive

5

Change

lV

Hazard

o

04

0.02

---------

----------------

-,._-- -_ .---—

----------

-------

------------

------------

. . -----

..- ,--0.00

--->.-’

..- .-”

..””

,.””

.-””
–0.02

–0.04

–0.06

LEGENO

–0.08

1
LRD

bo

lanced

panel

–

Recession

4

3

2
Since

Years
Source:

‘-------

Boom

plonts

Prior
with

Large
positive

Posltfve
long

5

Change
run

nonproductio

n

share

chong

es.

Figure 9: Observable and Unobservable Components of Nonproduction Share Changes (Base Case)
Mean
Mean

Difference
chanqe

95-5

0.019

Between

95th

and

5[h

Percen~ile~

chonge

0.20

0 017
0.18
0.015
0.16

0.013
0.011

0 14

0,009
0.12
0.007
0.005

0.10

0.003
0.08
0.001
0.06

-0.001
-0.003

0 04

-o 005
0.02
-0,007
lEGINO
-0.009
79

—
—

Acluol
Observubles-d

,

1

,

80

81

82

‘..- ...’
‘—

Y

8J

l[GENO

Observubles
Unobservobles

I

I

,

1

84

85

86

87

8B

—

Aclual
Observable;-dY

—

0.00
79

80

82

B1

83

Between

50th

and

5[h

Percentiles

Difference

50-5 change

95-50 change

o 10

0.10

O.OB

O.OB

006

0.06

//-,

\

/f

//

‘\

/

\/

l[GINO

...----......------””

1

00

All
resulls
Observable
LRO

95th

ond

50th

Percentiles

-------------

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..-

—
—

Acluol
Observobles-d

.
‘—

Y

..-

Observobles
Unobservable

1

1

I

1

1

81

82

83

B4

85

ore, employ menl-weigh
s-d Y IS observobles

bolonced

panel,

led.
eacludin

—
—

l[GINO
1

I

86

87

).00
88

79

Actual
Observable

1

1

1

00

al

B2

(he

change

n

oulpul

ellecl.

‘------‘—

s-d Y

1
83
Year

Yeor

Source:

Between

),02

0.00

Note:

80

0.04

. . . . ----

79

87

--------..------

-...................--------”-”0.02

06

L———

/

/r——”

85

/——-

/

0 04

84

Observobles
Unobservobles

Yeor

Yeor

Difference

‘...-. ‘—

Observobles
Unobservobles

1

1

I

B4

85

86

1
81

B8

Figure 10: Observable and Unobservable Components of Nonproduction Share Changes (R & D Case)
Mean
Mean

chanqe

Dif

erence

95-5

honge

95th

Eet ween

and

5th

Per cen tiles

0019
0017
0.180.015
0.16-

0.013
0011

0.14-

0.009
0.120.007
O.lo-

0 005

_———
0.003

/f——-

‘\,
\_/

/y

0 001

.........
,..
..............
...

....

0.06

-0.001

— ,

/“

0.08

....

-0.003

.,.
-’

0.04

-0.005
0.02 -0.007
—Aclual
—

l[GENO

-0.009
79

Observable

‘------‘—

s-d Y

—
—

l[GENO

Observobles
Unobservable

1

,

r

1

1

I

1

,

Bo

81

82

8J

84

85

86

07

0.00-,
8a

79

AC IUOI
Observable
1

I

1

!

80

al

02

03

Difference

Between

50th

and

5th

Percentiles

Difference
95-50

change

0.10

0.10

0.08

0.08

0 06

0 06

0

‘—

Obse(vables
Unobservable

,

1

1

I

04

83

06

87

Percen

iles

88

Yeol

Year

50-5

‘------s-d Y

Between

95th

and

50th

chonge

0.04

04/

. ...............

................ .. ..... .. ..---

...

0.02

0.02-....--.
””---”

LEGEND

O.OO-}
19

1

1

80

El

—
—

AC IUOI
Observobles-d

1

,

82

83

. . ....

1

1
04

B6

81

SOUrce:

All
resul~s
Observobles-d
LRO bolonced

are,
Y

employ meni-weiqh
IS observable
pOlle[

ied
excluding

88

79

1

1

1

80

al

02

Iuo I
Observable-d
1

(he

change

in

oulpul

ellecl.

‘------‘—

Y
1

83

04
Year

Year
Note:

0.00

1

1

05

‘Ac
—

lEGENO

Observable
Unobservable

‘—

Y

Observable
Unobstrvobles
I
1
85

86

1
87

88

