                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      LAW AND FINANCE




                                          Rafael La Porta
                                    Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                          Andrei Shleifer
                                         Robert W. Vishny




                                   NBER Working Paper 5661



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996



We are grateful to Mark Chen, Steven Friedman, Magdalena bpez-Morton,       and Katya Zhuravskaya
for excellent research assistance, to Robert Barre, Edward Glaeser, Zvi Griliches, Oliver Hart,
Martin Hellwig, James Hines, Louis Kaplow, Raghu Rajan, Luigi Zingales, the participants of the
Harvard Law School and Catholic University of Milan Law and Economics Seminars, and especially
Professor Francesco DeNozza for comments, and to the NSF, the NBER and the HIID for financial
support of this research. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Corporate Finance. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

O 1996 by Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny. All
rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper 5661
                                                                                         July 1996



                                        LAW AND FINANCE



                                             ABSTRACT



        This paper examines legal rules covering protection of corporate shareholders and creditors,

the origin of these rules, and the quality of their enforcement in 49 countries.   The results show that

common law countries generally have the best, and French civil law countries the worst, legal

protections of investors, with German and Scandinavian civil law countries located in the middle.

We also find that concentration of ownership of shares in the largest public companies is negatively

related to investor protections, consistent with the hypothesis that small, diversified shareholders are

unlikely to be important in countries that fail to protect their rights.




Rafael La Porta                                                  Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Department of Economics                                          Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University                                               Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                              79 JFK Street
                                                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                 and NBER

Andrei Shleifer                                                  Robert W. Vishny
Department of Economics                                          Graduate School of Business
Littauer315                                                      The University of Chicago
Harvard University                                               1101 East 58th Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                              Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                         and NBER
                                                     2

1. Overview of the issues.

        In traditional finance of Modigliani and Miller (1958), securities are recognized by their

cash flows. For example, debt has a fixed promised stream of interest payments, whereas equity

entitles its owner to receiving dividends.    Recent financial research has shown that this is fm from

the whole story, and that the defining feature of various securities is the rights that they bring to
                         .,
their owners (see, e.g., Hart 1995). Thus shares typically give their owners the right to vote for

directors of companies, whereas debt entitles creditors to, for example, the power to repossess

collateral when the company fails to make promised payments,

        The rights attached to securities become tremendously important once it is recognized that

managers of companies act in their own interest.         Investors’ rights give them the power to extract

from these managers the returns on their investment.         Thus shareholders receive dividends

because they can vote out the directors who do not pay them, and creditors are paid because they

have the power to repossess collateral.      Without these rights, investors would not be able to get

paid, and therefore firms would not have the benefit of raising finds from these investors,        The

rights attached to securities are what managers and entrepreneurs give up to get finance,

        But the view that securities are inherently characterized by some intrinsic rights is

incomplete as well, It ignores the obvious point that these rights depend on the legal rules of the

jurisdictions where these securities are issued.    Does being a shareholder in France give an

investor the same privileges as being a shareholder in the United States, India, or Mexico? Would

a secured creditor in Germany fare as well when the borrower defaults as one in Taiwan or Italy,

assuming that the value of the collateral is the same in all cases? Law and the quality of its

enforcement are potentially important determinants of what rights security holders have and how
                                                   3


well these rights are protected.   Since the protection investors receive determines their readiness

to finance firms, corporate finance may critically turn on these legal rules and their enforcement.

        Indeed, the differences in legal protections of investors might help explain why firms are

financed and owned so differently in different countries,   Why do Italian companies rarely go

public (Pagano, Panetta and Zingales 1995)? Why does Germany have such a small stock market,

but also maintains very luge and powefil     banks (Edwards and Fischer 1994)? My         is the voting

premium -- the price of shares with high voting rights relative to that of shares with low voting

rights -- small in Sweden and the United States, and much larger in Italy and Israel (Levy 1982,

Rydquist 1987, Zingales 1994, 1995)? Indeed, why were Russian stocks nearly worthless

immediately tier   privatization   -- by some estimates one hundred times cheaper than Western

stocks backed by comparable assets -- and why did Russian companies have virtually no access to

external finance (Boycko, Shleifer and Vishny 1993)? Why is ownership of large American and

British companies so widely dispersed (Berle and Means 1932)? The content of legal rules in

different countries may well shed light on these corporate governance puzzles,

        In recent years, economists and legal scholars have begun to examine theoretically the

costs of benefits of alternative legal rules regarding investor rights (e.g., Bebchuk 1995, Bebchuk

and Zingales 1995, &omb       1993, Grossman and Hart 1988, Harris and Raviv 1988). The trouble

is, there are no systematic data available on what the legal rules pertaining to corporate

governance are around the world, how well these rules are enforced in different countries, and

what effect these rules have. There is no systematic knowledge, for example, of whether different

countries actually do have substantially different rules that might explain differences in their

financing patterns. Comparative statistical analysis of the legal underpimings    of corporate finance
                                                    4

-- and commerce more generally -- remains unchartered territory.

        In this paper, we attempt to explore this territory.   We examine empirically how laws

protecting investors differ across countries, how quality of enforcement of these laws varies, and

whether these variations matter for corporate ownership patterns around the world.

        Our starting point is the recognition that laws in different countries are typically not

written from scratch, but rather transplanted -- voluntarily or otherwise -- from a few legal

families or traditions (Watson 1974).    In general, commercial laws come from two broad

traditions: common law and civil law, Legal rules of civil law countries are derived from Roman

Law, and “are conceived as rules of conduct intimately linked to ideas of justice and morality”

(David and Brierley 1985, p. 22). These rules are usually developed by legal scholars, and

incorporated into commercial codes. In contrast, common law is British in origin, and was

“formed primarily by judges who tried to resolve specific disputes” (David and Brierley, p. 24).

Furthermore, there are only three major civil law traditions or families that modem commercial

laws originate from: French, German, and Scandinavian,         The French and the German civil

traditions, as well as the common law tradition, have spread around the world through a

combination of conquest, imperialism, outright borrowing, and more subtle imitation.        The

resulting laws reflect both the influence of their families and the revisions specific to individual

countries.   As a result of this spread of legal families and the subsequent evolution of the laws, we

can compare both the individual legal rules and whole families across a large number of countries.

        To this end, we have assembled a data set covering legal rules pertaining to the rights of

investors, and to the quality of enforcement of these rules, in 49 countries that have publicly

traded companies.     For shareholders, some of the rules we examine cover voting powers, ease of
                                                       5

participation in corporate voting, and legal protections against expropriation by management.          For

creditors, some of these rules cover the respect for security of the loan, the ability to grab assets

in case of a loan default, and the inability of management to seek protection from creditors

unilaterally.   In effect, these rules measure the ease with which investors can exercise their powers

against management.      We also consider measures of the quality of enforcement of legal rules in

different countries and of the quality of their accounting systems. These data allow us to tell

which countries protect what types of investors, and how well they do it. We can also find out

how much of the differences between national laws is explained by the legal origin of these laws,

          Our analysis yields some striking results.       To begin, laws differ a great deal across

countries: an investor in France has very different legal rights than she does in Britain or Taiwan,

Moreover, a large part of this variation is accounted for by differences in legal origin, Civil laws

give investors weaker legal rights than common laws do. The most striking difference is between

common law countries, which give both shareholders and creditors the -- relatively speaking --

strongest protections,   and French civil law countries, which protect investors the least. German

civil law and Scandinavian countries fall between common law and French civil law countries in

the strength of legal investor protection.   The quality of law enforcement is the highest in

Scandinavian and German civil law countries, next highest in common law countries, and again

the lowest in French civil law countries,    Finally, these results are not just a consequence of

different income levels in countries with different laws. All the evidence thus suggests the

weahess     of the legal protections afforded investors in French civil law countries compared to

those in common law countries, regardless of income levels.

          But showing that law and its enforcement varies across countries and legal families is only
                                                    6

the beginning of the story. The nefi question is how do the countries with poor laws or their

enforcement cope with this problem?      Do their firms get no financing at all, or do these countries

have other, substitute mechanisms of corporate governance?       These mechanisms maybe in fact

incorporated into the law, or they may lie outside the law. In addition to establishing the

significant differences in investor protection across legal systems, this paper begins to examine

some of the possible adaptations to the lack of investor protection,

          One potential adaptation to fewer laws is strong enforcement of laws, but as we pointed

out above this does not appear to be the case empirically.    Another possible -- legal -- adaptation,

which legal scholars sometimes refer to as “bright line” rules, is to legally introduce mandatory

standards of retention and distribution of capital to investors, which limit the opportunities   for

managerial expropriation.    Indeed, we find that French civil law countries are more likely to have

such bright line legal rules, namely mmdato~      dividends and maintenance of legal capital reserves,

than the rest of the countries.

          Perhaps the most interesting adaptation to the lack of legal protections that we examine is

ownership concentration.     Some concentration   of ownership of a firm’s shares is typically efficient

to provide managers with an incentive to work, and large investors with an incentive to monitor

the managers (Jensen and Meckling 1976, Shleifer and Vishny 1986), However, some dispersion

of ownership among small investors is also desirable to diversifi risk. As argued by Shleifer and

Vishny (1996), ownership concentration     may actually become excessive when small investors do

not have enough legal rights to secure a return on their investment, and hence avoid holding

shares.    When the law protects investors, they can remain small and still hope to get something

back on their money, When the law does not protect them, investors have to be large and
                                                     7

powefil       to stand up to the management and extract payments from them,

          In this paper, we examine ownership concentration      in the largest publicly traded

companies in the countries in our smple,      and find a strong negative correlation between

concentration     of ownership, as measured by the combined stake of the three largest shareholders,

and the quality of legal protection of investors in a country,     The substitute for poor investor
                               ,
protection in French civil. law countries is extremely concentrated     ownership, and by consequence

lack of significant public equity markets.    The data on ownership concentration      thus cofirms   the

idea that legal systems matter for corporate governance, and that firms have to adapt to the

limitations of the legrd systems that they operate in.

          The next section of the paper describes the countries and their laws. Sections 3 and 4 then

compare shareholder and creditor rights, respectively, in different countries and different legal

traditions,    Section 5 compares the quality of law etiorcement     and accounting standards in

different countries and legal traditions.    Section 6 focuses on ownership.    In section 7, we

examine and reject the hypothesis that poverty accounts for poor investor protection, although the

quality of legal enforcement clearly improves with income.       Section 8 summarizes our findings.




2, Countries, Legal Families, and Legal Rules.

Countries

          Most studies of corporate governance focus on one, or a few, wealthy economies (see,

e.g., Rajan and Zingales 1995, Berglof and Perotti 1994, Gorton and Schmidt 1995, Kaplan and

Minton 1994). However, corporate governance in all of the three economies that scholars

typically focus on -- the United States, Germany, and Japan -- is quite effective, To understand
                                                     8

better the role of legal protection of investors,   we need to examine a larger sample of countries,

To this end, we have assembled as comprehensive a sample as possible of countries that have

some non-financial firms traded on their stock exchanges.      The sample covers 49 countries from

Europe, North and South Americ~ Afi-ica, Asia, and Australia.        There are no socialist or

“transition” economies in the sample. A country is selected for inclusion i~ based on the

WorldScope    sample of 1$,900 firms from 33 countries and the Moody’s International sample of

15,100 non-U. S. firms from 92 countries, that country had at least five domestic non-financial

publicly traded firms in 1993. We restrict attention to countries that have publicly traded firms

since our primary focus is on protecting investor rights, and without public shareholders a

discussion of investor rights would be limited, Having at least five non-financial firms is also

essential for construction of ownership data,




Legal Families

        Comparative legal scholars agree that, even though no two nations’ laws are exactly alike,

some national legal systems are sufficiently similar in certain critical respects to permit

classification of national legal systems into major families of law. Although there is no unanimity

among legal scholars on how to define legal families, “among the criteria often used for this

purpose are the following: (1) historical background and development of the legal system, (2)

theones and hierarchies of sources of law, (3) the working methodology        of jurists within the legal

systems, (4) the characteristics   of legal concepts employed by the system, (5) the legal institutions

of the system, and (6) the divisions of law employed within a system” (Glendon et al 1992, pp. 4-

5),   Based on this approach, scholars identifi two broad legal traditions that pertain to matters
                                                    9

discussed in this paper: civil law and common Ia#,

        The civil, or Romano-Germanic,      legal tradition is the oldest, the most itiuential,    and the

most widely distributed tradition around the world. It originates in Roman law, uses statutes and

comprehensive codes as a primary means of ordering legal material, and relies heavily on legal

scholars to ascertain and formulate its rules (Merryman 1969). Legal scholars typically identifi

three currently common families of laws within the civil law tradition: French, Germq             and

Scandinavian.    The French Commercial Code was written under Napoleon in 1807, and brought

by his armies to Belgium, the Netherlands,     part of Poland, Italy, and Western regions of Germany,

In the colonial era, France extended her legal itiuence     to the Near East and Northern and Sub-

Saharan Africa, Indochina, Oceania, and French Caribbea         islands. French legal influence has

been significant as well in Luxembourg,     Portugal, Spain, some of the Swiss cantons, and Italy

(Glendon et d. 1994). When the Spanish and Portuguese          empires in Latin America dissolved in

the 19th century, it was mainly the French civil law that the lawmakers of the new nations looked

to for inspiration.   Our sample contains 21 countries with laws in the French civil tradition.

        The German Commercial Code was written in 1897 afier Bismarck’s unification of

Germany, and perhaps because it was produced several decades later, was not as widely adopted

as the French Code. It had an important irdluence on the legal theory and doctrine in Austria,




         2The religious traditions, such as Jewish law, Canon Law, Hindu law, and Muslim law,
appear to be less relevant in matters of investor protections. “Thus the Arabian countries
unquestionably belong to Islamic law as far as family and inheritance law is concerned, just as
India belongs to Hindu law, but economic law of these countries (including commercial law and
the law of contract and tort) is heavily impressed by the legal thinking of the colonial and
mandatory powers -- the Common Law in the case of India, French law in the case of most of the
Arab States” (Zweigert and Kotz 1987, p, 66). We focus on the principal secular legal traditions
in this study.
                                                         10

Czechoslovakia,      Greece, Hungary, Italy, Switzerland, Yugoslavia, Japan and Korea.              Taiwan’s

laws came from China, which borrowed heavily from the Geman Code during its modernization.

We have 6 countries from this family in our sample.

         The Scandinavian ftily      is usually viewed as part of the civil law tradition, although its

law is less derivative of Roman law than the French and German ftilies                 (Zweigert and Kotz

1987).      Although Nordic countries had civil codes as fm back as the 18th centu~, these codes

are not used any more. Most writers describe the Scandinavian laws as similar to each other but

“distinct” fi-om others, so we keep the 4 Nordic countries in our sample as a separate family.

         The family referred to as the common law tradition includes the law of England and those

laws modeled on English law. The common law is formed by judges who have to resolve specific

disputes.    Precedents from judicid decisions, as opposed to contributions by the scholars, shape

common law. Common law has spread to British colonies, including the United States, Canada,

Australia, India, and many other countries.      There are 18 common law countries in our sample.

         Zweigert andKotz(1987)        offer a colofil        characterization   of the differences between

common and civil law: “The tradition of the English Common Law has been one of gradual

development from decision to decision: historically speaking, it is case law, not enacted law. On

the Continent, the development       since the reception of Roman law has been quite different, from

the interpretation    of the Justinian’s Corpus Iuris to the codification, nation by nation, of abstract

rules. So common law comes horn the court, Continental Law from the study; the great jurists of

England were judges, on the Continent professors.              On the Continent lawyers, faced with a

problem, even a new and unforeseen one, ask what solution the rule provides; in England and the

United States they predict how the judge would deal with the problem, given existing decisions.
                                                      11

These differences in style run through the whole legal system. On the Continent lawyers think

abstractly, in terms of institutions; in England concretely, in terms of cases, the relationship of the

parties, ‘rights and duties.’ On the Continent, the system is conceived as being complete and free

from gaps, in England lawyers feel their way gradually from case to case. On the Continent

lawyers delight in systematic,       in England they are skeptical of every generalization.   On the

Continent lawyers operatp with ideas, which often, dangerously enough, take on a life of their

own; in England they thih       in pictures; and so one could continue. ”

        To classify countries into legal ftilies,     we rely principally on a publication of the

American ~sociation      of Law Libraries called “Foreign Law: Current Sources of Codes and Basic

Legislation in Jurisdictions Around the World” (Reynolds and Flores, 1989), In most cases, such

classification is uncontroversial.     In some cases, however, while the basic origin of laws is clear,

laws over time have been amended to incorporate the needs of the adopting country as well as

influences from other ftilies.       For example, although Ecuador is a French civil law country, its

company law was revised in 1977 in part to incorporate some common law rules. Wer World

War II, the American occupying army changed some Japanese laws, although their basic German

civil law structure remained.     While Italian laws originate in the French tradition, over years they

had some German influence. In all these -- and several other -- cases, we have classified a country

based on the original structure of the laws it adopted, rather than on the revisions.

        One potential difficulty for our classification is posed by the attempt to harmonize West

European laws currently underway in the European Community (Andenas and Kenyon-Slade

1993, Werlauff 1993).      The Community has issued several directives designed to uni~ European

commercial laws, including some of the laws that pertain to corporate governance.             Several
                                                    12

countries have changed their laws to adhere to EC directives.      However, in most instances, the

directives are not mandatory, and the countries are given some time to change their laws.

Moreover, the EC directives accommodate         a great deal of diversity between countries.   As of

1993 -1994--   the point in time when we examine the legal rules of the countries in our sample --

EC harmonization has not generally affected the legal rules that we focus on. The one area where

the EC impact has been large, namely mergers and acquisitions, is not an area that we examine in

this paper (see below).




Legal Rules

        In this paper, we look at a fairly narrow range of differences between laws, namely those

pertaining to investor protection,   To this end, we examine two types of laws: company laws and

bankruptcy/ reorganization    laws. Company laws exist in all countries, and are concerned with (1)

the legal relations between corporate insiders (members of the corporation,      i.e., shareholders,

directors) and the corporation itself and (2) the legal relations between the corporation and

certain outsiders, particularly creditors,   Bankruptcy/ reorganization   laws apply more generally

than just to companies, but deal specifically with procedures that unfold in the case of failure to

pay back debt, All these laws are part of the commercial codes in civil law countries, and exist as

separate laws, mainly in the form of Acts, in common law countries.

        Although the focus on these two sources of law gives us a lot of data, there are several

conspicuous omissions from the data set. First, this paper says little about merger and takeover

rules, except indirectly by looking at voting mechanisms,     These rules are spread between

company laws, anti-trust laws, security laws, stock exchange regulations, and sometimes banking
                                                  13

regulations as well, Moreover, these rules have changed significantly in Europe as part of EC

legal harmonization.   Until now, takeovers have been an important governance tool mainly in a

few civil law countries, although the situation may change, We defer an analysis of these rules to

a separate paper,

        Second, this paper also says little about disclosure rules, which again come from many

sources, including comp~y      laws, security laws, and stock exchange regulations, and are also

intended for harmonization     across the European Community      One important caveat here is that

we do look at the quality of accounting standards, which to a significant extent is a consequence

of the disclosure rules.

        Third, we do not in this paper use any information from regulations imposed by security

exchanges.   One instance where this is relevant is exchange-imposed    restrictions on the voting

rights for the shares that companies can issue if these shares are to be traded on the exchange.

        Finally, a potentially important set of rules that we do not deal with here is banking and

financial institution regulations, which might take the form of restricting bank ownership, for

example, Much has been made of these regulations in the United States by Roe (1994).         Again,

we defer their codification and examination to fiture work.

        An inspection of company and bankruptcy laws suggests numerous potentially measurable

differences among countries.     Here we focus only on some of the most basic rules that observers

of corporate governance around the world (e.g., Paul Vishny 1994, Investor Responsibility

Research Center 1994, Institutional    Shareholder Sefices   1994, White 1993, American Bar

Association 1989 and 1993) believe to be critical to the quality of shareholder and creditor legal

rights. Moreover, we focus on variables that prima facie are interpretable as either pro-investor
                                                    14

or pro-management,      since this is the dimension along which we are trying to assess countries and

legal ftilies.    There are obvious differences in rules between countries, such as for example tier

structures of boards of directors, that we do not examine because we cannot ascertain which of

these rules are more sympathetic to shareholders.        Investor rights, as well as the other variables

we use in this paper, are summarized in Table 1. We discuss individual variables in more detail in

the sections where they we analyzed.     The Appendix summarizes by country the data sources that

were used to construct the data set3.




Some Conceptual Issues

         The goal of our research, as we already mentioned, is to establish whether laws pertaining

to investor protection differ across countries and whether these differences have consequences for

corporate finance. This research design immediately poses some conceptual problems.              To begin,

some scholars, such as Easterbrook     and Fischel (1991), are skeptical that legal rules are binding in

most instances, since ofien firms can opt out of these rules in their corporate charters, which

effectively serve as contracts between entrepreneurs and investors,        Indeed, in many countries,

firms can opt out of some of the rules we examine. As a practical matter, however, it maybe

costly for firms to opt out of standard legal rules since investors might have difficulty accepting

non-standard     contracts and, more importantly, judges might ftil to understand or enforce them,

Perhaps for this reason, standard legal rules appear to have some bite, Even more important, the



        3The data collected for this paper come from multiple sources, ranging from publicly and
commercially available data sets, to respective countries’ laws and commentaries on these laws.
We have been able to obtain nearly complete data for over 45 countries, and taken some care to
assure their accuracy. The tables in this paper present all the data on legal rights and their
enforcement that we use in the analysis.
                                                    15

question of whether legal rules matter is fundamentally empirical: if opting out were cheap and

simple, we would not find that legal rules matter for patterns of corporate ownership and finance

        Even if we were to find that legal rules matter, it would be possible to argue that these

rules endogenously adjust to economic reality, and hence the differences in rules and outcomes

simply reflect the differences in some other, exogenous conditions across countries.        Perhaps

some countries chose to have ordy bank finance of firms for political reasons, and then adjusted

their laws accordingly to protect banks and discourage shareholders.        For some individual rules,

this is surely the case, However, this is where our focus on the legal origin becomes crucial.

Countries typically adopted their legal systems involuntarily (through conquest or colonization),

and even when they chose a legal system freely, as in the case of former Spanish colonies, the

crucial consideration was language and the broad political stance of the law rather than the

treatment of investor protections.    The legal family can therefore be treated as exogenous to a

country’s structure of corporate ownership and finance.       If we find that legal rules differ

substantially across legal ftilies,   and that so do financing and ownership patterns, we have a

strong case that legal ftilies,   as expressed in the legal rules, actually affect outcomes,

        Finally, this paper takes the rather standard point of view that investor protections

contribute to external financing of firms, and hence to economic efficiency.       This need not

necessarily be the case, A country might develop and grow with limited legal protections of

outside investors, and with only internal and state finance of firms, Our paper does not address

this theoretical issue; it rather relies on the existing research (sumeyed, e.g., by Shleifer and

Vishny 1996) to presume that investor protections are good for economic efficiency.
                                                  16

3, Shareholder rights.

        We begin by considering shareholder rights from company laws. Because shareholders

exercise their power by voting for directors, experts focus on voting procedures in evaluating

shareholder rights. These include: voting rights attached to shares, rights that support the voting

mechanism against interference by the insiders, and what we call remedial rights. To begin,

investors may be better protected when dividend rights are tightly linked to voting rights, i,e.

companies in a country are subject to one-share-one-vote      rules (Grossman and Hart 1988, Harris

and Raviv 1988)4. The idea is that, when votes are tied to dividends, insiders cannot appropriate

cash flows to themselves by controlling ordy a small share of the company’s cash flows but still

maintaining voting control.   There are many ways out of the one-share-one-vote      principle that

laws in different countries accommodate.   Companies can issue non-voting shares, low and high-

voting shares, founders’ shares with extremely high voting rights, or shares whose votes increase

when they are held longer, as in France.   Companies can also restrict the total number of votes

that any given shareholder can exercise at a shareholders’ meeting, regardless of how many votes

he controls,   We say that a country has one-share one-vote if none of these practices is allowed by

law. In our sample, only 11 countries impose genuine one-share one-vote rules,

        The next five rights are much more straightforward,     and essentially describe how easy it is

for shareholders to exercise their voting rights, Because these rights measure how strongly the

legal system favors shareholders (against managers) in the voting process, we refer to them as

anti-director rights. First, in some countries, shareholders must show up in person, or send an


         40ne of the European Community directives recommends the adoption of one-share-one-
vote rules throughout the Community.   It does not appear that this directive is being incorporated
into national laws too rapidly,
                                                   17

authorized representative,   to a shareholders’ meeting to be able to vote, In other countries, in

contrast, they can vote by mail, which makes it easier for them to cast their votes, In Japan, for

example, about 80 percent of companies hold their annual meeting on the same week, and voting

by mail is not allowed, which makes it difficult for shareholders to exercise their votes unless they

go through a legal procedure of designating their proxies at the meetings.

        Second, in some gountries, law requires that shareholders deposit their shares with the

company or a financial intermediary several days prior to a shareholder meeting.     The shares are

then kept in custody until a few days after the meeting.   This practice prevents shareholders from

selling their shares for several days around the time of the meeting, and keeps shareholders who

do not bother to go through this exercise from voting,

        Third, some countries allow cumulative voting for directors, which in principle gives more

power for minority shareholders to put their representatives   on boards of directors.

        Fourth, some countries give minority shareholders legal mechanisms to be used against

perceived oppression by directors.    These mechanisms may include the right to sue directors (as in

the American derivative suits) or the right to force the company to purchase shares of the

shareholders who object to certain fundamental changes, such as mergers or asset sales.

        Fifth, we look at the percentage of share capital needed to call an extraordinary

shareholders’ meeting.   Presumably, the higher this percentage is, the harder it is for minority

shareholders to organize a meeting to challenge or oust the management.       This percentage varies

around the world from 1 percent in some U. S. states to 33 percent of share capital in Mexico.

        Finally, we combine these five anti-director rights into an aggregate anti-director rights

measure described in Table 1.
                                                   18

        The last shareholder rights measure, which we treat a bit differently from others, is the

right to a mandatory dividend. In some countries, companies are mandated by law to pay out a

certain fraction of their declared earnings as dividends,   Earnings of course can be misrepresented

within the limits allowed by the accounting system, so this measure is not as tough as it looks, but

at least it prevents declarations of high earnings, which might be needed to raise additional finds,

without dividend payouts.    The mandatory dividend right may be needed when other rights of

shareholders are too weak to induce them to invest. We test this hypothesis in Section 5.

        Table 2 presents the data on shareholder rights, where the vrdues of all variables are listed

by country, and countries are organized by legal origin. Columns in Table 2 generally correspond

to particular legal provisions concerning shareholder rights, and the values in the tables are

dummies indicating whether a country has the particular legal provision.     Table 2 also presents

equality of means tests for all the variables by origin.

        An examination of world means of the variables in Tables 2 suggests that relatively few

countries have legal rules favoring outside shareholders.    Ordy 22 percent of the countries have

one share one vote, ordy 16 percent allow cumulative voting, ordy 22 percent allow voting by

mail, and only 53 percent protect oppressed minorities.     One could argue that other -- private --

mechanisms facilitate external equity finance, such as the managerial reputations (Gomes 1996).

The point here is only that shareholder protections do not very ofien come from legal rules.

        The other clear result in Table 2 is that, for many variables, the origin of laws matters.

Although we present more formal statistical tests of this proposition later in this section, Table 2

shows that the means of shareholder rights variables are statistically significantly different between

origins. Two variables where most origins are similar are one-share-one-vote,      which is an
                                                       19

uncommon restriction everywhere (and never happens in Scandinavia, which is therefore

different), and cumulative voting, which is also uncommon everywhere (and never happens in

Scandinavia, which is therefore different).       With other variables, the differences in shareholder

rights between legal origins are more substantial,

        Specifically, two major facts emerge from Table 2. First, along a variety of dimensions,

common law countries word the best legal protections to shareholders.            They most frequently

(39%) allow shareholders to vote by mail, they never block shares for shareholder meetings, they

have the highest (92Yo) incidence of laws protecting oppressed minorities, and they generally

require relatively few shares (90A) to call an extraordinary shareholder meeting.        Not surprisingly,

they also have the highest of all legal ftilies     aggregate anti-director rights score (3.39), including

the only perfect 5 for the United States. Many of these differences between common law and civil

law countries are statistically significant.   In short, relative to the rest of the world, common law

countries have a better package of laws protecting shareholders.

        Second, along a broad range of dimensions, French civil law countries afford the worst

legal protections to shareholders.    Although they look average on one-share-one-vote         (24%) and

cumulative voting (190A), they have the lowest (90A) incidence of allowing voting by mail, a high

(43%, though not as high as German civil law countries) incidence of blocking shares for

shareholder meetings, a low (3 3°/0, though not as low as Nordic countries) incidence of laws

protecting oppressed minorities, and the highest (14%) percentage of share capital needed to call

an extraordinary shareholders’ meeting.        On the aggregate anti-director rights measure, French

civil law countries look the worst (1. 76), The differences between French civil law and common

law are large and statistically significant, although other civil law families are not evidently more
                                                    20

protective of shareholders than the French civil law countries are, Interestingly, even France

itself, except for allowing proxies by mail, does not have good legal protections of shareholders.

These results suggest that shareholders in the two most widely-spread legal regimes: common law

and French civil law, operate in very different legal environments.

        The Germm civil law countries are in general located between the two extremes, but

closer to the French family.    They have a relatively high frequency of one-share one-vote rules

(because of East Aia) and require relatively few votes to call an extraordinary meeting, but they

also typically block shares for shareholder meetings and rarely allow voting by mail. The average

anti-director score for this family is 2.00 -- closer to the French family than to the common law

family, Scandinavia presents a mixed picture, with an aggregate anti-director score of 2,50, For

example, only Denmark appears to have oppressed minority protections,        and only Norway allows

voting by mail,

        The one remedial measure in Table 2, namely mandatory dividend, shows that mandatory

dividends are used on~ in French civil law countries.     This result is broadly consistent with the

rest of our evidence, and suggests that mandatory dividends are indeed a remedial legal protection

for shareholders who have relatively few other legal rights.

        The final task of this section is to ask whether, in a statistical sense, once we consider all

the legal rules at once, legal origin matters,   In addressing this question, we must examine

shareholder and creditor rights together, even though we discuss the results on creditor rights in

the next section,   We can also deal with another potential concern (addressed in more detail in

section 7), namely that differences in legal origin just reflect differences in per capita income

levels, Accordingly, we estimate a stacked regression using all the variables from Table 2 (other
                                                  21

than the aggregate anti-director variable) plus the five creditor rights (described in Table 3 and the

next section) as dependent variables, and origin dummies and levels of GNP per capita in each

country as independent variables.   Because within a country specific laws are correlated with each

other, the appropriate estimation method is Seemingly Unrelated Regression.        We can then

perform F-tests of the hypothesis that origin matters for shareholder rights. The results of the

regressions are presented in Table 4, and the F-tests in Table 5,

        The results in Table 4 cofirm   the findings of Table 2 that civil law, and especially French

civil law, countries have inferior protections of shareholders to those of the common law

countries.   Controlling for per capita income does not change this result (we return to per capita

income in section 7). The tests in Panel A of Table 5 furthermore show that, even controlling for

per capita income levels, legal origin matters for laws protecting shareholders,    With reasonable

cofidence,   we can reject the hypothesis that any given origin has the same laws as the rest of the

world, Moreover, the table shows that the two origins that are most different from the others are

French civil law and common law. We can also reject the hypotheses that the laws in the German

family are the same as those in either the French or the common law fmilies.

        These formal tests are consistent with the principal finding of this section, namely that

common law countries have the relatively better protections of shareholders, and the French civil

law countries have the worst ones5. A minority shareholder in Australia or South Africa can vote



          5Some European legal scholars have objected to this conclusion on the grounds that our
selection of variables was biased toward finding common law countries more protective of
investors. One variable that these scholars objected to our not using is the mandato~ preemptive
right to buy new shares given by many European countries to the existing shareholders.
Originally, this right did not appear to us to be critical, which is why we did not include it. Mer
this criticism, we have analyzed the data on this right, although we did not include the results in
the basic tables since this right was selected to favor civil law countries, As it happens, 56
                                                     22

by mail, can trade his shares during a shareholders’ meeting, is protected from certain

expropriations by directors, and needs to have only 5°/0 of share capital to call an extraordinary

meeting. A minority shareholder in Italy or Belgium, in contrast, cannot vote by mail, has tis

shares blocked during the shareholder meeting, is not protected from expropriation by directors

and needs to have 20°/0 of share capital to call for an extraordinary meeting.       The differences

between legal origins come out loud and clear from this analysis of shareholder rights.




4. Creditor Rights.

        Conceptually,      creditor rights are more complex than shareholder rights. The reason is that

creditors exercise their power in several ways. Perhaps the most basic creditor right is the right to

repossess -- and then liquidate or keep -- collateral when a loan is in default (see Hart 1995).

For collateralized loans, the power of creditors against borrowers depends largely on the ease of

repossessing collateral.      In some countries, law makes it difficult for the lenders to repossess

collateral, in part because such repossession leads to liquidation of firms that is viewed as socially

undesirable.   In these countries, lenders may still have some powers against borrowers, namely

their votes in the decisions for how to reorganize the company and pay off the creditors.        The

creditor rights that experts consider to be essential for debt finance are the rights to repossess

collateral and to have a say in reorganization     (see Paul Vishny 1994, Aghion, Hart, and Moore


percent of common law countries have this rule, compared to 76 percent of French civil law
countries (t = 1.36), 50 percent of German civil law countries (t = .23 in the comparison to
common law), and 100 percent of Scandinavian countries ( t = -3.69 in the comparison to
common law). Thus the principal comparison of common law to French, and even German, civil
law families is not materially affected by the inclusion of this variable. We have also checked all
our firther results and none are affected by the inclusion of this measure of preemptive
shareholder rights.
                                                    23

1992, Baird 1995, White 1993).

        We use five creditor rights variables in this analysis. First, in some countries, the

reorganization procedure imposes an automatic stay on the assets, thereby preventing secured

creditors from getting possession of loan collateral.     This rule obviously protects managers and

unsecured creditors against secured creditors and prevents automatic liquidation.       In Greece, for

example, secured credito~s have the right for foreclose on their property when their claim matures

and not when the borrower defaults (Guide to Insolvency in Europe 1989, p, 112). In other

countries, in contrast, secured creditors can pull collateral from firms being reorganized without

waiting for completion of reorgtition.

        Second, some countries do not assure the secured creditors the right to collateral in

reorganization.   In these, admittedly rare, countries, secured creditors are in line behind the

Government and workers, who have absolute priority over them.           To use Mexico as an example,

various social constituencies   need to be repaid before the secured creditors, ofien leaving the

latter with no assets to back up their claims,

        Third, with respect to reorganizatio~     management in some countries can seek protection

from creditors unilaterally by filing for reorgtiation,     without creditor consent,   Such protection

is called Chapter 11 in the United States, and gives management a great deal of power against

creditors, since at best creditors can get their money or collateral only with a delay. In other

countries, in contrast, creditor consent is needed to file for reorganization,   and hence managers

cannot so easily escape creditor demands.

        Finally, in some countries, management stays pending the resolution of the reorganization

procedure, whereas in other countries, such as Malaysia, management is replaced by a party
                                                    24

appointed by the court or the creditors,     This threat of dismissal may enhance creditors’ power.

        As with shareholder rights, we use one remedial creditor rights measure, namely the

existence of a legal reserve requirement.    This requirement forces firms to maintain a certain level

of capital to avoid automatic liquidation.    It protects creditors when they have few other powers

in that it forces an automatic liquidation before all the capital is stolen or wasted by the insiders.

        The results on creditor rights are presented in Table 3, which is organized in the same way

as Table 2. In general, the protections of creditor rights analyzed here are more common than the

protections of shareholder rights. Over half the countries restrict the managers’ right to seek

protection from creditors unilaterally, 85 percent pay secured creditors first, nearly half do not

have automatic stay on assets, and 43 percent remove management in reorganization          proceedings,

As in Table 2, we see that, for many creditor rights, the legal origin matters (again we defer the F-

tests to the end of this section).   Moreover, the ranking of origins by the extent of investor

protection is similar for creditors to what it is for shareholders.

        Common law countries offer creditors better legal protections against managers.         They

most frequently (710/0, roughly tied with Scandinavia) preclude managers from unilaterally seeking

court protection from creditors; they have the lowest (29°/0) incidence of allowing automatic stay

on assets; with one exception, they guarantee that secured creditors are paid first (as do German

civil law and Scandinavian families); and they have far and away the lowest (24°/0) incidence of

managers staying on the job in reorganization     proceedings.   The United States is actually one of

the most anti-creditor common law countries: it allows unimpeded petition for reorganization,

permits automatic stay on assets, and lets managers keep their jobs in reorganization.

        Creditor rights results also resemble those for shareholder rights in that the French civil
                                                  25

law countries offer creditors the weakest protections.   Few of them (42Y0 -- still more than

German civil law countries) place restrictions on managers seeking court protection from

creditors, many (74°/0, tied with Scandinavia) allow the automatic stay on assets, relatively few

(68%) assure that secured creditors are paid first, and the vast majority (74%, though not as many

as in Scandinavia) allow managers to stay on the job in reorganization    proceedings.

        On some measure,s, countries in the German civil law ftily      are strongly pro-creditor.     For

instance, relatively few (3 3°/0) of them allow automatic stay and secured creditors in all of them

are paid first. On the other hand, relatively few of these countries (33°/0) prevent managers fi-om

getting protection from creditors unilaterally, and most (67VO)allow managers to stay in

reorganization.   One view of this evidence is that the German civil law countries are very

responsive to secured creditors by not allowing automatic stay and by letting them pull collateral,

As a consequence of making liquidation easy, these countries rely lesson reorganization       of

defaulting firms, and hence being sofi on such firms by letting managers stay may not be a big

problem.   Scandinavia, as before, has some pro-management      and some pro-creditor laws. The

main differences, as with shareholders, are between common law and French civil law countries.

        The evidence on the one remedial pro-creditor    legal rule in the sample, namely the legal

reserve requirement, is consistent with the rest of our findings. Specifically, these requirements

almost never exist in common law countries, where other investor protections presumably suffice.

On the other hand, these requirements are more common in all civil law countries,        Since legal

reserve requirements are likely to protect unsecured creditors in particular, it is not surprising that

they are relatively common in the German civil law countries, which tend to be as bad as the

French civil law countries in treating unsecured creditors.   Remedial rights, then, are used when
                                                      26

other investor powers are insufficient to enable them to earn returns on their investments.

        From this analysis, it appears that the ranking of origins is roughly the same for creditor

and shareholder protections.     Some legal ftilies     -- relatively speaking -- protect all investors, and

others protect none. It does not appear that some legal ftilies        protect shareholders and others

protect creditors.   We can ask this question more formally by looking at the correlations, across

countries, between shareholder and creditor rights measures.         This is done in Table 6. The results

do not support the hypothesis that countries protect either shareholders or creditors, and if

anything, suggest the reverse. For example, the correlation of oppressed minority rights is .08

with restrictions on managers unilaterally seeking protection from creditors, -.23 with having an

automatic stay on assets, ,18 with having secured creditors first in line, and -,33 with managers

staying in reorganization.    In short, we have no systematic evidence that legal rules discriminate

between investor types, except that German civil law countries are partial to secured creditors.

        Next, we return to Tables 4 and 5 and formally ask the question whether origin matters for

creditor rights, Table 4 confirms the results in Table 3 that, for several creditor rights, origin

matters, even after controlling for per capita income. The formal tests show even more strongly

than for shareholder rights that origin matters.      Every family of laws (other than Nordic) is

statistically different from the rest of the world, and common law countries are different from civil

law countries.   We can reject the hypothesis that French civil law countries have the same creditor

rights as German civil law countries.     The last panel of Table 5 pulls shareholder and creditor

rights together and cotirms     the result that laws in different families are different. With all the

data pulled together, we actually reject the hypothesis that any two fmilies        of laws are the sameb.
                                                   LI


        To summarize, our results on shareholder and creditor rights paint a very straightforward

picture, Laws differ a great deal across countries, and in particular they differ because they come

horn different legal ftilies,   Relatively speaking, common law countries protect investors the

most, and French civil law countries protect them the least. German civil law countries are in the

middle, though probably closer to the civil law group.     The one exception is the strong

protections that German civil law countries afford secured creditors.     Scandinavian countries have

some strong and some weak protections of investors,       The statistical evidence indicates that these

results are not a consequence of different income levels of countries with different laws.

        These results raise some questions. If poor investor protections are actually costly to

companies in terms of their ability to raise finds, then do countries    compensate for these

shortcomings in other ways? We have already shown that French civil law countries have a

higher incidence of remedial or bright line legal protections,   such as mandatory dividends and

legal reserves.   But there may be other strategies to compensate, at least in part, for investor-

unfi-iendly laws. One of them -- examined in the next section -- is strict and effective enforcement

of the laws that do exist. The other -- examined in section 6 -- is concentrated    ownership.

Although we try to examine all the components of the legal system, the superiority of common

law, and inferiority of the French civil law, in protecting investors is a key finding of our paper.




5. Enforcement.




         bWe have also conducted these tests controlling for geography, dividing the world into
Australia, Europe, Afi-ica, Asia, and America. In the combined comparison of shareholder and
creditor rights, only the difference between Scandinavia and the rest of the world loses
significance; all the remaining differences remain highly statistically significant.
                                                   28

        Legal rules are ordy one element of investor protection; the enforcement of these rules

may be equally, or even more, important.     A strong system of legal enforcement could even

substitute for weak rules, since active and well-functioning   courts can step in and rescue investors

abused by the management.      To address these issues, in addition to measures of investors’ legal

rights, this paper examines proxies for the quality of enforcement of these rights, namely estimates

of “law and order” in different countries compiled by credit risk agencies.     These measures are

collected by private firms for the use of foreign investors interested in doing btisiness in the

respective countries.   We use five of these measures: efficiency of the judicial system, rule of law,

corruption, risk of expropriation   -- meaning outright cordiscation or forced nationalization     -- by

the government, and likelihood of contract repudiation by the government,        The first two of these

measures obviously pertain to law enforcement proper; the last three deal more generally with the

government’s stance toward business.      Some of these measures have been previously shown to

affect national growth rates (Keefer and Knack 1995).

        In addition to these rule of law variables, this study uses an estimate of the quality of a

country’s accounting standards.     Accounting plays a potentially critical role in corporate

governance,   For investors to know anything about the companies they invest in, some basic

accounting standards are needed to render company disclosures interpretable,        Even more

important, contracts between managers and investors typically rely on some measures of firms’

income or assets being verifiable in court. If a bond covenant stipulates immediate repayment

when income falls below a certain level, this level of income must be verifiable for the bond

contract to be even in principle enforceable in court.    Accounting standards might then be

necessary for financial contracting, especially if investor rights are weak (Hay, Shleifer and Vishny
                                                      29

1996),   Themeasure       ofaccounting   standards weuse, likethe mleoflaw        measures, isaptivately

constructed index based on examination of company reports from different countries.

Unfortunately,   it is available for ordy 44 countries, 41 of which are in our sample’.

         Table 7 examines country scores on the various rule of law measures, as well as on their

accounting standards.      As before, it arranges countries by legal origin, and presents tests of

equality of means between families. The table suggests that quality of law enforcement differs

across legal ftilies.     However, the picture is different from that for the legal rules.

         In law enforcement, Scandinavian countries are clearly on top, with German civil law

countries close behind. These ftilies       have the highest scores of any group on the efficiency of

the judicial syste~     the rule of law, corruption, risk of expropriation,   and risk of contract

repudiation by the government.        On all the measures of rule of law, common law countries are

behind the leaders, but ahead of the French civil law countries,       The statistical significance of

these results varies from variable to variable. The French civil law countries are behind all others

on the quality of law enforcement just as they were on the quality of legal protections of investors.

         With quality of accounting, the results are somewhat different,        Scandinavia still comes

out on top, though common law countries are second, (statistically significantly) ahead of the

German civil law countries.       As with all the other measures, the French family has the weakest

quality of accounting.     Thus, although with these etiorcement      variables common law and German

civil law countries are closer together than they were with the legal rights variables, the French


        ‘The measure of accounting standards we use was published in 1991, At around the same
time, European countries began to harmonize their accounting standards under the pressure from
the EC. Over time, accounting standards may converge in Europe. However, for the purposes of
our analysis of country differences, and of determinants of ownership, historical differences in the
quality of standards are obviously more important than the fiture convergence.
                                                   30

civil law countries retain their last place,

        These results do not support the conclusion that the quality of law enforcement

compensates for the quality of laws. An investor in a French civil law country is poorly protected

by both the laws and the system that enforces them. The converse is true for an investor in a

common law country, on average.

        An inspection Table 7 suggests that, for the enforcement measures, the level of per capita

income may have a more important confounding effect than it did for the laws themselves.           In

Table 8, we investigate whether quality of enforcement is different in different legal families

through regression analysis across countries.    In the regressions, we control for each country’s

level of per capita income,   The omitted dummy in the regressions is for common law countries.

        By every single measure, richer countries have higher quality of law enforcement.

Nonetheless, even controlling for per capita income, the legal family matters for the quality of

enforcement and the accounting standards.       A great deal of the cross-sectional   variance in these

rule of law scores is explained by per capita income and the legal origin. In some cases, these

variables together explain around 80 percent of the cross-sectional     variation in rule of law scores,

with the lion’s share of the explanatory power coming from per capita income.

        Once income is controlled for, the conclusions change somewhat.        French civil law

countries still score lower on every single measure, and statistically significantly lower for almost

all measures, than the common law countries do, However, once per capita income is controlled

for, German civil law countries tend to score lower than the common law countries on all

measures other than repudiation of contracts by govement,         although the effect is significant only

for the efficiency of the judiciary and the accounting standards.     Scandinavian countries are
                                                   32

the more elaborate legal rules, such as protections of oppressed minorities, might require

sophisticated accounting standards, so that, in the absence of such standards, a legal system may

need to resort to remedial measures.    Finally, the results show quite clearly that, relative to

common law countries, remedial rules are more likely to exist in civil law countries.      Consistent

with our earlier findings, these results point to the need for remedial laws in countries where other

laws protect investors the least, In SUQ the results in Table 9 are consistent with the hypothesis

that remedial laws are an adaptation to poor laws protecting investors and to poor enforcement of

laws, including poor accounting standards.




6. Ownership,

        In this section, we explore the hypothesis that companies in countries with poor

protections of investors adapt through concentrated     ownership of their shares. The idea is that,

when investors have relatively few legal rights, then managers can be induced to return the money

to these investors is if one, or a very small number, of investors own the majority of shares.

Moreover, it is unattractive to be a small investor in such a company, since one is bound to be

expropriated by either the managers or the large investors, including the banks, themselves.        In

contrast, when legal protections are stronger, it is possible for ownership to be more dispersed

and for small investors to expect a return on their capital. It may still be desirable to have some

ownership concentration,   since large shareholders might monitor managers and thus increase the

value of the firm (Shleifer and Vishny 1986), With stronger legal protections,     however, small

investors can expect to benefit from these efforts by large shareholders, and hence some

ownership dispersion is possible.   This tradeoff between legal protections and ownership
                                                   33

concentration,    stressed by Shleifer and Vishny (1996), is tested below,

        To this end, we have assembled a data base of up to 10 largest by market capitalization

non-financial (i.e., no banks) domestic (i. e., no foreign multinationals) publicly traded (i.e., not

100% privately or government held) companies in each country in our sample.           In countries

where the largest publicly traded companies had some government ownership, we tried in addition

to find at least 10 comp~es     with no government ownership.      This changed the list substantially

in a few countries (13rtil, Austri~ Egypt).    For some countries, including Egypt, India, Nigeria,

Philippines, and Zimbabwe, we could not find 10 such companies and settled for at least five.

        For each company, we collected data on its three largest shareholders, and computed the

combined (cash flow) ownership stake of these three shareholders.       We did not correct for the

possibility that some of the large shareholders are affiliated with each other, or that the company

itself owns the shares of its shareholders (both of these corrections would raise effective

concentration),    Nor could we distinguish empirically between large shareholders who are the

management, tiliated      with the management, or separate from the management.        It is not clear

that a conceptual line between management and, say, a 40 percent shareholder can be drawn,

        Subject to these caveats, it is possible to construct measures of ownership concentration.

For each country, we took the average and the median ownership stake of the three largest

shareholders among its 10 largest publicly traded companies.      This measure resembles measures

of ownership concentration     used for American companies by Demsetz and Lehn (1985), Shleifer

and Vishny (1986),     and Morc~    Shleifer and Vishny (1988), although concentration     of ownership

in the world turns out to be very different from that in the United States,

        Table 10 begins by presenting our ownership data, as usual by legal origin, Recall that we
                                                    34

are getting the concentration   variable from up to 10 most valuable publicly traded companies in

each country, and have a separate variable for ownership concentration using all owners, using

private owners only, and using private owners in the largest companies that have no government

ownership.   As in turns out, government ownership of shares in publicly traded companies is not

that commo~ and hence the results are not particularly affected by the corrections for government

ownership.   We therefore discuss the results for the companies with no government ownership.

Note finally that we have been able to obtain ownership data for 45 out of our 49 countries.

        Table 10 contains perhaps the single most surprising finding of our paper. In the world as

a whole, even if we focus on the largest publicly traded companies, the average ownership of the

three largest shareholders is 46 percent, with the median of 45 percent.    Dispersed ownership in

large public companies is simply a myth. Even in the United States, the average for the 10 most

valuable companies is 20 percent (which is partly explained by the fact that Microsoft, Walmart,

Coca-Cola, and Intel are on the list and all have significant ownership concentration),    and the

median is 12 percent.   The average concentration    measure we use is under 30 percent only for the

United States, Australia, United Kingdom, Taiwan, Japan, Korea and Sweden.          Presumably, if we

looked at smaller companies, the numbers we would get for ownership concentration         would be

even larger, The finance textbook model of management faced by multitudes of dispersed

shareholders is an exception and not the rule.

        Table 10 also shows that ownership concentration varies by legal origin. By far the

highest concentration   of ownership is found in the French civil law countries, with the average

ownership by the three largest shareholders of a whopping 54 percent for the 10 largest non-

govemment firms. The lowest concentration        is in the German civil law countries, and is equal to
                                                     35

34 percent. Interestingly, this low concentration      comes from East Asia rather than from

Germany, Austria, or Switzerland,        Scandinavian countries are also relatively low, with 37 percent

concentration,   Finally common law countries are in the middle, with 43 percent average

ownership concentration.    The differences between the French civil law countries and other legal

families are statistically significant, although other differences are not. In sum, these data indicate

that the French civil law $ountries have unusually high ownership concentratio~         just like they

have unusually poor legal protections of investors and enforcement of laws. These results are at

least suggestive that concentration     of ownership is a response to poor legal protection.

        In Table 11, we examine empirically the determinants of ownership concentration,          in two

steps. First, we regress ownership concentration       on legal origin dummies and several control

variables, to see whether origin matters,      The controls we use are: (the logarithm o~ GNP per

capita on the theory that richer countries may have different ownership patterns;        (the logarithm

o~ total GNP on the theory that larger economies have larger firms which might therefore have

lower ownership concentration;        and the Gini coefficient for a country’s income on the theory --

suggested to us by several readers -- that more unequal societies have higher ownership

concentration.   Second, we add to the first regression several measures of legal protections,

including accounting standards, enforcement quality, shareholder rights, creditor rights, and the

remedial rights. Given the large number of variables collected for this paper, we cannot estimate

all the possible regressions, and we need to make some choices. We pick “rule of law” as our

measure of quality of etiorcement,      and several creditor and shareholder rights from Tables 2 and

3, The results we present are representative      of other specifications.

        Table 11 presents the results.     The first regression, with all 45 observations,   has an
                                                    36

adjusted R-squared of 49 percent, which is high for a cross-country       specification,    It shows that

larger countries have lower ownership concentration,      and more unequal countries have higher

ownership concentration,    consistent with the conjectured effects of these controls.       In addition,

the basic regression, consistent with the results in Table 10, shows a higher concentration         of

ownership in the French civil law countries,

        The second regression in Table 11 addresses this question.       The regression has ordy 39
                        .

observations because, as before, data on accounting standards are incomplete,           Still, an adjusted

R-squared rises to 58 percent.    The coefficients on controls remain significant, and in fact the

coefficient on per capita income becomes significant and positive,       The coefficient on the French

origin dummy turns negative but completely insignficiant, which suggests that our measures of

investor protections actually capture the limitations of the French civil law system. Several of the

measures of investor protection actually help determine ownership concentration.            Countries with

better accounting standards and rule of law have a statistically significantly lower concentration           of

ownership.     A 20 point increase in the accounting score (the distance between the common law

and French civil law averages) reduces average ownership concentration         by 9 percentage points,

whereas a ,4 point increase in the rule of law score (again, the distance between the common law

and French civil law averages) reduces average ownership by almost 1 percentage point,

Furthermore,   countries with better shareholders’ antidirector rights, as measured by our aggregate

variable, also have a statistically significantly lower concentration   of ownership.      A 1,6 points

increase in the anti-director rights score (again, the distance between common law and French

civil law averages) reduces ownership concentration      by 8 percentage points.     In contrast, the

one-share-one-vote   variable is not significant.
                                                       37

        The measures of creditor rights are not significant.      Theoretically, the effect of creditor

rights on ownership concentration      is ambiguous.    One could argue that when creditor rights are

good, bank borrowing becomes pervasive, and small shareholders can free ride on the monitoring

by banks, making dispersed ownership possible.          On the other hand, one could also argue that,

when creditor rights are good, bank borrowing is easier, and therefore firms will finance their

investment through debt rather tk       equity, leading to higher ownership concentration      in

equilibrium.   The lack of empirical association between creditor rights and ownership

concentration is consistent with this theoretical ambiguity,

        A word of caution is in order in interpreting these results.     Some of our independent

variables, but particularly accounting standards, might be endogenous,         Countries that for some

reason have heavily concentrated    ownership and small stock markets might have little use for

good accounting standards, and so ftil to develop them. The causality in this case would be from

ownership concentration    to accounting standards, rather than the other way around,         Since we

have no instruments that we believe determine accounting but not ownership concentration,            we

cannot reject this hypothesis, although we do not find it as plausible as ours. Of course, the legal

rules that we use as our independent variables, and the legal ongins that shape these rules, are

more likely to be exogenous to ownership concentration.

        In sum, the message of Table 11 is that the quality of legal protection of shareholders, as

well as the extent of protection of the voting process against manipulation by directors, are

significant determinants of ownership concentration.        Moreover, between them, these variables

account for the higher concentration     of ownership in the French civil law countries,     The results

support the idea that heavily concentrated    ownership results from, and perhaps substitutes for,
                                                   38

poor protection of investors in a corporate governance system, The evidence indicates that poor

laws actually make a difference and may have costs. One of these costs of heavily concentrated

ownership in large firms is that their core investors are not diversified,    The other cost is that

these firms probably face difEculty raising equity fimce,      since minority investors fear

expropriation by managers and concentrated      owners.




7. Per capita income.

        In the previous sections, we have presented results in which we controlled for per capita

income in assessing the dtierences    between the legal ftilies.     We have established that per capita

income is not the whole story. In this sectioq we focus on per capita income itself as a

determinant of a country’s law and its etiorcement.       Do poor countries have systematically worse

legal protections than rich countries do? If this were the case, then the possibility would exist

that poor countries are stuck in a bad equilibrium of inadequate legal protection and scarce

external finance, which would stunt growth and therefore keep them poor and with inadequate

legal protection.   On the other hand, if per capita income is not a critical determinant of effective

legal protection, then even if poor laws slow down financing and investment, countries can still

grow out of the trap. In this sectio~ we attempt to shed some light on these issues.

        In Table 12, we sort countries by per capita income into the bottom quartile, middle 50

percent, and the top quartile.   We then compare the means of some of our variables across per

capita income groups.     Shareholder rights do not systematically depend on the level of per capita

income. Table 12 shows this for the aggregate quality of shareholder rights variable, but the

result holds for individual rights as well. The unimportance       of per capita income as a determinant
                                                      39

of shareholder rights is apparent from the regressions in Table 4, which control for legal origin.

        Table 12 also suggests that some of the creditor rights, such as the restriction on

managers’ right to unilaterally seek protection from creditors, no automatic stay on assets, and

the replacement of managers in bankruptcy proceedings, actually get weaker in richer countries.

Some of these results, in weaker form, appear in the regressions in Table 4, which control for

legal origin. Interestingly, the one measure that rises most clearly with income is management

staying in reorganization.   It is possible that the relative anti-management    stance of poor

countries’ bankruptcy laws is dictated by efficiency: unless creditors get their hands on the assets

fast, these assets are likely to disappear.    It is also possible that, in richer countries, management

lobbying has succeeded in emasculating creditor rights. The aggressive pro-management              stance

of the U.S. bankruptcy law is consistent with both of these interpretations.       In any event, there is

no evidence that poor countries have weaker creditor rights.

        As we already reported in Table 8, however, the efficiency of the judicial system and rule

of law both increase substantially with the level of income. In fact, per capita G~         alone explains

over half of the variation in efiorcement     measures.    The quality of the accounting standards also

rises sharply with per capita income, although we have very few observations for the poorer

countries,   The picture is thus very different for law enforcement than it is for legal rules.

        In summary, the data provide no evidence of a legal trap: systematically weaker laws

protecting investors in poorer countries.      There is no systematic correlation between income and

shareholder rights, and, if anything, some creditor rights are weaker in richer countries.        What this

means is that some countries -- such as Italy and France -- have managed to get rich despite

having few laws that protect investors.       On the other hand, richer countries have a clearly higher
                                                  40

quality of law enforcement,   The failure of poor countries to consistently etiorce basic investor

protections may well help keep them poor.




8. Conclusions.

        In this paper, we have examined laws governing investor protection, the quality of

enforcement of these laws, and ownership concentration      in 49 countries around the world.   The

analysis suggests three broad conclusions.

        First, laws differ markedly around the world, though in most places they tend to give

investors a rather limited bundle of rights. In particular, countries whose legal rules originate in

the common law tradition tend to protect investors considerably better than do the countries

whose laws originate in the civil law, and especially the French civil law, tradition.   The German

civil law and the Scandinavian countries take an intermediate stance toward investor protections.

There is no clear evidence that different countries favor different types of investors; the evidence

rather points to a relatively stronger stance favoring all investors in common law countries.   This

evidence confirms our basic hypothesis that being a shareholder, or a creditor, in different legal

jurisdictions entitles an investor to very different bundles of rights. These rights are determined

by laws; they are not inherent in securities themselves.

        Second, law etiorcement    differs a great deal around the world.   German civil law and

Scandinavian countries have the best quality of law enforcement, although this reflects to some

extent their higher average income levels, Law enforcement is strong in common law countries as

well, whereas it is the weakest in the French civil law countries.   These rankings also hold for one

critical input into law enforcement in the area of investor protections: the accounting standards.
                                                   41

These standards are ranked the lowest in the French civil law countries, where an investor is

generally protected neither by the laws nor by high quality law enforcement.      The quality of law

enforcement, unlike the legal rights themselves, improves sharply with the level of income.

       Third, we have examined the concentration        of ownership in publicly traded companies

around the world, and investigated the hypothesis that highly concentrated      ownership is an

adaptive response to poor investor protection in a corporate governance system. To begin, we

have shown that ownership concentration     is extremely high around the world, consistent with our

evidence that laws, on average, are not terribly protective of investors.    In an average country,

close to half the equity in a publicly traded company is owned by the three largest shareholders.

Good accounting standards, rule of law, and shareholder protection measures are highly

negatively correlated with the concentration     of ownership.   These results suggest that inadequate

protection of investors maybe costly.    Specifically, if small investors are not protected,

companies would not be able to raise capital from the~       and entrepreneurs would not be able to

diversi~ their holdings.   High ownership concentration,     then, may be a symptom of a poorly

functioning capital market.

        These findings leave us with a puzzle. The most widely spread legal family, that

originating in the French civil law, appears to have the worst efficiency properties from the

perspective of corporate governance.    While this system was often not adopted voluntarily, it was

chosen by at least some governments,     and has survived for decades around the world. How can

it be so popular it as our results suggest, it is so bad? One possible answer is that, when

countries adopt a legal system, their leaders are more focused on its revolutionary spirit and on

the more basic rights than those of investors.   The legal reformers borrow the legal systems
                                                42

wholesale, without excessive focus on whether shareholders can vote by mail. Another possible

answer -- related to arguments made in Easterbrook     and Fischel (1991) -- is that the legal system

does not matter very much, and that investors can generally contract around the limitations of the

legal system. This answer, however, does not square with our evidence on ownership if one

believes that extreme ownership concentration   is costly,   Even if one gives some credence to

these arguments, the suMv~    and spread of rules that appew so inferior remains puzzling,

        The ultimate question that needs to be answered to deal with this puzzle, of course, is

whether countries with poor investor protections -- either laws or their enforcement -- actually do

suffer. Do such countries, especidy   the French civil law countries, have smaller capital markets?

Are their banking systems less developed?   Are companies in these countries incapable of getting

external finance? We defer this analysis to our follow-up paper, and for now leave the puzzle

open.
                                                 43

                                            References,

Aghion, Philippe, Oliver Hart and John Moore (1992), “The Economics of Bankruptcy Reform, ”

       Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization        8, 523-546.

American Bar Association (1989 and 1993), Multinational      Commercial Insolvency, Wisconsin:

       MG Publishing,

Andenas, Mads and Stqhen    Kenyon-Slade,    eds. (1993), E. C. Financial Marbt   Regulation and

       Company Luw, London, U. K.: Sweet and Maxwell.

Baird, Douglas (1995), “The Hidden Virtues of Chapter 11: an Overview of the Law and

       Economics of Financially Distressed Firms,” manuscript, Univ. of Chicago Law School.

Bebchuk, Lucian (1994), “Efficient and Inefficient Sales of Corporate Control,” QuarterZy

       Journal of Economics 109,957-994.

Bebchuk, Lucian and Luigi Zingales (1995), “Corporate Ownership Structures: Private vs. Social

       Optimality,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.

Berglof, Erik and Enrico Perotti (1994), “The Governance Structure of Japanese Financial

       Keretsu,” Journal of Financial Economics 36,259-284.

Berle, Adolf and Gardiner Means (1932), fie Modem Corporation and Private Property, New

       York: Macmillan.

Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny (1993), Privatizing Russia, Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activi@,    139-192.

David, Rene and JohnBrierley(1985),   Major Legal Systems in the World To*,        London:

       Stevens and Sons.

Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire (1996), “Measuring Income Inequality: a New Data-Base”,
                                                  44

       mimeo, World Bank.

Demsetz, Harold md Kenneth Lehn (1985), “The Structure of Corporate Ownership: Causes and

        Consequences,”     Journal of Po[itical Economy 93, 1155-77.

Easterbrook,     Frank and Daniel Fischel (199 1), me Economic Structure of Corporate@,

        Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Edwards, Jeremy and ~aus       Fischer (1 994), Banh, Finance and Inves~ent   in West Germany

        Since 1970, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

Glendon, Mary Ann, Michael Gordon and ChristopherOsakwe(1992),           Comparative Legal

        Trditions    in a Nutshell, St. Paul: West Publishing Company.

Gomes, Armando (1996), “The Dynamics of Stock Prices, Manager Ownership, and Private

        Benefits of Control,” Mmuscript,    Harvard University.

Gorton, Gary and Frank Schmid (1996), “Universrd Banking and the Performance of German

        Firms,” NBER Working Paper #5453.

Gromb, Denis (1993), “Is One-share-One-vote       Optimal?” Working Paper, LSE.

Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart (1988), “One-share-one-vote       and the Market for Corporate

        Control,” Journal of Financial Economics 20, 175-202.

Hams, Milton and ArturRaviv(1988),         “Corporate Governance: Voting Rights and Majority

        Rules,” Jmrnal of Financial Economics 20, 203-236.

Hart, Oliver (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, London: Oxford University

        Press.

Hay, Jonathan, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W, Vishny (1 996), “Toward a Theory of Legal

        Reform,” European Economic Review, forthcoming.
                                                45

Institutional Shareholder Services, Inc. (1994 and 1995), Proxy Yoiirzg Guidelines, several

       countries, 1SS Global Proxy Services.

Investor Responsibility Research Center (1994, 1995), Prow Voting Guide, Global Shareholder

       Service, Washington, DC: I.R.R,C.

Jensen, Michael and William Meckling (1 976), “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,

       Agency Costs, ~d Ownership Structure,”         Journal of Financial Economics 3,305-360.

Kaplan, Steven and Bernadette Minton (1 994), “Appointments of Outsiders to Japanese Boards:

       Determinants   and Implications for Managers,” Journal of Financial Economics 36,225-

       257.

Keefer, Philip and Stephen Knack (1995), “Institutions and Economic Performance:      Cross-

       Country Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Economics and Politics.

Levy, Haim (1 982), “Economic Valuation of Voting Power of Common Stock,” Journal of

       Finance 38, 79-93.

Merryman, John (1969), i?ze Civil Luw Tradition, Standord: University Pres.

Modigliani, Franco and Merton Miller (1958), “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance, and the

       Theory of Investment,” American Economic Review 48, 261-297.

Merck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, “Management Ownership and Market

       Valuation: an Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics 20,293-315.

Pagano, Marco, F. Panett~   andLuigiZingales(1995),       “Why Do Companies Go Public: an

       Empirical Analysis,” manuscript, University of Chicago.

Rajan, Raghurarn and Luigi Zingales (1995), “What do we Know about Capital Structure: some

       Evidence from International Data,” Journal of Finance 50, 1421-1460,
                                                  46

Reynolds, Thomas and ArturoFlores(1989),        Foreign Law: Current Sources of Basic Legislation

       in Jurisdictions of the World, Littleton, CO: Rothman and Co.

Roe, Mark (1994), S&ongA4mgers,           Weak Owners: the Political Roots of American Corporate

       Finance, Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press.

Rydquist, Kristian (1 987), “Empirical Investigation of the Voting Premium,” Northwestern

       University Worhng      Paper#35,   Evanston, IL,

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny (1986), “Large Shareholders and Corporate Control,”

       Journal of Political Economy 94,461-488.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert   W. Vishny (1996), “A Survey of Corporate Governance,”

       Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Vishny, Paul ( 1994), Guide to International Commerce b,        New York: McGraw-Hill.

Watson, Alan (1974), Legal Transplants, Charlotsville, VA: University of Virginia Press,

Werlauff, Erik (1993), EC Company W,         Copenhagen: Jurist- og Okonodorbundets      Forlag,

White, Michelle (1993), “The Costs of Corporate Bankruptcy: the U. S, - European Comparison, ”

       manuscript, University of Michigan.

World Bad   (1993), World Development Report, Washington, D. C,: Oxford University Press.

World Bank (1993), Social Indicators of Development       1991-1992, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins

       University Press.

Zingales, Luigi ( 1994), “The Value of the Voting Right: a Study of the Milan Stock Exchange

       Experience,”   ~e Review of Financial Studies 7, 125-148,

Zingales, Luigi (1995), “What Determines the Value of Corporate Votes?” QuarterZy Journal of

       Economics 110, 1075-1110.
                                           47

Zweigert, Konrad andHeinKotz(1987),   Introduction to Comparative ~,   Oxford: Clarendon

       Press.
                                                        TABLE 1: The Variables
This table describes the variables collected for the 49 countries included in our study. The first column gives the name of
the variable. The second column describes the variable and gives the range of possible values. The third column provides
the sources from which the variable was collected.


        Variable                                                  Dmcription                                                     Source9

 origin                     Identifies the legal origin of the Company Law or Commercial Code of wh country.              Foreign Law Encyclopedia
                            Equals 1 if the origin is English Common Law; 2 if the origin is the French Commercial        Commercial Laws of the
                            Code; and 3 if the origin is the German Commercial Code.                                      World.

 One Share-One Vote         Equals one if the Company Law or Commercial Code of the country requires that                 Company Law or
                            ordinary shares carry one vote per share, and Ootherwise, Equivalently, this variable         Commercird Code
                            equals one when the law prohibits the existence of both multiple-voting and non-voting
                            ordinary shares and does not allow fms to set a maximum number of votes per
                            shareholder _ive        of the number of shares she owns, and Ootherwise.

 Proxy by mail              Equals one ~the Company Law or Commercial Code allows shareholders to mail their              Company Law or
                            proxy vote, and O otherwise.                                                                  Commercird Code

 $hares blocked before      Equals one if the Company Law or Commercial Code allows firms to require that                 Company Law or
 neeting                    shareholders deposit their shares prior to a General Shareholders Meeting thus                Commercial Code
                            preventing them from =Iling those shares for a number of day$ and Ootherwise.

 :urnulative voting         Equals one if the Company Law or Commercial Code allows shareholders to cast dl of            Company Law or
                            their votes for one candidate standing for election to the board of directors, and O          Commercial Code
                            otherwise.

 *pressed minorities        Equals one if the Company Law or Commercial Code grants minority shareholders                 Company Law or
 nechanism                  either a judicial venue to challenge the management decisions or the right to step out of     Commercial Code
                            the ampany by requiring the company to purchase their shares when they object to
                            certain tidarnentrd changes, such as merge~ assets dispositions and changes in the
                            articles of incorporation. The variable equals O otherwise.

 ?ercentage of Share        It is the minimum percentage of ownership of share Capiti that entitles a shareholder to      Company Law or
 ~apital to Call an         call for an Exbaordin~ Shareholders’ Meeting. It ranges horn one to 33 percent.               Commercial Code
 ZXmrdinary
 Shareholders’ Meeting

 titidtiors    Rights       An index aggregating the shareholder rights which we labeled as “anti-director rights.”       Company Law or
                            The index is formed by adding I when: (1) the coun@ allows shareholders to mail their         Commercial Code
                            proxy VOW,(2) shareholders are not quired to deposit their shares prior to the General
                            Shareholders’ Meeting; (3) cumulative voting is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities
                            mechanism is in place; or (5) when the minimum Permntage of share Capiti that entitles
                            a shareholder to call for an Extraordinary Shareholders’ Meeting is less than or equal to
                            10% (the sample median). The index ranges fim O to 5.

 Mandatory Dividend         ~uals the pemntage of net income that the Company Law or Commercial Code                      Comprmy Law or
                            requires fms to distribute as dividends among ordinary stockholders. It takes a value of      Commercial Code
                            Ofor counlries without such restriction.

 Restrictions on filing a   Equals one if the rmrganization procedure imposes restrictions, such as creditors’            Bankruptcy and
 Rmrgani~tion petition      mnsen~ to file for reorganization. It equals O if there are no such restrictions.             Reorganization Laws

 Automatic S~y on           Equals one if the reorgantiion prtiure       imposes an automtiic stay on the assets of the   Bankruptcy and
 Secured &seb               firm upon filing the organization petition, This restriction prevents secured creditors       Reorganization Laws
                            to gain possession of their security, It equal O if such restriction does not exist in the
                            law,

 Secured Creditors First    Equals one if secured creditors are ranked first in the distribution of the proceeds that     Bankruptcy and
                            result from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt firm. Equals zero if non-secured      Reorganization Laws
                            creditors, such as the Government and workers, are given absolute priority.

 Management Stays           Equals one if the debtor keeps the administition of its property pending the resolution       Bankruptcy and
                            of the reorganization pro~ss, and zero otherwise. Equivantly, this variable equals zero       Reorganization Laws
                            when an official appointed by the CO- or by the creditors, is responsible for the
                            operation of the business during reorganization.
         Variable                                             Description                                                    Sources

Legal Reserve            It is the percentage of total share capital mandated by Corporate Law to avoid the          Company Law or
                         dissolution of an existing firm. It takes a value of zero for countries without such        Commercial Code
                         restriction.

Efficiency of Judicial   Assessment of the “efficiency and integrity of the legal environment as it tiects           Business International
System                   business, particularly foreign frrms’’produced by the country-risk rating agency Business   Corporation.
                         [nternationuf Corpation. It “may be taken to represent investors’ assessments of
                         renditions in the country in question”. Average between 1980-1983. Scrde from Oto
                         10, with lower scores lower efficiency levels.

Rule of Law              Assessment of the law and order tradition in the country produ~ by the counhy-risk          International Counby Wsk
                         mting agency International Counhy Risk (ICR). Average of the months of April and            Guide
                         October of the monthly irtdex betw~rt 1982 and 1995. Scale from Oto 10, with lower
                         wres for less tradition for law and order. (We changed the scrde of this variable tim its
                         original rartge go~g tim Oto 6).

Corruption               ICR’S -ent        of the arruption in government. Lower scores indicate “high               International Court@ Risk
                         government officials are likely to demand special payments” and “illegal paymenfi are       Guide
                         generaJly ex~ted throughout lower levels of government” in the form of “bribes
                         comected with import and export license% exchange control$ tax assessmen~ policy
                         protectio~ or loans”. Average of the months of April and October of the monthly index
                         between 1982 and 1995. Scale from Oto 10, with lower wres for higher levels of
                         corruption. (We changed the scale of this variable horn its originaJ range from Oto 6).

Risk of Expropriation    ICR’S assessment of the risk of “outright mnfiscation” or “ford nationalization”.           International Country Risk
                         Avemge of the monti of April and October of the monthly index betwm 1982 and                Guide
                         1995. Scale from Oto 10, with lower scores for higher risks

Repudiation of           ICR’S assessment of the “risk of a modification in a contmct taking the form of a           International Country Risk
Contracts by             repudiation, postponemen~ or soling down” due to “budget cutbacks, indigenization           Guide
Government               pressure, a change in government or a change in government economic and social
                         priorities.” Average of the months of April and October of tie monthly index between
                         1982 and 1995. Scale horn Oto 10, with lower scores for higher risks.

Amunting standards       Index created by examining and rating companies’ 1990 annual reports on their               International Accounting
                         inclusion or omission of 90 items. These items fall into 7 categories (general              and Auditing Trends,
                         information, income statements, balance sheets, funds flow statemeng accounting             Center for International
                         standards, stock data and spwial items). A minimum of 3 companies in each country           Financial Analysis &
                         were studied. me companies represent a cross-section of various industry groups where       Research Inc.
                         industrial wmpanies numbered 70’??o while financial mmpanies represented the
                         remaining 30%.

Ownership, 10 largest    The average peruntage of mmmon shares owned by the tJrree largest shareholders in the       Moodys International,
                         ten largest non-financial domestic firms in a given country.                                CIFAR,, EXTEL,
                                                                                                                     Worl&cope, 20-Fs, Price-
                                                                                                                     Waterhouse and various
                                                                                                                     Counq sources.

Ownemhip, 10 largest     The average percentage of common shares owned by the three largest shareholders in the      Moo&s International,
private fares            ten largest non-financial, privately-owned domestic firms in a given coun~. A furn is       CIFA~ , EXTEL,
                         considered privately owned if the State is not a known shareholder in iL                    Worl&cope, 20-Fs, Price-
                                                                                                                     Waterhouse and various
                                                                                                                     country sources.

GNP and GNP per          Gross NationaJ Product and Gross National Product per capita expressed in mnstant           World Bank and LMF
capita                   dollars of 1994.

Gini Coefficient         Gini Coefficient for income inequali~ in each munby. When the 1990 coefficient is           Deininger and Squire
                         not available, we use the most recent available.                                            (1996); World Bank
                                                               Table 2: Shareholder Rights around the World
         This table clmsifies munties    legal origin and shows the shareholders’ rights for each wuntsy. Exact definitions of each shareholders’ right can be fomd in Table 1.
         Pml B ‘ves the teat cIfma      or the different Iegat origins
                                                                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                     Purrc/A S-HOLDERS’                   IUGHTS ( I=exists in tie law)

                  COUNTRY                 One share -        Proxy by mail          Shares blocked      Cumulative           oppressed          % of Share Capital   Antidi~or    Mandatory
                                           One vote             alloti             before Minting      Voting for dirs.       Minority          to caJl an ESM          Rigftk    Dividend
c
 Ausualia                                      o                    1                     0                   0                   1                   0.05 d               4         0,00
                                               0                    1                     0                   0                   1                   0,10                 4         0.00
Hong Kong                                      1                     1                    0                   0                   1                   0,05                 4         0,00
fndia                                          0                    0                     0                   0                   0                   0.10                 2         0,00
kland                                          0                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0,10                 3         0,00
Iarul                                          0                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0,10                 3         0,00
Kqa                                            0                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 3         0.00
Malnyaia                                       I                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 3         0,00
New Zealmd                                     o                    I                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 4         0,00
Nigeria                                        0                    o                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 3         0.00
Pakisfao                                       1                    0                     0                   I                   I                   0.10                 4         0.00
Singapore                                      1                    0                     0                   o                   1                   0.10                 3         0.00
SOUUS Africa                                   0                    1                     0                   0                   I                   0.05                 4         0.00
Sri M                                          0                    0                     0                   0                   o                   0.1o                 2         0.00
~                                              0                    0                     0                   1                   I                   0.20 e               3         0.00
UK                                             0                    1                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 4         0.00
us                                             0                    1                     0                   1                   1                   0.01                 5         0.00
Zimh                                           0                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0.10                 3         0.00
AW EmgffahO~m                                0.22                 0.39                  0.00                0.17                0.92                  0.09               3.39        O.lnl

Argettdna                                      0                    1                     1                   1                   1                   0,05                4         0.00
Belgium                                        0                    0                     1                   0                   0                   0.20                0         0.00
Bd                                             1                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0.05                 3        0.50
Cfsife                                         I                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0,01                3         0,30
blombia                                        o                    0                     0                   0                   0                   0.25                 I        0.00
-r                                             0                    0                     0                   0                   1                   0.25                2         0.50
                                               0                    0                     0                   0                   0                   0.10                2         0.00
Fraoee                                         0                    1                     I                   0                   0                   0.1o                2         0.00
                                               1                    0                     1                   0                   0                   0.05                 1        0.35
Indonesia                                      0                    0                     0                   0                   0                   0.10                2         0,00
Italy                                          0                    0                     1                   0                  0                    0.20                0         0.00
Jordan                                         0                    0                     0                   0                   0                   0.15                 1        0.00
Mexim                                          0                    0                     1                   0                   0                   0.33                0         0.00
Netherlan&                                     0                    0                     1                   I                   0                   0.1o                2         0.00
Peru                                           1                    0                     0                   I                   0                   0.20                2         0.00
Phifippinea                                    0                    0                     0                   I                   1                   0.10                4         0.50
Portugal                                       0                    0                     0                   o                   0                   0.05                2         0.50
spain                                          0                    0                     I                   0                   1                   0.05                2         0.00
Turkq                                          0                    0                     o                   0                   0                   0.10                2         0.00
Usrsguay                                       1                    0                     I                   0                   I                   0.20                 I        0.20
V~la                                           0                    0                     o                   0                   o                   0.20                 1        0,00
AVGtiCh           O~tB                       0.24                 0.09                  0.43                0.19                0.33                  0.14               1.76       0.14

Ao.vbia                                        0                    1                     1                  0                   0                    0.05                 2         0.00
Oe$roany                                       0                    0                     1                  0                   0                    0.05                 1         0.00
Japan                                          1                    0                     0                   0                  1                    0.03                 3         0.00
South Korea                                    1                    0                     0                   0                  0                    0.05                 2         0.00
Switiand                                       0                    0                     1                   0                  0                    0.1o                 1         0,00
Taiw                                           0                    0                     1                   1                  I                    0.03                 3         0.00
Av&--o               O@SS                    0.33                 0.17                  0.67                0.17                033                   0.05               2.00        0.00

                                               0                    0                     0                   0                   I                    0.10                3         0.00
Firdand                                        0                    0                     0                   0                   o                    0.10                2         0.00
NOMY                                           0                    I                     0                   0                   0                    0.10                3         0.00
se                                             0                    o                     0                   0                   0                    0.10’               2         0.00
AVZ.Sandinavkm orfgin                        0.00                 0.25                  0.00                0.00                0.25                   0.10              2.50        0.00

                                             0.22                 0.22                   0.27                0.16               0.53                   0.11              2.44        0.06

                                                                                                     Purrel B Tmls   Of Means   (t-statistic)


Common vs. Civil hw                          -0.03               2.16b                  -4.65 ‘             0,05                4.48 a                 -1.14             5.24 “      2.82 “

England     VS.   Fmnw                       4.11                 2.25 b                -3, s7 “            4.19                4.14 ‘                -1.98’             5.13’       2.99 ‘

figfand     VS. ~y                           -0.52                0.98                  -3,16’               0.00               3.13 ‘                 2.42 c            3.66’       0.00

Engfand vs. Se.andinavia                     2.20 b               0.50                   0.00                1.84”               3.25 ‘                -0.87             2.14b       0.00

Fmn&      VS. &lTnS1’ly                      -0.45                -0.47                 -1.01                0.13                0.00                  2.34 b            -0.47       2,99 ‘

Fmnce vs. Scandinavia                        2.50 b               -0.85                  3.51 “             2.17b                0.31                   1.90’            -1,25       2.99 ‘
Oermany vs. Scandinavia                       1.58                  -0.29                3,16b               1.00                0,25             4.62 ‘                  -0.98       0.00
     a=slgsufieantat 1Yo level; b       Igs-lltle.antat 5“/. level ; c=Slgnli(mt     at 1O% Ievel;    d=ss a pmntage      of votes; &as a prcentage of the numk        of sks
                                                          Table 3: Creditor Righta around the World
     Ttds table classifies auntries by Ie al origin and shows the creditors’ ri~ts for each counby. Exact definitions for each creditors’
     right m be found in Table 1. Panef“B gives the tests of means for the different legal origins.


                                                                               P-i     A CREDITOR.SRIGHTS (1 = exists in the law)

II                    COUNTRY
                                                     Rtictions  for
                                                :oing into rmmantilon
                                                                               Automatic
                                                                              Stay on ssse~
                                                                                                    Secured Crcditom
                                                                                                        fimt paid
                                                                                                                                Management
                                                                                                                           stays in rmrgarrtion
                                                                                                                                                  Legal Reserve required
                                                                                                                                                     asa O/Oof~ itrd
 Australia                                                  o                         1                     1                           1                  0.00
                                                            0                         I                     1                           1                  0.00
HongJcong                                                   1                         o                     1                           0                  0.00
Jndis                                                       1                         0                     1                           0                  0.00
Ireland                                                     0                         1                     I                           1                  0.00
Jsrael                                                      1                         0                     I                           0                  0.00
Kenya                                                       1                         0                     I                           0                  0.00
MaJaysia                                                    1                         0                     1                           0                  0.00
New mand                                                    1                         0                     0                           0                  0.00
Nigeria                                                     1                         0                     I                           0                  O.oil
~                                                           I                         0                     I                           o                  0.00
Singapore                                                   I                         0                     1                           0                  0.00
Soudl Afrim                                                 1                         1                     I                           0                  0.00
Sri -                                                      M                          m                    M                           M                   0.00
TlsaiIarld                                                  o                         o                     I                           0                  0.10
UK                                                          I                         0                     1                           0                  0.00
us                                                          o                          1                    1                           1                  0.00
Zimtmbw                                                     I                          0                    1                           0                  0.00
Avg. Engtkh         O*SI                                  0.71                       0.29                 0.94                        0.24                 0.01

Argentina                                                  0                           I                    1                          1                   0.20
E!clgiurrr                                                 0                          o                     1                          1                   0.10
Brazil                                                     1                           1                    0                          1                   0.20
Chile                                                      1                           I                    1                          1                   0.20
Glombia                                                    0                           I                    0                          1                   0.50
-or                                                        1                          o                     1                          0                   0.50
                                                           1                          0                     1                          0                   0.50
F-                                                         0                           I                    0                          1                   0.10
                                                           0                           I                    0                          0                   0.33
tndone9ia                                                  1                          o                     1                          0                   0.00
Itsdy                                                      1                           1                    1                          1                   0.20
Jordan                                                     M                          na                   na                          m                   0.00
Mexim                                                      o                           1                    o                          1                   0.20
Netherlands                                                1                           1                    1                          1                   o.fs3
Peru                                                       0                           1                    0                          1                   0.20
Philippines                                                0                           1                    0                          1                   0.00
Portugal                                                   0                           1                    1                          1                   0.20
Spain                                                      0                          0                     1                          1                   0.20
Turkey                                                     1                           1                    1                          1                   0.20
Umguay                                                     0                           1                    1                          0                   0,20
V~ela                                                                                                       1                                              0,10
Avg. Frerrch       O@kl                                   0:;2                       0!;4                 0.6s                        0:$4                 0.20

Ad                                                         I                          o                     1                           1                  0.10
Germany                                                    I                           0                    1                           I                  0.10
JSIRUS                                                     o                           I                    I                          0                   0.25
SoutJr Koren                                               0                           o                    I                           0                  0.50
Switisnd                                                   0                           I                    1                           1                  0.50
Taiwan                                                     0                           o                    1                           1                  0.20
Avg. ~~              Od@                                  033                        0.33                 1.00                        0.67                 0.28

                                                            1                         0                         1                        1                 0.25
Finland                                                    0                           1                        1                        1                 0,00
Nowy                                                        1                          1                        1                        1                 0.20
SAen                                                        I                          1                        1                        1                 0.20
Avg. Scandlnmvun            O-                            0.75                       0.75                     1.00                     1.00                0.16

Totil Avermge                                             0.54                       Q.52                     0.s5                    0.57                  0.13

                                                                                               ParreJB Tabk     of Mans   (t-statistics)
Common Law vs. Civil Law                                  1.71 c                     -2.47 ‘                  1.59                   4.05 ‘                -5.47’
 Engtsnd     VS.   France                                 1.74 ‘                     -2.88 ‘              2.34 b                     -3.54 ‘               -5.19 ‘
 England vs. Germany                                      1.63                       -0.17                -1.00                      -1.99’                -6.35 *
 England vs. Scandinavia                                  -0.17                      -1.73’               -1.00                      -7.21 ‘               -5.90 ‘
 France   VS.   &MSSlly                                   0.37                       1.84’                -3.24 ‘                      0.39                -1.05
 France vs. Smdinavia                                     -1.18                      -0.05                -3.24 ‘                    -2.52 b                0.42
 Oermany vs. Smdimvia                                     -1.26                      -1.26                    0.00                    -1.58                 1.09
          a = Significant at 10/0level ;   b=    pifimt   at 50/. level ;   c =Significarst at Io?/olevel.
                                                   Table 4: Investors Rights, hgal                              Origin and GNP Regressions

 Seemingly Unrelated Regressions (SURE) of the cross section of 49 countries around the world. The dependent variables are:
 (1) one share-one vote ; (2) proxy by mail; (3) shares blocked before meeting; (4) cumulative voting; (5) oppressed minorities
 mechanism (6) percentage of share capital to call an extraordinary shareholders’ meeting (ESM); (7) mandatory dividend; (8)
 restrictions on reorganization; (9) automatic stay on assets (10) secured creditors’ first (11) management stays in
 reorganization; (12) legal reserve. The independent variables are (1) the log of GNP per capita and the set of “legal origins”
 dummies which include (a) “French Origin”; (b) “German Origin”; (c). “Scandinavian Origin”; and a Constant.

                                                                                                    Independent Variables

   DEPENDENT VARS.                             Log of GNP         French                German                 Scandinavian                 Constant
                                               per Capita         ongin                 origin                 origin

  Shareholders’ Righb

  One Share -One Vote                          -0.0111     ,       0.0284                0.1156                0.2152                        0.3271               Num. of Obs =46
                                               (0.0502)           (O.1481)              (0.2250)              (0.2626)                      (0.4293)              “Rz”=03(j2

  Proxy by Mail                                 0.1459 ‘          -0.3135 ‘             -0.4758 ‘             -0.4251 ‘                     -0.7964 b             Num, of Obs =46
                                               (0.0426)           (0.1259)              (0.1913)              (0.2232)                      (0.3648)              “RZ-= .3037

  Shar~ Blocked                                 0.1160’           0.4681 ‘              0.4832 ‘              -0.2094                       -0.9609 ‘             Num. of Obs =46
  before Meeting                               (0.0396)           (0.1168)              (0.1775)              (0.2071)                      (0.3386)              “RZ”= .4619

  Cumulative Voting                            -0.0261             0.0353                0.0316               -0.1291                        0.3933               Num. of Obs =46
                                               (0.0447)           (0.1320)              (0.2006)              (0.2340)                      (0,3826)              “R2”=.0303

  Oppressed Minorities                         -0.0103            -0.5733 ‘             -0.6241 “              -0.7097 ‘                     0.8562 b             Num. of Obs =46
  Mechanism                                    (0.0482)           (O.1422)              (0.2161)              (0.2522)                      (0.4121)              “Rl”=342~

  Percentage of Share                          -0.0079             0.0396 c             -0.0276                0.0225                        o.1573b              Num, of Obs =46
  Capital to call an                           (0.0071)           (0.0211)              (0.0320)              (0.0373)                      (0.0610)              “RZ”=1883
  ESM

  Mandatory Dividends                          -0.0138              0.1507 ‘              0.0219                 0.0249                        0.1146               Num, of Obs =46
                                               (0.0159)            (0.0469)              (0.0713)               (0.0832)                      (0.1360)              “R2”=.2471
............................................                   . ............................................ .................................................................................................
  Creditors’Rights

  Restrictions on                              -0.0952 ‘          -0.2802 c             -0.2219               0.2160                         1.4945 ‘             Num. of Obs =46
  Reorganization                               (0.0545)           (0.1610)              (0.2447)              (0.2855)                      (0.4667)              “F”=.1645

  Automatic Stay on                            0.1129 b           0.4373 ‘              -0.1393               0.2520                        -0.6410                Num.of Obs =46
  Assets.                                      (0.0509)           (0.1502)              (0.2283)              (0.2663)                      (0.4354)               “R2”=.27(j8

  ~ec~ed Creditors                              0.0094            -0.3101 ‘             0.0438                 0.0417                       0.8625 ‘               Num. of Obs =46
                                               (0.0408)           (o.1207)              (0.1833)               (0.2139)                     (0.3497)               “RI” = 1897

   Management Stays in                          0.1389’           0.4948 ‘               0.2116                0.5138 b                      -0.9154 b             Num. of Obs =46
   Reorganization                              (0.0452)           (O. 1336)              (0.203 1)             (0.2369)                      (0.3873)              “RZ” =4 ~9f)

   Legal Rese~e                                -0.0165             0.2070 ‘              0.2951 a              0.1863 ‘                       0.1424               Num. of Obs =46
                                               (0.0138)            (0-~09)               (cI.()(j23)           (0.0726)                      (0.1188)               “RI”=d(jj 1

a=Significant            at 10/0 level; b= Significant         at 5°/0 level; c= Significant                at 10°/0 level.
                                       TABLE 5: Legal Origin, Shareholder and Creditor Rights
The following table reports F-tests based on a SURE regression model. The dependent variable is the stack of shareholder and creditor
righ~ by mun~ and the independent variables are the log of GNP per capita and the set of dummies for the different legal origins. The
four legal origins are: (1) English; (2) French; (3) German; and (4) Scandinavian . Panel A reports F-tests on the significance of legal
origins for the set of shareholders’ rights. Panel B repofi F-tests on the significance of legal origins for the set of creditors’ rights. Finally,
panel C reports F-tests on the significance of legal origins for both sets of shareholder and creditor righm together. F-statistics are reported
with theu-associated probabili~ underneath         in parenthesis.
                                                        PANEL A: Shareholder Rights

               Mother                                     France             Germany            Scandinavia           Mother “I” against the
                                                                                                                           world (=0)

 Engknd                             F statistic             11.66               4.65                2.25                       10.07
                                    (Prob > F)            (0.0000)           (0.0007)             (0.0496)                   (0,0000)

 France                             F statistic                                 I .97                3.19                      7.75
                                    @b>F)          ,                         (0.0829)             (0.0086)                   (0.0000)

 Germany                            F stati~c                                                       2.41                       2.15
                                    (Prob > F)                                                    (0.0369)                   (0.0588)

 Scandinavia                        F statistic                                                                                2,06
                                    (Prob > F)                                                                               (0.0688)

 All mothers are equal to each      F statistic                                                                                 5.32
 other                              @rob > F)                                                                                (0.000o)

                                                         PANEL B: Creditor Rights

               Mother                                     Franu              Certiany           Scandinavia          Mother “I” against the
                                                                                                                           world (=0)

 Engknd                            F statistic              11.36              6.18                 3.87                       13.17
                                   (Prob > F)             (0.0000)           (0.0002)             (0.0058)                   (0.000o)

 France                            F statistic                                 2.28                  1.03                      5.73
                                   (Prob > F)                                (0.0643)             (0,4153)                   (0.0004)

 Germany                           F statistic                                                       1.58                      2.79
                                   (Prob > F)                                                     (0.1881)                   (0.0288)

 Scandinavia                       F statistic                                                                                  1.22
                                   (Prob > F)                                                                                (0.3157)

 All mothers are equal to each     F statistic                                                                                  5.30
 other                             (Prob > F)                                                                                (o.ooOO)

                                                  PANEL C: Shareholder and Creditor Righta

               Mother                                     France             Germany            Scandinavia           Mother “1” against the
                                                                                                                            world (+)

 England                            F statistic             12.95               7.27                 2.71                       12.51
                                    (Prob > F)            (0.0000)            (0.0000)             (0.0086)                   (0.0000)

 France                             F s~istic                                   2.24                 2.17                       5.93
                                    (Prob > F)                                (0.0272)             (0.0325)                   (0.0000)

 Germany                            F statistic                                                      2.55                       2.91
                                    (Prob > F)                                                     (0.0128)                   (0.0050)

 Scandinavia                        F statistic                                                                                 2.01
                                    (Prob > F)                                                                                (0.0567)

 All mothers are equal to each      F statistic                                                                                 6.05
 other                              (Prob > F)                                                                                (0,0000)
                                                                        Table 7: Rule of Law
This table classifies counhiesby legal origin and shows the politicaJ variables for each munby. Exact definitions for each of the variables can be found in
Tale 1. Panel B gives the tests of means for the different legaJ origins.


                                    Panel A                             ENFORCEMENT      VARIABLES                       ACCOUNTING         GNP PER
                                                                                                                                            CAPITA
                COUNTRY              Eficiency of         Rule of Law     Corruption     Risk of    Risk of Con~ct Rating on Acmunting (U.S. $)
                                    iudiciaJ svstem                                    ExDrooriation Repudiation       standards

Australia                                10,00               10.00           8.52            9.27             8.71            75                  17,500
Canada                                    9,25               10.00          10.00            9.67             8.96            74                  19,970
Hong Kong                                10,00                8,22          8.52             8.29             8.82            69                  18,060
Jndla                                    8.00                4,17           4.58             7.75             6.11            57                     300
Jrelmd                                   8.75                 7.80          8.52             9.67             8.96            na                  13,000
-I                                       10.00               4.82           8.33             8.25             7.54            64                  13,920
Kenya                                    5.75                 5.42          4.82             5.98             5.66                                   270
MaJaysia                                 9.00                6,78           7.38             7.95             7,43            E                    3,140
New ~and                                 10.00               10.00          10.00            9.69             9.29            70                  12,600
Nigeria                                  7.25                2.73           3.03             5,33             4.36            59                     300
Pakistan                                 5.00                3.03           2.98             5.62             4,87                                   430
Singapore                                10.00               8.57           8.22             9,30             8.86            ;:                  19,850
south Africa                             6.00         <      4.42           8.92             6.88             7,27            70                   2,980
Sri Lanka                                7.00                 1.90          5.00             6.05             5.25            na                     600
Nand                                                         6.25           5,18             7.42             7.57            64                   2,110
UK                                       :02d                8.57           9.10             9.71             9.63            78                  18,060
us                                       10.00               10,00          8.63             9.98             9.00            71                  24,740
Zimbabwe                                  7.50               3.68           5.42             5.61             5.04                                   520
Avg. English origin                       &15                6.46           7.06             7.91             7.41           6~.:2                 9353

Argentina              ‘                 6,00                5.35           6.02             5.91             4.91            45                   7,220
Belgium                                  9.50                10.00          8.82             9.63             9.48            61                  21,650
Btazil                                   5.75                6.32           6.32             7.62             6,30            54                   2,930
Chile                                    7.25                7.02           5.30             7,50             6.80            52                   3,170
tilombia                                 7.25                2.08           5.00             6.95             7,02            50                   1,400
                                         6.25                6.67           5.18             6.57             5,18                                 1,200
Egypt                                    6.50                4.17           3.87             6.30             6.05            ;:
France                                   8.00                8.98           9.05             9.65             9.19            69                 22,?;
Oreece                                   7.00                6.18           7.27             7.12             6.62            55                  7,390
[ndonesia                                2.50                3.98           2.15             7.16             6.09            na                    740
[taJy                                    6.75                8.33           6.13             9.35             9.17            62                 19,840
Jordan                                   8.66                4.35           5.48             6,07             4,86            na                  1,190
Mexim                                    6.00                5.35           4.77             7.29             6.55            60                  3,610
Netherlmds                               10,00               10.00          10,00            9,98             9,35            64                 20,950
Pem                                      6.75                2.50           4.70             5.54             4,68            38                  I,490
Philippines                              4.75                2.73           2.92             5,22             4,80            65                    850
Pomsgal                                  5.50                8.68           7.38             8,90             8,57            36                  9,130
spain                                    6.25                7.80           7.38             9,52             8,40            64                 13,590
Turkey                                   4.00                5.18           5.18             7,00             5,95            51                  2,970
Uruguay                                  6.50                5.00           5.00             6,58             7,29            31                  3,830
Venezuela                                6.50                6.37           4.70             6.89             6,30                                2,840
Avg. French       origin                 6.56                6.05           5.84             7.46             6.84           5::7                 7,102

Austria                                  9.50                10.00          8.57             9.69             9.60            54                  23,510
Germany                                  9.00                9.23           8.93             9.90             9.77            62                  23,560
Japan                                    10.00               8.98           8.52             9.67             9.69            65                  31,490
South Korea                              6.00                5.35           5.30             8.31             8.59            62                   7,660
SwikerJand                               10.00               10.00          10.00            9.98             9.98            68                  35,760
Taiwan                                   6.75                8.52           6.85             9.12             9.16            65                  10,425
Avg.   Gcrm#sr     origin                854                 8.68           8.03             9.45             9.47           62.67                22,067

Denmark                                  10.00               10.00          10.00            9.67             9.31            62                  26,730
FinJand                                  10.00               10,00          10.00            9.67             9.15            77                  19,300
Norway                                   10.00               10,00          10.00            9.88             9.71            74                  25,970
Sweden                                   10,00               10,00          10,00            9.40             9.58            83                  24,740
Avg. Scandinavian origin                 10.00               10.00          10.00            9.66             9.44           74.00                24,185

Total Average                            7.67                6.85           6.90             8.05             7.58           60.93                11,1s6


                                                                             Porrel B: Tub     of Mesns (t-statistics)
Common vs. Civil Law                      1,27               -0,77           0.39            -0.46           -0.51           3.12 ‘            -0.94
England vs. France                       2,65 ‘              0.51           1.79 ‘           0.90              1,06           4.66 ‘            0.85

England vs. Oermany                      -0.41              -1,82’          -0.93         -2. t9b            -2.79 ‘          2.22 b           -2,86 a

Engtand vs. Scandinavia                  -3.78   ■          -15.57 ‘        -5,38 C       -2.06 b            -2.26 ‘         -1,05             -3.24 ‘

Fronw    VS.   ~rm~y                     -2,53 ‘             -2.55 ‘        -2.49 ‘          -3.20   ●       -3.90 ‘         -2.10 b           -3.79 ‘

France vs. Scandinavia                   -9.34 a            -20.80 ‘        -9.77 a          -2,94 a         -3.17”          -3.32 ‘           -4.28 ‘

Oermany vs. Scandinavia                  -2.06 ‘            -11.29’         -2.88 ‘          -0.63            0,10           -2.66 ‘           -0.36
  -----     .. A,...      . . ..-.   . .. . .  .    . . ..    . . .-”, ,.
a=slgnmcam or 170level; n=hIgnmcant as 370 level; c=31gnlIIcant a[ Iu70 level
                                                   Table 8: bgal                   Origins,          Rule of Law and Accounting                                    Regressions


Ordinary least square regressions of the cross-section of 49 countries around the world. The dependent variables are: (1)
efficiency of the judiciary system; (2) rule of law; (3) corruption; (4) risk of expropriation; (5) repudiation of contracts by
government; and (6) accounting standards in each country. The independent variables for the first regression in each panel
are the log of GNP per capita and the set of “legal origin” dummies (French, German, Scandinavian and the omitted dummy
being English). The second regression in the panel of each dependent variable includes the log of GNP per capita and a
dummy variable “Civil Law” which takes a value equal to 1 when the country belongs to the civil law tradition (i.e. all French,
German and Scandinavian Codes), and Owhen the country belongs to the “Common Law” tradition (i.e. English Common
Law). White (1980) standard errors are given in parentheses.

                                                                                                                           Independent Variables

   DEPENDENT V-.                                Log of GNP Civil Law                                 French                Germs                  Scandinavian                   Intercept
                                                per Capita ‘ dummy                                   origin                origin                 origin

  Efficiency of the                               0.8421 i                     .. .. . .             -1.6609 *             -1.0305 ‘               0.2392                         1.2677                Num.of Obs =49
  Judiciary System                              (0.1374)                                             (0.4544)              (0.5717)               (0.3364)                       (1.2185)               A~ustedR’  = .5330

   Efficiency of the                              0.9763 a                   -1.3774 a                 -------               -. . . . . .           -------                      0.1702                 Num, of Obs =49
   Judiciary System                              (0.1312)                    (0.4103)                                                                                           (1.2462)                A~usted R2 = .4975
.............................................   .......................... ....................... ............................................ ........................................ .......................... ........................... ....
  Rule of Law                                     1.4761 ‘                     --—---                -0.5250               -0.2715                 0.7174                        -5.6050 ‘              Num.of Obs =49
                                                (0.1502)                                             (0.4325)              (0.5981)               (0.4436)                       (1.2887)               A~ustedRz  = .7538

  Rule of Law                                     1.5541 ‘                   -0.3642                   -------               -------                . . -----                   -6.2421 ‘                Num.of Obs =49
                                                 (0.1336)                    (0.4156)                                                                                           (1.1711)                A~ustedR2                = .7501
.............................................   .......................... ....................... ............................................ .....................................................   ............................ ................
  Corruption                                      1.3088 ‘                     -------               -1.3236 a             -1.2422 ‘                0.4369                      -3.6367 ‘               Num.of Obs =49
                                                (0.1076]                                             (0.3023)              (0.4500)               (0.2986)                       (0.9363)               A~ustedR’  =.7183

  Corruption                                      1.4020 ‘                  -1.1388’                  -------               . .. . . . .           -------                     -4.3986 ‘ Num. of Obs =49
                                                 (0.0962)                   (0.2929)                                                                                           (0.8440)                A@usted R2 = .6853
                                                ................................................. ............................................ .......................................... .......................... ........................... ..
  Risk      of Expropriation                     0.9098 m                                            -0.5164 b             -0.0009                 0.0054                         0.4732                Num. of Obs =49
                                                (0.0883)                                             (0.2386)              (O.1987)               (0.2124)                       (0.7989)               A~ustedR2   = .7949

  Risk of Expropriation                           0.9679 a                  -0.3855 c                 -------.              --------               -------                     -0.0018                 Num. of Obs =49
                                                 (0.0747)                   (0.2066)                                                                                           (0.6958)                A~ustedRz              = .7911
.............................................   ................................................. ............................................ ............................. .......... .......................... .......................... .....
  Repudiation of                                  0.9951 a                    -------               -0.6459 ‘              0.3803 b               0.1300                       -0.7290                 Num.of Obs =49
  Contracts by Govmnt,                           (0.0788)                                           (0.2388) (0.1844) (0.1985)                                                 (0.6870) A~usted R’ = .8326
   Repudiation of                                 1.0976 ‘                  -0.4111 ‘                 -------                -------                -------                     -1.5671 ‘ Num. of Obs =49
   Contracti by Govmnt.                          (0.0710)                   (0.2158)                                                                                            (0.6291)                A~ustedR’              = .8066
.............................................   ................................................. ...................... ...................... ....................................... .......................... .......................... ......
  Accounting Standards                            4.3348 a                    -------               -17.3661               -11.890’               -1.5272                       31.8070                 Num. of Obs =41
                                                 (1.1669)                                           (2.7591)               (2.7271)               (4.4562)                      (10.161)                A~usted R= = .5694

   Accounting Standards                           5.774 a                    -14.331 ‘                  -------               -------                . ------                    19.249 c                Num.of Obs =4]
                                                 (1.2426)                    (2.6385)                                                                                            (11.015)                A~wted R2 = .4875



a=Significant            at 10/0 level; b= Significant                  at 5°/0 level; c= Significant                   at 10°/0 level.
                                                         Table 9: Remedial            Rights

Ordinary Least Square regressions of the cross-section of 49 countries around the world. The dependent variables are: (1) a
“Mandatory Dividends” dummy which is equal to 1 if the law requires a mandatory dividend, and Ootherwise; (2) a “Legal
Reserves” dummy variable equal to 1 if the law requires the existence of a legal reserve, and Oothemise; and (3) a “Remedial
Rights” dummy variable equal to 1 if the law requires either the existence of a mandatory dividend or the existence of a legal
reseme. The independent variables are: (1) the log of GNP per capita which comes from; (2) the efficiency of the judiciary
system; (3) the index of quality of accounting stidards in the country; and (4) the set of “legal origin” dummies (French,
German., Scandinavian, and the omitted dummy for English origin). White (1980) corrected standard errors are shown in
pwnthesis.


                                                                               Dependent          Variabks


             ldpendent     Variables       ‘      Mandatory        Dividends         Legal Reserves                        Remedial Rights




         Log of GNP                                       -0.0033                                                                   0.0651 b
         per capita                                       (0.0336)                                                                 (0.0278)

         Efficiency of the Judiciary                      -0.0166                         4.0071                                  -o.lo50a
                                                          (0.0157)                        (0.0124)                                (0.0383)

         Accounting                                       -0.0004                         -0.0032                                 -0.0049’
                                                          (0.0038)                        (0.0023)                                 (0.0029)

         French Origin                                     0.1057                          o.1194b                                  0.5826 a
                                                          (0.0864)                        (0.0580)                                 (0.1563)

         German origin                                     0.0050                          0.2486 ‘                                 0.8004’
                                                          (0.0658)                        (0.0782)                                 (0.0938)

         Scandinavian Origin                               0.0244                         0.1838 a                                 0.74541
                                                          (0.0252)                        (0.0495)                                 (0.2169)

                                                                                      ............................. ...............................................



          Intercept                                        0.1389                         0.3286b                                  0.7659 b
                                                          (0.1333)                        (O.1452)                                 (0.3220)


         Number of Observations                               41                              41                                        41

         Adjusted R2                                       0.0994                          0.4159                                   0.7687




                a= s~l~t       at 1% level; b= Significant at 5% level; c= Si@cant      at 10% level.
                                                                                                   Table 10: Large Shareholders          around the World
me following table provi&s omemhip of tirms by large shareholders io the cross-section of 49 cotmtries. The fit mlumrt gives the average percentage of common shares
owed by the 3 largest shareholders in the 10 large~ domestsc tirrns in the non-fmanclsd sector in each counh-y, ‘fhe sewnd column provides ,tie average
wmmoo stock omed by the 31 cst shareholders excluding the govcrmnen4 that is, when the govensment was one of the largest shareholders It was substl,“r=n@Ei:   ted w
nextl~-xholdcr.           ~e=~lumnshowsthe              average                                               est shareholders m the ten largest non-tinanc!at, prtiafely-
oti        whc6rms     rnagivert.wmtry     A firmiswnsl “-~~~~~d~%~~-~~d~~~                             ~~~older in it. Thefoti      column gives the medan.wnershl~
of the 3 Ianswt shareholders in the 10 laruest non-financial Drrvafefv-owed~mes&ic   firms, me last two whmsns urovide averaee market cauitsl of the 10 iirrns in eac
 . -. ....     —“...           “.   -—   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .




                                                                                                                                 Pd,4    Owoership ( 10Lnrge firms)
                                                                                 Owrship     by Ik tie    ~est   Shareholders                                                      W&t      Cqitalizalion    oJFti
                             cout4TRY                                              10 Laracss Non F-d        hestic      Firms            10Lqw       private   tirnss                   10 LO.5t             10 Mgest
                                                                                                                                                                                    Priv-v                     Private
                                                                                 (includesgovmt)           (excludesgovhn)                 mm                       medians                ( Millionsof USS)
 Ausbalis                                                                                  0.32                   0,32                      0.28                         0.28                       5,940                  5,943
 Cansds                                                                                    0.40                   0,39                      0.40                         0.24                       3,589                  3,015
 Hong Kong                                                                                 0.54                   0,54                      0.54                         0.54                       4,282                  4,282
 Ma                                                                                        0.41                   0,38                      0.40                         0.43                       1,558                  1,721
 bland                                                                                     0.39                   0.39                      0,39                         0.36                        944                     944
 bl                                                                                        0.49                   0.44                      0.51                         0.55                        5s0                     428
 Kenys                                                                                                                                                                                                 27                     27
 Wysu                                                                                      0?4                    0%                        0?4                          0?2                        4,427                  2,0 I 3
 sew md                                                                                    0.48                  0.48                       0,48                         0.51                   1,019                     1,019
 v-                                                                                        0.46                  0,43                       0,40                         0.45                      39                        39
 mkistsn                                                                                   0.45                  0.26                       0,37                         0.41                      92                        49
 $-                                                                                        0.49                  0,49                       0.49                         0.53                   1,637                     1,637
 M Ma                                                                                      0.52                  0,52                       0.52                         0,52                   6,23a                     6.23a
 Mm                                                                                        0,60                  0,60                       0.60                         0,61                       4                          4
 rbailMd                                                                                   0,46                  0.44                       0.47                         o,4a                   1,009                       996
 JK                                                                                        0,22                  0.17                       0.19                         0,15                  21,019                    1a,5il
 JS                                                                                        0,20                  0.20                       0.20                         0.12                  71,650                    71,650
 ~~w                                                                                       0.54                  0.41                       0.55                         0.51                      63                        28
 LW E~h                 Ox                                                                 a4s                   0.41                       0.43                         a42                        6~                     6*

 -                                                                                         0.53                  0.50                       0.53                         0.55                     2,90a                    2,185
 klgium                                                                                    0.57                  0.48                       0.54                         0.62                     3,539                    3,4457
 ISs?il                                                                                    0.66                  0.31                       0.57                         0.63                     7,37a                    1,237
 m                                                                                         o.4a                  0.41                       0.45                         o.3a                     2,415                    2,330
 hlolnbia                                                                                  0.63                  0.63                       0,63                         o.6a                       457                      457
 ~
 ~w                                                                                        070                   0;1                        0?2                          0?2                      2;                         1:
 :-                                                                                        0.33                  0.22                       0.34                         0.24                  I 1,713                     8,914
 3ruce                                                                                     0.69                  0.62                       0.67                         0.68                     21a                        163
 ndase9is                                                                                  0.63                  0.53                       0.58                         0.62                    1,366                       a82
 taly                                                                                      0.58                  o.5a                       o.5a                         0.60                       3,140                  3,140
 ‘*                                                                                                                                                                                                    63                     63
 Wexiw                                                                                     O?a                   ova                        ova                          027                        2,924                  2,954
 ti~                                                                                       0.43                  0,33                       0.39                         0,31                       a,05a                  6,400
 leru                                                                                      0.50                  0.47                       0.56                         0,57                         427                    I54
 Wli*                                                                                      0.58                  0.56                       0.57                         0.51                         867                    156
 ‘-                                                                                        0.52                  0.52                       0.52                         0,59                         259                    259
 ;@                                                                                        0.43                  0,34                       0.51                         0,50                       3,154                  1,256
 r-                                                                                        0.61                  0.47                       0.59                         0,58                         701                    477
 Jntgusy                                                                                    IIS                   IIS                                                                                  IIS
 {~la                                                                                       M                     M                         0?1                          089                           Ira                  4;
 4~ Fre6eb origin                                                                          0.56                  0.45                       O.M                          0.55                       2,775                  1~

 id                                                                                        o.@                   0.53                       0.58                         0.51                     442                       325
 .
 ~Y                                                                                        0.42                  0.38                       0.48                         0.50                   9,465                     8,5M
 w                                                                                         0.22                  0.15                       0.18                         0.13                  37,532                    26,677
 M Kores                                                                                   0.23                  0,23                       0.23                         0.20                   1,034                     1,034
 ;ti~                                                                                      0,4 I                 0,41                       0.4 I                        o.4a                   9,578                     9,57a
 rtiw                                                                                      0,23                  0,16                       0.18                         0.14                   3,0a5                     2,186
 i~ German origin                                                                          036                   0.31                       034                          033                   lQla9                      %057

                                                                                           0.45                   0.45                      0.45                         0,40                       1,273                  1,273
 :inlerai                                                                                  0.44                   0.20                      0,37                         0.34                       2272                   1,980
 ~my                                                                                       0.40                   0.35                      0.36                         0.31                       1,561                  l,IM
 I*                                                                                        o.2a                   0,27                      o,2a                         o.2a                       6,a30                  6.216
 \v& =ndinmvtim origtn                                                                     0.39                   0.32                      037                          033                        3,059                  2,644

 rotal Avemge                                                                              0.47                   0.40                      0.46                         0.45                       5J79                   4J21

                                                                                                                                 Pti    B Teat of M=m (t-statistics)
 .~           vs. CivilLaw                                                                 -1,05                  0,12                     -I.1O                         -0.91             0.69                  1.Cm3

 Enaland vs. Franw                                                                         -3.11’                 -1,02                     -3.24 ‘                      -2.6a ‘           1.02                   1,22

 Engtand VS.           ~y                                                                   1.52                  1.62                       1.38                         1.31            -0.43                  4.20

 _           vs. ~via                                                                      0,92                   1.41                       1.05                         1.22             0.44                  0.46

 F-         vs.Ge-y                                                                        3,59 n                 2.02 b                    3.a7s                        3.29 ‘           -2,17’                 -2.61 b

 F-         vs. Scandinavia                                                                3.06 ‘                     1.71’                 3.93 “                       3.32 ‘           -0.16                  -0.61

 Germany vs. Scandinavia                                                                   -0.40                  -0.08                     -0.24                        -0.06             0.99                   1.05

                                                                                     a=Sj~ifiCan[at I0/0level. &–Simificant at 5“/0level; c=Significant at 10”/0level
                                                        TABLE 11: OWNERSHIP REGRESSIONS

Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of 49 countries around the world. The dependent variable is “ Ownership” which is the average
percentage of common skes owned by the three largest shareholders in the ten largmt privately -owneddomestic fm                given in a given country. A firm
is considered privately owned if the state is not a known shareholder in it, The independent variables are (1) log of GNP per capita; (2) log of GNP;
(3) Girti Coefficient; (4) the rule of law in the country which refers to an index of law and order tradition in the country; (5) the index for acmunting
standards in the country; (6) French legal origin; (~ German legal origin; (8) Scandimvian legal origin; (9) the antidirectors shareholders’ rights index
(calculated as indicated in Table 1); (10) “one share-one vote” that equals one if the Company Law or Commercial Code of the country requires that
ordinary shares carry one vote per share, and O otherwise; (11) mandatory dividend which equals the percentage of net inmme that the Company Law
or the Commercial Code of the wuntty requires f-            to distribute as dividend among ordinary stockholders; (12) “secured creditors first” which equals
1 if -ed     creditors are rtiti   first in the distribution of the pr-        that rdt  from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt firm; (13) “automatic
stay on assets” of the ti     upon fding the reorgtilon        petition and; (14) the legal reserve quirement   which is the minimum percentage of total share
capital ~          by Company hw or the Commercial Code of the muntry to avoid the dissolution of an existing firm. White (1980) corrected standard
errors are shown in parenthmis.




                                                                                        Depetient Variable: Ownerstip


                       In&pendent Variabks                           Basic Repion                                   Shareholder & Creditor Rights

                  hg   of GW                                                 0.0077                                                      0.0611’
                  per capita                                                (0.0097)                                                    (0.0185)

                  hg     of GNP                                             -0.0442 ‘                                                  -0.0321 ‘
                                                                            (0.0119)                                                   (0.0099)

                  Gin Coefficient                                             0.0024 c                                                   0.0052”
                                                                             (0.0014)                                                   (0.0017)

                  Rule of hw                                                                                                           4.0187 b
                                                                                                                                       (0.0093)

                  Accomting                                                                                                             -0.0044 b
                                                                                                                                        (0.0020)

                  French Origin                                             0.1296 z                                                    -0.0089
                                                                            (0.0261)                                                    (0.0634)

                  German Origin                                             -0.0113                                                      4.1060
                                                                            (0.0666)                                                    (0.0691)

                  Scandinavian Origin                                        -0.0496                                                    -0.M32
                                                                            (0.0371)                                                   (0.0465)

                  ~tidirectors     Shareholders                                                                                        -0.0517 a
                  Rights                                                                                                               (0.0131)

                  One Share-One Vote                                                                                                     -0.0278
                                                                                                                                        (0.0293)

                  Mandatory      Dividend                                                                                                0.1202
                                                                                                                                        (O. 1265)

                  Secured Creditor First                                                                                                 -0.0232
                                                                                                                                        (0.0337)

                  Automatic Stay on Assets                                                                                              -0.0473
                                                                                                                                        (0.0346)

                  bgal    Resetve Rquired                                                                                                -0.1839
                                                                                                                                        (0.1141)
                                                          .....................................................................................................................

                    Irtterwpt                                                0.7785 =                                                     0.7382 =
                                                                             (o. 1505)                                                   (0.2107)



                  Number of Observations                                          45                                                          39

                  Adjusted R2                                                 0.4885                                                      0.5805


                                            ~= si~fificant at 1% level; b= Significant at 5 % level; c= Significant at 10% level.
.
    -0         -   -   -   0   0   -   -     0   -   0    0   -   .   0   .   -    0     -    0   0   .   -0       a    .-.”---        -_.o.q      0
                                                                                                                   0“




    0--0----                           0--0---0-                              --------                             s
                                                                                                                   0




    -    0     g -     -   -   0   -   -     -   -   -0       -   0   0   -0 0           .    0   0   -   -    0   $
                                                                                                                   0




    oo~-----o                                000000-00                              -0--0--                        3    0-00---0--          00         s
                                                                                                                   0“                                  0’




    -00-00-                        -0-0--0                        000000-                         000.5                  0000000000-             0=.
                                                                                                                   0                                   0
                                                                              DATA APPENDIX

COWTRY                                                                                                                        SOURCE
 ARGE~A
....................................... ....................................................................................................................................... ..........................       .........................

SHAREHOLDERS                               Several ADW of different mmparties
                                           Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                           ComrrrerciaJNe of Argentina
                                           Digest of commercial Laws of Argentin& Oceana Publications, August 1994
                                           Doing Business in @entin% The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                           ILT, The hnomist Intelligent Uni\ June 1994
                                           IntemationsJ Society of Securities AdrnirsisWrs 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switirland
                                           IRRC, GlpbaJ Shareholder Serviw, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research center, 1995
                                           hgal Apects of doing Business in M                         Arrreriq August 1991
....................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................      .,
CREDITOW                                  Co~mte Insolvency and Rescue:Tlre International Dimension, Campbell and Collins, Kluwer b                                                         and Taxation Publishers,
                                          1993
                                          Cress- Border Insolvency : Compamtive Dimensions, Ed. Ian F. Fletcher, UK NationsJ bmmiti                                                      of Comparative Law, UK 19
                                          Current Development in International and Gmparsrtive Corpmate Law, J,Ziegel, Ed, Oxford, Clmndon Press, 1994
                                          Division for Professions Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          [ntemtiorral han Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate, Btilng and Business Law and the
                                          Division for Professional Education, Amerim Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
                                          @estiormaire on ~ditors’Rights AgrdrtstBusiness Debtom, Bianchi, Allende & BreL Buenos Aires, Argentina
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ........... ........... ........... ........... .........
owNERsHIP                                 Argentina Company Handbook, 1995/96 EditioL IMF Editora Ltda , Buenos AIrcs, Republics Argentina
                                          Di~ry    of Grpoti    ~liations, National Register Pub. Co,, New Jersey 1995
                                          Latin American Companies Database, International Company Handbook, 1995
                                          Moody’s International Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Serviu, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
                                          World Swpc Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

AUSTRALIA
...................................... ...................................................................................................................................... ..........................       ..........................
SHAREHOLDER                              Several ADRs of different mmpsnies
                                         Company Survey of Securities Law
                                         tirporations Law in Atii~                    Tomasic, The Fedemtion Press 1995, Sydney, Australia
                                         Digest of Commercial Laws of the Commonwealth of Atii&                                        Oceana Publications, Inc., April 1995
                                         Dmctor of shmholders rights
                                         Doing Business in Arsstrali&The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                         FFO, The Emnomist Intelligence Unit Jrme 1994
                                        Wide to Companies Act 1993, Hlckey, The Law book Co. Ltd, Sydney, Austiia
                                         lLS, The Economist Intelligertw Unig May 1994
                                         [ntemadond Society of Securities Adminis~rs                             1994, Union Bank of Swikerlsrs~ Zurich Swi-rland
                                         IRRC, Global Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Gntcr, 1995
                                         hgal Apects of Doing Business in Austrsdi~ William T. Mckay
                                         Shmholders Rights Abroad, Stephen M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Cen&r
                                         The New Corporations Law, P. Gllles, 2nd Edition, The Federation Press, Sydney, Austsalia 1992
                                         The Price Wrrtetrhouse Eumpearr Companies Handbook 199Z1993
...................................... .................................................................................................................................. ..........................         ..........................      ...
CREDITORS                                Cress- Border insolvency : Comparative Dimensions, Ed. Ian F. Fletcher, UK National Committee of Comparative Law, UK 19
                                          Mdtinational CommercisJ Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
                                          Corporate Insolvency and Rescue, Campbell, Denis and hthony Collins, Ed. Boston, Kluwer and Taxation Publisher, 1993
                                          Current Development in International and Comparative Corporate W, J.Ziegel, Ed. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1994
                                          Cress-Border Insolvency: NationsJ and Comparative Studies, 1.Fletcher, JCB Mohr, 1992
                                          Corporate Insolvency and Rescue: The IntemationaJ Dimension, Carnbell and Collins, Kluwer Law and Twation Publishers 19
...................................... ,.................................................................................................................................. .......................... ............. ...............
OWNERSHIP                                  Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                           Directory of Corporate Mlliatiorrs, Nationrd Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           The New Zealand Company Register 1994D5, 33th Edition, Mer-tile Gazette Marketing Ltd., Bishopdale, Christchurch.
                                           World Saps Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996
COUNTRY                                                                                                                   SOURCE
AUSTRIA
                                        .......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                            Several ADRS of different mmpsnies
                                        Capiti Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                        Digest of Commercial Laws of the Commonwealth of Austi& Ocesna Publications, Inc., August 1992
                                        Doing Business in ArssbiL The priw W*rhouse 1993
                                        FFO, The Ec4morrdstIntelligence Unit
                                        ILT, The Emnomist [ntelligenw Uni~ Sept. 1994
                                        International Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Brrrdcof Swi=rland, Zurich Switirlsnd
                                        IRRC, GlobaJ Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, LrrvestorResponsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        Legal Apects of Doing Business in Western Europe, July 1989
                                        The Priw WatetTJSorrse           Europem companies Handtik 1992/1993
                                        ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................      .......................
CWDITO~                                 ErrroP        Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik md Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                        Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH Intematiomd, Mordshire, U.K. 1993
.....................................   .................................................................................................................................. ..........................      ..........................
owNERsm                                 Directory of Corpoti Mliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                        Hoppenstedt Affiliation Corporate Structures
                                        ‘Theprim WatetrhoW European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
                                        World Scope GJobal, Disclosure Inc. 1996

 BELGIUM
.....................................   ........................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDER                             Several ADRs of different companies
                                        Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Mtiew Bender& Co.
                                        Digest of timmerc ial Laws of Belgi~                         Oceana Publications, Inc., November 1990
                                        Doing Business in Belgiq The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                        FFO, The Ewnomist Intelligence Unit, February 1995
                                        ILT, The Emnomist lntclligerrce Uni~ May 1994
                                        Intem~ional Society of Securities Adminis~rs                            1994, Union Bank of Swi~rlarrd, Zurich Swi@rlarrd
                                        IRRC, Global Shareholder Serviw, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        Legal Aspects of DoirsgBusiness in Western Europe, July 1989
                                        The price Watetiuse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
....................................    ................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................
CWDITORS                                Compositions in Bankruptcy, Dalhuisen, A.W. Sijthoff-Leyden, The Netherlands 1968
                                        European Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik and Weirrrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                        Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atilrrson, CCH IntcmationaJ, Oxfordshirc, U.K. 1993
                                        ................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................
OWNERSHJP                               Directory of Corporate ~Aistions, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                        Extel Flnancird Ltd., 1995
                                        Mmdy’s lntemational Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Servim, 1994 Vemion, New York, USA
                                        The Price Watetiuse European Compsrries Handhk 1992/1993
                                        World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

 BRAZIL
.....................................   ................................................................................................................................................ ..........................         .............
SWHOLDERS                               Severat ADW for different mmpsnies
                                        Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                        Digest of Commercial Laws of Brazil, Oceana Publications, Inc., October 1991
                                        Ming Business in Brazil, The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                        FFO, The ~nomist Intelligence Unit, March 1995
                                         ILT, The Mnomist Intelligence Unit January 1995
                                         International Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switirlsnd, Zurich Swi~rlsnd
                                         Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Latin America June 1993
.....................................   ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ........................
CREDITORS                               International ban WorkorrLSsrrd Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate , Banking and Business Law and the
                                        Division for professional Eduction, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                        Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Amiation 1993
 ....................................   ............................................................................................................................ ................................. .........................
 OWNERSHJP                               Brazil Company Handbook 1994/95 Edition, Rio de Brazil, Brazil
                                         CIFAR’S ( Center for lntemationsJ Finsncial Analysis & Research,. Global Company Handbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOL4,
                                         Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                         Directory of Corporate ~Iliations, Nationrd Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                         Moody’s [ntemational Company Da@ Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                         World Scope Global, Disclosrs~ Inc. 1996
COUNTRY                                                                                                                    SOURCE
CANABA
...................................
SHAREHOLDERS                            Several ADRs of different mrnpsnies
                                        Capital Formation and Inveshnent Inwntivcs, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                        Digest of CommercisJ hws of Saskatchewan Canada @aria Publications, Inc.$snuary 1996
                                        Digest of timmercial Laws of Quebec, Oceana Publicadons, Inc. August 1992
                                        Directory of Shmholders’ Righk
                                        Doing Business in Can@ The Pri@ Wsterbouse 1993
                                        FFO, The Emnomist Intelligence Unit, May 1994
                                        ILT, The hnomist Intelligence Unit October 1994
                                        International Society of Securities AdmtiIs~rs                          1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Swi~rland
                                        lRRC, Global Shmholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Invetir Responsibility Research center, 1995
                                        Legal Aspects of Doing Business in North Amen@                              June 1993
                                        Sharebol&rs Rights Abroad, Stephen M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Rescsrch &nter
....................................   .................................................................................................................................. ..........................     ...........................     .
2REDITON                                Cmas- Border I~lvcncy: Comparative Dimensions, Ed. Ian F, Fletcher, UK Nationrd Committee of Compsuative Law, UK 19!
                                        International han Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corpomtc, Banking and Business Law and the
                                        Diiision for ~fessiond ~ucatiom American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                        MultinationsJ Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
...................................    .................................................................................................................................................. .......................... ............
3WNERSHIP                              Directory of Corporate Aftilirrtions, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                       Extel Flmmcial Ltd., 1995
                                       Moody’s International Compmy Data, Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                       Survey of JndushiaJs 1994, 68th ~ition, ~ F!nsnciai Post -up,            Toronto, Canada

-E
...................................    .......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                           Several ADRs of different mmpsnies
                                       Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                       Commercial Law of Chile
                                       Digest of Commercial Laws of Chile, Oceana Prsblictions, Inc.,June 1994
                                       Doing Business in Chile, The price Waterhouse 1993
                                       FFO, The Economist Intelligent Unit, January 1995
                                       ILT, The Emnomist Intelligence lJni~ February 1995
                                       httemationrd Society of Securities AdminisWrs 1994, Union Bank of SwiWerlan~ Zurich Swi~rlrmd
                                       IRRC, Global ShahOlder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                       Legrd Aspcm of Doing Business in Latin Ameriq July 1993

:REDITORS                              Commercird Laws of Chile
                                       Doing Business in Chile, The Price Wa.tcrhouse 1993
                                       Ley de @iebm, Goozale< Ed. Fubliley, Santiago, Chile 1995
                                       ManusJ de Derecho CommercisJ, R. Sandoval, Editorial Juridica Chile 1990
....................................   .................................................................................................................................... ..........................      .........................
)WNERSHLP                              CIFAR’S ( tinter for [ntemationsJ Financial Analysis& Research,. GlobaJ Company Handbook 2nd ~ltion,                                                                 1993, VOI,4,
                                       Princeton, New JeMy. USA
                                       Extel Financial Ltr., 1995
                                       Moody’s Intimational Company D* Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
                                       World Smpc GlobaJ, Disclosure Inc. 1996

:OLOMBIA
...................................
WHOLDERS                               Several AJ3Rsof different companies
                                       CapitaJ Formadon snd Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                       CommercisJ Laws of Colombla
                                       Digest of Commercial Laws of Colombi~ hana Publications, lnc.,Jrme 1994
                                       Doing Businecs in colombi~ The Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                       FFO, me Emnomist Intclligena Unit, April 1995
                                       ILT, The ~nomist Intelligence Unit January 1995
                                       [ntemational S~iety of St%urities Administiors 1994, Union Bank of Switirland, Zurich Switzerland
                                       hgal ~pects of king Business in Latin Americ& July 1993
                                       Sociedades Comerciales, Piruon, Ed, Temis, BogoQ Colombia, 1982
...................................    ................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ...........................
;REDITORS                              Commercial Laws of Colombia
                                       LegaJ Aspects of Doing Business in Latin Arneric% July 1993
 COWTRY                                                                                                                 SOURCE
....................................   ................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                   .......................
OWNERSHJP                               Manual del Mercado Bursatil 1983, 1st Edition, Poligrupo Comunicacion, Bogo@ Colombia
                                        Moody’s Intcma&ionalCompany D- Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                        World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

 DE~
....................................   ...................................................................................................................................... ...........................      ......................
SHAREHOLDERS                            Several ADW of different mmpanies
                                        Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                        Corporations and Partnemhips in Dcnm@ Ebelin% Kluwer Law and Twation Publishers, Deventcr, The Netherlands 1993
                                        Doing Business in Denmark, The Price WaterhoW 1993
                                        FFO, The Economist Inklligenee Unit, February 1995
                                        ~T, The Economist Intelligence Unig February 1995
                                        IntemadonaJ WIety of Securities Adrninishators 1994, Union Bank of Swi~rland, Zurich Switzerland
                                        IRRC, Giobal Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        hgal ~ts             of Doing Business in Western Europe, July 1989
                                        The Priu WtiW                    European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
                                       ......&...... .................................................................................................................................. .......................... .............
CREDITORS                               European Bankruptcy hws, Ed. Botwinik and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                        Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH IntemtionaJ, &fordShire, U.K. 1993
                                        Wiving the klrrble, International Fimutcial Law Review, June 1990
....................................   ...................................................................................................................................... ..........................      .......................
OWNERSHJP                              Directory oftirporate AfJiiiations, NationsJ Register pub. Co., New Jemey 1995
                                       Etil Financial Ltd., 1995
                                       Major companies of Europe 1993~3, Gmharn & Tro~an, bndon, United Kingdom
                                       The, Price Waterhouse European companies Handbook 199Z1993
                                       World Scope Giobal, Dwlosw Inc. 1996

ECUADOR
....................................   ......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDER                            CapitsJ Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                       Commercial Laws of Ecuador
                                       Doing Business in Ecuador, The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                       ILT, The Emnornist Intelligence Uni~ Wumber 1993
                                       hctums de Derecho Emn6miw, Hanna Musse, BancJYCentml del Ecuador
                                       bgal Aspects of Doing Business in Latin Ameri@ Au~t                                    1991
                                       Legishui6n EcrrWriana de CompMiw, Necker France, 1988
                                       Ley de Companias y Reglarnentos, Corporation de Estudios y Publicaciones, Quito Ecuador 1989
                                       b Companias y Legislation Mermtil del Ecuador, Romero Arte@ 3erd W, Quito, Ecuador 1983
....................................   ................................................................................................................................... ..........................       .........................
CREDfTORS                              Commercial Laws of Ecuador
                                       Ugislaciones Ecuatorianas de Companias: hy de Companias, Reglamentn de Juntas Generales, India Arsalitico de la Ley, F.
                                       Mrddonado, Ecuador 1988
....................................   .................................................................................................................................... .......................... ............. ...........
OWNERSHIP                              Directory of Corpo* ~lliations, Nationrd Regi-r Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                       Moody’s International Company Da Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Versiou New York USA
                                       Hoppensteadt ~irslions     and Corpomte Sinrctures
                                       Principal International Businesses 1995. The World Marketing Directory, Dun & Brads_L USA

EGYPT
....................................   .......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                           Capital Formation and Investment Inwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                       Digest of Commercial Laws of Egypg Oceana Publications, Inc., April 1995
                                       Doing Business in EgypL The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                       ILT, me Emnomist [ntelligenm Unit,July 1994
                                        bgal Aspects of Doiig Business in the Middle EasL July 1993
                                       ................................................................................................................................... ............. ..........................        ..............
C~DITORS                                International hrm Workouk and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of brporatc, Banking and Business Law and the
                                        Division for Professional Education, American Bar As~iation, USA 19g7
                                        Questionnaire on Creditors’ Rights Against Business Debtors, Taylor, Sidley & Austin & Naguib, Cairo, Egypt
....................................   .................................................................................................................................... ...................... ........... ........... .......
OWRSHJP                                Hermes Stock Guide for the Egyptian Securities Market 1995 Edition, Hermes Finarrciat, G% Egypt
                                       Guide to the Egyptian Msrkeg 1996 Edition, Egyptian Financial Gfoup, Oii Egypt
                                       Major Companies of the AraJIWorld 1994/95, 18tb Edition, Graham & Trotman, hndon, United Kingdom.
                                       Moodv’s lntcmatiorral Commmv Data. Moodv’s Investnr’s Serviw. 1994 Versiom New York. USA
COUNTRY                                                                                                                        SOURCE
FINLAND
...................................... ..............................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ............................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Several ADRs of different mmparties
                                          A Legal Guide to Sadirraviart and Balhi counties
                                          Capital Formation and Investinertt Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Digest of hrrrmereial hws of Finlart~ Oeeana Publieatiom, Inc., April 1994
                                          Doing Business in Ftian~ The price Waterhouse 1993
                                          ILT, The bnomist Intelligence Uni~ February 1994
                                          Irrtematiortal %lety of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switirlarrd, Zurich Switzerland
                                          IRRC, Globrd Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Western Europer Jdy 1989
                                          me Price Watebirouae European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................        ...........................    .
CREDITORS                                 Corpoti Insolvency and Rescue: The Irrternntionai Dirrrensio~ Campbell & tillirrs, Klrswerhw                                                     and Taxation Publishers, 199
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... .......................... ..
DWNEMHIP                                  CUS       ( Center for Irrterntional Financial Analysis& Research,. Globrd Company Hmdti~                                                          2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                          prirrceto~ New Jersey. USA
                                          Dmctory of ~rporate Affsliadorts, National Register Pub. Co., New Je~y 1995
                                          me Prim Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
                                          Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                          Major timpanies of Europe 1993/93, Graham& Trotmq bndon, United Kingdom
                                          @itsd Links in German Companies, 18th Edition, 1994, Commerzb@ F-                Germany
                                          World ~pe ~0~,        Dii[os.ure  hC,  1996


FACE          ........................ ..........................................................................................................................................................................................
$HAREHOLDE~                              Several AJ3Rsof dlffererrt mmpanies
                                         Capital Forrnation and Investment Incentives, Mtiew Bender& Co.
                                         Digest of Cornmereial Laws of Fmce, @aria Publications, Inc., September 1993
                                         Dmctory Global of Shareholders’ Rightz
                                         Doiig Business in Franw, The Priw WaterhoW 1993
                                         Droit des ~tetes, M. Jeantin, 2nd Edition, Montchrestien, Paris
                                         European Company Laws, Drury md Xuereb, Chapter 7 & 9, Dartmouth, England 1991
                                         FFO, The Eusrsomist htelligenm Unit, September 1994
                                         French Company Law, Le Gall, Oyez Publishing bndon 1974
                                         ILT, The Emnornist Intelligence UniL June 1994
                                         International Society of Securities Admirristratom 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switirland
                                         IRRC, Global Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                         Legal Aspects of Doiig Business in Europe, September 1992
                                         Shmholdem Righs Abroad, Stephen M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Center
                                         The price Watetzhottse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
..................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................        ..........................     ..
;REDITORS                                Compositions in B*ptcy,                   Dalhuisen, A.W. Sijthoff-Leyden, The Netherlands 1%8
                                         Corporate Bankruptcy and Reorgantilon Procedures in OECD and Urrtral and Eastern European Countries, OECD, Paris,
                                         France 1994
                                         Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& AtkinsoL CCH ktemadonal, Oxfordshire, U.K. 1993
                                         European BankNptey Laws, Ed. Botwirsik and Weirrrib, Ameri* Bar Association , USA 1986
                                         [ntematiorral Lom Workou& and Barduuptcies, Sponsored by section of Corporate, Bting                                                    and Business Law and the Divisic
                                         for Profmsional Educntion, Amerim Bar Asociatiom USA 1987
                                         Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
                                         European Insolvency Mitioners’                     Handbook, Kenneth& Weiss, Ed. New York, St. Martin’s Press, 1984
..................................... ................................................................................................................................................. .......................... ...............
)WNERSHIP                                 CIFAR’S ( Center for International Finmcial Analysis & Research,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VO1.4,
                                          Prinwton, New Jersey. USA
                                          Directory of brponrte AfliliaSions,National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                          Extel FlrrrmcialLtd., 1995
                                          Major companies of Ersro~ 1993/93, Graham& Trohnan, Londo~ United Klrrgdom
                                          me, Price Waterhouse European Companies Harrdhk           1992/1993
                                          World SIYJpCGlobal, Disclosure Inc. 1996
COUNTRY                                                                                                                           SOURCE
GERMANY
...................................... ......................................................................................................................................... ..........................             .......................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Several ADRs of different mmpanies
                                          Business Transactions in Germany, Mathew Bender & Co. 1995
                                          Capiti Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co., 1995
                                          Capital Links in German Companies, 18th Edition, 1994, Commerzb@ F-                                                     Germany
                                          Corpomte Governanw, Monks and Mmow, Blackwell Business, USA 1995
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of FederaJ Republic of Germany, Oceana Publications, Inc., April 1992
                                          Doing Bminess in Germany, me Price Waterhouse
                                          Europem Company Laws, DruIYand Xuercb, Chapter 9, Dartmouth, England 1991
                                          FFO, The tinomist Intelligent Unit, April 1995
                                          ILT, The tinomiat Intilligerrce Unit, September 1994
                                          IntemationaJ Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Barrkof Switzerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          IRRC, Global Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Invesmr Responsibility Research titer,                                                     1995
                                          Journal of timparadve Business & Capital Market Law, The German Insidti Tsading Guidelines, 1986
                                          Le@ Aspects of Doing Business in Europe, October 1994
                                          Shmholders Rights Abro@ Stepherr M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Research center
                                          The Priw Waterhou European Companies Handkk 199Z1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................ ................................            ..........................
CREDfTOW                                  Corpoti Bardmrptcy and Rmrganizadon procedures in OECD and Central and Eastern European Gurrbies, OECD, Paris,
                                          Compositions in Bankruptcy, Dalhuisen, A.W. Sijthoff-hyden, The Netherlands 1968
                                          Cross- Border Insolvency: Comparative Dimensions, Ed. 1sssF. Fletcher, UK National Commiti of Comparative Law, UK 199
                                          Division for Professional Education, tiericao Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          EumP          Insolvency Practitioners’ Handbook Kemeth & Weiss, Ed. New York, St. Martin’s Press, 1984
                                          Euro-         Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik and Weisrrib,American Bar &sociation, USA 1986
                                          France 1994
                                          Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& AtiInsoL CCH International, Oxfordshw, U.K. 1993
                                          [rstemational ban Workouk and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corpomte, Banking and Business Law and the Moden
                                          Corporation Law, Ercklen@ Oceana Publications Inc. NY 1979
                                          Multinational Commercial Insolvency, Americsrr Bar Association 1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... .......................... ...........................
DWNERSHIP                                   Directory of Corporate ~lliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                            Major Companies of Europe 1993/93, Gmham & Trocman, London, United Kingdom
                                            Moody’s International Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Servim, 1994 Version, New Yok USA
                                            The Price Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
                                            World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

GREECE
................................. ..... .......................... ..... ............. ................................................. ...... .......................... .....................   .............   ...........................
SHAREHOLDERS                             CapitaJ Formtion and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                         Characteristics of Business Entities, Ernst& ErnsL USA January 1993
                                         Corporations and Partnerships in Hellas, Anastassopoulou, Kluwer Law and Taxation Publishers, Athens 1993
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Greece, Ocearrapublications, Inc,,March 1990
                                          Directory Global of Shmholders’ Rights
                                          Wing Business in Greece, The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, The Emnomist Intelligence Unit December 1994
                                          Greek Company Law, Kotsiris, SakkoulasilUuwer, Athens, Greew 1993
                                          ~T, The Economist Irrtelligena Unit, November 1994
                                          International Society of Securities Atilrris~rs                         1994, Union Bank of Switidan~ Zurich Switzerland
                                          The Price Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................. ..........................                ...............
URED1’TOW                                 Bankruptcy surdInsolvency Law in Greece, E. Papadodemrra,Athens Greece
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Greeu, hana Publications, Irrc.,March 1990
                                          Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& A&lnsou CCH International, Oxfordshm, U.K. 1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ...........................
DWNERSHXP                                   Directory of Corpomte Af3iliatiorrs,NationaJ Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Financial W., 1995
                                            Mqor Compmies of Europe 1993/93, Graham & Trotman, bndon, Unikd K1rrgdom
                                            Moody’s Intentional Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                            The Priw Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 199U1993
COWTRY                                                                                                                      SOURCE
                                         ..............................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ............
 HONKKONG
......... .............................. ......................................................................................................................................... ...........................                ......................
SHAREHOLDER                               Business Law in Hong Kon& Sihombing, 1991 Edition, CCH Asia Limited
                                          Capital Formation and Investment lnwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Company Law in Hong Kong, Wallace, 2nd Mitiom Butterwortbs, 1990
                                          brpomte Governance, Monks and Mmow, BlackWellBosiness, USA 1995
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Hong Kong, hana Publications, Inc., March 1992
                                          Dtitory of Shareholders’ Rights
                                          bing Business in Hong Kong The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, me Ewnomist Intelligence Unit
                                          Hong Kong Company Law, SWt, 2nd ~ltion, Pitmsn 1988
                                          ILT, The hnomist totelligence Unit December 1994
                                          Intemadonal Society of Securities Admirsislrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Swiwrland
                                          Gfobal Shareholders’ Servim, Proxy Voting tilde, 1995
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... ............. ..........;.. ...........................                       ..
CRED~ORS                                  Cornpaoy Law in Hong Kong P. WaflW, 2nd Ed., Butterworths, Hong Kong 1990
                                          Doing Business in Hong Kong, The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                          Horrg Kong Company Law, SttoC 2nd Uition, Pitman 1988
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ...........................
OWNERSHIP                                  Asiantimpany     ~dboo~    1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                           DRctory of Corporate ~liations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           Extcl Financial Ltd., 1995
                                           Moody’s htematiortal Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA

INDIA
...................................... ,................................................................................................................................ ................................             .........................
SHAREHOLDER                               Capitaf Formation and Investment Inwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          timpany Law, A* Singh, Eastern Book Company, Delhi, India
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Hong Kong, Oceana Publications, Inc., March 1994
                                          Doing Business in IndiL 1993 Price Waterhouse
                                          FFO, The hnomist [ntclligence Unit, June 1995
                                          ILT, The hnomist Intelligence Uoit, May 1995
                                          Indian Company Law, N.K. Roy, The World press Private Ltd, Cafcu@ India 1970
                                          Intemadonal Sociely of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Aia Pacific
                                          The Company bw, Orient hw House, 4th Edition, New Delhi, India
...................................... ...................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ...........................
CREDITORS                                 Digest of Commercial hws of Hong Kong, -a                                   Publitions, Inc., March 1994
                                          tilde to Sick Compmies, Dooger, Goldline Publishers, Delhir India 1991
                                          Law and Practiw of Company Winding Up, Goyle, Utem Law House, Calc~                                                    India 1987
                                          The Companies Act 1956
...................................... ...................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ..........................
DWNERSHIP                                  Bloombrg’s Ele*nic Database
                                           CIFAR’S ( Center for International Financial Arsatysis& Rescsrch,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VO1.4, Prim
                                           Jersey. USA
                                           Dwctory of Corporate ~lliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           Moody’s IntemationaJ Company Da Mnndy’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
                                           lTre India Be-ok 1992, A Guide to 100 Companies, 1992 Edition, Jardine Flemin& Bombay ,India
                                           World SWpe Globaf, Disclosure Inc. 1996

fNDONESIA
................. ..................... ............................... ...................................... ............................................................................      ..........................            ...............
SHAREHOLDER                              Capiti Formation and [nveslment [ncentivcs, Matthew Bender & Co,
                                         Company-Law in Irrdonesi&H. Perseroan, Pratomo, Legal Consultants
                                         Digest of timmercial Laws of Indonesia , Oceana Publications, Inc., October 1991
                                         Wing Business in Indonesi& 1993 Price Waterhouse
                                         FFO, The tinomist ktelligenw Unit April 1995
                                         Global Shareholder Sewice, ProrryVoting Guide 1995, Investor Responsibility Research Cenkr.
                                          ILT, me Emnomist Intelligence Unit January 1995
                                          ILTM
                                          Globat Shmholders’ Servim , Proxy Voting Guide, 1995
                                          bgd Aspects of Doing Business in Asia Pacific
...................................... .................................................................................................................................................. ..........................                     .............
CREDITORS                                  Compsny-Law in Indonesi& H. Perseroan, Pratomo, Ugal Consultants
 COUNTRY                                                                                                                  SOURCE
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ..........
 owNERsHIP                                Asian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                            Bloomberg’s Elechnic Database
                                            Directory of Corporale ~liations, National Register Pub. ti., New Jersey 1995
                                            Moody’s IntemationaJ Company D@ Moody’s Inves~r’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA

IRELAND
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................              ...........................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Seveml ADRs of di~rent companies
                                          Company Law, M. Forde, The Mercier Press Ltd., Dublin, Irelmd 1992
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Ireland, Oceana Publications, Inc., April 1992
                                          Doing Business in Ireland. The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          ILT, The hnomist ktclligence Uni4 ~cem~r                                1994
                                          hgal Aspects of ~ing Business in Europe, October 1994
                                          The Priu Watesitouse European Companies Handbook 1W1993
...................................... ................. ................................................................................................................. ..........................              ...........................         ..
CREDITORS                                 Digest of Corrm?erciafLaws of Irelana &ana Publitions, Inc., April 1992
                                          European Insolvency Practitioners’ Handb~                          Kcmeth & Weiss, Ed. New Yo~ St. Martin’s Press, 1984
                                          Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& AtkinsoU CCH Intemationaf, Oxfordshw, U.K. 1993
                                          ~ Law of Company Insolvency, M. Forde, Round Hafl Press, Dublin, Ireland 1993
                                          me Company Secre@: A Guide to the Law, Doyle, Round HaJl press, Dublin, Ireland 1994
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ............................                      .
OWNEMHIP                                    DirectoW of Corpomte foliations, Nationaf Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Financial M., 1995
                                            Major timpanies of Europe 1993/93, Gmham & Tro!man, bndon, United Kingdom
                                            me Price Waterhou European Companies Handbook 19921993
                                            World Swpe Gfobal, Disclosure Inc. 1996

ISRAEL
...................................... ....................................................................................................... ...........................................          ..........................        ..............
SHAREHOLDERS                              Several ADRs of different mmpanies
                                          Capital Formation and Invesbnent Inuntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Companies Ordinance, New VersioL A.G. Publications Ltd., June 1990
                                          Digest of Commercial hws of Israel , Oceana Publications, Inc., January 1993
                                          ~ing Business in Israel, The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          ILT, The Emnomist Intelligence Unit November 1994
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................              ...........................         .
CREDITORS                                 International ban Workouts and Bardrruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate, Banking and Business Law and the Divisi(
                                          for prof~sional Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          Multinadonal CornmerciaJ Insolvency, American Bar ksocia&ion 1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ........................... ..
OWNERSHJP                                   Seved 20F of dlfirent mmpanies
                                            CIFAR’S ( Center for lntemational Financial Analysis& Research,, Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            PrincetoL New Jersey. USA
                                            Directory of Corporate ~llia&ions, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Moody’s lntemtional Company D- Moody’s Investor’s service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                            World Swpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

ITALY
...................................... .... ...... .................... .................. .................................................................................... ..........................          ...........................
SHAREHOLDERS                                Several ADRs of difirent mmpanies
                                            Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Mtiew Bender& Co.
                                            Commercial Business and Trade Laws: Italy, Oceana Publications, Dcwmber 1996
                                            Digest of Commercial Laws of Italy, @aria Publications, Inc., May 1995
                                            Doing Busina in Italy, The Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                            Eum~      Company Laws, Drury snd Xuereb, Chapter 7, Dartmouth, England 1991
                                            FFO, The tinomist Intelligence Unit, June 1994
                                            ILT, The ~nomist Intelligence Unit August 1994
                                            International Wlety of Securities Adnrinis~rs    1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switirland
                                            Italian Company Law, P, Verrumli, Oyez Publishing bndon, 1977
                                            bgat Aspects of Doing Business in Western Europe, July 1989
                                            Shareholders Rights Abroad, Stephen M, Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Center
                                            Tire Priw Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
 COWTRY                                                                                                                   SOURCE
..........................................................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                       ........................
CREDITOM                                   Compositions in Bankruptcy, Drdhuisen, A.W. Sijthoff-byden, The Netherlands 1968
                                           Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH International, Oxfordshirc, U.K. 1993
                                           European Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                           [rstematiorralLoan Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate, Banking and Business Law and the Divisio
                                           for Professional Mutation, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                           European Insolvency -Itioners’                     Handbook Kemeti & Weiss, Ed, New Yo~ St. Martin’s Press, 1984
                                           [nterrsationalFmarsciaJLnw Review, Euromoney, London U.K. 1990
....................................... ................................................................................................................................. ................................ ..........................
owNERsHIP                                   Several 20F of different mmpanies
                                            CIFAR’S ( center for LntcmationalFinanciaJ Analysis & Research,. GIobaJ Company Hrmdbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                            DImtiry of Corporate ~liadons, Nationsd Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Financial M., 1995
                                            Major ~panies      of Europe 1993/93, Gmham & Trolmw London, United Kingdom
                                            The Price W~            European Companies Handkk      1~1993
                                            Wo~d Sape Glti,       DiSCIOSlll’e
                                                                            fslC.
                                                                                [996

JAPAN
...................................... ...... ............................................................................................................................. ..........................      ..........................         ...
SHAREHOLDERS                              Corporate Governance, Monks and Minow, Blackwell Business, USA 1995
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of Japan, Oceana Publications, Inc., August 1992
                                          Doing Business in Japan, The prim WaterhoW, 1993
                                          Doing Business in Japan, Z. Kitagrrw&Kyoto University, Matthew Bender & Co., 1995
                                          FFO, The bnomist totelligence UniCJrdy 1994 and July 1995
                                          ILT, The hrsomist Intelligerrw Unit, August 1994
                                          Legal Aspects of Doiig Business in Aia Pacific
                                          IRRC, Giobal Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          Shmholders RigJs~ Abroad, Stephen M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Center
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................       ............................
CREDITORS                                 Comparadve ArsaJysisof the U.S. and Japanese Bankruptcy Laws, Focusing on Trustees Avoiding Powers, Fujinaw& 1982
                                          C-nt       Developments irr International and Comparative Corporate Insolvency Law
                                          Division for Professional Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          Intcmstiorral ban Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corpomte , Btilng and Business Law arrdthe Divisio
                                          for Professional Edutio~                 American Bar Association, USA 1987,
                                          Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
                                          U.S. and Japan Barduuptcy Law, Matsuo, Sakai Publishing Company, Tokyo, Japan.
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ........................... .............
OWNERSHIP                                   CIFAR’S ( Center for JntemtionaJ Financird Analysis & Resemch,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            prirrceto~ New Jersey. USA
                                            Directory of Corporate ~lliadons, Nadonal Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                            Japan Company Handbook Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                            World Swpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

JORDAN
...................................... ...... .......... .......................................... ............ ............................................................. ..........................   .............   ................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Companies in Jordan and Saudi Arabi& Muhiba Haddadeen
                                          Legal Aspects of Doing Business in tie Middle East, February 1992
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................       ............. ...............
CWDITORS                                  Business Legislation in Jordan, @nomic Research Institute, American University, Beim~ Lebanon
                                          Companies in Jordan and Swdi Arabi~ Haddadcen Muhiba, Jordanian Printing Press, Amman, Jordan 1984
...................................... .......................................................................................................................................................... ......................            ..........
owNERsHIP                                   Major Companies of the Amb World 1994/95, 18th Edition, tiam                                             & Trotmrm, hndon, Unitid Kingdom.

~NYA
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................        ............................
SHAREHOLDERS                              CapitaJ Forrntion and Investment incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Company Law in Kenyz A. Hussain, Heinemann Educationrd Books, Nairobi, Kenya 1984
                                          Digest of Commercial Laws of the Republic KenyL Oceana Publications, Inc., December 1990
                                          Doing Business in Keny& me Price w~rhouse, 1993
                                           ILT, The Economist Intelligence Unig March 1995
                                           Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Abim September 1993
                                           Principles of Company Law in Keny~ S. KtikL Nixon Kariithi, Nairobi, Kenya 1991
....................................... ................................................................................................................................... ..........................       ............. .............. .
CREDITORS                                    Company Law in Keny~ A, Hussain, Heinemarm Educationrd Books, Ntirobi, Kenya 1984
                                             Principles of Company Law in Keny& S. Klrik& Nixon Kariitil, Nairobi, Kenya 1991
COWTRY                                                                                                                SOURCE
.................................... ..............................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                ..........................
OWNERSHIP                             CIFAR’S ( Center for [ntemational Financial Analysis& Research,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VO1.4,PriI
                                        Jersey. USA
                                        Moody’s International bmpany D-                           Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA

MALAYSIA
....................................    ........................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDER                             Capitid Forrnation and Investment Inwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                        Digest of Commercial bws of MaJaysia, barra publi~ions, Inc., January 1986
                                        Doing Business in MaJaysi&~ prim Waterhouse, 1993
                                        FFO, The bnomist Intelligence Unit, March 1995
                                        ILT, The hnornist Intelligence Unit May 1994
                                        lRRC, Global Shareholder ~iu,                      Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Asia and the Pacific
                                        Msdaysi+timpanies Act 1%5, MaJaysiarrCurrent bw JoumaJ
....................................    .................................................................................................................................. ..........................    ...........................
CREDI’fOM                               BrssjnessLaw in Hong Ko~ Malaysi& and Singapore, CCH Asia Ltd. 1991
                                        titipany Law and Psrlnership Law in selected &ian Countries: Chin% Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Koq Malaysi& SirrgW
                                        B= -iation              19S6
                                        Mslaysi& hgislation on Bankruptcy, Malaysian bw Publishers, 19S4
                                        so-book           of Singapore and Mslaysian Company Law, Pillai, Singapore Univemity Press 1975
                                        ................................................................................................................................... ............. .......................... .............
DWNERSH2P                               Asian Cirmpany Handbook 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                        CIFAR’S ( Center for lntemaSional FlnanciaJ Anrdysis & Research,. GlobaJ Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4, Prim
                                        Jersey. USA
                                        D=ry      of Corporate Afiliatiorrs, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                        Extcl Financial Ltd., 1995
                                        World SWpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

-Co
....................................    ........................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                            Several ADRs of di~rent wmpanies
                                        Codigo de Comercio y byes Complamentarias, 59th cd., Ed. Pow Mexim 1993
                                        Commercial & Investment bw Mexiw, Bmhq Wnge and Corre&Tmsnationrd Juris Publitiions, Mexia 1994
                                        Digest of commercial Laws of Mexia, -a                                 PublicaIions, Inc., April 1992
                                        Doing Business in Mexiw, The Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                        FFO, Ttse Emnomist Intelligence Unit, April 1995
                                        ILT, The ~nomist Jntelligenee Unit, September 1994
                                        International tilety of Securities Adnrinislrators 1994, Union Bank of SwiSzerlanL Zurich Switirlarrd
                                        IRRC, Global Shareholder Service, proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        hgal Aspects of Doing Bwineas in Mn Arnenc& August 1991
.....................................   ............................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ...............
DREDITORS                               [ntemadonal han Workouts and Btiptcies,                              Sponsored by Section of Corporate, Banking and Business bw and tie Dlvisio
                                        Professional Edution,               American Bar -Iation,                   USA 1987
                                        Multinationsd Commercial Insolvency, American Bar -iadon                                       1993
....................................    .................................................................................................................................. .......................... ...........................
3WNERSHJP                               Several 20F of different companies
                                        Anrrario Financier, Armual Financisd Data 1993, Bolsa Mexicana de Vsdores, MeximD.F. Mexim
                                        Directory of Corpoti ~liatiom,     National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                        Mexim Company Handb~          1991 Edition, Bolsa Mexicana de Vrdores, Mexim 1991
                                        World SWpe Global, DMclosureInc. 1996

WTHERLANDS
                                        ............................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..............,
SHAREHOLDERS                            Several ADR of different ampanies
                                        Capiti Formation and Invesbnent Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                        Digest of Commercial Laws of tie Netherlands. @aria publications, Inc.,October 1988
                                        Doiig Business in the Netherlands, The Priawaterhouse, 1993
                                        Dutch Business Law, 2nd Edition, Kluwer b     smdTuation Publishers.
                                        FFO, The tinomiat Intelligent= Unit, July 1994
                                        lLT, The hnomist Intelligent Unit December 1~
                                        lRRC, Global Shareholder Serviw, Proxy Voting tilde, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                        Aspects of Doing Businms in Europe, Octohr 1994
                                        Netherlands Pmctical Commercial Law, Hoyng, hngmarr Gmrrp Ltd. 1992
                                        Shareholders Righ& Abro@ Stephen M. Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Gntcr
                                        The Priw Waterhouse Eumoerm Comaomies Handbook 1992/1993
 COUNTRY                                                                                                                  SOURCE
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                    ..........................
CREDITORS                                  Division for Professional Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                           European Bardouptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                           European Insolvency Wltioners’ Hrrrrdboo~ Kemeth & Weiss, Ed. New Yo~ St. Martin’s Press, 1984
                                           Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH International, Oxfordshirc, U.K. 1993
                                           ktemational Loan Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Secdon of Corpoti,                                              Banking and Business Law and the Divisic
                                           for professional EducatioL American Bar -iatioL                                  USA 1987,
                                           Multinationsd Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
....................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... ........................... .
OWNEMHIP                                    DIrectosy of ~rporate Afflliatiorts, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Dutch timpany Yearbook, 1995/96 Mltion, The Hague, DELWEL, Netherlands
                                            ExtcI Financial Ltd., 1995
                                            Major bmpanies of Europe 1993/93, Graham& Troiman, hndon, Uinted Kingdom
                                            Moody’s Intcmadorral timpany D- Moody’s Investor’s service, 1994 VersioU New Yo~ USA
                                            Tire Price Waterhouse Euro-       timpanies Hnndbook 1992/1993
                                            World S&pe ~ObSd, Disclosure tOC.1996

NEW ZEALAND
............ .......................... ............................................. ........................................ ............................................... ......................       ........... ........... ..........
SHAREHOLDERS                              Several ADRs of diffe~nt mmpanies
                                          CapitaJ Formation and Investment Inwntiv~, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Company Survey of Securities hw
                                          ComrrrercirdLaw in New zedan~ Butterworlhs
                                          ~rpomte Govemsrrrw, Monks and Minow, Blwhell Business, USA 1995
                                          Digest of Commercial hws of New Zealand, Oceana publications, Inc., June 1994
                                          Dwctor of shmbolders rights
                                          Doing Bwirress in New Zealan4 The Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                          FFO, The ~nomist Intelligent@UniC April 1995
                                          Guidebook to N.Z. Comapsnies and Securities Law, Beck and Borrowdale, 5th Edition, New ZeaJarrd 1994
                                          ILS, The Emnomist Intelligence Uni4 May 1994
                                          IntcmationaJ Society of Securities AdmtiIsWors 1994, Union Bank of Swimerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          Introduction to Company Law in New Zealmd, Northey, 9th Edition, Wellin@n, N.Z. 1981
                                          IRRC, Giobal Shmholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Asia and the Pacific, William T. Mckay
                                          New fialand Company bw Guide, CCH New Zealand Lnited 1993
                                          The Price Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................... ............. ...........................
CREDITORS                                 Commercisd Law in New fialarr~ Butterwoti
                                          Insolvency, New ~aland Law Society Seminar, Tony Agar and Gerard Coles, May 1994
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ...........................
OWNERSHIP                                  CIFAR’S ( Center for Intcm40nrd Financial Analysis& Research,. GiobaJ Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                           Prinwtorr, New Jersey. USA
                                           Directory of Corporate Affiliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                           Moody’s IrrtemadorrrdCompany Data, Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                           The New Zealand Company Register 1994/95, 33th Edition, Mercantile Gazeti Marketing Ltd., Bishopdale, Christchurch.
                                           World Sapc Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

NIGEW
...................................... ............ ........................................................ .................................... ............................ .............      ..........................      ..............
SHAREHOLDERS                             Capital Formation and IrrvesbrrentIncentives, Matthew Bender&b.
                                         Digest of Commercial Laws of New ZesdanL Oceana Publications, Jnc., August 1994
                                         Ming Business in NigeriA me Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                         Essays on Company hw, Ed. E,O. Aktii, University of @es, Nigeria 1992
                                          FFO, The tinomist Intelligence UniL June 1994
                                          ILS, The Emnomist Intelligent UniL March 1995
                                         hgaJ Aspe~ of Doing Business in A.6ica, November 1994
                                         Nigeria Company Law. Iwadus A,Aw Graham Bum, U.K. 1984
                                         Nigerian Company and Partnership hw, Kachikwu, 1st Ed., Miic Law Publications Ltd, Lagos Nigeria 1988
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................                   ...
CREDITOM                                  Essays on Company Law, Ed. E.O. Akanki, University of Lagos, Nigeria 1992
                                          Nigeria Company Law, [gnatius A.Ayu~ Graham Bum, U.K. 1984
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................ ..........................               ...............,
OWNERSHIP                                   CIFAR’S ( Center for IntemationaJ FinanciaJ Analysis& Research,, GlobaJ Company Harrdboo~ 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                            Moody’s International Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
COWTRY                                                                                                                           SOURCE
 NORWAY
.......... ...... ....................... .....................................................................................................................................................        ............................            ..........
SHAREHOLDERS                              A Legal Guide to Scandinavia & BaJtic States, Norwegian CapiM Markets, Euromoney Publications
                                          Scveml ADRs of different mmpanies
                                          Capital Formation and Investment Inwntives, Matthew Bender& Co,
                                          Company Trade and Tax Law in Norway, Der Norzke Creditbarrk
                                          Doing Business in Norway, ~ Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, The hnomist Intelligence Unit, March 1995
                                          ILT, The Ewnomist Intelligent Unit April 1995
                                          IRRC, Global Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, tnvestor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          bgaJ Aspects of Doing Business in Europe, August 1991
                                          The Price Wateblrouse Eumpcan Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ............. ..........................                 ...............
CREDITORS                                 Corporatn Insolvcucy and Rescue: The InterrraliorralDimension, Campbell& Collins, KJuwer Law and Taxation Publishers, 199
                                          Doing Business in Norway, Arrrizen and Bugge, 2nd Ed., DcrrNorske Creditb@OsIo, Norway 1971
                                          Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkirraou CCH Intemadonal, Oxfordahire, U.K. 1993
                                          Multinational Commercial Insolvency, Arrreriw Bar Association 1993
...................................... ....... ........................................................................................................................... .......................... ........................... ...
owNERsHIP                                   Directory of Corporate ~liadons, National Regjater Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel FirsanciaJLtd., 1995
                                            Moody’s IrrtemationsdCompany ~     Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Veraion, New Yo~ USA
                                            The Price Waterirouse Ewpean Companies Handbook 1992/1993
                                            World %W Glow, DiilOS~ hC. 1996

P~AN
................................... ... ............................ ...................... ................................. ................................................ ..........................        ...........................            ...
SHAREHOLDERS                              Capital Formation and Investment Inwntivcs, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Gmparry hw in PtiIsti, Mansoor Book House, Lahore, Pakistan 1986
                                          Compmy Law, Mabmood, kgaJ Research Center, Lahorc, PtiIstarr 1982
                                          Digeat of Commercial Laws of Ptilstan, &ana Publications, Inc., October 1993
                                          IN, The Economist Intelligence Uni4 July 1994
                                          Information Guide for Doing Business in PtiIstarr, me Price Waterhouse, January 1964
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ...........................            ...
CREDITORS                                 Company bw, Mahmood, hgaJ Research Center, Lahorc, Ptiistzrr 1982
                                          Company Law, Luqmab, 3erd cd., Ghazanti Academy of Pakisti, Karachi, PtiIstarr 1990
                                          Company Law in PtiIstarr, Ahmed Sheikh, Manaoor Book House, Lahorc, Pakistan 1986
                                          Digest of commercial Laws of Pakistan, Oceana Publications, Inc., October 1993
                                          The Company Law: A Book for Lawyer’s and Businessmen, Mansoor Book House, Lahorc, PtiIstarr 1982
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ........... ......................               ........... ...........
OWNERSHIP                                   CIFAR’S ( Center for Intcmtiorral Financial Analysis& Research,. Global Company Handbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            Prirswtorr,New Jersey. USA
                                            Moody’s Intcmadonal Company ~        Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                            World Swpc Global, DMclosrsreInc. 1996

PERU
............ .......................... ........................ ...... .......................................................... ....................... ..................... ........... ........... ........... ........... ...........
SHAREHOLDER                               Capital Formation and Investment Inmntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Codlgo de Comcrcio y Ugislacion ComplemerstariL Ed. Norrnas Legales 1993, Lim& Peru
                                          Digest of Commercial bws of Pew Oce.anapublications, Inc., February 1994
                                          Ming Busbcas in Peru, The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                           ILS, me Emnomist Intelligence Unit August 1994
                                           International Society of Securities Adminis~rs                          1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switirland
                                           bgaJ Aswcts of Doing Business in M                          AmericL August 1991
                                           hy General de Socie-,                   2nd Edition,Cultural COZW,Lima, Pem 1987
                                           Sociedades Monimas, Pom Vidal, Ed. Jrrsto Valerrzuel&Lima Peru 1988
....................................... .................................................................................................................................................. ..........................                  ..............
CREDITORS                                  hdigo de Comercio y hgislacion Complemerrtari& Ed. Norrrrashgales, Lim~ Peru 1993
                                           Ley Procesal de Quiebras, A. Muro, Ed. Luis Nunez, 1986
....................................... ................................................................................................................................... ..........................             ..........................               ..
 0WNERSH3P                                   Directory of Corporate Affdiations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                             Moody’s International Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New Yoti USA
                                             World Smpc Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996
                                             Securities and Exchanges Commission of Peru, database. (Directorio de Sociedades Irrscritas en la Bolsa de Valores de Lima)
 COWTRY                                                                                                                          SOURCE
 PHILWPINES
....................................... ......................................................................................... ...... .....................................................         ...........................        ........
SHAREHOLDERS                               Several ADRs of different mmparries
                                           Capital Formation and Investment lnwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                           Doing Business in ~Illippines, Tbe Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                           FFO, The Emnomist Intclligenw Unit, April 1994
                                           ILT, ‘fire ~nomist totelligence Uni4 March 1995
                                           Law on P~ip                    and tirpomtiom, Ariche@ 1986 ed.Philippines 1986
                                           Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Asia and the Pacific, April 1992
                                           The Commercial Laws of fillippirrcs, OcearraPublications, Inc., March 1992
....................................... ................................................................................................................................... ..........................           ...........................
CREDITORS                                 The Iosumnm Code and Insolvency Law, H. Perez, Univemity Book Supply Inc., ManiI& Philippines 1983
                                          The Insolvency Act No, 1956 of 1909, Ch. 2, 1983
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................
owNERsHIP                                   Scveml 2bF of diffmnt qarries
                                            CIFAR’S ( &nter for International Fmarrcial Analysis & Research,, Global Company Handbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            prirr.ceto~New Jersey. USA
                                            Dmctory of Corporate ~litions,     National Register Pub, b., New Jemey 1995
                                            Moody’s Irrtematiomd Company ~       Moody’s hvestor’s service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                            World Sm~ Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

PORT’UGAL
.......... .... ....... ................. ...................... ........................................................................................... ................ ................   ................................          ........
SHAREHOLDE~                               Several ADRs of different companies
                                          Capital Formation md Irrvmiment Inwntives, Mattbcw Bender & Co.
                                          Digest of Commercial b                    of Portugal, tia              Publications, Inc., March 1991
                                          Doing Business in Portugal, The Priw Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, The Wnomist Intelligence Unit, May 1994
                                          lLT, The ~nomist Intelligent UniL August 1994
                                          Intimational Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switierlarrd, Zurich Switzerland
                                          Legal hpects of Doing B~iness in Europe, August 1991
                                          The Priw Watctiose European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................            ..........................
CREDITO~                                  tilde to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH International, Oxfordshirc, U.K. 1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................. ................................             ........................
OWNERSHIP                                  CIFAR’S ( Center for International Finsncial Analysis & Research,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                           Prinuton, New Jersey, USA
                                           Directory of Corporate foliations, National Register Pub, Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           Hoover’s Handbook of World Business 1995-1996
                                           Major Companies of Europe 1993/93, Graham& Tro~          bndon, United Kingdom
                                           The Price Waterhouse European bmpanies Handbook 199Y1993
                                           World Smpe Globsd, D~sclosureInc. 1996

SINGAPORE
...................................... ,................................................................................................................................ ................................             ........................
SHAREHOLDERS                             Capital Formation and Invesbrrent [nwntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Company Lawj Wal@rC M Woon, Longmarr Sing~re Publishers 1990
                                          Dire*ry of Shareholders’ Rights
                                          Doing Business in Singapore, The Prim Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, The Eumomist Intelligent UniL September 1994
                                          ILT, The Emnomist Irrtelligenm UniL June 1994
                                          International Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          IRRC, Global Shareholder Serviw, Proxy Voting tilde, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          Legal Aspeck of ~ing Business in Asia and the Pacific, Singapore 1994
                                          The Commercial Laws of Singapore, oceans Publications, Inc., February 1994
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ............. ..........................                 .............
CREDITORS                                Credit and Security in Singapore, Ed. Allan, Hlsmk & Roebuck St. Luci& Ncw York
                                          Judicial Management in Singapore, Choong, Bu~rworths, Singapore 1990
                                          Sourcebook of Singapore and Msdaysian Company Law, PIllai, Singapore University press 1975
                                          What Every Manager should Know About: Judicird Managemen~ Tay
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................             ...........................
owNERsHtP                                   Asian Company Handbook 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keti Inc.
                                            Directory of Corporate Affiliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            Extel Finsncird Ltr., 1995
                                            World Scope Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996
COUNTRY                                                                                                                                 SOURCE
SO~          ~CA
.............. ........... ............. ............ ................... ....................... ................................................................................. ..........................                   ..........................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Basic Company Law, Bersthin,2nd Edition, Buttcrwoti, South fica 1991.
                                          Capital Formsrdonand Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co,, 1995
                                          Company Law, Benade, 4th Edition, Butterwoti, Prctori& SoutJIAfrica 1982
                                          Digest of bmrnerciaJ Laws of SoUthM%                               Oceana Publications, Inc., August 1992
                                          Doing Business in soti fi~                     The Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                          FFO, The hnorrriat Intelligence Unit July 1995
                                          Honochsberg Company A@ 4ti Edition, Butterworths
                                          IH, The hnomk                 Intelligent Unit February 1995
                                          IntcmationaJ Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Swi~rland
                                          IRRC, Giobal Shareholder Service, Proxy Voting Guide, tnvestor Responsibility Research Center, 1995
                                          Lcgsd Aspects of Doing Business in Africa, September 1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................                       ..........................          ..
CREDITORS                                     co nsmercial Laws in SoutJrAJiiu
                                          Do@ Busin~ in South A6iq The Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                          The Law of Insolvency in South Aliic& Dc la Rey, 8th Edition, PrctoriL SA. 1988
                                          The Law of Insolvency in South ~c~                       C. Smith, Durban Buttcrworths 1982
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... ..........................                      ...........................           ...
OWNERSHJP                                     Directory of Corporate Mliations, National Register Pub, Co,, New Jersey 1995
                                              ExteI Financial Ltd., 1995
                                              Tire Johasmesburg Stock Exchange Handbook Flesch Financial Pub[idions, August 1994
                                              World Swpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

WUTH KOREA
...................................... ,........... ......................................... .......... .. ............. ............ .................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Seveml AD~ of dlffererstcompanies
                                          Capilal Formtion and Inv~ent                     tncc.ntiv~, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Doing Business in KoreL The Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                          FFO, The Emnomist Intelligence Unig February 1995
                                          ILT, The Emnomist Intelli8erscc Uni~ July 1991 and 1994
                                          International Wlety of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Swi~rlarrd
                                          hgal Aspect of Doing Business in Asia Pacific
...................................... ................................................................................................................................. ................................                       ..........................
CREDITORS
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................                      ...........................          ..
3WNERSHIP                                    Asian Company Handbook 1995/1996 EditioU Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                             CIFAR’S ( Center for [ntcmational Financial AnaJysis & Research,, GlobaJ Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                             Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                             Directory of Corporate ~lliations, National Register Pub. Co,, New Jersey 1995
                                             World Scope Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

SPAIN
............ .................... ..... .......................................... .........................................................................................................                  ..........................        ..............
SHAREHOLDERS                              SevemJ ADW of different companies
                                          CapiM Formation and lrrvesrment In-tives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                          Comentarios Practices de la Ley de Sociedades Anonimas, J.*                                      GaJvache, Madrid 1991
                                          Digest of Commercial bws of Spain, Oceana Prsblicaciones Inc, November 1992
                                          DIrcctory of Global Shareholders Righ&
                                          Doing Business in Spain, The Price Waterhouse 1993
                                          FFO, The tinomist [ntclligenw Unit, July 1994
                                          lLT, The bnomist [ntclligence Uni~ January 1995
                                          Legal ~pects of Mlrrg Business in Western Europe, July 1989
                                          The Priw Watcetsouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ,.................................................................................................................................... ..........................                       ...........................
CREDITORS                                 Guide to Insolvency in Errrope, Ed. Houghton & AWlnson, CCH Intcmationrd, Oxfordshirc, U.K. 1993
                                          Multinadonal CornrnerciaJ Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
...................................... ,................................................................................................................................ ................................                         ................ .........
OWNERSHIP                                     Directory of Corporate ~lliations, NationaJ Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                              Extcl Financial Ltd., 1995
                                              Major Companies of Eumpc 1993/93, Graham& Trotrnan, hndon, Uintcd Kingdom
                                              Moody’s International Company Da@ Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                              The Prim Watctrhousc European Companies Handbook 1992/1993, Euromoney
                                              The M-en      Espinosa Shareholder Directory, 7th Edition, 1994, S,P.A., Madrid, Espann
                                              World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996
 COWTRY                                                                                                                            SOURCE
 SWMKA
....................................... ................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                     ..........................
SHAREHOLDERS                               Capital Formation and Irrveslment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co,
                                           Ceylon ~mpany Law, Wlckremasinghe, TBaTSPress, Sri Na
                                           Guide to the Companies Act of 1982, Jaymtiy& Asian Pathfinder Publishers& Booksellers, Sri Lanka 1983
                                           Legal Aspecrs of Doing Business in Asia and the Pacific, April 1992
....................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ...........................             ..
 CREDITORS
....................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................        ...........................      .
OWNERSHJP                                    CIFAR’S ( Center for IntemationaJ Financial Analysis& ResearcL. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI,4,
                                             PrinwtoL New Jersey, USA
                                             Handbook of L~ted timpmies, 1992 EditioL Colombo Stock Exchange, tilombo Sri -
                                             Moody’s International Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Servim, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
                                             World ~~    dO~, Disclosure    hC. 1996

SWEDEN
............. ......................... ................ .......... ................. ............ .................................................. .......................... ..........................   ..........................      ...
SHAREHOLDERS                              Capital Formation and fnvesbnent Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Digest of bmmercial Laws of the tirrrmonwealth of Sweden, Ocearra publications, Inc., Jrure 1994
                                          ~ing Business in SwedeU The Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                          FFO, ~ ~nomist Intelligence Uni4 October 1994
                                          ILT, -        EccInomistIrrtelligenw Uni~ January 1995
                                          fLTM
                                          International Corpomte Govemanw, Chapter 15, Wilhelm Luning
                                          International soc~ of =urities Adrrsiniirs                              1994, Union Bank of Switzerlm~ Zurich Switzerland
                                          IRRC, ~obal Skbolder                   Semiu, Proxy Voting ~]de, Investor Responsibility Research Center,1995
                                          Legal As-            of Doing Business in Western Europe, Jldy 1989
                                          The Pria Wate*                   European timapanies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ..................................................................................................................................... ..........................         ...........................         .
CREDITORS                                 Guide to Insolvency in EuroP, Ed. Houghton & Atkinsou CCH Intemationrd, Oxfordshire, U.K. 1993
                                          Cross- Border Insolvency : Compamtive Dimemions, Ed, Ian F. Fletcher, UK NationaJ Corrrmi~ of Comparative Law, UK 199
                                          MrdtimuiorralCommercial lrssolvency, American Bar Association 1993
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... .......................... ...
OWNERSHIP                                   CIFAR’S(Center for Intemalional Financial Analysis& Research,. GlobaJ Compsny Haodbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                            princeto~ New Jeme.y.USA
                                            Directory of Corporate foliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                            EXSC1 Financial Ltd., 1995
                                            Major timparries of Europe 1993/93, Graham& Trobnim, hrrdo~      Uinted Kingdom
                                            ~ Pria W*trhouse European tirnapanics Handbook 1992/1993, Euromoney
                                            World Scope Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

SWITZERLAND
                                       ..................................................................................................................................
......................................,.                                                                                                                                         .................
                                                                                                                                                                                             ...
                                                                                                                                                                      ..........................
SHAREHOLDERS                             Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender & Co.
                                         Digest of Commercial hws of the bmmonwealth of Switirlsrrd , tiana publications, Inc., March 1991
                                         Doing Business in Swi~rlan~ The Priec Waterirouse, 1993
                                         FFO, The hnomist Irrtclligencc Unit October 1994
                                         ILT, The hrromist Intelligent Uni~ ~br                               1994
                                         Inlcmatiorral Society of kurities Adrniiistrators 1994, Union Bank of Switirhur~ Zurich Switzerland
                                         IRRC, Giobal Shareholder Service, proxy Voting Guide, Investor Responsibility Research Center,1995
                                         Ugal As~c@ of Doing Business in Europe, August 1991
                                         Shareholders Rights Abroad, Stephen M, Davis, Investor Resporrsibili~ Research Center
                                         The Price Watctrhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ...........................               .
CREDITORS                                   Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed, Houghton& Atkinson, CCH Intcmational, Oxfordshire, U.K. 1993
                                            European Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwink and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                            International ban Workouts and Brrrdurr~ies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate , Banking arrdBusiness Law and the Divisi(
                                            for Pro&ionrd Edudon,       American Bar Hlation,   USA 1987
                                            Mdtinational Commercird Insolvency, American Bar Association 1993
 COWTRY                                                                                                                SOURCE
..................................... ......................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                         ..........................
                                                                                                                                                                                                                .......
 OWNERSHIP                             CIFAR’S ( Center for International FirranciaJAnaJysis & Research,, Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI,4,
                                           Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                           Directory of Corporate Mlliations, Nationrd Register Pub, Co,, New Jersey 1995
                                           Extcl Financial Ltd., 1995
                                           Guide des Actions Suisses 1992, Verlag Finanz und Wirtschaft AG, Zurich, Switzerland
                                           Major Companies of Europe 1993/93, Gmham & TrotmQ London, Uinted Kingdom
                                           The Prim Watehtrouse European ComrrpaniesHandbook 1992/1993, Eummoney
                                           World Scope Giobal, Disclosure Inc. 1996

 TAIWAN
.............................. .... ...   .......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                               ktemationai Society of securities Adrrrinistratom 1994, Union Bank of Switzerlarr~ Zurich Switirland
                                           Doing Business in Taiwan, The Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                           Capital F-on               and Jnv-ent           Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                           ~T, The hnomist Intelligence Uni~ December 1994
                                           FFO, me Emoomist Intelligence Unit, November 1994
                                           hgal Aspect of~mg Business in Asia and the Pacific, James Chen
                                           Digest of Comrnercial Laws of the Republic of Chm& Oceana Publications, Inc., March 1992
                                          ................................................................................................................................ ................................      .......................
CREDITORS                                  hmmcrcial Business and Tmde Laws, Ttiwan, Oceana Publications, NY 1983
                                           Compsmy Law, (last amended 1983) Industrial Development and Investment Center, Taipei, Taiwan 1990
.....................................     ................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................
OW-NEMHIP                                 Asian hmpany HaodbooL 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                          Directory of Copti    ~iations,  National Register Pub. Co., New Je~y 1995
                                          CIFAR’S ( Center for Intemrrtiod FinanciaJ Analysis & Research,. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                          Priueetors,New Jew. USA
                                          Wosid bm OIOM. Disclosure Inc. 1996

THAILAND
.....................................     .......................................................................................................................................................................................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Capitat Forrndon and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Doing Business in Thailand, The Price Waterhouse t 993
                                          FFO, The hnomist htclligencc Uni4 Febmary 1995
                                          ILT, The Emnomist Intelligent Uni~ December 1994
                                          IL’fM
                                          IntemationaJ Society of Securities Administrators 1994, Union Bank of Switzerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          Legal Aspect of Doing Business in Asia Pacific
.....................................     .................................................................................................................................... ..........................       .........................
CREDITORS                                 Banknrptcy Act 1940
                                          Commercial, Business and Trade Laws, ksna Publications NY 1984
                                          Commercial Laws of Thailand, ~ana Publitiions, NY July 1990
                                           Public Lnited Gmpanies Act
                                          Thailand Business Basic, Tilleke & Gibbins,Standard Chsutcred B* Banko~ Thailand 1993
.....................................     .................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................
OWNERSHIP                                 Wlan ~mpany Handbook 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.
                                          CIFAR’S ( Center for Irstemationd FirrsncisdAnalysis & Research,. Global Company                                                Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                          Directory of Corporate ~liations,   NtionaJ Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                          ~ccton, New Jersey. USA
                                          World S-      Global, Dwclosure Inc. 1996

TURKEY
.....................................     ................................................................................................................................... ..........................      ..........................
SHAREHOLDERS                              Capital Formtion and Investment Inuntives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                          Doing Business in Turkey, The Priw Waterhouse, 1993
                                          FFO, me Wnomist Intelligent Uni~ February 1994
                                          ILT, The hnomist Intelligence Unit,June 1994
                                          lntcmationaJ Society of Securities Adrninishators 1994, Union Bsmkof Switzerland, Zurich Switzerland
                                          @al Aspect of Ming Bustiess in the Middle EasL Februasy 1992
                                          The Priu Waterhouse European timpany Handbook 1992
.....................................     .........................................................................................................................................................................................
CREDITORS                                  Guide to Insolvency in Eurow. Ed, Houmtorr & Atkinson. CCH [ntemational. Oxfordshlrc, U.K. 1993
   COUNTRY                                                                                                                           SOURCE
 .,...........................................................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ......................
   Owwm                                        Dmctory of Corporate A~lirdions, Nationaf Register Pub. Co,, New Jersey 1995
                                               Guide to Investment in Turkey, Global Investor 1993, Euromoney Publications, London 1993
                                               The Prim W*trhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993, Euromoney
                                               CIFAR’S ( Center for International Financial Analysis& Research,. Global Company Handbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                               Prineetom New Jersey. USA
                                               Mdy’s Intematiod Company D@ Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New Yo~ USA
                                               World Smpe Globaf, Disclosure   hC, 1996

   U.K
 ........................................ .................................................................................................................................... ..........................           ...........................   .
  SWHOLDERS                                 SeveraJ ADN of difirent wmpanies
                                            Capital Fotion             and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender& Co.
                                            Digest of Commercial Laws of England and Wates, @aria Publications, Inc., August 1994
                                            Directory of Global Shareholder
                                            Doing Business in the United Kingdom ~ pri~ Waterhouse, 1993
                                            E~            Company Laws, Drury and Xuereb, Chapter 7 & 9, Dartmouth, England 1991
                                            FFO, The tinornist Intelligence Uni~ August 1994
                                            ILT, The Ewnomist tntelligenee Unit October 1991
                                            mm
                                            International Corpomte Governance, Overview of UK corporate governance, Anne Simpson
                                            Intentional Society of Securities Administmtors 1994, Union Bank of Switirland, Zurich Switirlarsd
                                            IRRC, Gfobal Shareholder Servia, Proxy Voting tilde, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1995,
                                            Legal Aspects of Doing Business in Western Europe, July 1989
                                            Shareholders Rights Abroad, Stephen M, Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Center
                                            The Price Waterhouse European timapanies Handbook 199X1993
..,...................................... .................................................................................................................................... ..........................           ...........................   ,
  (CREDffOW                                   Impositions        in Bankruptcy, DalhuiseL A.W. Sijthoff-Leyden, The Netherlands 1968
                                            tirporatc Bankruptcy and Rcogarrtilon Prowdures in OECD and Cenbal and Eastern European Counties, OECD, Paris ,
                                            France 1994
                                            Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Ati!mon, CCH International, @fordshirer U.K. 1993
                                            Cross- Border Insolvency : Comparative Dimensions, Ed. Ian F, Fletcher, UK National Committee of Compamtive Law, UK 199
                                            European Bankruptcy Laws, Ed. Botwinik and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986
                                            [ntemtionaf ban Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate, Btilng and Business Law and tie Divisio
                                            for Professional Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                            MultinsrtionaJcommercial Insolvency, American BaI Association 1993
........................................ ,.................................................................................................................................... .......................... ...........................
 (3WNERSHIP                                   SeveraJ 20F of difirent companies
                                              CIFAR’S ( Center for International Financial Analysis& Researc~. Global Company Handbook 2nd Edition, 1993, VOI.4,
                                              Directmy of Corpomse Affiliations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995
                                              Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                              Moody’s International Company Da Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Vemion, New Yo~ USA
                                              Prin~ton, New Jersey, USA
                                              The Price WatetrhoW European Companies Handbook 19921993, Euromoney
                                              World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

  1~UGUAY
... ................................. .... ,............................... ......................... ............. ...... ...... ............ ...... .................................. .......................... ..........................
  :SHAREHOLDERS                               Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Mtiew Bender& Co.
                                              Commercial Laws of Uruguay
                                              Doing Business in Umguay, the price Waterhouse 1993
                                              ILTM
                                              ILT, The Emnomist Intelligence Unit April 1995
                                              Ley de Sociedades timereiales, Ferro and Olivera, La Realidad National, Montevideo, Uruguay 1989
                                              Socicdades Comereisdes, Rippe, Fundaeion de Cultura Universitari& 1st Edition, Montevideo, Uruguay 1989
........................................ ...................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................
 (2REDITORS                                  Quieb~ ~mcho Comercid, Nuria Rtigue~                                Ed. Universidad Ltda, Montevideo, Uruguay 1988
                                             Ley de Sociedades ComerciaJes, Ferro and Olive~ b Realidad Naeional, Montevideo, Uruguay 1989
                                             Sociedades Comereiales, Rippe, Fundacion de Cultura Universitari& 1st Edition, Montevideo, Uruguay 1989
                                             El Derecho Comereial, el Derccho de Cambio, el Dcrecho de Quiebra y el Derecho de Comercio Maritimo del Uruguay, Garcia
                                             A~vedo, London
                                             Cross-Border lnsolvency:national and Comparative Studies, I. Fletcher, JCM Mohr Tubingen 1992
... ..................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... ...........................
  {3WRSHIP                                   Hoppcnstedt ~liations               and Corporate Structures
                                             Moody’s lntemationrd Company Da@ Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Vemion, New York, USA
COUNTRY                                                                                                                         SOURCE
 Us.
....................................... .....................................................................................................................................................        ..........................       ..........
SHAREHOLDER                                Capital Formation and Investment Incentives, Matthew Bender &G.
                                           Digest of Commercial Laws of the United S*S of Commercial Laws, Oceana Publications, Inc., Dec. 1994
                                           Digest of Commercial Laws of State Vtiations of Commercial Laws, Oceana Publications, Inc., June 1994
                                           Doing Business in the United States, me Price Waterhouse, 1993
                                           FFO, The Ewnomist Intelligence UniL Mwh 1995
                                           Global Investor, Corporate Finarsw, Euromoney Publications, Novem&r 1992
                                           ILT, The hnomist LrrtelligenceUni~September 1994
                                           International Corpomte Govemana, [ostitutionaJ Investors and Corporate Governance, J. Heard
                                           IntemationaJ Society of Securities Adminimrs                            1994, Union Bti of Switzerland, Zurich Switirlmd
                                           Ugal Aspects of Doing Business in North Ameri@ February 1994
....................................... ...................................................................................................................................... .......................... .........................
CREDITORS                                 Comp@ve Analysis of the U.S. and Japanese B*ptcy                                      Laws, Focusing on Trustees Avoiding Powers, Fujinaw& 1982
                                          timpositions in Brmbuptcy, DalhuiseL AW. Sijthoff-LeydeL The Netherlands 1968
                                          U.S..and Japan Bankruptcy bw, Mmuo, Sakai Publishing Company, Tokyo, Japan.
                                          Co~rate Bardauptcy and Rmganization Proeedores in OECD and Central and Eastern Euro-                                                             Countries, OECD, Pruis,
                                          Frrmw 1994
                                          Multinational Commercial Insolvency, krican                            Bar Association 1993
                                          Solving the Insoluble, International Finanw Review, June 1990
...................................... .................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................                  .,
0WNERSH3P                                  CIFAR’S ( &nter for International FinanciaJ halysis & Research,, GlobaJ Company Harrdboo~ 2nd Edition, 1993, VO1.4,
                                           Princeton, New Jersey. USA
                                           DIrcctory of Corpomte ~liations,   NaIionaJ Register Pub, Co., New Jersey 1995
                                           Extel Financial Ltd., 1995
                                           World Smpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 196

mNzzuELA
.........................................................................................................................................................................
                                                                                                                                                                      ..........................
                                                                                                                                                                                 .................
                                                                                                                                                                                             ...
SHAREHOLDERS                              La Sociedad Anonima y el Derecho de 10SAccionistas Minoritarios en VenezuelZ Luque de Lazarn, Caracas 1987
                                          Sociedades de Responsabilidad Llmitad% J.E. Nunez, Universidad Catolica Andrcs Belle, C~,                                                         Venezuela 1978
...................................... ................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................                 ...
CREDITORS                                 hs&mationaJ ban Workouts and Bardmsptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate , Btiing and Business Law and the Divisi~
                                          for Professional Educatio~ American Bar Association, USA 1987
                                          Mtitinational Commercial Insolvency, Ameriean Bar kociation 1993
...................................... ...................................................................................................................................... .......................... ..........................
OWNERSHJP                                  Directory of Corporate Mliations,
                                           Bolsa de Caracas, Venezuela
                                           Moody’s Intentional Company ~       Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New Yom USA
                                           World Swpe Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996

ZIMBABWE
...................................... ,.................................................. ................................................................................. ..........................        ...........................
SHAREHOLDER                               Business Law in Zimbabwe, Christie, Juts& Co, Lti., Cape Town 1985
                                          Capital Formatiom ans Investment Incentives
                                          Doing Bus.mess in Zimbabwe, The Price W*rhousc 1993
                                          bgal Aspects of Doing Business in fiq                         June 1991
                                          Zimbabwean Business Law, Bampton, The hgaJ Resources Foundation, Harare, Zimbabwe
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................ ..........................             ...............
CREDITORS                                 Business Law in Zimbabwe, Christie, Juts& Co, Ltm., Cape Town 1985
                                          Zimbabwean Business Law, Banrpton, The LegaJ Resources Foundation Harare, Zimbabwe
...................................... ................................................................................................................................................. ..........................               ..............
OWNERSHIP                                  Moody’s IntemationaJ Company D- Moody’s Investor’s Service, 1994 Version, New York, USA
                                           World Scope Global, DMclosurcInc. 1996
 OTHER GENERAL SOURCES:

&ian Company Handbook, 1995/1996 Edition, Toyo Keizai Inc.

CIFAR’S ( Center for International Financial Analysis& Research,. Global Company Handbook, 2nd Edition, 1993, Vol,4 , Princeton, New Jersey.
USA

Corporate Bankruptcy arrd Reogmization Procedures in OECDmd Cenhalmd Ewtem Europem Counties, OECD, Pmis, Frmcel994

Corporate Governance, Monks and Minow, BlackWellBusiness, USA 1995

Cross- Border Insolvency : Comparative Dimensions, Ed. Ian F. Fletcher, UK National Committee of Comparative Law, UK 1990

Directory of Corporate Affdiations, National Register Pub. Co., New Jersey 1995

European Bankruptcy Laws, Ed, Botwinik and Weinrib, American Bar Association, USA 1986

Extel Financial Ltd,, United Kingdom, 1995

Guide to Insolvency in Europe, Ed. Houghton& Atkinson, CCH International, Oxfordshire, U.K. 1993

Hoppenstedt AfJiliation Corporate Structures, Germany, 1995

International Financial Statistics, Intemationat Monetary Funds, February 1996

International Loan Workouts and Bankruptcies, Sponsored by Section of Corporate , Banking and Business Law and the Division for Professional
Education, American Bar Association, USA 1987

Intemationrd Corporate Finance, Robert 1. Tricker, Chapters 2,3,4, & 8, Simon& Schuster, Singapore 1994

Main Emnomic Indicators, OECD, January 1996

Major Companies of Europe 1993/94, Graham& Trotman, London, Uinted Kingdom

Major Companies of the Arab World 1994/95, 18th Edition, Graham& Trotman, hndon, United Kingdom.

Minority Shareholders’ Rights, Robin Hollington, 2nd Edition, Sweet& Maxwell, London, U.K. 1994

Moody’s International Company Dat~ Moody’s Investor’s Serviw, 1994 Version, New York, USA

Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association 1989 and 1993, Wisconsin, USA

Shareholder Rights Abroad, A Hrmdbook for the Global Investor, Stephen M, Davis, Investor Responsibility Research Center, 1989

Social Indicators of Development 1991-92, World Bank, John Hopkins University Press 1992

The Price Waterhouse European Companies Handbook 1992/1993, Euromoney

Who Owns Whom 1995/96, Dun & Bradstreet International, Bucks, United Kingdom

World Development Report 1993, Investing in Health, World Bank, Oxford Press University 1993

World Tables, World Bank 1995, John Hopkins University Press

World Scope Global, Disclosure Inc. 1996
