                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERES




                        THE DE~RMINANTS    AND CONSEQUENCES
                            OF FINANCIAL EDUCATION IN THE
                        WORKPLACE: EVIDENCE FROM A SURVEY
                                    OF HOUSEHOLDS




                                        B. Douglas Bemheim
                                          Daniel M. Garrett




                                    NBER Working Paper 5667



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 1996



We are grateful to the National Science Foundation (Grant Number SBR94-09043 and Grant
Number SBR95- 11321) for financial support. Seminar participants at New York University,
Columbia University, and the National Bureau of Economic Research provided helpful comments.
We would also like to thank Merrill Lynch, Inc. for collecting the data required to conduct this study.
This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Aging and Public Economics, Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by B. Douglas Bemheim and Daniel M. Garrett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                       NBER Working Paper 5667
                                                                                     July 1996



                         THE DETERMINANTS AND CONSEQUENCES
                             OF FINANCIAL EDUCATION IN THE
                         WORKPLACE: EVIDENCE FROM A SURVEY
                                     OF HOUSEHOLDS



                                           ABSTRACT



        In recent years, the United States has witnessed significant growth in programs of financial

and retirement education in the workplace. This phenomenon provides an opportunity to assess the

effects of targeted education programs on financial choices.    This paper uses a novel household

survey to develop econometric     evidence on the efficacy of employer-based      financial education.

While our primary focus concerns the effects of these programs on saving (both in general and for

the purposes of retirement),   we also examine a number of collateral issues.      These include the

circumstances    under which employers offer, and employees participate      in, financial education

programs,    and the effects of these programs on sources of information     and advice concerning

retirement   planning.   Our findings indicate that employer-based   retirement    education   strongly

influences household financial behavior.




B. Douglas Bemheim                                                    Daniel M. Garrett
Department of Economics                                               Department of Economics
Stanford University                                                   Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072                                               Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
1. Introduction

         In recent years, low rates of saving among U.S. households have attracted considerable attention,

Most of the related public policy debate has focused on the efficacy of tax incentives for saving. From the

available evidence, it is not at all clear that tax policy -- by itself -- adequately addresses the underlying

causes of low saving (see Bernheim, 1996, for a review of the literature).     Some recent research departs from

traditional life-cycle assumptions by investigating the possibility that low saving results in part from

“financial illiteracy.” For example, Bernheim ( 1994a, 1995a) argues that many individuals poorly

understand their economic vulnerabilities, as well as the economic incentives that some tax provisions seek to

create. If so, then education policy may prove to be a powerful tool, either in isolation or in combination with

tax incentives, for stimulating rates of saving. This possibility has recently led the Department of Labor to

launch “a national pension education program aimed at drawing the attention of American workers to the

importance of taking personal responsibility for their retirement security” (Berg, 1995, p, 2),

         Unfortunately, there is virtually no hard evidence concerning the effects of education on financial

decisions. Although anecdotal evidence suggests that the post-War increase in saving by Japanese

households may beat least partially attributable to an extensive educational and promotional campaign, there

are other competing explanations for the same phenomenon (see Bernheim, 1991, or Central Council for

Savings Promotion, 198 1). Likewise, correlations between an individual’s general level of educational

attainment and his or her rate of saving (documented by Bemheim and Scholz, 1993, and by Hubbard,

Skinner, and Zeldes, 1995) maybe attributable to other related factors, such as rates of time preference.

         The rapid growth of financial and retirement education in the workplace provides useful

opportunities to study the effects of education on financial decisions. As of 1994, 880/0of large employers

offered some form of financial education, and more than two-thirds had added these programs after 1990.1

While this phenomenon is often linked to the increasing popularity of employee-directed pension plans, such




         i“Employees getting more: Investment education, plaming help on the increase,” Pensions & investments,
January 23, 1995, p. 74.

                                                          1
as 401 (k)s (see e.g. Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1995), educational programs are also becoming

increasingly common among firms that sponsor only defined benefit plans (see section 3, below).

         Employer-based    financial education takes many forms, including written materials (brochures, plan

descriptions, f~d prospectuses, newsletters, and memos), one-on-one counseling or financial planning,

seminars, workshops, focus groups, interactive voice response systems, 800 numbers, videos, and interactive

software. Topics covered often include basic investment terminology, asset allocation principles, the

concepts of risk tolerance and risk-return tradeoffs, the effects of inflation, the estimation of retirement

income needs and retirement income sources, retirement strategies, and the impact of preretirement

withdrawals on retirement income. While emphasis varies, nearly all programs cover asset allocation, and

sizable majorities cover retirement income needs (73°/0) and retirement strategies (8 8°/0).2 Thus, one might

well expect educational measures to affect a wide range of behaviors, including plan participation, voluntary

contributions, portfolio mix, and the individual’s overall rate of saving.

        Existing evidence on the effects of retirement education in the workplace is confined to qualitative

surveys and case studies, According to the Employee Benefit Research Institute (1994), 92% of 401(k)

participants say that they read materials provided by their employers; of those, 44% say that they allocate

their funds differently, and 33V. say that they contribute more to their plans. Unfortunately, there is no way

to verify the accuracy of these responses, and in any case the survey did not attempt to measure the magnitude

of the behavioral effects. Employers who enhanced their educational efforts also tend to report increases in

participation (A. Foster Higgins & Co., Inc., 1994), but the available evidence does not establish whether

these increases are out of the ordinary   Case studies frequently cite dramatic changes in behavior (see e.g.

Employee Benefit Research Institute, 1995, or Borleis and Wedell, 1994), but the link to education is usually

speculative, and often confounded by other factors. For example, one company views its communications

program as the “most important factor” behind its 92V0 401(k) participation rate; yet it also matches 100% of

employee contributions up to the first 3% of compensation (Geisel, 1995)



        ‘See Employee Benefit Research Institute ( 1995, p. 15).

                                                          2
         The object of this paper is to provide the first econometric evidence on the efticacy of employer-

based retirement education. We make use of a novel survey of U.S. households.                Bayer, Bemheim, and

Scholz (1 996) address similar questions using data obtained from employers. Both data sources have

advantages and disadvantages.       While the employer data is probably more reliable, it does not contain

information on assets held outside of retirement plans. Thus, household data is required to determine the

extent to which educationally-induced      changes in retirement portfolios are offset by other changes in

behavior. In section 2, we describe the survey, discuss its limitations, and explore the reliability of the data.

         Section 3 provides an analysis of the circumstances under which employers offer, and employees

participate in, retirement education programs.       These issues are important for the analysis that follows since

the existence of educational programs, as well as the decision to participate in these programs, maybe

correlated with the characteristics of employ ees.’ Our evidence is consistent with the hypothesis that

educational progams      are t~ically   remedial, in the sense that they tend to be offered more frequently in

situations where employees are predisposed against saving. Moreover, there does not appear to be a positive

relation between the decision to participate in educational programs and characteristics that correlate with the

predisposition to save. We find that employers are more likely to offer education in the context of self-

directed plans, but a surprising amount of education is also offered in the context of more traditional plans.

Employees are far more likely to make use of educational offerings, however, when the plan is self-directed.

         We also provide an analysis of the effects of employer-based education on sources of information

and advice concerning retirement planning (section 4). This issue is important, since education is not likely to

have a si~ificant   effect on behavior if it simply displaces other similar sources of guidance (such as financial

planners).   We find that employees do rely on employer-based education to a large extent when it is available.

While education tends primarily to displace sources of questionable reliability (e.g. parents and friends), it




         3A similar issue arises in the context of the literature that attempts to assess the impact of401 (k)s on saving.
As several commentators have observed, employers may offer 40 I @)s in response to the demands of employees who are
interested in saving, or alternatively employees who are predisposed to save may seek out employers with 401 (k) plans
(see e.g. Bernheim, 1994b, or Engen, Gale, and Scholz, 1994)

                                                              3
also replaces potentially authoritative sources (e.g. financial planners) to a significant extent.

         We find that rates of saving, both in general and for the purposes of retirement, increase significantly

with the provision of retirement education (section 5). Saving for all purposes actually increases by a larger

amount than saving for retirement. We also find that education significantly stimulates participation in and

contributions to 401(k) plans (section 6). These results are particularly striking in light of the fact (discussed

above) that employers tend to offer education in circumstances where employees are less predisposed towards

saving. Due to data limitations, we are unable to study the effects of education on portfolio allocation.



2. The Data

        Unfortunately, none of the standard sources of information on household finances (such the Survey

of Consumer Finances, and the Survey of Income and Program Participation, the Panel Study on Income

Dynamics) contain information on employer-based retirement education. To address the nexus of issues

discussed in section 1, it was necessa~ to collect new data.

        The first author of this paper has directed an ongoing project, sponsored by Merrill Lynch, Inc., to

monitor the adequacy of personal saving through annual household surveys (see Bernheim, 1995b). For the

Fall of 1994, the survey instrument was expanded to cover a number of new topics, including employer-based

financial education.4 Data were collected during the month of November from a nationally representative

sample of respondents between the ages of 30 and 48. A total of 2,055 surveys were completed.s

        The survey gathered standard economic and demographic information, including household assets

and liabilities, rates of saving, earnings, income, pension coverage, employment status, gender, marital status,

age, ethnic group, education, and household composition.        It also covered less standard topics, such as

retirement education in the workplace, economic and financial bowledge,            sources of information and advice

on retirement planning, and childhood experiences of potential relevance to later financial decisions.


         4The survey was desi~ed   in cooperation with the til-st author of this paper, and fielded for Merrill Lynch by the
Luntz Research Companies.

        5Respondents who terminated their interviews before completion of the sumey are not included in this sample.

                                                           4
         One potential concern is that the survey was administered by telephone. While telephone interviews

are usually regarded as less reliable than face-to-face interviews, the survey was designed to achieve a high

level of compliance and to assure accuracy. Questions were sequenced according to their degree of

invasiveness.   This permitted interviewers to establish credibility, to place respondents at ease, and to engage

them in dialogue. Interviewers first asked respondents to assess their own levels of financial howledge,        and

then moved on to childhood experiences (whether the respondent received an allowance, held a regular job,

and so forth), sources of information and advice about retirement (including financial education in the

workplace), and questions designed to test economic and financial howledge.         Invasive questions concerning

assets and earnings were deferred until later in the survey, and the most innocuous of these (for example, the

household’s rate of saving) were placed before the most problematic ones (primarily those desi~ed         to elicit

asset holdings). As a result, rates of refusal were surprisingly low: 79. 1°/0of completed surveys contained

quantitative answers to all questions concerning components of wealth, and 90.4% contained quantitative

answers to all questions concerning earnings. While high response rates are encouraging,        it is important to

judge the reliability of the data by making appropriate comparisons with hewn        benchmarks (see below).

         Table 1 lists variable names and abbreviated definitions.     It also identifies each variable as binary (a

dummy), continuous (defined over an open range), or categorical (defined over a discrete set of values).

         The survey contains two questions concerning employer-based retirement education.          The first asks

whether the respondent’s employer offers seminars, professional assistance, or informative materials to assist

with retirement planning. Answers to this question are summarized by the variable OEBRE, which is set

equal to unity when assistance is available, and zero otherwise.     Nearly all respondents (2,037 out of 2,055)

provided valid answers to this question (other than “don’t how”       or “refused”), with approximately half

indicating that some form of retirement education is available. The second question asks whether the

respondent has taken advantage of these offerings. This question forms the basis for the variable UEBRE.

         Obviously, OEBRE and UEBRE are coarse measures of exposure to employer-based retirement

education. Unfortunately, detailed descriptions of pro~am structure and content are not available. One



                                                         5
should therefore view this study as an investigation of the average effects of educational activities -- our

analysis almost certainly understates the effects of the best programs.            We expect to refine our treatment of

education in subsequent work using more detailed data sources.b.

          Several variables listed in table 1 measure aspects of pension coverage. RE40 lK indicates whether

the respondent was eligible to participate in “a 40 l(k) or some other tax-defemed salary reduction plan”

sponsored by his or her employer; RP40 1K indicates whether the respondent actively participated in this

plan,. SE40 lK and SP40 IK summarize similar information for spouses.                   RB40 lK and SB40 lK (for

respondents and spouses, respectively) measure accumulated balances in tax-defemed salary reduction plans

sponsored by pastor present employers.’          ROPEN and SOPEN indicate whether the respondent (or spouse)

participates in any other retirement plan sponsored by his or her employer.

          Table 1 also lists a number of demographic variables, the definitions of which are generally self-

explanato~,     RED (SED) measures the respondent’s (spouse’s) highest level of educational attainment on a

scale of 1 (no high school degree) to 6 (some post-graduate education in addition to a college degree).

          Information-on employment includes earnings and work status. Measured earnings reflects only what

respondents (spouses) made at their jobs or through self-employment (before taxes). LREARN (LSEARN)

is constructed by adding one dollar to the respondent’s (spouse’s) reported earnings, and taking the natural

logarithm.E Respondents were also asked to describe themselves (and their spouses) as a student, housewife,

unemployed, employed full-time by a company other than their own, employed part-time by a company other

than their own, self-employed full-time, or self-employed part-time.            Answers to these questions are used to

construct RSE, SSE, RPART, SPART, RNOWORK, and SNOWORK.                              For our purposes, students,




          6More detailed information on educational pl-ograms are contained in surveys of employers fielded by Hewitt
Associates and KPMG Peat Manvick.

          ‘It is worth emphasizing that these variables reflect eligibility and participation not only for 401 (k)s, but also
for other kinds of plans, such as 403(b)s. We usc (he401 (k) label for notational brevity,

         8The addltlon of one dol]ar is necessaly prior to taking the natural 10gtiti      because some respondents rePOfis
earnings of zero.

                                                               6
housewives, and the unemployed are categorized as “not employed,”

          The data also contain measures of \vealth and saving. Questions on homes, businesses, other real

prope~,    financial assets (including cash, bank accounts, retirement accounts, and other investments such as

stocks, bonds, and mutual funds), and debt are used to construct an all-inclusive measure of net worth, TW,

In some specifications, we also use a transformation of this variable, LOGTW, which is constructed by

resealing TW so that its minimum value is one dollar, and applying natural logarithms.           RW measures the

total amount of money that respondents report having saved specifically for retirement. Finally, the survey

collected self-assessed rates of saving, The variables TSAVE and RSAVE measure, respectively,

respondents’ estimates of the percentage of yearly household earnings (not including income earned on assets

and investments) saved in all forms, and the percentage of earnings saved for retirement.         The reliability of

self-reported measures of saving is open to question; we return to this issue in section 5.

          Table 1 lists two additional variables under the heading “other.” In subsequent sections, these are

generally used as proxies for underlying preferences.      PARSAVE provides a measure of parental attitudes

towards saving (scaled from one to five), based on the respondents’ assessments of whether their parents

saved a lot less, somewhat less, the same, someivhat more, or a lot more than other families. TSCORE

measures economic and financial kowledge,         based on a series of factual and conceptual questions, g For each

of these questions, we assigned a “relative knowledge score,” defined as the fraction of the population who

gave answers that were at least as far in absolute value as the respondent’s answer from the true mswer.’”

This procedure normalizes the scores for each question to reflect difficulty, so that no question (or group of

questions) dominates the variation in total scores. For questions that require continuous, quantitative




          ~actual questions concerned rates ofuncmployment, inflation, taxation (in the lowest federal income t~x
bracket), and interest (on 30 year mortgages), and levels of the minimum wage, the federal deficit, federal debt per
household, and Dow Jones average. Conceptual questions probed the respondent’s understanding of real vs. nominal
investment returns and risk-1-etum tradeoffs.

         1‘Suppose ,,for example, that we ask four individuals (A, B, C, and D) the same question. Suppose that the true
answer is “5,” that A answers “6,” B and C ans~ver “8,” and D answers “0.” Then A would receive a score of 100, B
and C would receive scores of 75, and C would receive a score of 25.

                                                           7
responses, rela[ive knowledge scores are also less arbitra~ than coding answers as “right” or “wrong,”

TSCORE is defined as the average relative knowledge score over the respondent’s answers,

        Since the reliability of telephone intcmiews is open to dispute, we have undertaken comparisons

between the Merrill Lymch survey and other recognized data sources. Suitable benchmarks must mimic the

survey’s focus on members of the baby boom generation.       One convenient source of information on this

group is a study by the Congressional Budget Office (1993) (henceforth, CBO), which uses the 1989 Survey

of Consumer Finances and the 1990 Current Population Survey. The CBO tabulates statistics for two age

groups: 25-34, and 35-44. For the older group, one can make comparisons with an analogous sample drawn

from the Merrill Lynch survey, Since the CBO’S data were collected four to five years earlier, discrepancies

are to be expected. However, given the slow rate of real wage growth over this period, it is natural to expect a

rough correspondence bcltvecn the sun’eys. Thus, the CBO study provides a meaningful benchmark,

        The data contained in the first seclion of table 2, labeled “general characteristics,”   indicates that the

composition of the Merrill Ljmch sample differs s?slematically from the comparison sample in several

respects, The most important distinction is Lhathome ownership is much more common in the Merrill Lynch

sample (81. 1°Avs. 65.20/0). Apparently, the chances of contacting a prospective respondent via telephone are

higher for homeowners than for renters. Respondents in the Merrill Lynch sample are more likely to be

married (73, 8% vs. 62.00/0), and are somewhat better educated than those in the comparison sample.

        The second section of table 2 contains information on household income. Comparability is

imperfect, since the benchmark statistics refer to total household income, while the Merrill Lynch smey

responses measure total earnings from employment.      However, for the age group in question, employment         is

the predominant source of household income. With this qualification in mind, there is a striking

correspondence between median household income for the Merrill Lynch and benchmark samples. The

overall median is only slightly higher in LheMerrill Lynch sample ($48,000 vs. $46,359).         There is

astonishing little difference across the two samples in median incomes for urunarried individuals, all married

couples, single-earner married couples, and dual-earner married couples. The nmbers         match up only slightly



                                                         8
less well when “thesamples are segmented by educational attainment.

         The third and fourth sections of table 2 presents similar comparisons for total household wealth and

non-housing wealth. Reported levels of \vealth are generally higher in the Merrill Lynch sample than in the

comparison sample. For example, the median for all households is $95,000 in the Merrill Lynch sample,

versus $65,433 in the comparison sample. Despite this discrepancy, the variation in median wealth across

subgroups (defined by marital status and educational attainment) is qualitatively similar for the two samples.

        The apparent discrepancies in median wealth are easily explained. As indicated in table 2, the CBO

found an enormous disparity between median wealth for homeo~ners ($11 1,068) and non-homeowers

($1,8 11). When the data is segmented in this way, the Merrill Lynch survey matches the benchmarks much

more closely ($126,000 for homeowners, $4,000 for non-homeowners).           Thus, the oversampling of

homeo~mers, noted above, leads to the selection of a weallhier sample. One can compensate for this

selectivity by re-weighting the Merrill Lymch sample to produce the same proportion of home ownership as in

the comparison sample (see the final column of table 2). While this results in estimates of median income

that are slightly lower than the CBO’S numbers, part of the difference is probably attributable to the omission

of capital income and transfers.   Re-\veighling reduces median wealth more dramatically than median income

(for example, median wealth for all households falls to $61,000, versus $65,433 for the comparison sample).

Given the large variances associated with measures of wealth, there-weighted      figures are remarkably close to

the benchmarks (both for total wealth and for non-housing wealth). The largest discrepancy        -- net worth for

college educated household heads -- is consistent \vith the corresponding discrepancy for household income.

        The final section of table 2 contains information on pensions. Since the CBO does not report this

information, and since we were unable to identify another appropriate published benchmark, we constructed

our own comparison sample using the 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). We selected a subsample

to mirror the entire Merrill Ly-nch sample, rather than a restricted age group. Since the SCF did not gather

information on eligibility separately for different tyTes of pensions, we restricted our attenlion to overall rates

of pension coverage. The fractions of married women, single women, and married men with access to



                                                         9
pension plans are very similar across the tlvo samples. Results for single men are anomalous.              This

discrepancy is probably not a significant indictment of data quality since single men comprise the smallest of

the subsamples.    Table 2 also indicates that median reported balances in 40 l(k) accounts for the SCF are very

close to median balances in the somewhat broader catego~ of accounts for the Merrill Lynch survey.

         In summary, comparisons between the Merrill Lynch survey and recognized benchmarks reveal that

the survey probably oversampled certain population subgroups, most notably homeowners.                  However, once

one accounts for this phenomenon, medians for income and wealth correspond remarkably closely to

statistics obtained from other sources. Rates of pension coverage are also similar. These findings provide us

with considerable comfort concerning the accuracy of the Merrill Lymch data.



3. The Determinants of Employer-Based                             Financial Education

         The rapid gro~ilh of financial education in the workplace is an intriguing phenomenon.             A reading of

the trade press suggests four possible explanations.       First, rules governing employer liability in the context of

self-directed pension plans (particularly 401 (k)s) may stimulate educational initiatives.         Section 404(c) of

ERISA, which spells out conditions under which an employer is relieved of liability for investment results

when sponsoring a “participant-controlled’       plan, creates an affirmative obligation to provide adequate

disclosure for informed investment decisions. 11 Second, employers may adopt educational programs when

they run afoul of the non-discrimination     requirements that preclude the existence of large discrepancies

between contribution rates for highly compensated and non-highly compensated employees. By encouraging

participation among non-highly compensated employees, education may relax binding constraints on highly

compensated employees (see Garrett, 1995, for further discussion of non-discrimination              requirements and



           “This first explanation is probably of limited impollance.    The disclosure requirement is modest, and does not
necessitate activities that are recognizable as meaningful financial education. Indeed, the fact that section 404(c) does
not specifically mention broader financial education has led some observers to fear that the provision of education --
beyond simple disclosul-e -- would create a potential fiducialy liability. The Department of Labor has recently attempted
to alter this perception by drafting an “interpretive bulletin” which is “intended to enable employers, plan officials and
educational providers to distinWish participant education fi-om fiduciary activities and, thereby, encourage these
individuals to institute pa]licipant education programs without fear of inadvertently incumng potential fiduciary liability”
(Berg, 1995, p. 2).

                                                             10
their effects).   Third, employers may offer education when low rates of participation and/or low contributions

confound other objectives.     Education may help employees to appreciate the substantial value associated with

their 401(k) options (see Scott, 1995), and thereby reduce their demands for compensation in other forms.

By promoting adequate preparation for retirement, an employer may also hope to avoid subsequent conflicts

with older, poorly prepared workers. Assistance with financial plaming may also enhance employee loyalty,

improve labor relations, and boost morale. Fourth, if workers are interested in retirement planning, they may

ask their employers to provide educational materials along with other benefits.

          It is important to investigate the impetus for employer-based retirement education, as well as the

factors that motivate individuals to make use of these programs, prior to studying the effects of this education

on financial choices. Participation in an educational program, like participation in a 401(k), is probably

correlated with underlying tastes for saving andor risk. Even the availability of education, like the

availability of a 40 l(k), may be correlated with tastes. However, in contrast to the example of 40 l(k)s, there

is no presumption that eilher the receipt of, or eligibility for, retirement education is positively correlated with

a predisposition to siive. With respect to participation, those with sufficiently high propensities to save may

choose not to make use of educational offerings simply because they have already informed themselves

adequately on the subject of retirement.    And with respect to availability, the sign of the correlation between

education and underlying tastes for saving differs across the various hypotheses discussed above.

         Under the first hypothesis, correlations between education and the predisposition to save may result

from correlations between education and 40 l(k) eligibility. However, this hypothesis has no implication

concerning the sign of correlation between education and tastes conditional on the existence of a 40 l(k).

Thus, as long as one controls for 40 l(k) eligibility when studying financial behavior, the direction of the bias

is not obvious. Under the second and third hypotheses listed above, education is remedial, and -- conditional

on the existence of a 401 (k) -- tends to be offered more frequently in situations where employees are

predisposed ugainsf saving. Consequently, if either of these hypotheses is valid, studies based on cross-

sectional data (including the current paper) lvill tend to be biased against the finding that education stimulates



                                                         11
saving. Under-the fourth hypothesis listed above, the resulting bias might well work in the opposite direction,

since high-saving employees may be more likely to demand investment education as a fringe benefit.

          In a related paper, Bayer, Bemhcim, and Scholz [ 1996] investigate these hypotheses using data on a

sample of employers suneyed by KPMG Peat Marwick in 1993 and 1994. They find that low rates of

participation among non-highly compensated employees significantly increase the likelihood that employers

will establish   or enhance educational offerings.   No other variable compares in importance as a predictor of

subsequent educational activity. This evidence is most consistent with the third hypothesis mentioned above,

and supports the view that educational offerings tend to be associated with a predisposition against saving.

          The remainder of this section investigates the factors that influence the availability of financial

education in the workplace, and the decision to make use of this education. It sheds additional light on the

relative merits of the four hypotheses discussed above, as well as on the nature of correlations between the

receipt and availability of education, and the underlying predisposition to save.

          A. Availability   of employer-based    retirement    education

          A strong relation between the availabilih of education and pension eligibility is apparent in the raw

data. Overall, just over one-half (53.5%1) of respondents report that their employers offer some form of

retirement education. Of those without pensions, only 26.6°/0 say that educational programs are available. In

contrast, 68 .9°/0of those covered only by 401 (k)s, 58 .OO/O
                                                            of those covered only by other pension plans, and

76.4% of those covered by both ~-pes of plans report the existence of educational options. 12 Since these

options have become common even in the absence of401 (k)s, the growth of self-directed plans does not

appear to be the sole factor motivating the growth of retirement education in the workplace. 13




         12A relatively small number of those who describe themselves as “not working” nevertheless report that their
employers offer some form of retirement education. These respondents may have in mind educational programs offered
by past employers, their spouse’s employer, or a school that they attend.

          13Concelvab]v, “other pensions “ may include some self-directed plans, However, our “401(k)” category is
                       .
intended to include “other tax-dcfelTed salary reduction plans,” which subsumes many other common self-directed plans,
such as 403(b)s. Of course, some I-espondents may have misclassified their pensions, but misclassification would have
to be extremely common to explain the obselwed diflkrences between those with and without other pensions. Notably,
Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz (1996) colTobol-ate our tindlngs using employer survey data

                                                          12
         Table 3 contains estimates of probit models explaining the availability of retirement education at the

respondent’s workplace.    Obsemations were dropped if the respondent was not employed or answered “don’t

know” or “refused” to any of the questions used to elicit the values of the explanatory variables.       These

variables fall into four categories: information on pension eligibility, demographic characteristics, aspects of

employment, and “other,” which includes a constant and taste proxies, discussed belo}v.

         Equation (1) explores the relation between the availability of education, characteristics of the

respondent’s job, and demographics.     We include the demographic variables because they may be related to

the type of job held by the respondent; it is also conceivable that they maybe related to tastes, and that the

coefficients of these variables may reflect self-selection among employment opportunities,         Equation (1)

omits three variables that we regard as more straightforward proxies for tastes (SE40 IK, TSCORE, and

PARSAVE),      The estimates reveal that, as expected, workers with pensions are much more likely to have

access to retirement education.. While the existence of a 401 (k) plan is particularly important, the presence

of other pensions is also strongly related LOeducational offerings. The relative sizes of the coefficients for

ROPEN and R2PENS indicate that the existence of another pension plan on top of a 40 l(k) contributes

significantly to the probability that retirement education is available. Women, non-whites, highly educated

individuals, and highly compensated individuals are significantly more likely to work for employers who offer

retirement education. There is little evidence that education is more widely available for older workers: while

the coefficient of RAGE is positive, it lacks statistical significance.

         Equation (2) adds three variables that arguably proxy for tastes, in an attempt to illuminate the

relation between the availability of education and underlying tastes for saving. The first, TSCORE, measures

the respondent’s economic and financial knowledge. Respondents with higher values of TSCORE tend to

have significantly greater wealth (see section 5). Thus, either TSCORE measures an aspect of tastes for

saving (financial literacy), or it is correlated with unobserved characteristics that determine tastes for saving.

One potential difficulty with the inclusion of TSCORE is that retirement education may improve economic

and financial knowledge.    However, the direct ion of the resulting bias is clear: if there is no correlation



                                                          13
between the availabili~ of education and tastes for saving, the coefficient of TSCORE would be positive.

Unless education impairs economic Iitcracy (which seems very unlikely), a negative coefficient would suppofi

the premise that education is typically provided as a remedial measure to those who are less inclined to save.

          The second variable, PARSAVE, proxies for saving by the respondent’s parents. PARSAVE should

be correlated with tastes as long as tastes are, at least to some extent, inherited from parents either through

“genes” or childhood experiences.          There is no reason to expect that the correlation between rates of saving

by parents and children would necessarily be positive. For example, respondents with frugal parents might be

inclined to save less than others if they expect to receive large inheritances.         However, in practice, there is a

strong positive correlation between wealth and PARSAVE (see section 5).

         The third variable, SE40 lK, indicates whether the respondent’s spouse is eligible for a 40 l(k). Since

SE40 lK (unlike RE40 lK) is not an attribute of the respondent’s job, it should have no direct effect on the

Presence or absence of education at the respondents            wor~Place    ILmaY7however, have an indirect effect

Several authors (including Bcmheim, 1994b, 1996, and Engen, Gale, and Scholz, 1994) have argued that

401(k) eligibility   is positively   correlated   with the predisposition   to save   If this is correct, then SE40 lK

should be a reasonable proxy for tastes as long as household financial decisions are influenced by the

preferences   of both spouses, or as long as tastes are correlated across spouses. 14

          The addition of these taste proxies does not significantly alter any of the results discussed above

(compare equations (1) and (2) in table 3). The coe~cient              of TSCORE is negative, large in absolute value

relative to those of other important explanatory variables, and statistically significant at a high level of

confidence. The coefficient of SE40 lK is also negative, but statistically insignificant, while the coefficient of

PARSAVE is positive and statistically insignificant.            This pattern of coefficients suggests that the presence of

retirement education is negatively correlated with the predisposition to save.




           ]4Conceivably, SE40 IK may also be correlated with aspects of the respondent’s job (since 401 (k) eligibili~ is
correlated with characteristics, such as skills, that may affect assoflive matching); however, it is unlikely that significant
systematic correlations exist once one controls fol- the respondent’s earnings, education, pension status, and other
characteristics.

                                                                14
         To ftilier   examine the legitimacy of this inference, we performed the same exercise for a probit

model explaining the respondent’s 40 l(k) eligibility. It would be implausible to suggest that 40 l(k) eligibility

is negatively correlated with the predisposition to save. Thus, if TSCORE, PARSAVE, and SE40 lK do

indeed proxy for tastes, their coefficients should be zero or positive, in sharp contrast to the results obtained

for educational offerings.   Controlling for the same set of variables as in table 3, we find that the coefficients

of TSCORE and SE40 lK are both positive and significant at exceptionally high levels of statistical

confidence, while the coefficient of PARSAVE is negative but statistically insignificant (we have omitted the

estimated equations to consewe space). These results are at least consistent with the view that 40 l(k)

eligibility (unlike the availabiliw of education) is positively correlated with the predisposition to save.]s

         B. Usage ofemployer-bnsed         retirement    education

         Overall, 77% of respondents with access to retirement education in the workplace report that they

make use of these opportunities.     This is lower than the 92°/0 figure (which refers to the fraction of workers

who read written materials provided by their employers) reported by EBRI (1994). The usage rate is higher

for workers covered only by 40 l(k)s (79.9Yo) than for workers without pensions (69. lYo). However, those

covered only by pensions other than 40 l(k)s are no more likely to participate in educational programs than

those who have no pension coverage (69.2°/0 vs. 69. 170), and those with both 401 (k)s and some other plan are

no more likely to participate than those covered by 40 l(k)s alone (80.2°/0 vs. 79.90/0). Thus, the existence of

a pension plan does not appear to affect the likelihood of worker participation in retirement education

offerings unless the plan has self-directed features that require active participant decision-making.

         These same patterns are evident in estimates of a probit model explaining the decision to use

educational offerings, conditional upon availability      (table 3, equation (3)). While the coefficient of RE40 lK




         IsThl~~vldence is by no means conclusive. If 401 &)s encourage ~eater saving, then they may also induce
individuals to acquire greater financial bowledge.    This would account for the positive correlation between401 (k)
eligibility and TSCORE. The correlation with SE40 IK is more difficult to explain, particularly given that we have
controlled for a range of respondent characteristics, including ea]mings and education. To some extent, the correlation
may be attributable to households in which [he husband and wife have the same employer, but we doubt that this
circumstance is sufficiently common to explain the magnitude of the estimated coefficient.

                                                            15
is large and statistically significant, the coefficients of ROPEN and WPENS are not. This finding contrasts

with our results regarding the factors that determine the existence of educational programs (section A).

          It is also instructive to compare the coefficients of the other explanatory variables in equations (1)

and (3), While women and non-whites are more likely to work for employers who offer retirement education,

their usage rates are not higher. Educational offerings are more common for those with higher earnings, but

participation is not. Married individuals are more likely to participate (the difference between married and

single respondents being significant at ihc 90°/0 level of confidence), but not more likely to work for an

employer who offers retirement education. And while RED and RPART emerge with coefficients of the same

sign in both equations, the estimates arc imprecise. Overall, the dissimilarity of coefficients between these

two regressions suggests that the existence of retirement education in the workplace is not demand driven --

factors affecting the pattcm of availability appear largely unrelated to factors affecting the pattern of usage.

          Analogously to section A, we also add our taste proxies (TSCORE, PARSAVE, and SE401K) to

investigate the possibility that the use of retirement education is correlated with underlying tastes for saving.

In this context, it maybe lCSSappropriate to think of SE40 lK as proxying for taste, since its coefficient may

reflect a behavioral response: respondents may choose to participate in educational programs to learn how to

manage their spouse’s 40 l(k) assets. Indeed, lhe coefficient of SE40 IK in equation (4) is positive, but

insignificant.    While the coefficients of TSCORE and PARSAVE also lack statistical significance, both are

nevertheless negative. As before, if educalion improves economic and financial knowledge, we would expect

to observe a positive coefficient for TSCORE unless participation is negcrfively correlated with innate

sophistication.    Since all three variables are strongly related to wealth and saving (see section 5), and since

TSCORE and SE40 lK are strongly related to the respondent’s401          (k) eligibility, these results suggest that

participation is not positively correlated with the predisposition to save. We are only moderately surprised by

this finding. Those who are most inclined to save may have already educated themselves, and may view the

low-level, remedial financial education offered by most employers as redundant.




                                                          16
4. Sources of Information and Advice

         A central objective of this paper is to determine whether employer-provided          financial education

influences employee behavior. Education might not affect behavior for a number of reasons, Workers might

simply ignore it if they are uninterested, unmotivated, unable to understand it, or already well-informed,          A

more subtle possibility is that the information provided by employers might substitute for information that

employees would have obtained from other sources. For example, an employee offered free investment

counseling might stop paying for the advice of a financial planner. If this kind of substitution occurs, then

employer-based financial education may serve as a tax-favored form of in-kind compensation, rather as an

activity that should be expected to measurably alter the financial choices of employees,

         mile    it is essential to examine actual behavior, our survey also permits us to investigate directly the

extent to which employees rely on emplo)er-provided       education and to measure the displacement of other

information sources, Specifically, each respondent was asked to name the household decision-maker’s most

important source of advice and information on retirement planning. Respondents were offered fourteen

possible answers, as well as the opportunity to provide an “open” response. We recoded these responses into

six categories: employer, financial professional, parentifriend/relative,   print media, own judgement, and other,

         The first two columns of table 4 contain data on the distribution of primary sources of information

and advice, tabulated separately according to whether the respondent’s employer offered financial education.

When education is offered, 27,0% of respondents report relying primarily on their employers, compared with

only 7.4°/0 of employees in instances where employer-based education is not offered. Thus, many employees

apparently regard employer-based financial education as a critical source of information and advice.

         A comparison of the distribution of primary sources of assistance for those with and without

employer-based    financial education provides some evidence on the extent to which this education displaces

other specific sources of assistance.   The fractions relying on parents/friends/relatives,     own judgement, and

“other” sources are much lower in the presence of educational programs, while the fractions relying on

arguably authoritative sources (financial professionals and print media) are only slightly smaller. This


                                                         17
pattern suggests Lhat, for the most part, employer-based education may displace less authoritative sources of

assistance. If so, there is a greater likelihood that the behavioral effects of education are significant.

         Of course, these simple tabulations maybe misleading.       In section 3, we found that respondents’

characteristics differ systematically according to whether employer-based education is available. For

example, education is offered more frequently when the respondent’s employer provides a401 (k).

Employees who are eligible for 401 (k)s tend to have higher incomes, more education, and greater financial

sophistication.   They also tend to rely on more authoritative sources when making financial decisions. Thus,

raw statistics may understate the extent to which employer education supplants authoritative sources.

         To control for these other factors, we estimated a multinominal Iogit equation explaining the

respondent’s primary source of assistance as a function of education, pension eligibility, demographic

characteristics, employment information, and similar characteristics for spouses (when present).        To conserve

space, we omit the full set of parameter estimates, and instead summarize our central results as follows.

Setting OEBRE equal to zero. we use the parameter estimates to fit a probability distribution over sources of

assistance for each observation in our sample. We then average these probabilities across observations to

create a fitted population distribution.   Next, we set OEBRE equal to one and repeat the calculations.      Results

are reported in the two righlmost columns of Table 4. Slightly less than half (8.1 percentage points) of the

16,7 percentage point increase in reliance on employers reflects displacement of authoritative sources

(financial professionals and print media). The remaining 8.6% reflects displacement of parentsifriendsl

relatives, the respondent’s own judgement, or “other” sources, Thus, although employer-based education

displaces authoritative sources of assistance to a larger extent than was apparent from the raw data,

displacement of non-authoritative    sources appears to be more common. This finding supports the view that

education has significant potential to influence behavior.

         The full set of multinominal logit coefficients are difficult to interpret since the impact of any variable

on the use of any pafiicular source of assistance cannot be inferred from any one coefficient.      We therefore

estimate six separate probit equations -- one explaining the use of each information source -- and report



                                                          18
results in Table 5. Note that the coefficient of education is large, positive, and statistically significant in the

equation explaining reliance on employers. This finding is inconsistent with the view that employees ignore

employer-provided     education. Education also has a negative and statistically si~ificant         effect on the use of

print media, the respondent’s own judgement, and “other” sources of assistance.

         Although we are primarily interested in the effects of education, other patterns are of independent

interest. Respondents with pension coverage rely less on parents/friends/relatives,           and more on print media.

Women appear more Iikcly to rely on employers, financial professionals, and parents/friends/relatives,                but

less likely to rely on print media and their o~~mjudgement.’b More highly educated individuals depend more

heavily on financial professionals and print media, and lesson employers and other sources. Reliance on

parents, friends, and relatives declines \vith age. As one might expect, the self-employed are less likely to say

that they rely on assistance from employers.’7 as are those who work part-time or not at all (though the

coefficients of these last two characteristics are only marginally significant).

         We conclude that many employees rely heavily on financial education in the workplace, and that this

education most commonl)’ displaces non-authoritative          sources of assistance (though si~ificant      displacement

of authoritative assistance also occurs). Thus, there is considerable scope for employer-based education to

affect financial choices.



5. The Effect of Retirement Education on Household Saving

         We now turn to the critical question of Ivhether retirement education in the workplace significantly

affects saving behavior.    In this section, we investigate the relation between employer-based education and

four different behavioral variables: total net worth (TW), the total value of all assets which the respondent

characterizes as savings for retirement (RW), saving for all purposes expressed as a fraction of current




           lGConceivably, diRerences in I-epolled usage by gender may reflect differences in reporting, rather than
differences in usage. For example, men maybe more likely to credit their own judgement after the fact.

         IT~en    a se]f.emP]oYed respondent repolts relying on an employer, this may refer to a sPouse’s ‘mPIOyer> ‘r ‘0
educational programs set up primarily for the respondent’s employees.

                                                             19
income (TSAVE), and saving for the purpose of retirement expressed as a fraction of current income

(RSAVE).      The first two variables measure stocks of wealth, while the last two measure flows,

          The use of information on flow saving is particularly impofiant in this context. As mentioned in

section   1, most retirement education programs have not existed for very long. The effect of education on

flows should be proportionately larger, and more easily detectable, than the effect on stocks of wealth because

stocks reflect all past choices, including those made prior to the availability of education. Also recall that the

existence of financial education is negatively correlated with the predisposition to save (see section 3 or

Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz, 1996). Thus, in cases where educational programs are sufficiently recent,

stocks of wealth may actually be 10wer for those who have access to employer-based education, even if

education stimulates rates of saving. These considerations are less problematic for retirement wealth than for

total wealth since stocks of retirement wealth are ~~ically very low to begin with (a given change in rate of

flow should manifest itself more quickly in the stock when the range of initial stocks is small).

          This discussion suggests a procedure for distinguishing between causal hypotheses.      If education

stimulates saving, and if it is negatively correlated with the underlying inclination to save, its estimated effect

on flow saving should be particularly pronounced, and its impact on retirement wealth should also be

detectable.   Education may nevertheless appear unrelated to, or even negatively correlated with, total net

worth, Moreover, it would be difficult to account for this pattern under any other hypothesis.      For example, if

education is ineffective but positively correlated with the imate inclination to save, one would observe

positive and equally strong effects for all of our dependent variables.

          Several important issues arise with respect to the use of the flow variables. First, self-reported rates

of saving are suspect because they do no necessarily retlcct the consistent application of economically

appropriate concepts. For example, some individuals may report the fractions of their paychecks that they

put away, while others may (despite the wording of the questions) count some portion of reinvested capital




                                                         20
income (e.g realizations) as both income and saving.l E This disadvantage is at least partially offset by the

fact that questions about rates are less invasive than questions about asset values; as a result, one obtains

higher response rates, and possibly more honest answers. It is also obvious from the results reported in this

section that the variables TS AVE and RSAVE contain more than random noise. They are highly correlated

with total net wealth (presumably reflecting serial correlation in rates of saving), and they exhibit the

expected correlations with variables such as 401(k) eligibility and education, even controlling for wealth.

Absent either a true panel or a detailed log of household spending, self-reported rates of saving are the only

available measures of flow saving. While TSAVE and RSAVE are imperfect, they do appear to provide

meaningful information on flow saving, and are therefore worthwhile subjects of analysis.

           Second, the distinction between total wealth and retirement wealth, and the analogous distinction

between the overall rate of saving and the rate of saving for retirement, may be imprecise and subjective.

Some individuals may earmark funds for particular purposes, while others may regard their resources as

f~gible,    While these distinctions are sharper when individuals use targeted retirement savings vehicles (e.g.

IR4s, 40 l(k)s, variable annuities. and life insurance products), some individuals may save for retirement

through other vehicles, or save for other objectives (such as college education) through a retirement account.

Despite these issues, high response rates indicate that most individuals do have a sense about the portions of

their wealth and flow saving that are psychologically, if not physically, earmarked for retirement.

           In examining the relation between saving behavior and education, one must also be cognizant of the

fact that the response to education may vary systematically across the population.          While most Americans

probably save too little, some save adequately, and a few probably put away significantly more than is

necessa~.     If educat ion nudges each household toward an appropriate mode of behavior, its impact on low

and average savers may bear little resemblance to its impact on high savers -- even the sign of the effect may




          “It is worth noting that no respondent reports negative saving, despite the fact that some households
undoubtable dissave. This probably reflects the fact that most individuals do not thiti about saving and dissaving
symmetrically. For those who dissave, it is probably more natural to report that they save nothing (a saving rate of zero)
than to report a negative rate of saving.

                                                            21
differ. For this reason, it is very important to distinguish between mean effects and quantile effects.

Traditional regression techniques such as OLS may systematically understate the importance of education

precisely because the effect of education on mean saving is diluted by the response (or lack thereo~ among

those who already save enough. A separate but related concern is that, due to the pronounced skewness in the

distributions of reported wealth and rates of saving, OLS estimates maybe driven by the behavior of a

relatively small number of individuals with the greatest inclination to save. For these reasons, we rely in this

section primarily on quantile regression techniques (although, for completeness, we also report OLS results).

         Before discussing the regression results, it is useful to summarize the key patterns in the raw data.

The median ratio of total net worth to yearly earnings is iower for those whose employers offer retirement

education (1.76) than for those \vhose employers do not (1.97). It is also lower for those who make use of

these offerings (1.75) than for those who either do not make use of, or do not have access to such programs

(1.89). These findings are difficult to reconcile with the hypothesis that education is positively correlated

with the underlying inclination to save; indeed, lhey support the opposite inference.

         It is therefore quite striking that much di ffcrent patterns emerge for retirement wealth and flow

saving. The median ratio of retirement wealth to annual earnings is higher when the respondent’s employer

offers retirement education (0.35 3 vs. O.192). It is also higher for those who make use of these offerings than

for those who do not (0.364 vs. O.195). Median rates of saving and rates of saving for retirement are also

higher for those who have access to retirement education programs ( 10VOand 5Y0,respectively) and for those

who make use of these programs (again, 10O/oand 50A)than for those who are ineligible (6°/0 and 30/0),and for

those who are either ineligible or who don’t participate (6Y0and 4Yo).

         The patterns in the raw data coincide with those predicted at the outset of this section, under the

hypothesis that retirement education is remedial (and therefore negatively correlated with the predisposition

to save) and effective at stimulating saving. In light of the negative correlation between retirement education

and total wealth, it is difficult to rationalize the positive correlations between educational offerings, retirement

wealth, and flow saving as consequences of a spurious relation between these offerings and tastes for saving.



                                                         22
         Of course, the raw statistics maybe misleading. As shown in section 3, educational offerings are

correlated with other factors that may influence saving. It is therefore important to determine whether the

central empirical patterns su~ive once one properly controls for a range of pertinent characteristics.

         Table 6 contains four median reg~essions -- one for each dependent variable, The explanatory

variables include the availability of retirement education in the workplace (OEBRE), pension characteristics

for both respondent and spouse (if any), the demographic characteristics of both respondent and spouse,

characteristics of emplo~ent     for both respondent and spouse (earnings and work status), and “other”

controls, including taste proxies (TSCORE and PARSAVE) and the log of total wealth (LOGTw.                   LOGTW

is, of course, not included in the rcg~essions that explain stocks of wealth. Its Inclusion in the specifications

explaining flow saving is justified by the usual life cycle considerations, which imply that its coefficient

should be negative (since higher wealth should increase consumption).         However, if preferences towards

saving are reasonably stable over time, it may be more appropriate to think of LOGTW as another taste

proxy, in which case one would expect a positive coefficient. Table 7 presents analogous results for UEBRE.

         The use of both OEBRE and UEBRE requires some comment. Conceptually,                   it may seem more

appropriate to control for participation in educational programs (UEBRE), rather than the mere availability

of such programs (OEBRE).        We are concerned, however, about endogeneity.           While either variable may

be correlated with factors that determine a respondent’s underlying predisposition to save, this concern is

more pronounced in the case of UEBRE. 19 One can think of specifications that control for OEBRE as

reduced forms, in which we have substituted an expression explaining UEBRE.

         In the specification for total wealth (Table 6), the coefficient of OEBRE is positive, though quite

small in magnitude, and statistically insignificant.   Thus, while the addition of other control variables

(including taste proxies) eliminates the negative correlation between OEBRE and median wealth, there is no




         “For OEBRE, the issue of endogeneity depends onty on the factors that motivate an employer to offer
f~cial   ducation. If, as we hfive ar~ld, ducation is remdial, the coefficient of OEBRE will be biasd
downward. With respect to UEBRE, the bias depends not only on the factors affecting the availability of education, but
also on the characteristics that motivate an employee to use an available program.

                                                          23
positive relation to speak of. In contrast, the estimated effect of OEBRE on median retirement wealth is large

(nearly $2,500) and statistically significant.   The availability of retirement education also increases the

overall rate of saving by 165 percentage points, and raises the rate of saving for retirement by just under one

percentage point. Bolh effects are large relative to median rates of saving for those who do not have access to

retirement education in the workplace (6 percent and 3 percent, respectively), and both are statistically

significant at high levels of confidence. Notably, the estimated effect on the overall rate of saving is larger

than the estimated effect on retirement saving. This suggests that retirement education may have a positive

spillover effect on saving outside of retirement accounts..

         We are again struck by the finding that education is strongly related to retirement wealth and flow

saving, but not to total net worth. We reiterate that this is consistent with the pattern predicted at the outset

of this section, but inconsistent with the hypothesis that education is correlated with unobsen’ed tastes for

saving. One might question this inference on the grounds that some spurious factor, such as poor

measurement of total net worth, could explain the discrepancy.       However, if this was the case, then one would

also observe similar discrepancies for other variables. It is therefore notable that the coefficients of RE40 lK

are all positive and statistically siyificant.   Indeed. the coefficient of RE401K in the specification for total

wealth is particularly large. The coefficients ofSE401 K etiibit     a similar pattern,

         It is tempting to interpret the coefficients of RE40 lK and SE401K as behavioral effects, and to

conclude that 401 (k)s also stimulate saving, Caution is warranted, however, since there is a strong

presumption that the correlation between 401 (k) eligibility and the predisposition to save is non-negative.        If

anything, our results strengthen this presumption.     Note that the coe~lcients of RE40 lK and SE401 K in the

equation for total wealth are nearly four times as large as the corresponding coefficients in the equation for

retirement wealth. If we interpret these coefficients as behavioral effects, we would be forced to conclude that

40 l(k)s crowd in olher saving at the astonishing rate of four to one, Strictly speaking, this finding does not

rule out a behavioral interpretation; for example, it is consistent with a powerful “recognition effect.”

However, if such an effect exists, it is difficult to understand why the effect of the respondent’s 401(k)



                                                          24
eligibility on the total saving rate is less than its effect on the retirement saving rate (which implies some

crowding out, rather than crowding in). We are therefore inclined to attribute some unknown portion of the

coefficients for 401 (k) eligibility to correlations with unobsemed tastes.

             Since our focus is on the effects of financial education, we will touch only briefly on the other

coefficients reported in table 6. Eligibility for other pensions is associated with greater wealth and higher

rates of saving, although none of the estimated effects (with the exception of ROPEN in the equation for

retirement wealth) is statistically significant. The interpretation of the coefficients for the marital status

dummy (which are statistically significant in the wealth equations) is obscure, since all variables measuring

spousal characteristics arc given fixed default values (usually zero) for single individuals.        The coefficients of

FEMALE and BLACK are uniformly negative, but lack statistical significance.               General education is

positively     related to wealth for both the respondent and spouse, and to flow saving for the respondent (the

relations between flow saving and spousc”s education are statistically insignificant),20 Wealth is strongly

related to age, but flow saving is not; there is very little evidence that rates of saving accelerate over the age

range covered by our sample. Earnings arc positively related to wealth, but there is only weak evidence that

the rate of saving rises with earnings. Self employed individuals have more total wealth (~ically             in the form

of businesses), but they do not have more retirement ~~calth, and they do not tend to save at higher rates (the

associated coefficients are negative and statistically insignificant).     Not surprisingly, part-time employees

save at significantly lower rates. However, there is no indication that they have less wealth.2’ One-earner

households have greater wealth, but they do not appear to save at higher rates,22


           ‘“There are many possible explanations for this linding General education may proxy for permanent income,
or for patience; it may also provide analytic skills lhat cent]-ibute to more deliberate decision-making.

           “There are several possible explanations for Lhis tinding. First, recall that we control for earnings. Suppose
that a part-time worker has the same earnings as a full time worker. If the part-time worker has worked full-time in the
past, then he or she has greater past earnings. Thus, he or she might well have greater wealth. Second, the decision to
work part-time may be endogenous. An individual may select this option only if he or she has suficient resources to
tiord it.

         ‘zOne can explain this finding analogously to the coefficients of RPART and SPART. Holding current
earnings constant, one-earner households may have higher past earnings than two-earner households, since the non-
working spouse may have wol-ked in the past. Alternatively, having one spouse stay at home may be a luxury, chosen

                                                            25
         Our taste proxies uniformly have the expected signs. In the total wealth and retirement wealth

specifications, the coefficients of both TSCORE and PARSAVE are large and statistically significant at high

levels of confidence. While the statistical significance of these variables is diminished in the saving rate

regressions (PARSAVE remains si~ificant,          while TSCORE does not), this is in part due to the inclusion of

LOGTW, which enters with positive and highly significant coefficients.         This finding, which appears to

contradict the implications of the life cycle h~othesis,     implies that LOGTW acts as a superior taste proxy.

         We obtain similar results for specifications that control for participation in educational programs

(UEBRE, table 7). As with OEBRE, we find essentially no relation between UEBRE and total wealth. The

coefficient of UEBRE is slightly smaller than that of OEBRE in the equation for retirement wealth (though

still statistically siWificant), and larger in the equations for flow saving. The use of UEBRE, rather than

OEBRE, does not dramatically alter the pattern of coefficients obtained for other variables.

         To ftiher   investigate the robustness of our results, and to develop additional evidence concerning

possible spurious relations between education and underlying preferences for saving, we conduct some

additional exercises: To conserve space, we omit detailed results, and summarize key coefficients in table 8.

         We focus hereon the specifications for flow saving, since this is where the effects of education are

most pronounced,     Table 8 is divided into four sections, \vhich are distinguished according to whether the

explanatory variables include OEBRE or UEBRE, and whether the dependent variable is TSAVE or RSAVE.

Each of these sections contains the coefficients for education (OEBRE or UEBRE) and 401(k) eligibility

(RE401(k) and SE40 l(k)) from five equations.         Each regression controls for the same set of explanatory

variables used in tables 6 and 7, except where othcnvise noted. For purposes of comparison, the first entry in

each section provides the key coefficients from the “basic median re~essions”        reported in tables 6 and 7.

         We motivate our first robustness exercise as follows. If the availability andor usage of education is

correlated with underlying and (at least to some extent) unobserved preferences for saving, then, absent an

ideal instrument, bias is inevitable. If education is negatively correlated with the predisposition to save, then



only by households that have accumulated sufficient wealth to afford it.

                                                            26
the estimated effects of education should be biased do~~mward,and the inclusion of taste proxies should

reduce (but not eliminate) this bias. In conlrast, if education is positively correlated with the predisposition to

save, then the estimated effects of education should be biased upward, and the inclusion of taste proxies

should again reduce (but not eliminate) this bias. Thus, we can shed light on the sign of the bias by omitting

the taste proxies, and examining the resulting changes in the key coefficients.23

         The second entry in each of the four sections of table 8 presents the key coefficients from a median

regression in which we have removed the taste proxies (TSCORE, PARSAVE, and LOGTW).                          Note that, in

eve~ case, the estimated coefficient of education declines, while the coefficientsofRE401              (k) and SE40 l(k)

increase, This contrast is significant because of the presupposition that 40 l(k) eligibility is positively (or at

least not negatively) correlated with the predisposition to save. These tindings provide further support for the

hypothesis that both OEBRE and UEBRE are negatively correlated with the predisposition to save, We are

therefore inclined to believe that even our basic median recessions          understate the true impact of education.

         Our second robustness exercise involves the estimation of quartile regressions for the 25th and 75th

percentiles of the population distribution, as well as OLS regressions. The comparison of effects for different

quartiles is of interest since, as noted previously, the impact of education should be most pronounced among

low savers.   The results in table 8 indicate that the effects of OEBRE and UEBRE on total flow saving are

smaller at the third quartile (75th percentile) than at the first quartile (25th percentile), as expected. In

addition, the effects of education at the first quartile and at the median are statistically significant, whereas

the effects at the third quartile are not. Mile     the absolute effect of education does not decline monotonically


           23The argument in the text abstracts fi-omthe possibility that certain taste proxies (TSCORE and LOGT~
may be tiected by education and by underlying atti~udes towards saving. This complicates, but does not fundamentally
alter the logic of the exercise. Suppose [hat education increases saving. Consider two individuals with the same level of
LOGTW, one of whom has received retirement educat ion, and one of whom has not. On average, the one without
retirement education must have a greater predisposition to save. Thus, controlling for LOGTW induces a negative
partial correlation between education and (he taste fo]-saving, thereby biasing the coefficient of OEBRE (or UEBRE)
downwards. A similar argument applies for TSCORE. The omission of the taste proxies eliminates [his bias, but
increases the bias associated with correlations belween OEBRE (or UEBRE) and unobserved tastes. If education is
negatively correlated wilh tastes for saving, then the two etiects work in opposite directions, and the omission of the taste
proxies can in principle move the coefficient of education in either direction, However, if education is positively
correlated with tastes for saving, the two effects work in Lhesame direction, and the omission of the taste proxies should
unambiguously increase the coefficient of education.

                                                             27
across quartiles (it is greater at the median than at (he first quartile), one must keep in mind that respondents

at the first quortile save very little to begin wi[h (only about 2°/0of income in the absence of education,

compared with 6°/0 at the median). Thus, the first quartile effects represent Imger proportionate increases

than the median effects. A ve~ different pattern of coefficients emerges for401 (k) eligibility. The

magnitude of the coefficient for RE40 l(k) is similar across quartiles -- there is no decline at the third quartile,

although statistical significance is reduced. For SE401 (k), by far the largest effect is found at the third

quartile; indeed, no impact on saving at the first quartile is evident.

         Table 8 also contains results for flow retirement saving. For both OEBRE and UEBRE, the

estimated effects at the third quartile are similar to lhose at the median, and somewhat larger in magnitude

than at the first quartile. Howe\’er, when OEBRE is used, the effect at the third quartile is not statistically

significant, whereas the effects at the median and first quartile are. Also, the proportional change in behavior

is much larger at the first quartile. Again, these results contrast sharply with our findings for 40 l(k)s. The

size of the estimated coefficients for RE401 (k) and SE401 (k) increase monotonically as one moves from the

first quartile to the median, and from the median to the third quartile.

         The finding that education is generally Icss effective among those more inclined to save is consistent

with our predictions, and provides additional evidence that our results are not attributable to spurious factors.

Since the reasons for making this prediction are peculiar to education, we take ftiher     comfort from the fact

that no such pattern is apparent for our measures of401 (k) eligibility

         We have included OLS reg~essions for the sake of completeness.        The coefficients of UEBRE are

smaller, but remain statistically significant.   The coe~cients   of OEBRE are also smaller, and statistical

significance is only marginal in the case of total flow saving. Since the skewness of saving causes OLS

results to be disproportionately   influenced by high savers, the weakening of our results is not surprising.     For

the reasons expressed earlier in this section, we believe that the quantile regressions provide more reliable and

complete information on the effects of education.




                                                          28
6. 401(k) Activity

          As discussed in section 3, the growth of employeedirected          retirement plans has been a major

factor contributing to the emergence of employer-provided          fimncial education.     It is therefore natural to

investigate the behavioral consequences of education in the context of these plans.

          Educational offerings are strongly correlated with participation in a 401(k) plan. Rates of reported

participation are 83.5 % among respondents when education is available, compared with ordy 70.4% when

it is not. Of those who use educational offerings, 88.470 participate in 401(k) plans, while the participation

rate is ordy 64.4% for those who have access to, but do not make use of these offerings .*4 Account

balances follow a similar pattern. Men education is offered, the median 401(k) balance for respondents

(counting eligible non-participants    as zeros) is $8,250, compared with ordy $5,000 among those for whom

such programs are unavailable.        Those making use of educational offerings have median plan balances of

$10,000, while those failing to make use of available education have median balances of only $4,000.

          It is also possible that the availability of education has a positive spillover effect on rates of

participation in 401(k)s for spouses.     Indeed, the participation rate for spouses is 86% when employer-

based education is available to the respondent, compared witi           74% when it is not available to the

respondent.      The difference in median balances is smaller for spouses than for respondents: $6,000 when

education is offered to the respondent, versus $5,000 when it is not.

          Of course, the subset of employees who have access to employer-based             financial education is not

typical of all those who are eligible for 401(k)s (see section 3). Inasmuch as that subset tends to be less

sophisticated and less pre-disposed to save, the raw correlations may understate the effec~ of education on

participation.    In the remainder to this section, we investigate the relation between education and plan




           24Reported rates ofpa]licipalion in our sample (78V0for respondents, 79~0 for spouses) are slightly higher than
estimates based on su]veys of employers. Hewitt and Associates (1993) repoll average plan-we i@ted participation
rates of 750/o; the average participant-weighted figure is 720A. Papke, Peterson, & Poterba ( 1993) calculate an average
participation rate of 76% based on a small 1990 survey of employers. Some previous household surveys also yield
lower participation rates. Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1 993) report a rate of 70.8% based on 199 I data from the SIPP.
Given that participation rates have been rising, our fi~res do not appear to be far out of line with past estimates.

                                                            29
activity, controlling for other personal characteristics.

            Ideally, one should control for plan features, such as the rate at which an employer matches

contributions,       as well as individual characteristics.       The available evidence on the effects of these features

is   mixed.n      If education is more common among employers who offer matching contributions,                                 and if

matching provisions increase participation,              then our failure to control for match rates may impart an

upward bias to the coefficient of education in our regressions.                 There is, however, no reason to assume

that the correlation between match rates and education is positive. One might expect to observe a positive

correlation if employers differ in their desire to make their plans attractive, and if those intent on

enhancing their plans offer both education and matching.                  However, if employers view education and

matching provisions as substitutable methods of stimulating participation (e.g. to satisfy non-discrimimtion

requirements),        then these provisions might be negatively correlated.               In practice, employer survey data

indicate    that tie correlation      between    matching   and educational     efforts   is slightly    negative,       and statistically

insignificant      (see Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz, 1996). Thus, the failure to control for matching is

probably unimportant,           and if anything may cause us to understate slightly the effects of education.

            Other features of a 401(k) plan, such as loan provisions or the number and variety of investment

optiom, may also influence participation.              Bayer, Bernheim, and Scholz (1996) do find a small positive

correlations between education and certain other plan features.                   However, on the basis of the existing

evidence, it is doubtful that these other features dramatically affect participation or contributions; hence,

their omission is probably not very important.

            The first two columns in Table 9 contain estimates of probit specifications explaining the

respondent’s 401(k) participation,            conditioml on eligibility.      The explanatory variables include our




            25AccOr~~g to      paPk-, Peter~On,& poterb~(1993),the         existence   of matchg        contributiorrs    ‘ic~~ses
participation rates by 15 percentage points. They cannot, however,             reject the hypothesis       that participation    rates are
depedent      of the size of the match. Scott (1995) conchldes that both the existence of a match, d    the size of the
match, are positively associatd    with participation. Papke (1992) finds that low match rates increase the share of
salary contribute,   but at high match rates (i.e. 50%), there appears to be a negative effat.  Andrews [1992]
concludes      that the existence   of a match increases partic ipat ion rates but dwreases    cent ribut ion levels.

                                                                   30
measures of education (OEBRE in equation (1), and UEBRE in equation (2)), other pension variables,

demographic characteristics, aspects of employment, and two variables used as proxies for underlying

tastes regarding saving (TSCORE and PARSAVE) ,Z6 Our central finding is that OEBRE and UEBRE both

enter with large and highly statistically significant coe~lcients.       This result is not sensitive       to the inclusion

of taste proxies.   Indeed, in contrast to other measures of wealth and saving examined elsewhere in section

5, the respondent’s participation in 401(k) plans appears to be essentially unrelated to the taste proxies.

         To provide some sense for the importance of education, we calculate fitted probabilities that the

average eligible respondent would participate in his or her 401(k) plan when education is available

(OEBRE equals 1), and when it is not available (OEBRE equals O). The availability of education increases

the fitted probability by 11.8 percentage points. We also conduct a similar calculation, fitting probabilities

for each value of UEBRE.        This exercise indicates that rates of participation are 19.5 percentage points

higher for those who make use of education than for those who do not.

         While we are primarily concerned with the effects of education, other aspects of the reported

regressions are also of interest.    Participation is less likely when the respondent is eligible for another

pension plan, but the statistical significance of this result is margiml.        Spouse’s pension eligibility does not

appear to affect respondent’s participation.       While neither marriage nor gender influences participation,

blacks appear less likely to participate (with moderate statistical significance).          Surprisingly,     there is no

significant tendency for participation rates to rise either with general education or age. Respondent                  with

higher incomes are much more likely to participate, but spouse’s income has little effect on respondent’s

participation.

         We now turn our attention to the respondents’ account balances.             Following our previous practice,

we initially present results based on median regressions.         These are contained in the two rightmost columns

of table 9 (equations (3) and (4)). The estimated effect of OEBRE on 401(k) balances is almost exactly the



         ZSHere ~Veonly ~e[aln the spousal cha]-acterislics that appear mOSt pertinent.   symmetrically> ‘e ‘liminate a
number of respondent characteristics fl-om speciticatlons explaining spouse’s 40 I(k) activity (table 10). None of the
omitted enters wi[h a statistically significant coeticicnt, or meaningfully affects the reported results.

                                                            31
same as its effect on retirement wealth (table 6). The estimate is less precise (due to the reduction in

sample size that results from confining attention to those eligible for 401(k) s), but still significant at the

90% level of confidence.       The coefficient of UEBRE is slightIy larger than the corresponding effect on

retirement wealth (table 6), and highly significant.         As in section 5 (table 8), the omission of our taste

proxies (TSCORE and PARSVE) reduces both the size and statistical significance of the coefficients of

OEBRE and UEBRE (we omit details to conserve space).                This pattern again suggests that our imbility to

control fully for tastes leads us to utiers?afe the true effects of education.

            Table 9 reveals that accumulated balances rise significantly with the respondent’s age and

earnings.     Part-time respondents also have larger accumulated balances (see footnote 21 for possible

explamtions).      Aside from TSCORE, none of the remaining explanatory variables enter either

specification with statistically significant coefficients.

            Next, we investigate the possibility that education for the respondent has positive behavioral

spillovers on spouse’s 40 l(k) activity.    Results   on participation     and contributions are contained in table 10

(the structure of which parallels that of table 9). The estimated relation between education (OEBRE and

UEBRE) and participation (equations (1) and (2)) is quite pronounced.              Aside from OEBRE and UEBRE,

very few explamtory       variables enter these equations with statistically significant coefficients.    Spouse’s

education and spouse’s earnings are positively related to participation,          and spouses who work part-time are

less likely to participate,   Just as spouse’s earnings were poor predictors of the respondent’s participation,

respondent’s earnings are poor predictors of the spouse’s participation.

            Equations (3) and (4) of table 10 reveal a small positive relation between the availability of

education at the respondent’s workplace and spouse’s median 401(k) balances.               However, the coefficients

of OEBRE and UEBRE are statistically insignificant.            Our estimates of the specifications for spouse’s

401(k) balances resemble the corresponding        estimates for respondents (table 9, equations (3) and (4)) in

that spouse’s balances rise with spouse’s age and earnings, but are umffected by the respondent’s

characteristics.    However, there are also a few differences.           Spouse’s balances fall when the spouse is



                                                             32
eligible for another pension (perhaps indicating some degree of substitution), and rise with the spouse’s

education.   Also, the coefilcients of part-time work and TSCORE are insignificant.            The latter finding

perhaps indicates that TSCORE is a better proxy for the respondent’s tastes than for the spouse’s tastes.

         Analogously to section 5, it is possible to shed further light on the relation between education and

401(k) balances by examining behavior at quantiles other than the median.            There is, however, reason to

anticipate a somewhat different pattern of coefficients in the current context.        As in section 5, one would

expect to find strong behavioral effects, both for respondents and for spouses, among those least inclined to

save (that is, at lower quantiles). However, to the extent education promotes greater contributions from

non-highly compensated employees, it relaxes the non-d iscrimimtion           requirements   that limi t contributions

by many aggressive savers.      This in turn impels the constrained, aggressive savers to contribute more,

regardless of whether they themselves actually use the education. z’ These observations have specific and

distinctive implications.   At higher quantiles, we expect to find some relation between respondent’s 401(k)

balances and education, and this relation should be stronger for the avaiMifi~           of education (OEBRE) than

for the usage of education (UEBRE).        In contrast, since OEBRE pertains to the respondent ‘.sworkplace, it

camot influence non-discrimination       constraints at the spouse’s workplace.     We therefore expect to find

little or no relation between spouse’s 401(k) balances and measured education at higher quantiles.

         We test these predictions in table 11. To conserve space, we omit detailed regression results, and

report ordy the coefficients of educatioml variables.       For purposes of comparison,      the table lists the

pertinent coefficients from the “basic median regressions” of tables 9 and 10, as well as coefficients for

regressions at the first and third quartiles.   For the respondent’s plan balances, the effects of education

(either OEBRE or UEBRE) are somewhat smaller in absolute value, but larger proportiomtely                  and

considerably more significant statistically, at the 25th percentile than at the median.         We also find a

statistically significant relation between spouse’s plan balances and education at the 25th percentile, even




        27This might or might not show up as an increase in the rate of retirement saving, depending on the extent to
which 401 (k) saving displaces othel- retirement saving for highly motivated savers

                                                           33
though this effect was difficult to detect at the median.      These findings strengthen our inference that the

effects of education are most pronounced among those who are least inclined to save. As predicted,

neither OEBRE nor UEBRE appear to affect spouse’s plan balances at the 75th percentile.              Similarly, the

coefficient of UEBRE, though positive, is s~tistically insignificant in the corresponding        equation

explaining respondent’s 40 l(k) balances.      However, the effect of OEBRE on respondent’s balances is large

and statistically significant at the 75th percentile.   It is difficult to account for this pattern urdess the

availability of education at the respondent’s workplace relaxes nondiscrimimtion           requirements by

encouraging contributions from low-saving, non-highly compensated employees.

         Overall, the evidence indicates that employer-provided fimncial education significantly increases

rates of participation in and contributions to 401(k) plans. Part of this effect appears to reflect the

relaxation of non-discrimination    comtraints that would otherwise reduce the contributions of highly

motivated savers.    Education also has significant spillover effects on the participation rates of spouses, and

on the plan balances of spouse’s among those who are least inclined to save.



7. Conclusions

         In this study, we have provided the first systematic evidence on the determinants and consequences

of financial education in the workplace.    Our analysis suggests that education is ~ically     offered as a

remedial measure, most common] y in the context of participant-directed       pension plans. Holding the features

of pension plans constant, education therefore tends to be inversely correlated with factors that predispose

individuals toward saving. We find that significant numbers of employees rely heavily on employer-based

financial education when it is made available to them, Moreover, although education replaces potentially

authoritative sources of information and guidonce (e.g. financial planners) to some extent, it primarily

displaces sources of questionable reliability (e.g. parents and friends). Rates of saving, both in general and

for the purposes of retirement, increase significantly with the provision of employer-based education.

Employees who are offered retirement education are far more likely to participatein401         (k) programs, and to



                                                          34
make larger contributions to their plans. The effects of education are pafiicularly pronounced among those

least inclined to save; however, there is some indication that education stimulates 401(k) contributions among

high savers by relaxing non-discrimination            constraints.

           One possible criticism of this analysis is that education may change the way individuals think about

and report saving, rather than the way they behave. We are inclined to discount this hypothesis, on the

grounds that it provides far less natural explanations for the differentials between the effects of education on

flow saving and stocks of weallh, on retirement savings and net worth, and on low savers and high savers.

Nor does it account adequately for the impacton401                (k) participation,zs or the distinctive effect of

avaifc-ibili~ (rather than usage) on the 401(k) contributions of aggressive savers. It is also noteworthy that

results based on employer sumcys corroborate our central findings for 40 l(k)s (see Bayer, Bemheim, and

Scholz, 1996).

          Our analysis has potentially important implications concerning the efficacy of strategies to stimulate

saving by U.S. households.         Most obviously, it raises the prospect that a serious national campaign to

promote saving through education and information could have a measurable impact on behavior. Since many

employers are apparently inclined to offer retirement education in the workplace, the Department of Labor

could speed this process by taking more aggressive steps to alleviate the concern that the provision of

education might trigger fiduciary liabilities under ERISA,




          2BEduca~i~n   ~robablvillcrea~e~ ~wareness of401(k)   plans among non-participants.   Thus, if it has no effect ‘n actual
                              J
participation, one would expect it to reduce measured participation.


                                                                  35
                                                References

A. Foster Higgins & Co., Inc. Sllrvey of Employee Savings Plans, 1994, Report 2: Plan Participation     and
Discrimination Testing, Princeton, NJ: A. Foster Higgins& Co., Inc., 1994.

Bayer, Patrick J., B. Douglas Bcmheim, and J. Karl Scholz, “The Effects of Financial Education in the
Workplace: Evidence from a Survey of Employers,” 1996, in progress.

Berg, Olena, “DOL to Launch Savings and Pension Education Campaign,” EBRINores,        June 1995, p. 2.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, ~e Vankhing Nest Egg: Rejections on Saving in America, New York: Priority
Press, 1991.

Bernbeim, B, Douglas, “Persoml Saving, Information, and Economic Literacy: New Directions for Public
Policy, ” in Tu Policy for Economic Growth in rhe 19WS, Washington, DC: American Council for Capital
Formation, 1994a, 53-78.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Comments and Discussion, ” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~ ( 1), 1994b,
152-166.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities? An Analysis of
Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy, ” Ta Poliq and Economic Growth, Washington, DC: American
Council for Capital Formation, 1995a, pp. 1-30.

Bernheim, B. Douglas, “The Merrill Lynch Baby Boom Retirement Index: Update ‘95,” mimeo, 1995b.

 Bernheim, B. Douglas, “Rethinking Saving Incentives, “ in Alan Auerbach (cd.), Fiscal Poliq.” Lessons
from Economic Research, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996, forthcoming.

Bernheim, B. Douglas and J. Karl Scholz, “Private Saving and Public Policy, ” Ta Poliq and the
Economy 7, 1993, 73-110.

Borleis, Melvin W., and Kimberly K. Wedell, “How to spark employee interest with employer matching
contributions,” ProJt Sharing, January 1994, pp. 7-16.

Central Council for Savings Promotion, Savings and Savings Promotion Movement in Japan, Tokyo: Bank
of Japan, 1981.

Congressioml   Budget Office, Baby Boomers in Retirement: An Early Perspective, September 1993.

Employee Benefit Research Institute, Retirement Confidence in America: Get~ing Ready for Tomorrow,
EBRI Special Report SR-27, Issue Brief Number 156, December 1994.

Employee Benefit Research Institute, “Can We Save Enough to Retire? Participant Education in Defined
Contribution Plans,” EBRZ lss~~eBrie~ no. 160, April 1995.

Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz, “Do Saving Incentives Work?” Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity (1), 1994, 85-151.

                                                     36
Garrett, Daniel M., “The Effects of Nondiscrimination Rules on 401(k) Contributions, ” mimeo, Stanford
University, 1995.

Geisel, Jerry, “Communication yields success for XTRA 40 l(k),” Business Insurance, April 10, 1995, p, 3,

Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, “Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance,”
Journal of Political Economy, 103(2), April 1995,360-399.

Scott, Jason, “The Compensation Value of 40 l(k) Pension Plans,” mimeo, Stanford University, 1994
                                 Table 1: List of Variables


            Variable   Name                    Definition               Type


Education          OEBRE      Respondentoffered employer-based         Binary
                              retirement education

                   UEBRE      Respondent uses employer-based           Binary
                              retirement education

Pensions           RE401K     Respondent eligible for 401(k)           Binary

                   SE401K     Spouse eligible for 401(k), spouse       Binary

                   RP401K     Respondent participates in 401 k)        Binary

                   SP401K     Spouse participates   in 401*)           Binary

                   RB401K     Respondent’s     balances in 401(k)s   Continuous

                   SB401K     Spouse’s balances in 401(k)s           Continuous

                   ROPEN      Olher pension, respondent                Binary

                   SOPEN      Other pension, spouse                    Binary

Demographics      MAR         Marital status                           Binary

                  FEMALE      Gender                                   Binary

                  BLACK       Black respondent                         Binary

                  OTHER       Otl]er non-white respondent              Binary

                  RED         Formal education, respondent           Categorical

                  SED         Formal education, spouse               Categorical

                  RAGE        Age, respondent                        Continuous

                  SAGE        Age, spouse                            Continuous

Employment        LREARN      Log of annual earnings, respondent     Continuous

                  LSEARN      Log of annual earnings, spouse         Continuous

                  RSE         Self-employment, respondent              Binary

                  SSE         Self-employment, spouse                  Binary

                  RPART       Part-time worker, respondent             Binary

                  SPART       Part-time worker, spouse                 Binary

                  RNOWORK     Not employed, respondent                 Binary

                  SNOWORK     Not employed, spouse                     Binary

Saving(s)         Tw          Total net wotih                        Continuous

                  LOGTW       Log of total net worth                 Continuous


                                               Continzted
        Variable Name                  Definition                     Type


             RW         Total savings for retirement               Continuous

             TSAVE      Overall rate of saving (as a fraction of   Continuous
                        annual income)

             RSAVE      Rate of saving for retirement (as a        Continuous
                        fraction of annual income)

Other        PARSAVE    Pdrents’ inclination to save               Categorical

             TSCORE     Normalized score on                        Continuous
                        economic/f[nancial test auestions
                                         Table 2: Comparisons            with Benchmarks


                        Variable   and Subsample                             Benchmark’       Merrill Lynch      MerriU Lynch
                                                                                               household           survey,
                                                                                                 survey            adjusted

  General characteristics             Percent   married                         62.0%              73.8%              68.3 %
                                      Percent   homeowners                      65.2%              81.1%              65.2%
                                      Percent   no high school degree2          11.5%               4.2%               5,2%
                                      Percent   high school de~ree2             58.1%              56.1%              56.7%
                                      Percent   college degree”                 30.4%              39.5%              38,0%

 Median household income’             All households                           46,359              48,000            45,000
                                      Unmarried individuals                    30,544              30,000            27,000
                                      Married couples                          56,500              56,000            53,000
                                          Single earner                        46,479              45,000            40,000
                                          Dual earner                          60,846              60,000            57,000
                                      No high school degree                    25,111              28,000            20,000
                                      High school degree                       42,978              45,000            40,000
                                      College degree                           64,468              60,000            55,000

 Median wealth                        All households                           65,433              95,000            61,000
                                      Unmarried individuals                    20,161              46,000            20,000
                                      Married couples                          84,629              115,000           93,000
                                      No high school deg:ee2                    7,364              24,000              600
                                      High school de;ree-                      55,051              78,500            52,000
                                      College degree’                          123,985             140,000           102,OOO
                                      Homeowner                                111,068             1~6,(300          126,000
                                      Non-homeowner                             1,811               4,000             4,000

 Median non-housing wealth            All households                           21,006              35,500            23,000
                                      Unmarried households                      4,829              13,000             7,000
                                      Married couples                          ~8,~50              49,000            38,000
                                      No high school degree?                    1,811                 0                 0
                                      High school de reez                      16,539              25,000             17,000
                                                      F
                                      College degree-                          44,910              63,000            48,000

 Pensions                             Married women, eligibility                71,7%              70.4%              68.7%
                                      Single women, eligibility~                68,2%’             64.8%              64.2%
                                      Married men, eligibility*                 71,5%              73.5%              71.2%
                                      Single men, eligibility’                  60,4%              81.3%              80.8%
                                      Median 401 ~) balances                     8,856             10,OOO             IO,ooo



Notes:         1.    For general characteristics, median household income, median wealth, and median non-housing wealth,
                     benchmark statistics are obtained from tabulations by the Congressional Budget Office [1993] based on [he
                     1989 Survey of Consumer Finances and the 1990 Current Population Survey. The benchmark sample
                     consists of households with heads between the ages of 35 to 44. An identical subset of the Merrill Lynch
                     sample is used for the comparison. For pensions, benchmark statistics are based on the authors’
                     calculations, using the 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances. The benchmark sample is constructed to
                     mirror the entire Merrill Lynch sample, rather than a restricted age group. All income and wealth figures
                     are reported in 1994 dollars.

               ‘-J
               -.    Refers to maximum educational attainment of household head.

               3.    Refers to total income for the benchmark sample, and total earnings from employment      in the Merrill
                     Lynch sample.

               4.    Refers to fraction of indicated subsample eligible for any kind of pension.
                             Table 3: Probit Estimates for Retirement Education Offerings

                 Variable                   Eqllation (1)    Equation (2)     Equation (3)   Equation (4)
                                            Avaihbility      Availability        Usage          Usage

Pensions                    RE401 K             0.990             1.02           0.397          0.389
                                              (0.0839)         (0,0859)         (0,134)        (0,138)

                            ROPEN              0.698            0.720           -0.00715      -0,00058
                                              (0.126)          (0.127)           (0.183)       (0.185)

                            R2PENS            -0.495            -0.508          0,0291         0,0220
                                              (0.164)          (0.165)          (0, 222)       (0.223)

                        SE401K                                 -0,0473                          0.133
                                                               (0,0845)                        (0.121)
Demographics                MAR                -0.0845         -0,0400           0.172          0.116
                                              (0.0766)         (0.0852)         (0, 104)       (0.116)
                            FEMALE              0.280           o~42            -0.0875         -0.105
                                              (0.0758)         (0,0787)         (0.105)        (o. 109)
                        BLACK                  0.505            0.477           0,0437         0.0160
                                              (0, 148)         (0.150)          (0.169)        (0.171)
                        OTHER                  0.440            0.4?6            -f3~16         -o.~09
                                              (0.147)          (0.147)          (0. 186)       (0.186)
                        RED                    0.0406           0.0545           0.0471         0,0560
                                              (0.0241)         (0.0256)         (0,0345)       (0.0363)
                        RAGE/100               0.433            0,465           -0.0246        0,0583
                                              (0.652)          (0.652)          (0,918)        (0.921)
Employment              LREARN                  0.111            0.118           -0.0581       -0,0430
                                              (0.0562)         (0.0575)         (0.0985)       (0,0996)

                        RSE                   -0,661            -0,673           0.315          0.325
                                              (0.097)          (0.0981)         (0,190)        (0.192)

                        RPART                  -o~07           -0,201           -0,287          -0,~98
                                              (0, 128)         (0,129)          (0,194)        (0,196)

Other                   Constant               -1.97            -1,8’2           0,788          0.852
                                              (0.608)          (0,623)           (1,02)         (1,02)

                        TSCORE                                 -0,647                           -o~37
                                                               (0,299)                         (0,427)

                        PARSAVE                                0.0286                          -0.0361
                                                               (.0216)                         (0,0301)


Observations                                    1594            1594               863           863
Log likelihood                                 -897.3          -893,7            -456.5        -455.1
                              Table 4: Primary Source of Advice and Information on
                                               Retirement Planning


                                                      Raw Data                       Fitted, based on
                                                                                     multinominal bgit
Primary source of advice and
hformatkn
                                          Education ❑ot          Education   Education not        Educat”mn
                                             oNered               o~erd         offerti            offered

Employer                                      7.4%                 27.070        8,2%                24.9%

Financial professional                       ?4.3~o                23.370       25.1%                23.0%

Parents, friends, relatives                  24.670                19.2%        ~~,d~o               21.6%

print media                                  18.2%                 15.4%        20,2%                14.2%

Own judgement                                14.5%                 9.3%         14,4%                9.5%

Other                                        11.0%                 5.7%          9,7%                6.8%

Total all sources                            100.0%               100.0%        100.0%              lM.0%
                           Table 5: Probit Estimates for Primary Sources of Advice
                              and Information Concerning Retirement Planning


            Variable             Emptoyer     Financial         Parenb     Print         Own        Other
                                                 Pro.             etc.     media      judgement

Education          OEBRE            0.743      -0.0681          -0.0308    -13~50       -0,244      -0.200
                                  (0.0877)    (0,0750)          (0.0776)   (0.0829)    (0,0901)    (0.1012)

Pensions           RE401K          0.045        0.017           -0,198      0.310       -0,062      -0.189
                                  (0.088)      (0.078)          (0,081)    (0.088)      (0,094)    (0,106)

                   ROPEN           0.112        -0,002          4,279       0.129       0.088      -0,043
                                  (0.091)      (0,085)          (0.094)    (0.091)     (0.102)     (0,121)

                   SE401K          -0.128       0.161           -0.071     -0.062        0,095      0.053
                                  (0.100)      (0.089)          (0,092)    (0.098)      (0,108)    (0.121)

                   SOPEN           -0.038       0.107           -0,064      0.002       -0,003      -0,046
                                  (0. 1 15)    (0.099)          (0,107)    (o. 109)     (0,124)    (0,141)

Demographics       MAR             0,057        -0.456           o,~82     -0.038        0,031      0,582
                                  (0.342)      (0.295)          (0.335)    (0.318)      (0,345)    (0.506)

                  FEMALE           o~47         0.155            0.133     -o~34        -0,423     -0.011
                                  (0.087)      (0.078)          (0.081)    (0.086)      (0,096)    (0,105)

                  BLACK            0,069       -0.097           -0.006      -029~        0,303      -o,o~9
                                  (0. 140)     (0.141)          (0.138)    (0.171)      (0,153)    (0.181)

                  OTHER            0.025       -o~69             0.047     -0.072        0,237      0,023
                                  (0.155)      (0.149)          (0.137)    (0.154)      (0,148)    (0,176)

                  RED              -0.087       0.054           -0.031      0.140       -0,020     -0,108
                                  (0.029)      (0.035)          (0,026)    (0.028)      (0.030)    (0,034)

                  SED              -0.062       0,061            0.022     -0.030        -0,043     0,012
                                  (0.033)      (0,029)          (0.030)    (0.032)      (0.035)    (0,040)

                  RAGE/100         0.688        0.487           .3,286      ~~16       -0,017       0,384
                                  (0.887)      (0.812)          (0,817)    (0.896)     (0.961)      (1.04)

                  SAGE/100         0.813        0.5?2            0.336       1.67        0,605       -1.03
                                  (0.919)      (0.808)          (0.829)    (0.901)      (0,970)     (1.07)

Employment        LREARN           0.0142      0.0187           -0.0160    -0.0269      0,0227     -0,0141
                                  (0.0256)    (0.0200)          (0.0195)   (0,0216)    (0,0228)    (0,0241)

                  LSEARN           0.0303      0.0233            -0.0402    0.0186      0,0084     -0,0804
                                  (0.0319)    (0.0270)          (0.0313)   (0.0295)    (0.0316)    (0,0461)

                  RSE              -0.515       0.071            0.041      0.042        0,064      0.171
                                  (0.141)      (0.098)          (0,101)    (0.108)      (0,115)    (0,126)

                  SSE              -o~~o        0.198           -0.135      0.033        0.149     -0,101
                                  (o. 154)     (0.122)          (0,130)    (0.134)      (0.148)    (0,175)

                  RPART            -o~39        -0.116           0.115     -0.045        0,097      0,263
                                  (0.146)      (0.128)          (0,126)    (0.148)      (0, 159)   (0,156)




                                                   Contlntied
           Variable                   Financinl   Parents    Print        Own       Other
                                         Pro.       etc.     media     judgement

                 SPART     -0,127       0.040      o~48      -o~89        0,086     -0.077
                           (0, 172)    (0.151)    (o. 150)   (0.168)     (0,169)    (0.215)

                 RNOWORK   -0.241       -0.041     -0.032     0.111      o,~5~      -0.049
                           (0,210)     (0.173)    (0.171)    (0.189)     (0, 186)   (o,~06)

                 SNOWORK   -0.006       0.363      -0.389     0.028       0.185     -0,574
                           (0.293)     (0.256)    (0.301)    (0.279)     (0,300)    (0.483)

Constant                    -1.91       -1,64      0.76      -1,40        -1.36     -0.35
                           (0.422)     (0.351)    (0.36)     (0.39)      (0.41)     (0.46)

Observations                1,819       1,819      1,819      1,819       1,819      1,819
Log Likelihood             -738,9      -972.7     -918.9     -782.8      -635,6     -497,4
                Table 6: Median Regressions for Various Mwures of Wealth and Saving:
                               The Availability of Retirement Eduation


               Variable               Totil             Retirement    Total saving     Redrernent
                                     Wealth               Wealth          rate         saving rate

Education           OEBRE              1793                   2488       1.650            0.922
                                      (6399)                 (1016)     (0,462)          (0.354)

Pensions             RE401 (k)        949gfj                  6550       1.470            1.963
                                      ;67;6)                 (1069)     (0,491)          (0.374)

                    ROPEN              4886                  6472        0,330            0,408
                                      (7267)                 (1145)     (0,523)          (0,397)

                    SE401(k)          13702                  31~~        0.856            0,539
                                      (7697)                 (1206)     (0.558)          (0.424)

                    SOPEN              1760                   ?058       0,108            o~37
                                      (890?)                 (1376)     (0.643)          (0.491)

Demographics         MAR              -68282                 -14255      ~,~54            -0.104
                                     (~53313)                (3997)     (1,840)          (1.400)

                    FEMALE            -8751                  -4534      -0,110           -0,215
                                      (6803)                 (1069)     (0,491)          (0.375)

                    BLACK             -14396                 .l~lo      -0,132           -0.0865
                                     (11662)                 (1863)     (0,853)           (0.628)

                    OTHER             14667                    36       .0,8Z8           -0.718
                                     (11613)                 (1780)     (0,839)          (0,632)

                    RED                5888                   1202       0,425            0,199
                                      (2264)                 (352)      (0.165)          (0,125)

                    SED                12806                  1582      -0,327           -0.0244
                                      (2501)                 (389)      (0.182)          (0.138)

                    RAGE              3215                    490        -o~o~           -0.0778
                                      (682)                  ( 106)     (0.0497)        (0.0381)

                    SAGE              2637                    44?        0.0931          0.0668
                                      (690)                  (108)      (0.0497)        (0.0382)

Employment          LREARN             30?5                   498        0.122          -0.0320
                                      (1670)                 (262)      (0.123)         (0.0930)

                    LSEARN             7595                   1555      0.0977            0.181
                                      (2346)                 (367)      (0,170)          (0.129)

                    RSE               71964                    -57      -o,5~6           -0.985
                                      (8813)                 (1326)     (0,645)          (0.494)

                    SSE               67420                   -243      -1.165            -0.850
                                     (11022)                 (1658)     (0,796)          (0.606)

                    RPART              3796                   -941       -~5~~           -1267
                                     (11010)                 (1727)     (0.796)          (0.609)




                                                Continz~ed
               Variable        Totil      Retirement   Tohl saving   Retirement
                               Wealth       Wealth         rate      saving rate

                    SPART       15247        -3043       -3.307         -2.744
                               (12511)      (1965)       (0.904)       (0.680)

                    RNOWORK     16310        3134        -0.660         -1.029
                               (13957)      (2222)       (1.034)       (0.780)

                    SNOWORK     69747        9271         -1.704        0258
                               (22433)      (3500)       (1.624)       (1.234)

Other               Constant   -307450      -50~53       -57.66        -34.38
                               (32432)      (5059)       (4.39)        (3.32)

                    TSCORE      60874       15~~2         1.866         1.360
                               (2461 1)     (3846)       (1.783)       (1.355)

                    PARSAVE     8075          826         0.199         0.225
                               (1743)        (273)       (0,127)       (0.096)

                    LOGTW                                 5.029         2.833
                                                         (0.341)       (0.259)

Observations                    1,523        1,615        1,500         1,493
                Titble 7: Median Regrtisions for Various Mwures of W~lth   and Saving:
                                    Usage of Retirement Education


               Variable                                Retirement   Total saving         Retirement
                                                         Wealth          rate            saving rate

EducaLion           UEBRE              1384                2176        2.182                1.829
                                      (6378)               (99 1)     (0.486)              (0.282)

Pensions             RE40 1(k)        24567                 6695       1.421                1.580
                                      (6827)               (1049)     (0,522)              (0.304)

                    ROPEN              5092                 6982       0,313                0.503
                                      (7371)               (1133)     (0,559)              (0.324)

                    SE401(k)           14154                2762       0,788                0.923
                                      (7854)               (1193)     (0,596)              (0.348)

                    SOPEN              1417                 1847       0.170                o.~7~
                                      (9085)               (1369)     (0.690)              (0.400)

Demographics         MAR             -6754?                -13408      3.025                -1.008
                                     (26325)               (3965)     (1.973)              (1.159)

                    FEMALE             -8875                -4078      -0.348               -0.396
                                      (6925)               (1058)     (0.526)              (0.308)

                    BLACK            -14069                 -1061      0.067               -0.301
                                     (11806)               (1853)     (0.91 1)             (0.516)

                    OTHER             17939                 -416       -0.766              -o~7~
                                     (11847)               (1780)     (0,892)              (0.519)

                    RED                5681                 1245       0.491                0.218
                                      (2312)               (351)      (0.176)              (0.102)

                    SED                12802                1448      -0.397                -0.058
                                      (2555)               (387)      (o. 194)             (0.113)

                    RAGE              3205                  485        -o,~l~              -0,0699
                                      (694)                (106)      (0.053)             (0.0312)

                    SAGE              2669                  429        0.0988              0,0731
                                      (704)                (107)      (0.0534)            (0,0314)

Employment          LREARN             3011                 505        0.161               -0,0604
                                      (1707)               (258)      (0.131)             (0,0755)

                    LSEARN             7554                 1519       0.064                o,~4~
                                      (2440)               (364)      (0.182)              (0.107)

                    RS E              71436                 _fj8~      -0.376               -0.890
                                      (8933)               (1309)     (0.689)              (0.402)

                    SSE               67554                 -3~~      -1.553                -0.766
                                     (11218)               (1643)     (0.854)              (0,497)

                    RPART              4357                 -874       -2.559              -1.351
                                     (11243)               (1717)     (0.854)              (0,499)




                                               Continued
               Variable        Total      Retirement   Total saving   Retirem~t
                               Wealth       Wealth         rate       saving rate

                    SPART       14603       -2869        -3.658         -1.963
                               (12775)      (1953)       (0.96?)        (0.560)

                    RNOWORK     15458        ~906         -0,664        -1.007
                               (I 4322)     (2178)       (1.102)        (0,627)

                    SNOWORK     69846        9519         -2,346         1,040
                               (23413)      (3470)       (1.741)        (1,028)

Other               Constant   -306877      49684         -60.52        -35.7
                               (33127)      (5021)        (4.70)        (2.73)

                    TSCORE      60100       15332         1.294          1.103
                               (25138)      (3803)       (1.910)        (1.118)

                    PARSAVE     8088          846         0.262          (3279
                               (1778)        (~7~)       (O.136)        (0,079)

                    LOGTW                                 5242           2.917
                                                         (0,365)        (0.213)

Observations                    1,523        1,615        1,500          1,493
                              Table 9: Respondent’s 401(k) Activity


             Variable         Equation (1)      Equation (2)          Equation (3)   Equation (4)
                              Participation     Participation          Balances       Balances

Education          OEBRE          0,406                                  ~,508
                                 (0,117)                                (1,436)

                    UEBRE                           0.717                               2,826
                                                   (o. 108)                            (1,058)

Pensions            ROPEN         -0.167           -0,195                 .462           -521
                                 (0, 122)          (0, 125)             (1,420)        (1,198)

                   SE401K       -0.0479           -0,0488                 -477           -469
                                (0.139)           (0.143)                (1572)        (1,321)

                   SOPEN         0.157             0.150                  481
                                (O. 169)          (0.173)               (1 ,898)       (1:5?4)

Demographics        MAR         -0.0429           -0.0391                1,009          1,358
                                (0.203)           (0.206)               (2,408)        (2,037)

                   FEMALE       0.0544            0.0714                  -809           -303
                                (o. 125)          (0.128)               (1,450)        (1,215)

                   BLACK         -0.309            -0.338                -1,572         -1,137
                                (0.189)           (0.193)               (2,414)        (2,032)

                   OTHER        0.0?91            0,0443                 1,851          1,986
                                (0.261)           (0,263)               (?,814)        (2,361)

                   RED          -0.0010           0.00996                 247
                                (0.0405)          (0,0414)               (483)          (::5)

                   RAGE          -0.0109          -0.00951                ?-.8’I         297
                                (0.0102)         (0.01049)               (118)           (99)

Employment         LREARN        0.351             0,356                 10,170         10,139
                                (0,114)           (0.115)               (1,460)        (1,228)

                   LSEARN        0,0235            0.0221                 -30            -58
                                (0,0210)          (0.0213)               (244)          (206)

                   RPART         -0.173           -0.0939                5,867          6,560
                                (0.216)           (0.219)               (2,839)        (2,370)

Other              Constant      -?.83?           -3.089               -116,158       -117,740
                                (1,171)           (1.188)              (14,966)       (12,623)

                   TSCORE        0.139             0.312                 9,~07          11,138
                                (0.470)           (0.478)               (5,555)        (4,674)

                   PARSAVE       0.0107            0.0125                 227            346
                                (0.0328)          (0.0334)               (386)          (325)

Observations                       795               795                                 722
Log likelihood                   -374.5            -358.1
                                     Table 10: Spouse’s 401(k) Activity


             Variable              Equation (1)      Equatin (2)          Equation (3)   Equation (4)
                                   Participation     Partkipation          Balancm        Balances

Education               OEBRE          0.35?                                  42(3
                                      (O.146)                               (1,085)

                        UEBRE                            0.308                              1,205
                                                        (o. 145)                            (839)

Pensions                SOPEN        -0.0769            -0.104              -3,682          -3,448
                                     (0.151)            (0.150)             (1,184)          (921)

                        RE401 K       0.185             o~lg                  987            556
                                     (o. 150)           (0.147)             (1,136)         (885)

                        ROPEN         -0.133            -0.113                               317
                                     (o. 166)           (0, 165)            (1:31)          (960)

Demographics            FEMALE       -0.0494           -0,0234              -2,364          -~,70(3
                                     (0.162)           (0,161)              (1,179)         (925)

                        BLACK        -0.164              -0.126              -~,~lg         -1,286
                                     (0.293)            (0.292)             (2,376)        (1,869)

                        OTHER         o~79               o. ?70              3,763          3,401
                                     (0.336)            (0.335)             (2,310)        (1,818)

                        SED           0.114              0.121                786            782
                                     (0.0460)          (0.0458)              (342)          (269)

                        SAGE         0.00218           0,00267                194            206
                                     (0,0109)          (0.0109)               (77)           (61)

Employment              LSEARN        0,216              O’J?’)
                                                           ---               5,638          5,521
                                     (0.0845)          (0.0847)              (69 1)         (543)

                        LREARN        0.0320            0,0347               -185           -160
                                     (0.0218)          (0.0216)              (175)          (139)

                        SPART         -0.503            -0.460               1,998          1,267
                                     (0.271)            (0.270)             (2,120)        (1,637)

Other                   Constant      -1.93              -2,09              -57,9?6        -56,974
                                     (1.021)            (1.021)             (7,747)        (6,090)

                        TSCORE        -0.596            -0.531              -~ ,624        -3,262
                                     (0.571)            (0.570)             (4,335)        (3,382)

                        PARSAVE       -0.0145          -0.0143                210            234
                                     (0.0397)          (0.0397)              (299)          (235)

Obsemations                            529                529                 397            397
Log likelihood                        -247, 1           -247.8
              Table 11: Summary of Quantile Effects of Education on 401(k) Balances


                                  E1’feeton Respondent’s 401(li) Balance   Effect on Spuse’s   401(li) Balance


OEBRE    Basicmedianregression                    2,508                                   4 Z()
                                                 (1,435)                                (1,085)

        25th percentile                           1,113                                  1,022
                                                  (590)                                  (555)

        75th percentile                           6,084                                    466
                                                 (3.147)                                 (2,947)

UEBRE   Basic median regression                   z.s~6                                  1,205
                                                 (1,058)                                 (839)

        25th percentile                           2,161                                   1,069
                                                  (502)                                   (444)

        75th percentile                           2.714                                    436
                                                 (2,839)                                 (2,548)
