                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DEMOGRAPHIC STRUCTURE AND
                           THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF PUBLIC
                                       EDUCATION




                                        James M. Poterba




                                   NBER Working Paper 5677




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996



I am grateful to Marianne Bitlerand Marci Smith foroutstanding research assistance, to David
Cutler, Angus Deaton, Victor Fuchs, Jonathan Gruber, Robert Inman, Lawrence Katz, Sam Preston,
Kim Rueben, Richard Zeckhauser, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments, and to the
Institute for Policy Reform, the Center for Advanced Study in Behavioral Sciences, and the National
Science Foundation for research support. A data appendix for this project has been archived at the
ICPSR in Ann Arbor, MI. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Aging and Public
Economics, Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by James M. Poterba. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                              NBER Working Paper 5677
                                                                                            July 1996



                                DEMOGRAPHIC STRUCTURE AND
                              THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF PUBLIC
                                          EDUCATION



                                               ABSTRACT


        This paper examines        the relationship     between demographic    structure and the level of

govemmentspendingon          K-12education.    Panel data for the U.S. states over the 1960-1990 period

suggests that an increasein      the fraction of elderly residents in ajurisdictionis    associated witha

significant reduction inperchild     educational spending. This reduction isparticularly    large when the

elderly residents and the school-age population are from different racial groups. Variation in the size

of the school-age population does not result in proportionate          changes in education spending, so

students in states with larger school-age populations receive lower per-student spending than those

in states with smaller numbers of potential students.         These results provide support for models of

generational   competition    in the allocation of public sector resources.     They also suggest that the

effect of cohort size on government-mediated          transfers must be considered in analyzing how cohort

size affects economic well-being.




James M. Poterba
Department of Economics, E52-350
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139-4307
and NBER
        Spending on primary and secondary education is the largest expenditure            item

it state and local government       budgets,   While tax-financed     public education    may

provide some benefits to society and the local community at large, most of the return

to such spending accrues to families with children.           The costs of public education

nevertheless fall on households with and without school-age children.          In particular,

older households with owner-occupied       homes pay local property taxes as well as state

sales and income taxes that ultimately finance K-1 2 education.          These generational

differences in the net benefits from publicly-provided education can lead to tensions

in the political process in which education budgets are set. This paper explores the

empirical    significance   of these    generational   tensions,   and   presents     evidence

suggesting that during the postwar period, a state’s demographic composition has

affected the level of per-child education spending.

       Questions of intergenerational burden-sharing and equity in school finance have

received less attention     to date than intra-generational     issues such as inequality in

school district    spending   levels.   The prospective       aging of the   United    States’

population, indicated by the projected growth of the population share aged age 65+

from 12,5%     in 1990 to 18,7% in 2030, may however lead to heightened generational

tensions and interest in these issues.      These issues have already become salient in

debates over Social Security, where younger workers are taxed to finance benefits for

older retirees,   The transfers in the public education system flow in the opposite

direction.

       The analysis presented below relates more generally to the analysis of how

cohort size affects the well-being of cohort members.           Traditional analyses of this
                                              2

issue in economic demography focus on the supply and demand for workers, and on

the induced rates of return on various assets.       Those in a large cohort must supply

their labor when aggregate labor supply is high, so they are predicted to earn lower

real wages than those in relatively smaller birth cohorts.        Similarly, when those in

large cohorts decide to save for retirement,       they must compete with many other

savers in buying assets, thereby bidding up prices and driving down returns.           These

two effects       combine to reduce the lifetime utility of those in large birth cohorts

relative to those in smaller cohorts.

        This traditional analysis neglects the potentially important role of government

transfers in altering the inter-cohort distribution of resources.    Because the level and

direction of government-mediated      transfers reflect in part the relative political powers

of different cohorts, those in small cohorts may receive smaller net transfers than

those in larger cohorts.     Preston [1 984] suggests that such generational competition

is part of the explanation      for the relative improvement    in the economic status of

elderly households in the U. S., and the decline in the well-being of children, during the

1960-1980     period.    This hypothesis is confirmed by at least anecdotal evidence on

public support for various government programs.        Recent survey results suggest that

support for increased federal funding of public schools declines from 77 percent if the

respondent is under 30, to 47 percent for those over age 70 [Business Week, 3 April

1995,   p. 42].

        The theoretical relationship between demographic structure and the age-specific

pattern of government spending is complex, in part because the age-specific benefits
                                                 3

of various government        programs may be difficult to assess.       Richman and Stagner

[19861,      for example, develop an alternative to Preston’s [19841 hypothesis that a

rising number of elderly households will lead to greater government              transfer flows

toward this group. They suggest that rising numbers of dependent elderly may seek

to raise the training of younger workers,            both to raise the pool of resources from

which transfers can be funded and to raise the quality of services they receive.          Such

alternative     hypotheses    make the relationship       between   the age structure   of the

population, and the level of age-specific transfers, an issue for empirical research.

       The present paper explores the link between cohort size and spending patterns

by focusing on the relationship between state and local education spending per child

and three demographic variables: the share of the population over age 65, the share

of the population of school age (5 through 17), and the difference                in the racial

composition of the elderly and school-age populations.           The paper is divided into four

sections.     The first summarizes previous work on demographic structure and public

spending determination,        with particular attention     to studies of public education.

Section two presents the econometric specification that provides the basis for this

study, and summarizes the demographic variation across the U.S. states.               The third

section      presents   regression   evidence   on the association     between    demographic

structure and education spending, along with “control equations” that relate state and

local spending for activities other than K-1 2 education to the same set of demographic

variables.     A brief conclusion suggests several limitations of the current analysis, as

well as directions for future work.
                                                   4

1. Gove rnment -Mediated        Redistrib ution Across Ge nerations

          Government-provided       retirement    pensions, tax-financed   national health care

systems that transfer resources from those in the labor force to older individuals, and

publicly provided     education     are the most prominent        examples    of government’s

substantial role in intergenerational     redistribution.   The relative levels of these various

transfers    differ substantially   across countries.       Table 1 presents a cross-national

comparison of per capita social spending on children, middle-aged individuals, and the

elderly in several large OECD nations. Per-child spending has been normalized to 100

for each nation.      The table shows that spending on the elderly exceeds that on

children in all of the countries, but that the ratio of spending per elderly individual to

spending per child varies from 2.3 in Japan and Sweden to 3.8 in Italy and the United

States.

          The cross-national    data do not suggest an obvious relationship between          the

share of the elderly in the population and the share of government spending devoted

to the elderly or to children.      Simple statistics such as those in Table 1 are virtually

impossible to interpret, however, in the absence of other information on the relative

incomes of different cohorts, the costs of providing services in different countries, and

the nature of transfers that are not mediated by the government.l             Nevertheless the

data suggest      substantial   differences      across nations in the government       transfer




    lFurther discussion of international comparisons maybe foundinO’Higgins[19881
and Smeeding, Torrey, and Rein [1 988]. For a historical perspective on the growth
of social spending in several OECD nations, with attention to demographic factors, see
Lindert [1996].
                                                5

component of the bargain that is struck between generations.

       Searching for a link between demographic variables and spending outcomes

raises an obvious question: how should potential demographic effects be modelled?

Because there is no universally-accepted        model of political equilibrium, it is difficult

to invoke a maintained model of generational          bargaining as a basis for developing

econometric     specifications    for public spending     on education     or other    directed

expenditure    programs that accrue to particular age groups. z Different          models can

yield different answers to questions of the form “How will government spending on

children change if the share of older individuals in the population increases?”             In a

median-voter    framework,       the answer   to this question depends       on whether     the

demographic shift changes the identity of the median voter.          It is possible to shift the

population age structure     without     changing the identity of the median voter, and

therefore without affecting       the political equilibrium or the age-specific   structure of

government transfer payments.          In other models of political equilibrium, the relative

size of different   voting groups may affect spending outcomes.             In this setting, a

natural role for empirical work is to search for robust relationships between various

demographic variables and the level of education spending.



     ~he notion that different groups within society compete for resources is the
centerpiece of many models of distributive politics, such as that developed by
Weingast, Shepsle, and Johnsen [1 981].         Inman [1 987] summarizes the many
possible models that can be considered in analyzing the political process that
determines policy outcomes.        The special case of inter-generational    bargaining
involves particularly pronounced differences in the objectives of different participants
in the political process, with age the primary determinant of interest group affiliation.
lnman [1978] explicitly models demographic variables as shifting the median position
and hence the behavior of the public sector.
                                            6

      The political dynamic between different generations reduces to a simple transfer

game when there arenocross-generational         effects of directed spending.    Whethera

larger generation will succeed in transferring resources from smaller generations to

itself depends, in this case, on the structure of the political process, and the degree

to which protection against such transfers has been afforded to minority groups. This

simple framework     ignores cross-generational     effects,   however,    which    may be

significant and which can make clear predictions very difficult.          If individuals are

altruistically linked to their parents and their children, then spending that raises the

utility of the old will also raise the utility of the young, and vice versa.3 Even without

such altruistic links, there may be cross-cohort direct utility effects associated with

government spending,     Spending on public education, for example, may reduce the

incidence of crime and thereby raise utility of the old, while also raising the utility of

the school-age children who receive this education, as well as their parents who are

not required to arrange for private education,4     Such cross-effects     make it difficult

to build a satisfactory model of the political process that determines school spending.

      In addition to generational affiliation, many other individual characteristics that

may also determine the value of goods that benefit particular population sub-groups.

Cutler, Elmendorf, and Zeckhauser (1993),       who label such goods “directed goods, ”

posit that ethnic group affiliation   is one such characteristic.     They argue that an




    3Logan and Spitze [1995] present evidence of substantial intergenerational altruism
with respect to public programs.

    4Poterba [1 995a] and Lott [1987] provide         more detailed    discussion    of the
externalities associated with public education.
                                                 7

individual’s support for a particular spending program depends on both age pnd et hnic

proximity to the beneficiaries.      This view is supported by anecdotal evidence.             In

Holyoke, Massachusetts,      the Wall Street Jou rnal [25 November 1991] reports, elderly

white voters support programs that benefit young whites                but not programs that

benefit young non-whites,     and this has resulted in sharply declining school outlays.

       There    are many ways      to test      for links between     population   age,   ethnic

composition and the level and mix of public spending,             The cross-national   evidence

discussed above is one possibility, with the attraction that demographic composition

differs substantially across nations.       A crucial drawback,     however,   is that there are

differences    in the bundles of public goods provided in different        nations, as well as

differences in the non-government         transfers across generations.   Thus it is difficult to

evaluate the cross-national data on government spending.

       Studying differences in spending outcomes and demographic structure across

U.S. states, or local jurisdictions such as school districts or counties, represents an

alternative   strategy for investigating     how demographics      affect the composition of

public spending.     The U.S. states represent a comparable set of jurisdictions with

widely-available   data on public spending, demographic characteristics,        and numerous

other variables that might impinge on spending choices.              They also operate under

broadly similar political institutions.     One drawback of analyzing state-level data on

spending and demographics is that many of the critical decisions on spending levels

are made by voters in local jurisdictions.           State average spending levels therefore

conceal substantial heterogeneity     within states.      Studying local jurisdictions brings a
                                            8

different    set of empirical problems, since the demographic   composition of a small

community cannot be viewed as exogenous, but rather depends on the structure of

local public spending.    This can make it impossible to generalize from the local-level

relationship between demographic structure and spending patterns to broader-based

changes.

       There have been many previous empirical studies of the determinants      of state

spending, and a substantial fraction of these consider education spending in particular,

Cutler, Elmendorf, andZeckhauser[1993]       survey much of this work, and present new

empirical evidence relating state- and county-level per capita spending to the fraction

of the population above age 65, below age 18, and the fraction of the county that is

nonwhite.     Their analysis combines all types of state and local government spending,

including outlays on public hospitals, nursing homes, and on primary and secondary

education.     Separating these spending categories and focusing on particular types of

spending, such as K-12 education       spending, offers a more powerful     method for

testing hypotheses about demographic mix and spending levels, and motivates the

analysis below.

       Rubinfeld and Shapiro [1989]     survey the substantial related literature on the

demand for state and local spending on elementary education.        The particular issue

of interest in the current context is how demographic factors affect the demand for

school spending, and this question has been considered in several previous studies.

Rubinfeld [1 977]    analyzes data from a household survey and finds that age of

household head does not have substantial explanatory        power for school spending
                                               9

preferences, while an indicator variable for whether the household has children in the

local public school system does have a substantial and positive effect on local public

school SUppOrt.6      Button [1 992]   finds that elderly Florida residents tend to vote

against school bond issues, although they are not fiscally conservative          in general.

Dowries [1 996], however, finds a statistically insignificant relationship between the

fraction of voters with school-aged children and the level of school spending in his

analysis of post-Proposition     13 data on California,

        Most   of the previous     work   on the demand     for education    spending   has

concentrated    on community-level     variables and their impact on local spending, even

though the growing role for state finance in K-12 education suggests that state-wide

demographic patterns may also be of substantial consequence,        State-wide    referenda

on property tax limits, for example,        can have important   effects    on the level of

education    spending in each district,    and provide an example of how state voter

interests may affect the opportunity set of a local community.      This is one attraction

of using total state and local education spending within a state, as in the analysis

presented below.




2.   Emr)irical SDec ification and Dat a Desc rir)tion

        The present project focuses on the relationship between       state demographic



    ‘Chomitz (1985) suggests that the relationship between having children in the
schools, and supporting higher spending, is a robust finding that also appears in other
studies.   Both this study and Rubinfeld [1 977] are concerned with whether an
individual says he or she supports higher school spending, rather than with actual
school spending outcomes.
                                           10
composition and the level of per-child education spending in the state.   The empirical

specification draws heavily on previous studies of state spending, including early work

by Bergstrom and Goodman [1973]        and Borcherding and Deacon [1 973] and more

recent studies by Case, Hines, and Rosen [1 993] and Poterba [1995b],          Although

studies of state-level spending are often motivated with a variant of the median voter

model, in which demographic variables should not affect spending outcomes unless

they affect the median voter’s preferences, many “spending demand” studies justify

including variables on demographic     structure   by arguing that they shift the local

service production function,    i.e. the level of spending that is needed to achieve a

given level of output, rather than the political support for spending.*

       The reduced form equation that is estimated below relates the logarithm of M

M     9overnment   spending on K-12 education’     (ED/CHILD) to the logarithm of state

real per capita personal income in the state (Y), the logarithm of real federal aid to K-

12 education (FEDAID), the logarithms of the population shares aged 5-17 (KID) and

65+   (OLD), and the logarithms of the population shares that own homes (OWNERS),

are nonwhite (NONWHITE),       live in urban areas (URBAN), and live below the poverty




    ‘Gross [19951 presents in ingenious analysis of the role of demographic variables
in accounting for variation in local public spending. He finds relatively weak evidence
that households with similar demographic characteristics exhibit similar preferences,
but one of the cases for which his evidence is strongest is the homogeneity of
households with school-age children.

     7The dependent variable is total government spending on K-12 education divided
by the state population aged 5-17. Using population rather than enrollment as the
divisor avoids the potential endogeneity problems associated with decisions to use
private schools, but it also makes it difficult to interpret the dependent variable as a
per-pupil-expenditure measure for public schools.
                                             11

line (POVER~).      Both the education spending variable and the federal aid variable

reflect outlays by state as well as local governments,    The ED variable is drawn from

various issues of Governme nt Finances, and federal aid to primary and secondary

education is computed from information reported in the Tax Foundation’s publication

Facts and Fiaures on Gove rnment Finance.

       Most of the independent variables have been found to be statistically significant

explanatory of state spending in previous empirical studies. Several variables deserve

particular comment,    however.   The OWNERS variable proxies for the after-tax     price

of education spending, since the fraction of state residents who itemize income tax

deductions and therefore can deduct state and local taxes from their federal income

taxes is strongly affected   by the percentage of homeowners.       It may also capture

differences   in taste for educational spending between     those who own homes and

those who do not. The NONWHITE variable is interpreted by Cutler, Elmendorf, and

Zeckhauser [1993] as testing whether racial mix affects support for public spending.

It’s interpretation is difficult, however, since it may also proxy for higher moments of

the income distribution, such as the fraction of households with low income levels or

the fraction living in large cities.   To allow for these possibilities, some equations

include the logarithm of the fraction of the state’s population living below the poverty

line (POVERTY) or in urban areas (URBAN). The URBAN variable has an independent

rationale for inclusion: it may capture potential differences   in the cost of delivering

school services as a function of the spatial distribution of population,      as well as

potential taste differences for public spending between urban and rural residents.
                                              12

        The estimation equation is:

(1)     ED/CHILD~ = #0 + fll*Yti       + ~2*FEDAlD,   + #,*KID,    + f14*OLDk

             + f16*OWNERS~ + fle*NONWHITEfi           + #?T*URBANti +#O*POVERTYti         + Eti.

All of the variables are measured in logarithms, so the estimated coefficients          can be

interpreted as “elasticities. ” There is relatively little year-to-year    variation in most of

the variables in this specification,    so the data base includes observations         on each

state every ten years.     Since the decennial U.S. Census of Population and Housing

provides the necessary demographic information, it is natural to estimate the model

using data on education spending from fiscal years 1961,           1971,    1981,   and 1991.

Nominal values from different years are deflated using the implicit price deflator for

state and local government      purchases, as reported in the 199 6 Economic ReDOrt of

Ihe President.   All of the analysis is limited to the forty-eight    continental states, so

there are a total of 192 state-year observations.

        There are many state-specific     factors that may affect per capita government

spending in a state, such as a high average wage which raises the cost of hiring

teachers.    There are also time-specific      factors,   such as the rise of court-       and

legislature-imposed    special education spending. To recognize the potential influence

of such effects, the equations are estimated allowing for state and time fixed effects

in the estimation,    so that ~fi = di + ~, + Jk. In this case the coefficients     of interest

are identified from within-state   (over time) variation in demographic structure that can

~     be explained by economy-wide       shocks to demographics or spending levels.

        Table 2 presents summary statistics on the panel data set.              The first and
                                               13

second columns report means and standard deviations of variables in levels, even

though logs are used in the estimation.       The mean level of per-child spending in the

sample is $3058,       with a coefficient    of variation   of slightly less than one third.

Although summary statistics from single-year cross section data sets are not reported

in Table 2, the coefficient     of variation for per-child spending in each of the cross-

section years is very similar to that in the panel. The key demographic variables also

display substantial variation.    The standard deviation of the share of the population

aged 5-17 is .034, and the analogous measure for the population share aged 65+             is

.022.   The most youthful state has 29.6%           of its population in the 5-17 age group,

and its school age population share is twice as high the share in the oldest one. The

population share aged 65+        in different states ranges from 5.4°A to 18,2Y0.

        The NONWHITE        variable ranges from near zero to more than forty percent in

the state-year    sample.    The average value of NONWHITE        is .117,   but this masks a

substantial trend over time. This fraction rises by more than four percentage points,

on average,      between    1960 and 1990.     The cross-sectional    standard deviation of

NONWHITE       declines over the sample period.E

        Rather than focusing on the NONWHITE coefficient           as a test of ethnic group

competition,     the present analysis focuses on how differences       in racial composition




     ‘Nonwhites have historically been less likely than whites to vote, although racial
differences in voter turnout have declined in recent years [see Filer, Kenny, and
Morton, 1991 ]. Changes in nonwhite voter participation could lead to variation over
time in the size and interpretation of the coefficient on this variable.
                                              14

~            the elderly    and the school-age     population      affect   the   level of school

spending.s     Thekeyexplanatory       variable isthe fraction of non-whites         in the school

age (5-1 7) group, minus the fraction of non-whites in the elderly (65+)              population.

The mean and standard deviation for this variable are shown in the last row of Table

2. On average, the nonwhite share of the school aged population is 6.5 percentage

points higher than the nonwhite share of the 65+           population.      There is substantial

range and variation        in this aspect of demographic    structure,       with the maximum

difference 23.2%     (Florida) and the smallest -0.6Y0.    West Virginia and Maine are the

only continental states with a greater non-white share in the over-65 population than

in the school-age population.      The mean difference in the nonwhite population shares

increased by nearly six percentage points between          1960 and 1990,

      There are substantial differences across states in the degree of ethnic and age

heterogeneity.      Florida exhibits    the greatest   disparity     between      the fraction   of

nonwhites in the 5-17 population and that in the 65+            population; this is largely the

result of immigration by elderly white households and younger Latino households. The

other high-disparity states include a number of states in the industrial North, such as

New York, New Jersey, and Illinois, as well as several states from the South, such as

Mississippi and South Carolina.




     ~here is in principle no link between the NONWHITE variable and the differential
racial composition of the two groups, One could envision a state with a large
nonwhite population spread evenly across the age distribution, as well as one with a
young nonwhite population and few elderly nonwhites, Thus NONWHITE could be the
same in two cases, but the differential age composition variable would be very
different.
                                                 15

          Given the difficulties of interpreting the various coefficients in the reduced form

model described above, it is helpful to estimate a “control specification”             that may

provide evidence on spurious relationships.             To this end, the ED/CHILD variable in

equation     (1) is replaced with      NONED/POP,        the level of per-capita   spending on

programs gther than education.         Estimating this equation can provide some insight on

whether      demographic    and other variables are simply capturing differences         across

states in the taste for public spending, or whether they are capturing allocative effects

with respect to education and other programs.




3.    EmDirical Evidence on Demou rar)hic Var iation and Educat ion SDe ndin~

          This section presents the central empirical findings with respect to demographic

variation and education spending.            The first sub-section reports the basic results,

while     the second sub-section        considers     several   models in which    demographic

structure is interacted with other variables that might alter its impact on spending

levels.




3.1     Results f rom Bas ic St)ec ificat ions

          Table   3 presents    the results of estimating        regression   models for school

expenditures      without   the variable measuring the ethnic differences          between   the

elderly and school-age         population.   The parallel equations in Table 5 include this

variable in the specification,        Tables 4 and 6 present similar regression models in
                                               16

which the dependent       variable    is per capita   non-school   direct   spend ing.10   For

completeness,     the first column in each table shows the effect           of ordinary least

squares estimation without either state or time fixed effects.         The equations in all

subsequent columns include these effects.

       The results in Table 3 suggest that the fraction of children and elderly in the

population   affect   per-child spending on education.        The share of elderly in the

population is negatively related to this spending variable in the equations that include

state and time fixed effects,        These estimates    suggest an elasticity    of per-child

spending with respect to the over-65 population share of approximately             -.25.   The

results are attenuated   when the fraction of the population in urban areas is included

in the specification; in this case the estimated coefficient is not statistically significant

at conventional    significance   levels.   The estimates   in either the second or fourth

column of Table 3 imply that a one standard deviation change in the share of elderly

in the population, a shift from .108 to ,130, results in almost of five percent decline

in per-pupil education spending,      The results suggest that all else equal, jurisdictions

with more elderly voters spend less on public schools.ll




    10The FEDAID variable in the control equations for non-education spending is the
same variable, federal aid for K-1 2 education, as in the education equations. While
this is not ideal from the standpoint of explaining cross-state variation in non-
education spending, it does provide a check for spurious results in the education
equation.

    llA key issue for future research is ~   they spend less. This may simply reflect
a lack of support among elderly voters for public programs that do not benefit the
elderly, or it may reflect a higher cost of raising funds in states with more elderly
because of pre-existing demands that elderly populations place on public coffers.
                                               17

        These results are strengthened by comparing them with the “control equation”

findings in Table 4, where the estimates suggest that a larger elderly population in a

state leads to higher spending on non-education programs.            Thus it does not appear

that the fraction of elderly individuals in the population is simply capturing a tendency

for elderly voters to support lower levels of public spending in general.

        The fraction of the population of school-age also has a strong effect on per-

child spending.      In the OLS equation in the first column, the estimated elasticity is -

.40,   while after    the equations    include controls for state and time effects,        the

estimated elasticity rises to nearly -1.0.    These results, if interpreted literally, suggest

that education       spending per capita is indeDe nden~ of the share of school-aged

children, suggesting that an increase in the population share in this age group leads

to a proportionate     reduction in per-child spending.

        These striking results should be viewed with caution for several reasons. First,

the “control equations” in Table 4 suggest that a higher population share of school

age reduces non-school spending per capita, with an elasticity of approximately          -.30.

The results in Table 3 suggest that per caD i@ school spending is independent of the

fraction of school-aged children in the population.       This implies that an increase in the

school-aged population reduces state and local government spending per capita, but

raises the share of such spending that flows to education.

        Second, the differences       between the results of the OLS estimation      (Table 3

column 1 ) and the fixed effects specification may indicate that economy-wide        changes

in the share of children in the population are associated           with different   types of
                                                18

spending        response   than     idiosyncratic,   state-specific      demographic      shocks.

Conventional      wisdom holds that rising K-1 2 enrollments were a key factor in the

growth of state and local spending in the late 1950s and 1960s,                 and again in the

1990s.        The specifications    that allow for year effects        remove such systematic

changes in the size of the school-age population from the analysis.             If the enrollment

in a single state rises, competitive tax pressures and other factors may lead to smaller

spending increases than when the school-aged              population in the entire economy

increases.

           Finally, the results suggesting a strong negative effect of student cohort size

on spending per pupil are consistent with a number of previous studies of spending

on public schools. Case, Hines, and Rosen [1993] find significant negative effects of

the school-aged       proportion of the population on per-child school spending,             even

though several earlier studies, including Denzau [1975],              Ladd [1 975],   and Megdal

[1 984],     found small effects.     Borge and Rattso [1 995]         find slow adjustment    to

demographic shocks in the composition of spending in Norway, along with a negative

correlation between group size and per-person spending.               Further analysis of the link

between cohort size and per-pupil spending, perhaps using changes in enrollment that

result from exogenous shocks such as changes in school district boundaries, seems

warranted .12



     12Equations not reported here also explored how other demographic variables, such
as the number of children per household or the fraction of households with children,
are related to the level of education spending.         These variables did not have
statistically significant effects on school spending per child after the current variables
(school-age share and elderly share) were included in the regressions.
                                                19

       A central    issue in interpreting     these    results is whether    they   arise from

differences in the “demand” for educational spending, mediated through the political

process,   or differences      in the technology      of supplying   educational    services   to

jurisdictions   with different    demographic    characteristics.    It seems reasonable to

exclude    the share of the local population          over the age of 65,     and the ethnic

composition of this group, from the education production function. This suggests that

the demographic      effects   associated with these variables are likely to result from

demand-side factors.      Interpretation   of the effect of fluctuations    in the school-age

population is more difficult, because economies of scale in education could make it

possible to deliver the same education to a larger cohort with less than a proportionate

expansion in educational spending. This is an issue that requires further exploration,

       The estimated effects of the other independent variables in Tables 3 and 4 can

be described briefly. The relationship between per capita income and per child school

spending is weak but positive, and is highly affected by the inclusion of state and time

fixed effects as well as the fraction of the state population living below the poverty

line. Without POVERTY in the specification, the estimated income elasticity of school

spending is approximately        .50; without this variable, the income elasticity is on the

order of. 75. Federal grants to the state have a statistically significant positive effect

on the level of per-child school spending, although once again the coefficient                 is

substantially   reduced when state and time effects are included in the model.

       States    with a higher fraction      of homeowners      spend more on education,

consistent with the view that homeowners face a lower marginal tax price of public
                                              20

spending.    The OWNERS variable may also capture differences in the taste for public

spending on education between homeowners and renters.             The NONWHITE      fraction

of the population does not exhibit strong predictive power for the level of per-child

spending.      Including the URBAN variable has little effect on the coefficient      of the

share of the population of school age, but it does reduce the coefficient on the share

of elderly individuals in the population.    The URBAN variable has a significant effect

on spending as well, with a one percent increase in the state population in urban areas

reducing per-child spending by about 0.4 percent.

       Table     5 presents     results that are similar to those    in Table   3, but each

specification now includes the variable for racial heterogeneity      between the 5-17 and

65+   segments of the population.       While the estimated coefficient on this variable is

positive in the OLS estimates, the coefficient       is negative (although not statistically

significant at standard confidence       levels) when the model includes state and time

effects.   Including this variable does not substantially affect the estimated coefficients

for either the aged share or school-aged share of the population.

       The estimates suggest that demographic heterogeneity can have a substantively

important effect on education spending.        The point estimates for this variable must

be interpreted    differently   from those for other variables,     because this variable is

entered in levels rather than logarithms.     The estimate in Table 5, column 2 suggests

that a one percentage point increase in the share of nonwhites in the O-17 population,

holding the share of nonwhites in the 65+          population constant,   reduces the log of
                                             21

per-child school spending by -.006,        or approximately   one half of one percent.13

These findings suggest that an increase in the fraction of a jurisdiction’s population

over the age of 65 tends to reduce per-child school spending, and that the effect is

especially pronounced when the elderly residents are from a different ethnic group

than the school-aged population. 14

       Table 6 presents results similar to those in Table 5, but with per capita non-

school spending as the dependent variable.        The results for the racial heterogeneity

variable are distinctly different from those in Table 5. The coefficient     estimates are

positive, and in all four specifications     the null hypothesis   of zero effect   can be

rejected.   These results bolster the argument that demographic heterogeneityy tends

to reduce spending on education,       particularly    in relation to spending on other

programs.




3*2   Facto rs that Affect the Demos rar)hv-SDend ina Link

       The results in the last subsection      suggest that the elderly fraction    in the

population affects the level of per-child school spending, and that racial heterogeneity



    l~he demographic heterogeneity variable is included in levels, rather than logs,
because it takes some negative values. The standard deviation of the percentage of
whites in the over-65 (O-17) population is .084 (.116).        Because these two
percentages covary positively, however, the standard deviation of their difference is
only .047.

     14T0 explore the robustness of the findings on demographic heterogeneity, I
separated this variable into two separate variables, (% Nonwhite Age 5-17) and (Yo
Nonwhite Age 65+ ), and included both in the regression specification, The resulting
estimates did not reject the null hypothesis that the coefficients on these two
variables are of opposite signs but equal absolute value,
                                            22

across age groups can also have a negative effect on such spending. This subsection

explores two aspects of this interaction: whether these effects are stronger in states

with a high degree of population mobility, and whether these effects are attenuated

by property tax circuit-breaker   rules that limit property tax burdens, particularly for

older residents.

       To address the impact of population mobility, a variable from the decennial

census indicating the fraction of the state population that resided in the state five

years ago is added to the basic specification.     This variable is also interacted with the

logarithm of the elderly share of the population, and the difference in the racial mix

between the 65+     and school-age population.      The resulting equation estimates are

shown in the first two columns of Table 7. The estimates in the first column suggest

that states with low population turnover (high values of Percent in State Five Years

Ago) spend more per child on public schools, although the estimated effects are not

statistically significantly different from zero.

       There is also evidence of an intriguing, but imprecise, interaction effect with the

percent elderly in the population.    In a state in which all of the residents had been

there five years ago, the percent elderly variable would have essentially no effect on

school spending.   In a state with only half of the population resident for five or more

years, the estimated elasticity of school spending with respect to the elderly share

would be -.50.15    The interaction effects with respect to the racial heterogeneity




   16The fraction of five year residents varies between .64 and .94 in the panel data
sample, with a standard deviation of .059 and a mean of ,86.
                                              23

variable operate in the same direction, so the effect of this variable is reduced when

the state’s population consists of primarily long-term residents.    However, the effects

in this case are estimated with too little precision for further discussion.

       The last two columns of Table 7 report estimates of equations that include an

indicator variable for whether      or not the state has a property tax circuit-breaker

provisionlo, and interactions of this variable with the demographic         variables.   The

effects are similar to those for the long-term residence variable.   States with property

tax circuit breakers exhibit higher per-child school spending, and in such states, the

effect of a rising share of elderly in the population is also reduced.       The standard

errors for both of the relevant coefficients       are roughly as large as the estimated

coefficients,   however, so it is difficult to draw strong conclusions.   When the circuit-

breaker variable is interacted     with the variable measuring racial heterogeneity,     the

heterogeneity    coefficient   itself falls to nearly zero, and the estimates suggest that

states with circuit-breaker    laws have larger negative effects of racial heterogeneity.

Once again, however, the estimated effects are not significant at conventional levels

of statistical significance.

       The link between property tax circuit breakers and demographic tension is an

issue that warrants further study. Better information on the nature of circuit-breakers,

particularly on whether they apply only to elderly residents or to all residents, would

result in more precise tests of how demographics interact with these institutions.        In




   l~hese variables are created by referring to various publications of the Advisory
Council on Intergovernmental Relations.
                                             24

addition, the circuit breakers are examples of endogenous         fiscal institutions,   and

further    work could explicitly    model this endogeneity    and attempt    to find valid

instruments for studying the effect of circuit breakers on spending levels.




4.   co nclusions

          This paper presents empirical results suggesting that demographic      structure

affects the level and composition of public spending,      The empirical analysis, which

focuses on public spending for K-12 education,         indicates that an increase in the

fraction of elderly residents in a state is associated with a significant reduction in u

Child educational spending.      This reduction is even larger when the elderly residents

are predominantly from a different racial group than the school-age population. These

results suggest that students who are part of larger school-age cohorts receive lower

per-student spending than those in smaller cohorts. 17

          These findings,   if they in fact reflect tensions between    generations   in the

allocation of public funds, suggest that the changing demographic profile of the United

States may lead to long-term reductions in the level of per-child school expenditure.

Projections suggesting that the fraction of the population aged 65+          will rise from

12.5 percent in 1990 to 18.7 percent in 2030,         would translate   (using the central

estimates in the present study) into a ten percent reduction in per child spending. The




    17Figlio (1 997) relates the level of per pupil spending in the late 1980s to changes
in enrollment in the late 1970s, and finds evidence that rising enrollment is associated
with lower spending levels. This raises issues about the long-term persistence of
demographic effects and warrants further exploration,
                                            25

implications of such changes for income inequality and economic growth depend on

controversial parameters linking school spending to school outcomes and wages, but

the potential effects could be substantial.

       These results raise, but do not resolve, questions about how fiscal institutions

and the structure of the political process more generally may affect the degree of

generational tension in allocating public spending.     Mechanisms that move education

finance closer to benefit taxation, such as property tax circuit-breakers,    are one device

that might be used to reduce generational        conflict.   Tying education spending to

programs that benefit other community residents, for example building a school that

is used as an elder center for part of the week, is another option.         The prospective

decline in the share of the population with children in public school systems may

dictate greater attention to these mechanisms.

       The results presented    in this paper raise a number of broader issues for

evaluating how demographic change is likely to affect the structure of government

programs.     First, the mechanism through which demographic structure affects the

composition    of government    spending   requires further     analysis.    If a particular

demographic group such as the elderly place substantial demands on the public sector,

and this raises non-education   government spending, then the shadow cost of funds

for education will rise, and this spending program is likely to contract.      Second, it is

possible that elderly voters do not assign high priority to spending for education,       In

this case, jurisdictions where elderly voters are more important will spend less on

education as a result of the different tastes of their voting population.     Further work
                                                 26

is needed to disentangle        these alternative       explanations   of the empirical findings,

Finally,   the   results   suggest    the   potential    importance     of   normative     questions

concerning community composition.            Benabou [1995] and Schwab and Oates [1991],

among others,      have analyzed the problem of optimal community                 structure,     with

particular attention to the optimal degree of heterogeneity in community composition;

the present findings suggest the potential relevance of these studies in considering the

age composition of communities.




James      M. Poterba,     Mitsui   Professor   of Economics,      Massachusetts         Institute   of

Technology.
                                               REFERENCES

Benabou, Roland (1995),            “The Workings of a City,” mimeo, New York University.

Bergstrom, Theodore C., and Richard Goodman (1973),                  Private Demands for Public

          Goods, ” ~merican        Econo mic Revie W 63, pp. 280-296.

Borcherding, Thomas E. and Robert T. Deacon (1972),                “The Demand for the Services

          of Non-Federal Governments, ” A me rican Economic Review 62, pp. 891-901.

Barge, Lars-Erik and Jorn Rattso (1995),            “Demographic Shift, Relative Costs, and the

          Allocation     of Local Public Consumption         in Norway, ” Reaional Sc ience and

          urban ECOnomic~ 25, pp. 705-726.

Button, James W. (1992),               “A Sign of Generational Conflict: The Impact of Florida’s

          Aging Voters on Local School and Tax Referenda, ” Soc ial Sc ience Qua rterlv 73,

          pp. 786-797.

Case, Anne C., James R, Hines, and Harvey S, Rosen (1993),               “Budget Spillovers and

          Fiscal Policy Interdependence:          Evidence From the States, ” Jou rnal of Publiq

          Economic s 52, pp. 285-308.

Chomitz,     Kenneth M. (1985),            “Demographic    Influences on Local Public Education

          Expenditure: A Review of Econometric Evidence, ” paper presented to National

          Academy of Sciences Workshop on Demographic Change and the Well Being

          of Children.

Cutler,    David      M,,    Douglas     W,   Elmendorf,   and Richard J. Zeckhauser    (1993),

          “Demographic Characteristics and the Public Bundle, ” Public Finance/ Finances

          Fubliaues 48, pp. 178-198.

Denzau,      Arthur     T.   (1975),     “An Empirical Survey    of Studies   on Public School
                                             28

       Spending,” National Tax Jo urnal XXVIII,     pp. 241-249.

Dowries, Thomas A. (1996),         “An Examination of the Structure      of Governance     in

       California School Districts Before and After Proposition 13, ” Public C hoice 86,

       pp. 297-307.

Figlio, David (1 997),   “Did the Tax Revolt Reduce School Performance?, ” Jou rnal of

       pllblic Econo mics (fotihcoming),

Filer, John E., Lawrence W, Kenny, and Rebecca B. Morton (1991),            “Voting Laws,

       Educational Policies, and Minority Turnout, ” Jou rnal of Law and Economics 34,

       pp. 371-393.

Gross, John (1 995), “Heterogeneity     of Preferences for Local Public Goods: The Case

       of Private Expenditure on Public Education, ” Jo urnal of Public Economic~ 57,

       pp. 103-128.

Inman, Robert P. (1 978),      “Testing Political Economy’s     ‘As If’ Proposition: Is the

       Median Income Voter Really Decisive?,” public Choic@ 33, pp,45-65.

Inman, Robert P. (1 987), “Markets,     Governments,   and the New Political Economy, ”

       in A. Auerbach and M. Feldstein (eds. ), ~andboo k of Public Eco nomics: Volume

       z (Amsterdam:     North Holland).

Ladd, Helen F. (1975),       “Local Educational Expenditures,    Fiscal Capacity,   and the

       Composition of the Property Tax Base, ” Nat ional Tax Jou rnal XXVIII,       pp. 145-

       158.

Lindert, Peter H. (1 996),   “What Limits Social Spending?, ” Explorations in Economic

      m        33, pp. 1-34,
                                                   29

Logan,     John     R.   and   Glenna     Spitze   (1 995),    “Self   Interest    and   Altruism   in

         Intergenerational     Relations, ”PemograDhv         32, pp. 353-364.

Lott, John R., Jr. (1987),       “Why Is Education Publicly Provided?             A Critical Survey, ”

         Cato    Journal 7, pp. 475-501.

Megdal,     Sharon B. (1984),      “A Model of Local Demand for Education, ” Jo urnal of

         Urban Eco nomics 16, pp. 13-30.

O’Higgins, Michael (1 988),       “The Allocation of Public Resources to Children and the

         Elderly in OECD countries, “ in John L. Palmer, Timothy Smeeding, and Barbara

         Boyle Torrey (eds.), The Vulnerable (Washington: The Urban Institute press).

Organization       for   Economic       Cooperation     and     Development        (1988al,   -Q

         PODU   Iations: The Soc ial Policv lmDlicat ions (Paris: OECD).

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development                  (1988b),     Reformina Public

         Pensions (Paris: OECD).

Peltzman,       Sam (1993),    “The Political Economy of the Decline of American               Public

         Education, ” Jou rnal of Law and Economic s 36, pp. 331-370.

Poterba, James M, (1995a),          “Government Intervention in Markets for Education and

         Health: Why and How, “ in V. Fuchs (cd,), Individual and Soc ial ResDonsibilitv

         (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Poterba, James M. (1995b),          “Capital Budgets, Borrowing Rules, and State Capital

         Spending,” Jou rnal of Public Fcono mic s 56, pp. 165-188.

Preston, Samuel (1 984), “Children and the Elderly in the United States, ” Demoaraohv

         21, pp. 435-457.
                                             30

Richman, Harold A. and Matthew W. Stagner (1986),          “Children: Treasured Resource

      or Forgotten       Minority ?,” in Alan Pifer and Lydia Bronte (eds, ), Ou r Aainq

                 .
      Societv,       paradox and Promis e (New York: W.W.    Norton).

Rubinfeld, Daniel L. (1977),      “Voting in a Local School Election: A Micro Analysis, ”

      Review of Eco nomics and Stat istic s 59, pp. 30-42.

Rubinfeld, Daniel L. and Perry Shapiro (1989),      “Micro-estimation   of the Demand for

      Schooling: Evidence from Michigan and Massachusetts, ” Reaional Science and

      Urban Eco nomic~ 19, pp. 381-398.

Schwab, Robert M. and Wallace E. Oates (1991),         “Community Composition and the

      Provision of Local Public Goods: A Normative          Analysis, ” Jou rnal of Public

      Eco nomi~        44, 217-238.

Smeeding,   Timothy,      Barbara Boyle Torrey, and Martin Rein (1988),      “Patterns   of

      Income and Poverty: The Economic Status of Children and the Elderly in Eight

      Countries, “ in John L, Palmer, Timothy Smeeding, and Barbara Boyle Torrey

      (eds.), ~                   (Washington: The Urban Institute Press).

Weingast, Barry R., Kenneth Shepsle, and C, Johnsen (1981),       “The Political Economy

      of Benefits and Costs: A Neoclassical Approach to Distributive Politics, ” Journal

      gf Political Economv 89, pp. 642-664.
                                                                             31

             Table 1: Relative Per-Capita Social Spending By Age Group, 1980
-------------------------- -------------------------- -------------- ------------------------ -------------------------
                                  Relative Spending (Age 0-14 = 100)                                              Population Share
                                     Ages 15-64            Ages 65+                                                 Aged 65+
---------------------------            ----------------    ------------------------         -----------------------------              -------------------
Canada                                              72                                265                                   9,5%
France                                              51                                263                                   14.0
Germany                                             60                                316                                   15.5
Italy                                               110                               380                                   13.5
Japan                                               44                                235                                   9.1
Sweden                                              43                                234                                   16.3
United Kingdom                                      54                                213                                   14.9
United States                                       67                                381                                   11.3
--------------------          --------------------------       ---------------------------------------------------------------------
Source: Columns one and two are drawn from OECD [1988a],                                                                    Table 18.              Column
three is from [1988bl, Table 3.1.
                   Table 2: Summary Statistics, 1961-1991                             Panel Data Set
--------- ------ ---------------- --.--- ------ ------ -------------------- ------ ----------------------------------------
                                                                         Standard            Maximum/
Variable                                       Mean                     Deviation              Minimum
-----.----- ------------------------         ---------------------------------- ----------------------------------------------

Per Child                                     3058                                     1164                          6884/
School Spending                                                                                                       1101

Per Capita Non-                                 1891                                      563                        4112/
Education Spending                                                                                                     834

Real Per Capita                             14958                                      3537                         26810/
Income                                                                                                                6595

Real Federal Aid                                  224                                     119                         612/
Per Capita                                                                                                              15

Population Share                              0.226                                  0.034                           ,296/
Aged 5-17                                                                                                             .157

Population Share                              0.108                                  0.022                          0.182/
Aged 65+                                                                                                             0.054

Percent of Population                         0.162                                  0.083                          0.545/
8elow Poverty Line                                                                                                   0.064

Percent of Population                         0.669                                  0.056                          0.791/
Owning Homes                                                                                                         0.448

Percent of Population                         0.117                                  0.094                          0.422/
Nonwhite                                                                                                             0.002

Percent of Population                         0.655                                  0.146                          0.926/
in Urban Area                                                                                                        0.322

Nonwhite Population                           0.065                                  0.048                          0.232/
Share Aged 5-17-                                                                                                    -0.006
Nonwhite Population
Share Aged 65+

------------------   --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------                -----
Notes: Monetary values are reported in 1992 dollars, with deflation across years
using the National Income and Product Accounts deflator for government purchases
of goods and services. The sample consists of the 48 continental United States for
the years 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991.
                                                                      33

  Table3: Determinants                  of Per Child School Spending: Age-Related Demographics
-----------------------------------      ------------------------ -------------------- ------------------------------------
Variable                                 OLS                                 With State and Time Fixed Effects
-------------------- -------------------------------------------             ----------------------------------------------------

Constant                                    3.082                           1.366                                  1,719                                2.062
                                           (0,604)                         (0.995)                                (0.979)                              (1.157)

Real Per Capita                             1,067                           0.672                                  0.776                                0.528
Income                                     (0.068)                         (0.148)                                (0.149)                              (0,192)

Real Federal Aid                            0.138                           0.034                                  0.024                                0.037
Per Capita                                 (0.01 8)                        (0.022)                                (0.023)                              (0,023)

Population Share                           -0.404                          -0.998                                 -0.940                              -0.986
Aged 5-17                                  (0.132)                         (0.212)                                (0.208)                             (0,21 2)

Population Share                            0.029                          -0.276                                 -0.155                              -0.264
Aged 65+                                   (0.068)                         (0.121)                                (0.125)                             (0.121)

Percent of Population                       0.163                           0.645                                  0.535                               0.646
Owning Homes                               (o. 130)                        (0.240)                                (0.237)                             (0.240)

Percent of Population                      -0.027                           0.023                                  0.013                               0.033
Nonwhite                                   (0.01 2)                        (0.037)                                (0.036)                             (0.038)

Percent of Population                                                                                            -0.434
in Urban Areas                                                                                                   (0.153)

Percent of Population                                                                                                                                 -0.094
Below Poverty Line                                                                                                                                    (0.080)

Adjusted R2                                 0.885                          0.954                                   0.956                                0.954
-------- --------------------   -----------------------------------           . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..- -------------------
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Monetary values are reported in
1992 dollars.    All variables are in logarithms. The sample consists of the 48
continental United States for the years 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991.
                                                                         34

              Table4: Determinants of Per Capita Non-School Direct Spending
------------------------ -------------------------------- ---------------------- ---------------------------                                 ----------
Variable                               OLS                        With State and Time Fixed Effects
-—------------ -------------------- -------- ------------------------ ------------------------- -----------------------

Constant                                         6.388                         4.448                               4.477                       5.270
                                                (0.703)                       (0.976)                             (0.988)                     (1.lm

Real Per Capita                                  0.614                         0.328                               0.336                       0.157
Income                                          (0.079)                       (0.138)                             (o. 150)                    (0.1=)

Real Federal Aid                                 0.134                         0.014                               0.013                       0.017
Per Capita                                      (0.021)                       (0.022)                             (0.023)                     (0.022)

Population Share                                -0.466                        -0.286                              -0.282                      -0.272
Aged 5-17                                       (o. 1 54)                     (0.208)                             (0,210)                     (0.=)

Population Share                                -0.013                         0.218                               0.228                       0.232
Aged 65+                                        (0.079)                       (0.118)                             (0,126)                     (0.1 18)

Percent of Population                           -0.508                         0.617                               0.608                       0.618
Owning Homes                                    (0.151)                       (0.236)                             (0,240)                     (0.235)

Percent of Population                           -0.069                         0.023                               0.023                       0.035
Nonwhite                                        (0.01 3)                      (0.036)                             (0.036)                     (0.037)

Percent of Population                                                                                             -0.035
in Urban Areas                                                                                                    (0.155)

Percent of Population                                                                                                                         -0.111
Below Poverty Line                                                                                                                            (0.078)

Adjusted R*                                     0.730                            0.923                            0.922                        0.923
-----------------   -------------------------        -------------------------           ----------------------       --------------------------
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses, Monetary values are reported in
1992 dollars.    All variables are in logarithms. The sample consists of the 48
continental United States for the years 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991.
                                                                        35

                       Table5: Determinants of Per Child School Spending:
                          Age Distribution and Ethnic Composition Effects
---------------------- --------------------- ----------------------------- ----------------------------                 ---------------
Variable                                   OLS                       With State and Time Fixed Effects
---.---- ---------------------------------   ------------------------ ------------ --------------- -----------------------

Constant                                         4,293                        1.522                1.827                        2.070
                                                (0.628)                      (0.995)              (0.980)                      (1.153)

Real Per Capita                                  0.973                        0.639                0.744                        0.525
Income                                          (0.065)                      (0.149)              (o. 1 50)                    (0.191)

Real Federal Aid                                 0.073                        0.032                0.023                        0.034
Per Capita                                      (0.020)                      (0.023)              (0.022)                      (0.023)

Population Share                                -0.062                       -1.025               -0.965                       -1.013
Aged 5-17                                       (0.128)                      (0.212)              (0.208)                      (0.212

Population Share                                -0.037                      -0.244                -0.136                       -0.238
Aged 65+                                        (0.064)                     (0.122)               (0.126)                      (0.122)

Percent of Population                            0.121                        0.654                0.548                        0.654
Owning Homes                                    (0.121)                      (0.239)              (0.237)                      (0.=)

Percent of Population                           -0.048                        0.037                0.024                        0.043
Nonwhite                                        (0.015)                      (0.037)              (0.037)                      (0.038)

Percent of Population                                                                             -0.411
in Urban Areas                                                                                    (0.154)

Percent of Population                                                                                                         -0.076
Below Poverty Line                                                                                                            (0.081)

Nonwhite Percent of                              0.770                      -0.621               -0.502                       -0.561
Age 5-17 Population                             (0.342)                     (0.394)              (0.388)                      (0.a
- Nonwhite Percent
of 65+ Population

Adjusted R*                                     0.908                        0.954                 0.956                        0.954
------------   ------------------------------       -------------------------------------   -------------------------       -----------
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Monetary values are reported in
1992 dollars, All variables are in logarithms except for the difference between the
nonwhite shares of the population aged 5-17 and 65+.      The sample consists of the
48 continental United States for the years 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991.
                                                                                 36

                 Table6:  Determinants of Per Capita Non-Education Direct Spending
                           Age Distribution and Ethnic Composition Effects
-------------------------- --------------------- ------------------- --------------- --------------- -------------------
Variable                                 OLS                     With State and Time Fixed Effects
----------------- -------------------------- --------------- -------------------------------------- -------------------

Constant                                            7.713                           4,251                              4.304      5.256
                                                   (0.736)                         (0.970)                            (0.979)    (1.114)

Real Per Capita                                     0.475                           0.369                             0.388       0.161
Income                                             (0.073)                         (0.144)                           (o. 1 30)   (O. 184)

Real Federal Aid                                    0.060                            0.017                            0.016       0.021
Per Capita                                         (0.023)                         (0.022)                           (0.022)     (0.022)

Population Share                                   -0.072                          -0.252                            -0.242      -0.229
Aged 5-17                                          (0.150)                         (0.206)                           (0.208)     (0.205)

Population Share                                   -0.126                           0.179                             0.197       0.190
Aged 65+                                           (0.075)                         (0.119)                           (0.126)     (0.1 18)

Percent of Population                              -0.545                           0.605                             0.587       0.606
Owning Homes                                       (0.141)                         (0.233)                           (0.237)     (0.231 )

Percent of Population                              -0,111                           0.007                             0.005       0.019
Nonwhite                                           (0,01 7)                        (0.036)                           (0.037)     (0.036)

Percent of Population                                                                                                -0.071
in Urban Areas                                                                                                       (o. 154)

Percent of Population                                                                                                            -0.140
Below Poverty Line                                                                                                               (0.078)

Nonwhite Percent of                                 1,258                           0.785                             0.806       0.895
Age 5-17 Population                                (0.400)                         (0.384)                           (0.388)     (0.386)
- Nonwhite Percent
of 65+ Population

Adjusted R*                                         0.781                           0.924                             0.924      0.926
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses. Monetary values are reported in 1992
dollars, All variables are in logarithms except for the difference between the nonwhite
shares of the population aged 5-17 and 65 +. The sample consists of the 48 continental
United States for the years 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991,
                                                                                       37

             Table7: Per          Child Education              Spending:          Migration         & Property Tax Circuit-Breaker                           Effects



                                                      0.313                                0.840                                   1.464                                 1.645
                                                     (1.671)                              (2.052)                                 (1.010)                               (1 .007)

W    Par Capita                                       0.644                                0.626                                   0.656                                 0.611
Inmma                                                (0.153)                              (0.154)                                 (o. 1501                              (o. 1501

Real Federal Aid                                      0.017                                0.014                                   0.025                                 0.017
Par Capita                                           (0.025)                              (0.027)                                 [0.024)                               (0.024)

Population Share                                     -1.005                               -1.051                                  -1.013                                -1.058
Aged 5-17                                            (0.223)                              (0.226)                                 (0.213)                               (0.211)

Population    Share                                  -1,017                               4.779                                   -0.289                                -0.227
Aged 65+                                             (0.5601                              (0.680)                                 (0.1211                               (0. 123)

Percent    of Population                              0.587                                0.606                                   0.636                                 0.668
Owning     Homes                                     [0,242)                              (0.243)                                 (0.241)                               (0.239)

Percent    of Population                              0.047                                0.058                                   0.027                                 0.045
Nonwhite                                             {0.040)                              (0.041)                                 (0.0371                               (0.037)

Percent of Population in                              2.172                                1.545
-      State 5 Years Ago                             (1 .7471                             (2.158]


(sameState 5 YearsAgo)”                               1.028                                0.757
ShareAged65+                                         (0.709)                              (0.824)

Indicatorfor PropwtY                                                                                                               0.208                                 0.288
Tax CircuitBreaker                                                                                                                [0.201)                               (0.217)

(CircuitBraakerl●                                                                                                                  0.106                                 0.124
ShareAged65+                                                                                                                      (0.093)                              (0.096)

NW % Population 5-17                                                                      -2.360                                                                        0.007
- NW % Population 65+                                                                     f4.412)                                                                      (0.542)


(-me      State 5 Years AOOI
                           ●                                                               2.067
(NW%       5-17 -NW %65   +)                                                              (4.971)


(Circuit Breaker)
                ●                                                                                                                                                      -0.677
(NW% 5-17 -NW %65 +)                                                                                                                                                   (0.404)

AdjustedR2                                           0.954                                 0.954                                   0.954                                0.955
               ......... .. ... .... ... ... ...... ... ... ...... .... ... ... ....... ... ... ....... ... ... ... .. .... .... .... .... ...... .. .... ... ...... ... .. ............
Notes: Standard errors are shown in parentheses.    Monetary values are reported in 1992 dollars. All equations
include state and time fixad effects.  All variables are in logarithms except for the difference between the
nonwhite shares of the population aged 5-17 and 65+.        The sample consists of the 48 continental United
States for the yaars 1961, 1971, 1981, and 1991.
