NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGE SUBSIDIES FOR THE
DISADVANTAGED

Lawrence F. Katz

NBER Working Paper 5679

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

The original version of this paper was prepared for the Russell Sage Foundation Conference on
“Demand Side Policies for Low-Wage Labor Markets,” New York, NY, June 26-27, 1995. I am
grateful to Richard Freeman and the conference participants for helpful comments, to David Lah for
valuable information and data on the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit, and to Marianne Bertrand for
excellent research assistance. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Labor Studies. Any
opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
O 1996 by Lawrence F. Katz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @ notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5679
July 1996

WAGE SUBSIDIES FOR THE
DISADVANTAGED

ABSTRACT

Wage subsidies to private employers have often been proposed by economists as a potentially
flexible and efficient method to improve the earnings and employment of low-wage workers. This
paper lays out the basic economics of wage subsidies; examines issues arising in the design of
alternative forms of wage subsidies; and reviews evidence on the effectiveness of recent U.S. wage
subsidy programs and demonstration projects. Wage subsidies to employers to hire disadvantaged
workers appear to modestly raise the demand for labor for those workers. Stand-alone wage
subsidies (or employment tax credits) that are highly targeted on very specific groups (such as
welfare recipients) appear to have low utilization rates and may (in some cases) stigmatize the
targeted group. But new evidence based on an examination of changes in eligibility rales for the
Targeted Jobs Tax Credit, the major U.S, wage subsidy program for the economically disadvantaged
from 1979 to 1994, suggests modest positive employment effects of the TJTC on economically
disadvantaged young adults, Policies combining wage subsidies with job development, training, and
job search assistance efforts appear to have been somewhat successful in improving the employment
and earnings of specific targeted disadvantaged groups.

Lawrence F. Katz
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER

I. INTRODUCTION
Growing disparities in the economic fortunes of American families over the past
twenty years have been associated with large increases in wage in~uality and rising gaps in
labor market outcomes between more- and less-skilled workers.

The real earnings of many

groups of workers, particularly less-educated young men, have fallen since the early 1970s.
Much research suggests that a major contributor to these changes has ban a substantial
decline in the relative demand for the less-educated and those doing more routinized tasks
compared to the relative supply of such workers (e. g., Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and
Murphy, 1992). The shift in relative demand against the less-skilled appears to be driven by
both skill-biased technological change--the computer revolution--and the increased
internationalization of economic activity. While much debate exists concerning the relative
importance of different underlying causes of the decline in demand for the less-skilled, the
underlying trends do not appear likely to quickly reverse themselves.

In summary,

the U.S. labor market has experienced a sustained twist against disadvantaged workers--those
with limited education or skills and)or from impoverished families and neighborhoods--that
has greatly diminished their earnings prospects.
Market incentives for increased educational investments and skill upgrading can play
some role in alleviating growing wage inequality. Evidence from U.S. time series and crosscountry studies strongly suggest that rapid expansions of the supply of more educated
workers narrow earnings differentials and improve the labor market position of the lessskilled (Freeman and Katz, 1994). But the process of supply adjustment can take many
years, and many disadvantaged individuals face financial and informational barriers to
pursuing further education and training and are likely to be left behind.

2
This prospect motivates an examination of policies that dd

directly with the market

shifts adversely impacting less-skilled workers by improving their skills and/or stimulating
employment opportunities through direct job creation in the public sector or the subsidization
of their employment in the private sector. Much recent work has evaluated the effectiveness
of alternative education and training policies for improving the labor market prospects of the
disadvantaged.

Increased access to schooling at mainstream educational institutions (high

schools, community colleges, and universities) for those from low-income families appear to
have a reasonably high payoff (Card, 1994).

Public sector-sponsored training programs

have a mixed record with strong positive returns for disadvantaged adults (particularly adult
women) and a more disappointing results in evaluations of programs for disadvantaged outof-school youths (Heckman, Roselius, and Smith, 1993; Katz, 1994; and Wnde,

1995).

Much less recent research attention has focused on micro demand-side policies to
offset the decline in demand for the less-skilled. Wage subsidies to private employers have
often been proposed by economists as a relatively flexible and efficient method to improve
the earnings and employment of the less-skilled,

In a wage subsidy program, job creation

and hiring decisions remain in the hands of private firms, but the cost is partially borne by
government.

Firms are likely to respond to wage subsidies by increasing their utilization of

workers in the targeted population.

The extent to which this response raises the wages and

employment of the targeted group and has impacts on non-subsidized workers is an empirical
question that depends on the relevant labor demand and supply parameters as well as
administrative aspects of the design of the subsidy program.

The U.S. has experimented

with a variety of tax credit programs to encourage firms to change their hiring patterns in the

3
past and several demonstration projects using variants of wage subsidies have been evaluated.
Most other OECD nations also have experience with private sector employment subsidies.
In this paper, I first lay out briefly the basic economics of wage subsidies and issues
arising in the design of alternative forms of wage subsidies. I then review the available
evidence on the effectiveness of private sector wage subsidies as a tool to improve the labor
market prospects of less-skilled workers and provide some new evidence on the employment
effects of the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit, a targeted wage subsidy program that operated in the
United States from 1979 to 1994. Finally I derive lessons for policy-design from past
experience with wage subsidies. 1
I conclude that there exists much uncertainty concerning the likely effects of a general
graduated wage subsidy for low-wage or low-skill workers, but the existing evidence
suggests it is a policy worthy of some further experimentation.

Stand-alone wage subsidies

(or employment tax credits) that are highly targeted on very specific socioeconomic groups
(such as welfare recipients or ex-convicts) appear to be somewhat less-effective than more
broadly targeted subsidies and may (in some cases) stigmatize the targeted group. Policies
using an intermediary (a public employment agency, nonprofit training organization, etc. )
that combine job development, job search assistance, training, and wage (or employment)
subsidies appear more successful for targeting on specific disadvantaged groups.

II. THE ECONOMICS AND DESIGN OF WAGE SUBSIDIES
The basic idea behind (employer-side) wage subsidies is to reduce the costs to
employers of employing the targeted group of workers thereby stimulating demand for these

4
workers and raising their employment rates and earnings. A substantial literature has
examined the analytics of the impacts of wage subsidies on employment and wages in both
standard competitive labor market models and in models with various types of wage rigidities
or other market imperfections that generate structural unemployment (e.g., Kaldor, 1936;
Hamermesh, 1978; Phelps, 1994b; and Snower, 1994). Phelps (1994a) makes a particularly
strong case for wage subsidies for low-wage workers based on equity considerations; the
social costs of inefficiently high unemployment; and the possible negative spillover effects of
poor labor market performance by the disadvantaged on their neighbors, children, and
younger siblings.

The Desi~n of Wape Subsidies

Employer-side wage subsidies (programs that subsidize efforts to create jobs in the
private sector) can take a variety of forms (Hamermesh, 1978; OECD, 1982). A wage
subsidy can be applied to all employment, to net changes in employment (a marginal or
incremental employment subsidy), or to gross flows into employment arising from new hires
or layoffs. Subsidies based on toti employment (or, often in practice, on the total wage bill)
apply during the entire time a workers is employed with a firm and create “windfalls” to
employers on that part of employment that would exist in the absence of the subsidy. True
marginal employment subsidies could eliminate these windfalls (and reduce the net costs of
job creation/wage increases) but such a policy would require information on what
employment levels would be in the absence of the subsidy. Actual incremental employment
subsidies can somewhat reduce windfalls by providing subsidies only for employment growth

5

beyond some base employment level, but such policies can create perverse incentives for
employment variation and changes in organizational form and can become administratively
quite complex. Many OECD wage subsidy programs are hiring subsidies that provide
temporary wage subsidies for selected groups of new hires. Such programs can generate
incentives for higher turnover and disproportionately benefit sectors with high turnover and
more variable employment. Some U.S. programs have attempted to mitigate these incentives
by barring employers who systematically fail to retain subsidized workers.

Some OECD

nations have attempted to provide subsidies to “struggling” firms to avert layoffs, but such
policies can create moral hazard problems with firms’ threatening layoffs to gain a subsidy.
Wage subsidies can also be either general or categorical.

Categorical subsidy

(targeted wage subsidies) are paid on the employment or hiring of only certain specific
categories of workers (e. g., economically disadvantaged youth, public assistance recipients,
the disabled, dislocated workers, or the long-term unemployed).

Targeted wage subsidies are

often motivated by desires to affect the composition of employment and aim program benefits
at specific groups of workers whose employment opportunities are viewed as particularly in
need of improvement.

But targeting on the basis of sociodemographic categories of which

employers may have negative views may serve to stigmatize participating job-seekers and
limit employer interest in the program.

If categorical subsidies are successful in expanding

employment opportunities for target group members, one must worry about the horizontal
equity of potentially displacing workers with similar labor market prospects who are not
eligible for the program.

General wage subsidies with caps on the amount of subsidy per

worker or with a graduated structure may be able to increase the incentives for employing

6

low-wage workers without the stigmatizing potential of categorical programs.
Two other considerations in the design of wage subsidies are the geographic extent of
the subsidies and the administrative operation of the program,

Wage subsidies can either

operate nationally or be place-based programs with eligibility restricted to certain regions or
local labor markets. Place-based targeting based on location of residence may be less
stigmatizing than targeting on the basis of demographic groups. Place-based subsidies may
largely serve to redistribute employment levels across areas with small impacts on aggregate
employment opportunities for the targeted groups if firm and/or worker migration is
significant in response to labor market incentives.

Subsidies can also be run through the tax

system (employment tax credits as in the New Jobs Tax Credit and the Targeted Jobs Tax
Credit) which can reduce administrative burdens but only provide incentives to firms with
positive tax liabilities (although they can be designed with generous loss carryovers), or they
can be directly paid to employers (which may require new information requirements and an
administering agency).
In a simple Coasian world without transaction costs or imperfwt information, it
should not matter whether wage subsidies are provided to employers or equivalent earnings
supplements provided to workers. There are many reasons why the side of the market in
which the subsidy is provided could matter in practice.
supplements (such as the Mned

For example, employee earnings

Income Tax Credit) may allow better targeting on the basis

of family income without the stigma of sociodemographic targeting in categorical employer
subsidies. When wages are rigid because of a binding minimum wage law or other
impediments to wage adjustment, employ~-side wage supplements will be more effective in

7
raising take-home earnings and employer-side subsidies more effmtive at increasing
employment.

The choice of the side of the market to place a subsidy may depend on the

immediate deeision-maker one is trying to affect. Employer-side subsidies hiring subsidies
for targeted groups are more likely to be salient and affect their recruiting patterns towards
those groups, while employee-side wage supplements or re-employment bonuses may have a
greater affect on worker search behavior.

The SimDle (Partial- ~uilibrium)

Analvtics of Wage Subsidies

An employer-side wage subsidy for low-wage workers shifts out the labor demand
curve for low-wage workers.

In a situation of structural unemployment in which the

effective supply of labor is infinitely elastic (Figure 1A), a (proportional) wage subsidy (s)
will not affect the wages of but will expand the employment of low-wage workers in
proportion to the (absolute value of the) elasticity of labor demand for low-wage workers.
More generally the impact on wages and employment of the targeted group depends on the
effmtive wage elasticities of labor demand and labor supply for the group (Figure lB). The
impact of a proportional wage subsidy (s) for low-wage workers on the employment (L) and
wages (W) of low-wage workers starting from a point of zero subsidy is given by the
standard formulas:

(1)

dlnL
ds

=

nE
q+E

(2)

dlnW =
ds

A
q+E

8

where q is the absolute value of the labor demand elasticity for low-wage labor and ~ is the
effective labor supply elasticity, Thus the greater is the effective labor supply elasticity, the
greater will be the effmt of a wage subsidy on employment and the smaller the effect on
wages. More elastic labor demand implies larger wage and employment effects of a subsidy.
The impact of an actual wage subsidy will depend not only on the relevant labor supply and
demand parameters but also on design issues such as its administrative costs to utilize,
whether the subsidy stigmatizes eligible groups, and the extent to which employers are aware
of the program.
Much uncertainty exists concerning the magnitude of the relevant labor supply and
labor demand elasticities for quantitatively assessing the likely impact of a wage subsidy for
low-wage or low-skilled workers in the U.S. labor market. Most research suggests at least
fairly substitial

positive labor supply elasticities for low-wage workers. Juhn, Murphy, and

Topel (1991) interpret the decline in employment rates for low-wage adult U.S. males in the
1980s as reflecting a downward shift in labor demand for less-skilled workers combined with
a stable labor supply curve. Their estimates (based on both cross-section and time-series
variation) of the gross wage elasticity of the labor supply of low-wage men (those in the
bottom quintile of the wage distribution) range from 0.3 to 0.4. Many studies conclude that
labor supply elasticities for teenagers and low-wage women are likely to be at least as large
as these estimates for low-wage men, although Moffitt (1992) argues for lower wage
elasticities of around 0.2 for single female household heads.
Even less consensus exists concerning the relevant labor demand elasticity for lowwage workers.

The empirical labor demand literature that attempts to estimate labor demand

9

elasticities using “exogenous” supply shifts concludes that own-wage elasticities are
particularly high for less-skilled workers in the range of -0.5 or even greater in magnitude
(Hamermesh, 1993). But much of the literature estimating the impact of minimum wages on
low-wage (particularly teenage) employment suggests small to negligible adverse employment
impacts that could be interpreted as implying the demand for low-wage labor is quite
inelastic (Card and Krueger, 1995). One possible reconciliation of these findings is the
“dissipation effect” of estimated minimum wage effects. Since many t=nage workers do not
have their wages changed by a minimum wage increase, the percentage increase in the toti
labor costs of employing teenagers rises by less than the percentage increase in the minimum
wage. Thus standard elasticities of a minimum wage increase on teenage employmentpopulation ratios of -0.05 to -0.20 could be consistent with labor demand elasticities for
teenagers in the -0.10 to -0.60 range (since Card and Krueger (1995) estimates suggest that
average teenage wages appear to rise proportionately by a third to a half as much as
increases in the minimum wage). Furthermore, if employers have some wage setting power
in low-wage labor markets, as in certain efficiency wage models and search models, then
even exogenous minimum wage increases cannot easily be used to estimate labor demand
elasticities for low-wage labor (Manning, 1995). Increases in toti labor costs may be less
than proportional to observed wage increases since, for example, turnover costs might be
reduced by a higher minimum wage. Administrative burdens and lack of employer
awareness of some targeted wage subsidies suggests the “effective labor demand elasticity” in
response to such a wage subsidy might be lower than for an “equivalent” wage decline.
My best guess at “reasonable” parameters for simulating the likely medium-term

10
impact of a general wage subsidy for U.S. low-wage workers is a labor supply elasticity of
approximately 0.4 and a labor demand elasticity of approximately -0.5. Substituting these
guesses into equations (1) and (2) yields the prediction that a general 10 percent wage
subsidy for low-wage workers would expand their employment by approximately 2 percent
and increase their hourly wages by approximately 5 to 6 percent. Thus evaluations of wage
subsidies focusing only on employment effects may miss the possibly larger effect of such
policies on the wages of the targeted group. But, as I noted above, substantial uncertainty
surrounds these predictions and “reasonable” choices of elasticities based on existing
evidence could lead to very different estimates. If the labor demand elasticity were -0.1 (as
suggested by the minimum wage literature) along with a labor supply elasticity of 0.4, then a
10 percent subsidy produces a 0.8 percent increase in employment and 2 percent increase in
wages. If the labor supply elasticity is really much larger as might be the case for groups
facing substantial structural unemployment (such as disadvantaged inner-city t~nagers),
more of the focus on employment effects is reasonable.

then

This wide range of scenarios

suggests a possibly more fruitful approach to assessing the likely effectiveness of a wage
subsidy policy is to examine the outcomes observed in past attempts at using wage subsidies
and in demonstration projects designed to test alternative employment-subsidy strategies. 2

III. U.S. EXPERIENCE

WITH WAGE SUBSIDIES

The United States has experimented over the past three decades with various forms of
categorical wage subsidies to increase private employment opportunities for the disadvantaged
and with an incremental employment tax credit as part of a fiscal stimulus package. The

11
three major efforts have been the New Jobs Tax Credit, the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit, and
some aspects of Title II of the Job Training Partnership Act. Two early attempts were the
contract component of Job Opportunities in the Business Sector (JOBS), a late 1960s-early
1970s effort to train and hire disadvantaged workers; and the WIN tax credit (WINTC), a
1970s subsidy paid on the wages of AFDC recipients enrolled in the work-incentive program.
The JOBS program started as a voluntary effort by the National Alliance of Business
(NAB) to place young and less-educated workers from impoverished backgrounds in private
employment.

To assist NAB in placing participants, the federal government offered contracts

that would reimburse businesses for part of the costs of employment ($3200 per placement on
average).

Despite this fairly large hiring subsidy and much publicity, surprisingly few of the

employers who cooperated with NAB and accepted placements (those employing about one
third of the JOBS enrollees) actually took advantage of it (Hamermesh, 1978). The JOBS
program provided subsidies to approximately 93,000 positions at its peak in 1971, and it was
eliminated with the introduction of the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
(CETA) in 1973. Data from the WINTC program indicate low utilization with never more
than 20 percent of the WIN individuals who were known to have entered employment during
the year being claimed by firms as tax credits (0’ Neill, 1982). The JOBS and WINTC
experiences suggest some reluctance on the part of employers to hire under a highly targeted
subsidy the rquires

paperwork not normally part of the hiring process.

New Jobs Tax Credit

The United States has tried one noncategorical employment subsidy, the New Jobs

12
Tax Credit (NJTC) which was in effect from mid-1977 to the end of 1978. Its main
objective was counter-cyclical--to spur private employment expansion and speed up the
recovery that was already under way.
The relatively simple idea was to provide a tax credit of fifty percent of the first
$4200 of wages per employee for increases in employment of more than two percent over the
previous year. But attempts to close loopholes and limit the share of tax benefits accruing to
large employers meant the NJTC ended up being fairly complicated (Ashenfelter, 1978).
Subject to various limitations, the NJTC entitled employers to a tax credit equal to 50 percent
of the excess of wages covered by federal unemployment insurance (FUTA) over 102 percent
of FUTA wages (the first $4200 of annual wages paid to each individual employee summed
over all employees on the payroll at any time during the year) for the previous year. The
total credit could not exceed $100,000 for any one firm (a maximum of approximately 47
employees) so that no marginal incentives were provided for large growing firms.
The NJTC was not explicitly targeted on any sociodemographic group. But because
the NJTC only applied to the first $4200 of wages per employee (a maximum credit of
$21OO),it provided a greater relative incentive for the hiring of low-wage, more
disadvantaged and part-time labor than for the hiring of high-wage and full-time labor.
While the NJTC was a marginal credit affecting “incremental” hirings rather than a wage
subsidy covering all employment, the maximum allowable credit implies that the NJTC
provided only a lump sum credit and no marginal wage subsidy to firms with planned
employment growth in the absence of the NJTC that is greater than the employment growth
subsidized by the credit. Contracting firms also faced no marginal change in incentives.

13
The credit’s employment incentives may also have been limited by its complexity.
The NJTC appears to have been fairly widely claimed on corporate tax returns
especially in 1978, although it is unclear the extent to which firms were aware of the credit
at the time they were making employment decisions. The Treasury estimates that the direct
reduction in tax revenues ansing from the NJTC was $5.7 billion for 1977 and 1978
combined (U. S. Departments of Labor and Treasury, 1986). Bishop (1981) estimates that at
least 1.1 million employ=s were subsidized in 1977, and at least 2.15 million in 1978.
Two studies have attempted to evaluate the effects of the NJTC on employment
growth, Perloff and Wachter (1979) use data from a large employer survey to compare the
1976 to 1977 employment growth of firms which knew about the NJTC to that of firms
unaware of the NJTC. Only 34 percent of the firms in their sample knew of the program
although almost all large firms did. They find (from employment growth regressions with
controls for firm-size, one-digit industry, region, and tax filing status) that firms which knew
about the credit increased employment by over 3 percent more than similar firms that were
ignorant of the program.

The proportional increase in employment from knowledge of the

program decreased with firm size, a finding consistent with the lower likelihood that the
NJTC would produce marginal employment incentives for large firms. Nevertheless, one
should be somewhat critical of these results since firms with growing employment had a
much greater incentive to learn about the program and knowledge of the tax code may be
correlated with other characteristics associated with more successful, growing firms.
Bishop (1981) estimates labor demand equations in which employment is related to a
measure of employer awareness of the NJTC, current and lagged output, and current and

14
lagged measure of wages and other inputs using time series data for the construction,
wholesale, and retail trade industries. Bishop’s estimates imply that the NJTC increased
employment in construction and retail from 150,00 to 670,000 (equivalent to an economywide employment increase of 0.2 to 0.8 percent) over the mid-1977 to mid-1978 period.
While one worries that it may be difficult to sort out the effects of the NJTC from other
cyclical factors affecting the economy, the existing evidence suggests that a temporary,
noncategorical, incremental employment subsidy has some potential for stimulating
employment growth.

Tarpeted Jobs Tax Credit

The Targeted Jobs Tax Credit (TJTC) was enacted in 1978 to replace the NJTC and
remained in effect during almost dl of the 1979 to 1994 period.3 The TJTC offered a tax
credit to employers hiring certified target group individuals.

The target groups in the TJTC

have varied over time but have included various groups of economically disadvantaged
youths, public assistance and SS1 recipients, Vietnam-era veterans, certain ex-convicts, and
disabled individuals undergoing vocational rehabilitation.

The TJTC originally provided a

w credit amounting to 50 percent of first year and 25 percent of second year wages up to
$6000 for employers who hired individuals certified as members of a target group. Target
group individuals could attain vouchers at the Employment Service which they could provide
to employers to allow them to receive the credit. The TJTC appears to have b~n mainly
utilized by large firms in the retail and service sectors who contract with management
assistance companies to review the eligibility of all new hires and arrange for the

15
Employment Service to voucher retroactively and certify those found eligible (Lorenz, 1995).
The federal government increasingly restricted eligibility and reduced the value of the
credit starting in the mid- 1980s. The tax credit for the second year of employment was
eliminated in late 1986 and the subsidy rate for the first year of employment was
simultaneously reduced to 40 percent for the first $6000 of qualified wages. The age range
for eligible economically disadvantaged youth reduced from 18 to 24 years to 18 to 22 years
starting on January 1, 1989. The real value of the maximum credit declined by 75 percent
over the course of the program.

Table 1 illustrates that the number of TJTC certified

workers (number of jobs receiving a tax-credit from the TJTC) reached a peak of 622,000 in
1985 and then declined to 364,000 in 1992 in the face of program changes. A recent survey
of TJTC-certified workers indicates that the median duration of a TJTC job was 6 months in
the early 1990s (U.S. Department of Labor, 1994). This suggests that the stock of
individuals in TJTC jobs at a point in time was approximately hdf the total number of TJTC
certifications in a year. Thus the TJTC may have subsidized approximately 0.4 percent of
private employment at its peak in 1985. Tax expenditures on the TJTC were approximately
$500 million (in 1991 dollars) in the mid-1980s and declined to $245 million in 1991 (U.S.
Office of Management and Budget, 1992).

Thus the TJTC paid approximately $570 per

starting participant in 1991 ($245 million divided by 428 thousand participants).

The mean

TJTC worker earned approximately $5.00 per hour and worked close to 30 hours per week
in 1992 (U.S. Department of Labor, 1994). Thus the TJTC appears to have reduced
employer wage costs by approximately 15 percent for the typical TJTC participant in a job of
six month duration in the early 1990s.

16
The TJTC has played a modest labor market role for disadvantaged youths and
welfare recipients, who together accounted for more than 80 percent of the total tax credits.
Economically disadvantaged youth represented the majority of TJTC certifications throughout
the life of the program.

Table 1 provides a comparison of the level of TJTC certifications

and an estimate of the number of employed ~onomically disadvantaged youths for whom
firms could theoretically collect the TJTC.4

The estimates in the table imply that from the

mid- to late- 1980s approximately 9 percent of economically disadvantaged youth who were
eligible and employed had been hired under the credit. This take-up rate is a bit higher than
the under 5 percent rate estimated by O’Neill (1982) for the first year of program operation.
One possibility for low utilization of the TJTC is regulatory burden and the lack of
support for the program by its administering agencies the Department of Labor and the state
Employment Services. An alternative explanation is the stigma that targeting may attach to
workers whose employment the government seeks to advance. The stigma hypothesis gains
support from the results of a controlled experiment conducted in Dayton, Ohio in 1980-81 to
try to test the effectiveness of two targeted wage subsidy plans (Burtless, 1985). Welfare
(AFDC and general assistance) recipients, all eligible for the TJTC, were randomly assigned
to three groups. The first group received vouchers that could be presented to prospective
employers for direct cash rebate subsidies. The second experimental treatment group were
given tax credit vouchers that allowed prospective employers to receive either the WIN tax
credit or the TJTC. Participants in these first two groups were encouraged to distribute
explanatory material about the wage subsidies (tax credits) to employers they contacted
during their job search. Members of the third group while technically eligible for the WIN

17
or TJTC tax credits received no vouchers and were not informed of their eligibility for these
programs.

The striking result of this experiment is that job seekers given experimental

vouchers in both treatment groups were significantly less likely to find employment than
were job seekers without vouchers.

One interpretation is that vouchers indicating eligibility

for a targeted wage subsidy but also indicating that the individual is a welfare recipients ae
more of a stigma that a help in job search. Hollenbeck and Willke (1991) report that in a
second similar random assignment experiment (conducted by the Wisconsin Department of
Health and Social Services) the target group members (welfare, ex-offenders, and
handicapped), who were trained to announce their eligibility for the TJTC to employers, also
fared worse than the controls. It is unclear whether the results from these two studies from
the early 1980s for welfare recipients are transferable to the largest TJTC group,
economically disadvantaged youth.
Several nonexperimental studies have attempted to estimate the impacts of the TJTC
on the earnings and employment of eligible workers and on net job creation, but the sources
of identifying information have not been very persuasive.

Hollenbeck and Willke (1991) find

greater regional availability and usage of the TJTC is associated with positive labor market
impacts for nonwhite male youths and small negative impacts on other eligible race/sex
groups, but the results are fairly sensitive to specification choice. Lorenz (1988) finds
positive impacts of the TJTC on earnings in the year the credit is received, but the control
group of those vouchered and not obtaining TJTC jobs is likely to bias him towards finding
positive results. Bishop and Montgomery (1993) use a survey of 3500 private employers
from the early 1980s to determine whether use of the TJTC alters a firms employment level

18
and/or whom the firm hires. They compare hiring patterns and employment growth in firms
that do and don’t use the TJTC. They conclude that each subsidized hire generates between
0.13 and 0.3 new jobs to a participating firm and that program use induces shifts in
employment towards workers under age 25. But they do not present a convincing solution to
the endogeneity of TJTC usage arising from the likelihood that fast growing firms and those
using the youth labor market are simply more likely to use the TJTC.

Evaluating

the Effect of T.lTC Eligibility on the Em~loyment

of Disadvantaged

Youth

Legislative changes in the eligibility rules and generosity of the TJTC provide a
possibly more plausible and exogenous source of variation to try to identify the impacts of
the TJTC on the labor market outcomes of the target groups. A major change occurred on
January 1, 1989 when economically disadvantaged youths aged 23-24 were made ineligible
for the TJTC while those aged 18-22 maintained their eligibility. Table 1 shows that the
number of TJTC certifications for economically disadvantaged youths fell by over 50,000 in
from 1988 to 1989 and averaged 93,000 less per year in 1989-90 than in 1987-88. This 30
percent decline in certifications for disadvantaged youth from 1987-88 to 1989-90 is similar
to the share of total employment of disadvantaged youth of individuals aged 23-24.
An analysis of the employment rates of disadvantaged individuals aged 23-24 before
and after this legislative change can potentially help us assess the employment impacts of the
TJTC. If the TJTC buoyed the employment of these youths, then its removal should have
lowered the employment of disadvantaged youths aged 23-24 in 1989-90 relative to their
employment in earlier years. But since other factors (e. g., business cycle conditions) are

19
also likely to have caused changes in employment of young adults over this period, it is
critical to account for these. One useful approach is to compare the employment experience
of disadvantaged 23-24 year olds with the employment experiences of other 23-24 year olds
over the same time period. The gap in the before/after change in employment rate of
disadvantaged 23-24 year olds to others aged 23-24 provides a differences-in-differences
estimate of the impact of TJTC eligibility on the employment of the target group. This
differences-in-differences estimate does not take into account non-TJTC factors that
differentially affect the labor market prospects of disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged
workers.

Since disadvantaged 18-22 year olds (who remained covered by the TJTC after

1988) and disadvantaged 25-29 year olds (who were never eligible) were not affected by the
legislative change, the changes in their employment rates relative to non-disadvantaged
individuals of the same age provides an estimate of the magnitude of non-TJTC factors
differentially affecting the employment of disadvantaged young workers over this period. If
one subtracts the differences-in-differences estimate of disadvantaged-specific employment
factors for the “placebo” groups (18-22 and 25-29 year olds) from the differences-indifferences estimate for the “experimental” group (23-24 year olds) then one has a
differences-in-differences-in-differences

(DDD) estimate of the employment effect of the

TJTC on disadvantaged youth aged 23-24. This DDD estimate adjusts the simple
before/after change in employment of the group losing TJTC eligibility for generaJ labor
market trends affecting young workers and for those specifically affecting economically
disadvantaged individuals.
Such an analysis also requires a designation of the appropriate “before” and “after”

20
periods.

The macroeconomic environment was reasonably stable in the period surrounding

the legislative change from early 1987 to early 1990, TJTC rules were unchanged during
1987 and 1988. The TJTC was much more generous in the period prior to 1986, and the
program expired at the beginning of 1986 with uncertainty concerning its reauthorization
prior to late 1986 when it was retroactively reauthorized.

The labor market for

disadvantaged youth was affected in the period after March 1990 by increases in the Federal
minimum wage in April 1990 and April 1991, and by a rwession that could substantially
change the composition of individuals imputed to be economically disadvantaged.

Thus I

focus on 1987-88 as the before period and 1989-90 as the after period.
Table 2 presents estimates calculated from the March Current Population Surveys of
the employment rates of disadvantaged and non-disadvantaged youths and young adults from
1984 to 1992 for the experimental group (those aged 23-24) and the two placebo groups
(those aged 18 to 22 who aged 25 to 29). The employment rate of disadvantaged 23-24 year
olds is lower in 1989-90 than in 1987-88, while, in contrast, the employment rate for nondisadvantaged 23-24 year olds increased over this period, Table 3 shows that these
employment rate patterns imply a simple differences-in-differences estimate of a marginally
statistically significant -.030 indicating a 3 percentage point decline in the employment of
disadvantaged to non-disadvantaged 23-24 year olds after elimination of eligibility for the
TJTC of this age group. Tables 2 and 3 show similar declines in the relative employment of
the economically disadvantaged did not occur for those aged 18-22 and 25-29. Figure 2
further illustrates that the gap in employment rates between non-disadvantaged and
disadvantaged 23-24 year olds expanded relative to the analogous two control groups in

21
1989-90 period versus the 1987-88 period. The DDD estimate (presented in Table 3)
comparing the change in the gap in employment rate for disadvantaged and nondisadvantaged individuals in the experimental group with the average of the change in the
two placebo groups from 1987-88 to 1989-90 implies the TJTC boosted the employment rate
of disadvantaged 23-24 year olds by 0.043 (with a standard error of 0,020).
This basic DDD estimate fails to account for changes in the composition of the
treatment groups (the disadvantaged) and control groups (the non-disadvantaged) that could
affect their employment rates. A simple regression framework allows one to adjust the DDD
estimates for changes in the observed individual characteristics.

The regression equation -- a

linear probability model for employment (E) -- is estimated on pooled March Current
Population Survey data from 1987 to 1990 for individuals aged 18 to 29:

where i indexes individual, t indexes time, a and the @‘sare the parameters to be estimated,
X is a vector of observable covariates (e. g., years of schooling, race dummies, mariti
status, region), DIS is a dummy variable taking on a value of 1 for disadvantaged
individuals, ~ equals 1 in 1989-90 and O in 1987-88, AGED equals 1 for those aged 23-24
and O otherwise, and ~ is an error term. The coefficient on the third-level interaction term
(~~) captures variation in employment specific to the disadvantaged (relative to the nondisadvantaged) in the experimental age group (relative to the placebo age groups) in the after

22

period (relative to the before period). This provides an adjusted DDD estimate of the effect
of the TJTC on the employment of disadvantaged 23-24 year olds. The bottom row of Table
3 presents the adjusted DDD estimate from a specification of the form of equation (3)
including a substantial number of demographic controls, state dummy variables and regionspecific trends. The adjusted DDD estimate indicates a 3.4 percentage point (or 7.7 percent)
decline in employment associated with removal of eligibility from the TJTC.

Since wage

costs were reduced approximately 15 percent on average by the TJTC in this period, a 7.7
percent employment effect suggests an own-wage labor demand elasticity of -0.5 (under the
restrictive assumption that the labor supply of the affected group was effectively infinite).
A 3.4 percentage point decline in the employment rate for economically disadvantaged
23-24 year olds in 1989 represents a decline of 39,000 jobs relative to a base of possibly
100,000 annual certifications for this group in 1987-88. Employment durations for certified
23-24 year olds were likely to have been a bit longer than for the typical younger TJTC
recipient.

My crude guess at the typical TJTC job duration for 23-24 year olds is 9 to 12

months. This implies a (point-in-time) stock of approximately 75,000 to 100,000 jobs that
received the TJTC. The adjusted DDD estimate suggests that 40 to 52 percent of the jobs
getting TJTC subsidies reflected net employment additions for economically disadvantaged
23-24 year olds at a cost of $1500 (1991 dollars) or so per net job created.
There are reasons to be cautious in interpreting these DDD estimates of the
employment effects of the TJTC, Figure 2 and Table 2 suggest the relative decline in the
employment of disadvantaged 23-24 years actually started in 1988, a year before elimination
of TJTC eligibility for this group. Thus other unmeasured factors differentially affecting

23

disadvantaged 23-24 year olds could be present. 5 But the elimination of TJTC subsidy for a
second year of employment which was put into place in 1987 and could have been more
important for 23-24 years olds who are likely to have more stable labor force attachment
than 18-22 year olds. Thus the TJTC does appear to have had modest positive employment
effects on economically disadvantaged young adults.

Temporarv

Wage Subsidies for On-the-Job

Traininp under JTPA Title II

The Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) replaced CETA as the major federally
sponsored employment and training program for the disadvantaged in 1983. The JTPA,
unlike CETA, has no provision for adult public service employment, but it does emphasize
on-the-job training (OJT) and provide temporary wage subsidies of 50 percent of wages for
up to six months of employment to encourage firms to hire and train JTPA participants.
Employers receiving wage subsidies under JTPA are expected to provide long-term
employment opportunities for OJT participants, and employers exhibiting a pattern of failing
to retain OJT participants lose eligibility for future subsidies. Wage subsidies under JTPA
have been most important for economically disadvantaged adults (who are not public
assistance recipients) since this group has not been eligible for the TJTC. In 1993, JTPA
Title II (excluding the summer youth employment program) enrolled about 550,000 new
participants of whom 310,000 were adults, and approximately 18 percent of the adult JTPA
Title II participants received on-the-job training (U.S. Department of Labor, 1995),
Thirty month follow-up results from a large-scale, random assignment evaluation of
JTPA Title II, the National JTPA Study, provide estimates of the impacts of JTPA services

24
on the earnings of JTPA enrollees (Bloom et al., 1994). Twenty thousand JTPA applicants
at sixteen sites were randomly assigned to either a treatment group which could use JTPA
services or a control group which could not use JTPA services but could make use of nonJTPA training and education services. The applicants (both those becoming treatments and
controls) were classified by local JTPA staffs into service strategy groups prior to
randomization.

Thus one can estimate the impact on future earnings of a strategy focused on

OJT by examining differences in outcomes between treatments and controls for whom OJT
was the recommended strategy (denoted the OJT/JSA subgroup since many of the treatment
group members were enrolled in job search assistance while searching for a subsidized OJT
position or an unsubsidized job). The OJT/JSA service strategy group included the most
“job-ready” JTPA eligibles, approximately 39 percent of JTPA applicants.
The National JTPA Study findings indicate that JTPA has substantial and sustained
positive effects on earnings for adults enrolled in a service strategy emphasizing placement in
subsidized OJT positions with private employers (Bloom et al., 1994). The OJT/JSA strategy
is estimated to increase the earnings of adult women by a highly statistically significant 15
percent ($2292) and adult men by a marginally significant 10 percent ($2109) over thirty
months. Positive program impacts on earnings are present both during the six months of
program participation and in the first two post-program years. In fact, both men and women
in the OJT/JSA strategy showed statistically significant earnings gains of over $1000 (17
percent for women and 13 percent for men) in the second post-program ym.

The OJT/JSA

service strategy for adults appears to have substantial net benefits for both enrollees and
society even when ignoring any possible sustained impacts on earnings beyond the thirty

25

months so far analyzed in the National JTPA Study (Bloom et al, 1994). Unfortunately the
JTPA evaluation indicates this same strategy has no impacts on the earnings or employment
prospects of out-of-school disadvantaged youth.
A mixed strategy providing job search assistance, job development, and a temporary
wage subsidy s=ms to be a successful approach to substantially improving the earnings of
disadvantaged adults (particularly adult women). But, like other non-intensive strategies that
have been evaluated, it dose not appear very effective for out-of-school youth from poor
families. The JTPA evaluation estimates provide estimates of the marginal impacts of JTPA
services above the impacts of non-JTPA training services available to control group
members. The OJT wage subsidy was a more important marginal service for adults than for
youths since economically disadvantaged youth eligible for JTPA in the control group were
eligible for a wage subsidy from the TJTC. Thus the importance of a temporary wage
subsidy could play some role in explaining the more positive program impacts for adults than
youth. The extent to which the positive JTPA impacts on participants come at the expense of
displacement effects on other workers can’t be determined from the JTPA evaluation.

IV. EVALUATIONS OF U.S. WAGE SUBSIDY DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS
Further information on the likely effectiveness of private-sector employment subsidies
can be gleaned from evaluation studies of several U.S. demonstration projects testing policies
with wage subsidy components to improve the employment and earnings of disadvantaged
youth, AFDC recipients, and unemployment insurance recipients.

26
Youth Incentive Entitlement

Pilot Proiect

The Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Projwt (YIEPP) was a demonstration active
from late 1978 to early 1981 that guaranteed full-time summer jobs and part-time school year
jobs to disadvantaged youth agti 16 to 19 in selected communities provided that they stay in
school (Farkas et al., 1982; U.S. Department of Labor, 1995). All the jobs offered paid the
minimum wage. The project directly created jobs in the public and non-profit sectors and
dso offered 100 percent wage subsidies to private sector for-profit firms to encourage them
to hire disadvantaged in-school youth. Thus the YIEPP represented a saturation job creation
program for in-school youth in poor neighborhoods that attempted to use both private and
public sector employers.

Twenty-nine percent of the program jobs were with private, for-

profit employers with retail trade being the largest category of private sector employers.
The program does appear to have substantially increased the earnings and employment
rates of youths in the treatment communities relative to those in four “comparable” cities that
were used as control sites (Farkas et al., 1982, 1984). School year employment rates
doubled from about 20% to 40%, while summer employment rates increased from about
35% to 45%.

Minority employment rates under YIEPP were raised up to those of whites in

the same areas. School-year earnings were estimated to have increased by 46 to 161 percent
in the different years of operation of the program, and summer earnings were raised by
approximately 50 percent.

Most of the in-program earnings gains arose from increases in

employment rates and hours worked per week rather than higher wages; this is not surprising
since the program only funded minimum wage jobs. Private sector employment for the
youth increased by 18 percent (representing an increase of 3.1 percentage points in the

27
employment- population ratio) on average during the operation of the program.

While the

employer take-up rate was low, substantial wage subsidies combined with job development
efforts by an intermediary did substantially expand private employment for difficult to
employ poor youth. Comparisons of the treatment effect on private sector employment with
the total number of private sector jobs subsidized implies a fifty percent displacement rate for
YIEPP private sector job slots so that it took 2 private sector slots to expand employment of
YIEPP participants by one.
Despite the linkage of employment opportunities to school enrollment, YIEPP did not
appear to increase the school enrollment rate of eligible youth. Nevertheless, the YIEPP
does suggest the importance of demand-side barriers to employment of poor minority youth
and the potential for mixed public-private employment creation efforts to improve the
situation. Furthermore, Farkas et al. (1984) find a positive and statistically significant postprogram overall weekly earnings effect of 39 percent (and a modest but statistically
insignificant 5 percent increase in hourly wages) in the year following program termination.

Subsidized

Emplovrn ent for AFDC Reci~ients

Several evaluations suggest that subsidized employment combined with training and
other support services appears to be a promising and particularly effwtive strategy to
improve the earnings of adult female AFDC recipients.

The strongest positive earnings

impacts of the OJT/JSA service strategy in the JTPA Title 11evaluation were found for adult
female AFDC recipients (U.S. Department of hbor,

1995). Similarly, state work-welfare

demonstrations in New Jersey and Maine, which emphasized on-the-job training with

28

subsidized wages, showed earnings impacts of over $1000 per year (Gueron and Pauly,
1991). The National Supported Work Demonstration (NSW) of the late 1970s provided
single parents who were long-term welfare recipients with extensive support services and 12
to 18 months of subsidized employment on projects (sheltered workshops) directly developed
and managed by the demonstration’s operators.

A random assignment evaluation of the

NSW found large in-program annual earnings increases during the period of subsidized
employment of over $6000 (300%) on average. Earnings increases of over 20% were
apparent in the first two post-program years, and substantial earnings impacts of over $400
per year remained in the sixth through eighth post-program years (Gueron and Pauly, 1991;
Couch, 1992).
The Homemaker-Home Health Aide Demonstrations (HHHA) of the mid- 1980s
provided “job ready” AFDC recipients with four to eight weeks of training and up to twelve
months of subsidized employment under close supervision as home health aides with private
and quasi-public nursing homes and home health care agencies. The HHHA demonstrations
were implemented with a random assignment design in seven states and, unlike the NSW,
made substantial use of subsidies for employment with private-sector employers operating in
a “rd”

market (Bell and Orr, 1994). The HHHA demonstrations produced significant

earnings gains for participants in five out of the seven states in which they were carried out.
The earnings gains averaged around $2000 annually in the first two years of the program and
sustained gains of approximately $500 annually were sustained during the fourth to fifth
years after exit from the program (U.S. Department of Labor, 1995). Bell and Orr (1994)
estimate positive net social benefits in six of the seven states experimenting with HHHA,

29

Thus welfare-to-work programs that combine training, job development, employment
subsidies to private-sector employers, and support services appear to be a cost-effective route
to producing substantial and sustained ~nings

increases for AFDC recipients.

But the low

earnings base for this population implies that such program by themselves do not produce
large enough earnings gains to move such families out of poverty.

Furthermore the extent to

which modest-sized demonstration projects emphasizing subsidized employment can be
successfully implemented as operations of the scale necessary for a work program associated
with currently popular time-limited welfare proposals is very much an open question.

Wage Subsidies for ,Tob Losers

Many recent random assignment experiments have evaluated alternative approaches to
improve the re-employment prospects of U.S. unemployment insurance (UI) recipients.
Some evidence on the effectiveness of hiring subsidies for UI recipients can be extracted
from the Illinois Re-employment Bonus experiments (Woodbury and Spiegelman, 1987).
In one of the experiments (the Employer Bonus Experiment), a random sample of UI
claimants were told that their next employer would qualify for a cash bonus of $500 if they,
the claimants, found a job within eleven weeks of filing the UI claim, and if they retained
that job for four months. Participation in the experiment was voluntary for the treatments
and about one-third of the subjects refused to take the subsidy voucher offered to them. The
participation rates were lower for higher-skilled workers suggesting possible perceived
stigmatic effects of the vouchers.

Under the assumption that the treatment had no effect on

those not participating (not accepting the vouchers), the availability of the wage subsidy

30
reduced the weeks of insured employment by approximately one week on average and
reduced UI benefits paid over the benefit year by a modest, marginally statistically significant
amount (Dubin and Rivers, 1993). The number of employer bonuses claimed were quite
small (only 3 percent of the sample) and the impacts of the employer hiring bonus were
smaller than the estimated effwts of a claimant bonus treatment in which the UI recipient
could earn the $500 bonus and did not have to provide any information about the bonus to an
employer.

The employer subsidy appears less powerful than the claimant re-employment

bonus in speeding up re-employment.

Nevertheless, Meyer (1995) reports mixed results

concerning the impacts of re-employment bonuses in a series of other experiments and
expresses skepticism about the efficacy of a permanent re-employment bonus program.

V. EXPERIENCES

OF OTHER OECD COUNTRIES

WITH EMPLOYER

SUBSIDIES

OECD countries have experimented with a variety of subsidies for private-sector
employment, although few formal evaluations of the impacts of non-U. S. programs have
been performed.b Many countries implemented marginal (incremental) employment
subsidies of some type during the 1970s. Canada operated an Employment Tax Program
from 1978 to 1981 that was similar to the U.S. NJTC. Gera (1987) estimates the job
creation and net costs per job created of this Canadian program were quite similar to
estimates for the NJTC. Evaluations of 1970s marginal employment subsidies in other
countries are not terribly convincing and typically based on surveys asking employers
whether they altered their behavior in response to the subsidy. OECD (1982, p. 11)
concludes on the basis of this type of evidence that marginal employment subsidies can be a

31
reasonably efficient employment-promoting device on a temporary basis during a recovery.
More recently many OECD nations have attempted to use wage subsidies to spur the
employment of targeted groups, particularly the long-term unemployed and unemployed
youth. OECD (1993) concludes from the existing evaluations that targeted recruitment
subsides are likely to have substantial displacement effects and large deadweight losses, but
none of the studies summarized are particularly compelling.

A caeful nonexperimental

evaluation of two Dutch wage subsidy schemes for the long-term unemployed suggests they
may have increased re-employment rates for the long-term unemployed by up to 10 percent
but at the cost of substantial displacement of the employment of other workers (de Koning,
1993). Further evaluations of the variety of private-employment subsidy programs being
implemented outside the U.S. could greatly increase our understanding of the efficacy of
wage subsidies.

VI. CONCLUSIONS

Despite the substantial experience of advanced nations with private-sector employment
subsidies, the lack of formal evaluation evidence leaves much uncertainty concerning the
likely impacts of such policies. Table 4 summarizes the characteristics and estimated impacts
of the major U.S. wage subsidy programs and demonstrations trageted on the economically
disadvantaged.

The current evidence suggests that wage subsidies combined with training

and job development are effective in improving the earnings and employment of
disadvantaged adults, particularly AFDC recipients.

Stand-alone targeted wage subsidies

appear to hampered by stigma and low employer utilization when the eligible groups are

32

those with negative connotations for employers.

But some new evidence presented in this

paper indicates that the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit may have modestly improved the
employment rates of economically disadvantaged youth. The evidence from the YIEPP also
suggests that a saturation job creation strategy that combines direct public job creation and
private-sector subsidies can play an important role in improving the employment and earnings
of disadvantaged youth. A non-categorical wage subsidy for low-wage workers appears at
least worthy of a demonstration project that compared outcomes for low-wage workers in
comparable communities with and without the availability of such a policy.
Two new U.S. experiments with employment tax credits were initiated with the
passage of the 1993 Budget Reconciliation Bill. The bill has led to the designation of six
urban and three rural Empowerment Zones in which a 20 percent tax credit will be
applicable on the first $15,000 of wages and training expenses for employees who live and
work in a zone. The second is the transformation of corporate tax incentives to locate in
Puerto Rico under Section 936 partially into an employment tax credit (with the maximum
credit available affected by labor compensation paid in Puerto Rico). The impacts of the
incentives introduced by these two new initiatives deserve careful evaluation.

33

References
Ashenfelter, Orley. “Evaluating the Effmts of the Employment Tax Credit. ” In U.S.
Department of Labor, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Policy, Evaluation, and Research,
Conference Report on Evaluating the 1977 Economic Stimulus Package. Washington, D. C.:
U.S. GPO, 1978, 1-14.
Bell, Stephen H. and Larry L. Orr. “Is Subsidized Employment Cost Effective for Welfare
Recipients?” Journal of Human Resources 29 (Winter 1994): 42-61.
Bishop, John. “Employment in Construction and Distribution Industries: The Impact of the
New Jobs Tax Credit, ” in S. Rosen, ed., Studies in Labor Markets. (Chicago: University of
Chicago), 1981, 209-46.
Bishop, John and Mark Montgomery. “Does the Targeted Jobs Tax Credit Create Jobs at
Participating Firms?” Industrial Relations 32 (Fall 1993): 289-306.
Bloom, Howard S. et al. The National JTPA Study: Overview: Impacts. Benefits. and Costs
of Title II-A. Abt Associates, January 1994.
Bound, John and George Johnson. “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980s: An
Evaluation of Alternative Explanations. ” American Economic Review 82 (June 1992): 37192.
Burtless, Gary. “Are Targeted Wage Subsidies Harmful? Evidence from a Wage Voucher
Experiment. ” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (October 1985): 105-14.
Card, David. “Earnings, Schooling, and Ability Revisited. ” Princeton University, Industrial
Relations Section Working Paper No. 311, May 1994.
Card, David and Alan Krueger. Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
Minimum Wage, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.
Card, David and Phillip K. Robbins. “Do Financial Incentives Encourage Welfare Recipients
to Work? Early Findings from the Canadian Self-Sufficiency Project. ” Princeton University,
Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #359, March 1996.
Couch, Kenneth A. “New Evidence on the brig-Term Effects of Employment Training
Programs. ” Journal of Labor Economics 10 (October 1992): 380-88.
Davidson, Carl and Stephen A. Woodbury. “Wage Subsidies for Dislocated Workers. ”
Upjohn Institute Working Paper No. 95-31, January 1995.

34
Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Douglas Rivers. “Experimental Estimates of the Impact of Wage
Subsidies. ” Journal of Econometrics 56 (1993): 219-42.
Eissa, Nada and Jeffrey B. Liebman. “Labor Supply Response to the Earned Income Tax
Credit. ” Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 111 (May 1996): 605-37
Farkas, Gmrge, et al. Impacts from the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Proi&ts:
Participation. Work. and Schooling over the Full Program Period. Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation, December 1982.
Farkas, George, et al. Post-Pro~ram Imuacts of the Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot
Projects. Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, June 1984.
Freeman, Richard B. and Lawrence F. Katz. “Rising Wage Inequality: The United States
vs. Other Advanced Countries. ” In R. Freeman, ed., Working Under Different Rules. New
York: Russell Sage Foundation and NBER, 1994, 29-62.
Gera, Surendra. “An Evaluation of the Canadian Employment Tax Credit Program. ”
Canadian Public Policy 13 (1987): 196-207.
Grubb, David. “Direct and Indirect Effects of Active Labor Market Policies in OECD
Countries.” In R. Barren, ed., The UK Labor Market. London: Cambridge University
Press, 1994, 183-213.
Gueron, Judith M. and Edward Pauly. From Welfare to Work. New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1991.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. “Subsidies for Jobs in the Private Sector. ” In J. Palmer, ed., Creating
~.
Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1978, 87-122.
Hamermesh, Daniel S. Labor Demand. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
Heckrnan, James J., Rebecca L. Roselius, and Jeffrey A. Smith. “U.S, Education and
Training Policy: A Re-Evaluation of the Underlying Assumptions Behind the New
Consensus. ” University of Chicago, Dwember 1993.
Hoffman, Saul D. and Laurence Siedman, The Earned Income Tax Credit: Anti~overtv
Effectiveness and Labor Market Effects. Kalamazoo, MI: Upjohn Institute, 1990.
Hollenbeck, Kevin M. and Richard J. Willke, “The Employment and Earnings Impacts of the
Targeted Jobs Tax Credit. ” Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, February 1991.
Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert Topel. “Why Has the Natural Rate Increased
over Time?” Brookin~s Papers on ~onomic Activity 1991:2, 75-142.

35

Kaldor, Nicholas. “Wage Subsidies as a Remedy for Unemployment. ” Journal of Political
Economy 44 (1936): 721-42.
Katz, Lawrence F. “Active Labor Market Policies to Expand Employment and Opportunity. ”
In Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Reducing Unemployment: Current Issues and
Policv Outions. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1994, pp. 239-90.
Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors. ” Ouarterlv Journal of Economics 107 (February 1992): 35-78,
de Koning, Jaap. “Measuring the Placement Effects of Two Wage-Subsidy Schemes for the
Long-Term Unemployed. “ EmDirical Economics 18 (1993): 447-68.
LaLonde, Robert J. “The Promise of Public-Sector Sponsored Training Programs. ” Journal
of Economic Perspectives 9 (Spring 1995): 149-68.
Lorenz, Edward C. The Tar~eted Jobs Tax Credit in Maryland and Missouri: 1982-87.
National Commission of Employment Policy, November 1988.
brenz, Edward C. “TJTC and the Promise and Reality of Redistributive Vouchering and
Tax Credit Policy. ” Journal of Policy Analvsis and Management 14 (Spring 1995): 270-90.
Manning, Alan. “How Do We Know that Rd
Economics 110 (November 1995): 1111-25.

Wages Are too High?” Ouarterly Journal of

Meyer, Bruce D. “Lessons from the U.S. Unemployment Insurance Experiments. ” Journal of
Economic Literature 33 (March 1995): 91-131.
Moffitt, Robert. “Incentive Effects of the U, S. Welfare System: A Review, ” Journal of
Economic Literature 30 (March 1995): 1-61.
Mortensen, Dale T. “Reducing Supply-Side Disincentives to Job Creation. ” In Federal Bank
of Kansas City, Reducin g Unem~lovment: Current Issues and Policy Options. Kansas City:
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1994, pp. 189-219.
OECD. Mar~inal Employment Subsidies. Paris: OECD, 1982.
OECD. Labor Market Policies for the 1990s. Paris: OECD, 1990.
OECD. Employment Outlook. Paris: OECD, 1993.
O’Neill, Dave M. “Employment Tax Credit Programs: The Effects of Sociomonomic
Targeting Provisions. ” Journal of Human Resources 17 (Summer 1982): 449-59.

36

Perloff, Jeffrey M. and Michael Wachter. “The New Jobs Tax Credit: An Evaluation of the
1977-78 Wage Subsidy Program. ” American Economic Review (May 1979), 173-79.
Phelps, Edmund S. “Low-Wage Employment Subsidies versus the Welfare State. ” American
Economic Review 84 (May 1994): 54-58. (a)
Phelps, Edmund S. “Wage Subsidy Programs: Alternative Designs. ” Unpublished paper,
Columbia University and Russell Sage Foundation, August 1994. (b)
Schwanse, Peter. “European Experience. ” In R. Haveman and J. Palmer, eds., Jobs for
Disadvantaged Workers. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1982, 297-327.
Snower, Dennis J. “Converting Unemployment Benefits into Wage Subsidies. ” American
Economic Review 84 (May 1994): 65-70.
U.S. Department of Labor. Office of Inspector General. Targeted Jobs Tax Credit:
Employment Inducement or Employer Windfall?, August 1994.
U.S. Department of Labor. Office of the Chief Economist. What’s Working and What’s Not:
What We Know About Getting People New Skills and New Jobs, January 1995.
U, S. Departments of Labor and Treasury, The Use of Tax Subsidies for Em~lovment.
Report to Congress. May 1986.

A

U.S. House of Representatives. Committee on Ways and Means. 1993 Green Book.
Washington DC: U.S. GPO, 1993.
U, S. Office of Management and Budget. Bud~et of the United States Government: Fiscal
Year 1993. Washington, DC: U.S. GPO, 1992.
Woodbury, Stephen A. and Robert G. Spiegelman. “Bonuses to Workers and Employers to
Reduce Unemployment: Randomized Trials in Illinois. ” American Economic Review 77
(September 1987): 513-30.

37
Endnotes

1. Since there exists a burgeoning literature examining the effects of employee-side earnings
supplements such as the Earned Income Tax Credit (e.g. Hoffman and Siedman, 1990; and
Eissa and Liebman, 1996) in the United States and the Self-Sufficiency Project in Canada
(Card and Robbins, 1996), I limit my focus to employer-side wage subsidies.
2. An alternative approach is to simulate the effats of wage subsidies in more fully
developed (but still highly stylized) general equilibrium labor market models, See Mortensen
(1994) for an interesting attempt to simulate the effects of a general new hire subsidy; and
Davidson and Woodbury (1995) for an ambitious simulation model to analyze wage-rate
subsidies for dislocated workers.
3, The most recent authorization of the TJTC expired at the end of 1994. The TJTC has
expired several times in the past and then b~n reauthorized. It is unclear at this date
whether the TJTC will once again be resurrected by Congress in some form.
4. An individual qualified as “economically disadvantaged” under the TJTC if he or she had
a family income in the six months prior to starting a job that on an annual basis would be
less than seventy percent of the Bureau of Labor Statistics “lower level standard income
level” (LLSIL) for his or her gmgraphic region. The LLSIL varies by family size,
metropolitan area status, and across the four Census regions. Seventy percent of the LLSIL
is approximately 125 percent of the poverty line for a family of four in the average
geographic area. I use the March Current Population Surveys (CPSS) to estimate the toti
number of economically disadvantaged youths aged 18-22 and 23-24 and their employment
rates in each year from 1984 to 1992. Information on annual family income for the previous
calendar year, residential location (state and metropolitan area), age, and family size
available in the March CPS is used to impute whether an individual would been classified as
economically disadvantaged at the time of the survey. The employment rates are based on
employment status information from the March survey reference week. Since family income
varies over a calendar year, the number of individuals imputed to be eligible for the program
using annual income from the March CPS is likely to be somewhat of an underestimate of
those actually eligible on the basis of their family income over the previous six months.
Information on the LLSIL by region and metropolitan areas was kindly provided by David
Lah of the Employment and Training Administration of the U.S. Department of Labor,
Individuals residing in Alaska and Hawaii are excluded from the analysis because of
incomplete information on the official LLSIL levels for these states.
5. Contamination effects leading to an overestimate could be present if the employment rates

of non-disadvantaged 23-24 year olds were increased when they became cheaper relative to
disadvantaged 23-24 years; an opposite contamination bias leading to an underestimate could
arise if the employment rates of disadvantaged 18-22 year and 25-29 year olds were bolstered
by the policy change.

38
6. 0ECD(1982)

mdSchwmse (1982)descnbe OECDemployment subsidies operating in
the 1970s and summarize evidence on the impacts of these policies. OECD (1990) and
Grubb (1994) describe more recent efforts.

Figure 1
Partial Equilibrium Impact of a Wage Subsidy (s) on the Low-Wage Labor Market
(a)
LD(W [1 - s])
LD(W)
w

w, ‘w.

Ls (W)

Lo

L,

L

(b)
LD(W

[1 - s])

LD(W)
w

w,
w~

L’ (W)

.........
.......... .............
.......... . ... . . . ....... ... . . ........

LO

L,

L

0 18 to
❑

25

to

22

29

years
years

+ 23 to

old
old

24

years

old

-,25

-,3

-.35
c

.d

-.4

-.45
I
04

Differences

I
B5

I

86

in

Emp.

I

87

Rates
Figure

I

BO
year

(Dlsad.

2

I

I

89

–

90

I

I

91

Non– Dlsad.

92

)

Table
Targeted
the Employment

TJTC

Jobs Tax Credit

1
(TJTC)

certifications and

of Economically
Disadvantaged
(in millions)

Certifications

Employment

Youth,

1984-92

of Disadvantaged

Youth

Year

Total

Disad.
Youth

18-22

23-24

1984

.563

.328

1.454

.649

2.103

1985

.622

.367

1.452

.624

2.076

1986

.242

.144

1.264

.617

1.881

1987

.598

,349

1.213

.562

1.776

1988

.497

.282

1,200

.550

1.750

1989

.452

.231

1.281

.477

1.281

1990

.445

.219

1.204

.502

1.204

1991

.428

.225

1.181

.513

1,181

1992

.364

.191

1.174

.541

1.174

Sources:
p. 1073)

Numbers of TJTC Certifications
and from unpublished tabulations

Total
Eligible

(in millions) are from U.S. House of Representatives
(1 993,
provided by the U.S. Department
of Labor, Employment
and

Training Administration.
Data on certifications
for 1984 and 1985 cover fiscal years (October
previous year to September of the listed year); data for 1986 covers October 1985 to December
data for 1987

to 1992

the suspension
Employment

cover calendar

of the program

years. The low number

from January

levels of economically

disadvantaged

in 1986

partially

reflects

for March

of each

1986.

youth are the author’s

year from the March
Current
Population
Surveys
Economically
disadvantaged
status for each individual
1984 to March 1992 was imputed
calendar year and family structure

of certifications

to late October

of the
1986;

tabulations

(CPS) using CPS basic sampling
weights.
aged 18 to 24 in the March CPS’S from March

using the available information
on family income in the previous
combined with information
on the relevant Lower Income Living

Standard Level by geographic
region and metropolitan
area of residence.
Residents
of Alaska and
Hawaii are excluded from the employment
totals.
Economically
disadvantaged
individuals aged 18 to
24 were

eligible for the TJTC

18 to 22 from

1989

to 1992.

during the 1984

to 1988

period;

eligibility

was restricted

to those aged

Table
Employment
Non-Disadvantaged

2

Rates for Economically
Young

18 to 22 Years

Adults,

Aged

23 to 24 Years

Old

Non-Disad.

.425

.779
.006)

.421
(.011)

.798

(.017)

.783

.408

,811

,006)

(.012)

.004)

.631
,005)

.381
(.010)

.642
.005)

.422
(.017)

1989

1990

1991

1992

Employment
Current
of year.
599

.365

.643

.456

,804

.412

.820

.005)

(.018)

(,006)

(,012)

.004)

.365
(.011)

.647
.005)

,455

.806
(,006)

.424

(.019)

(,012)

.824
.004)

.367
(.011)

.644

,429

,821

,423

.836

.005)

(.019)

(.006)

(.012)

.004)

.397

.657

,412

.825

.419

.836

(.012)

(.005)

(.020)

(.007)

(.013)

(.004)

.391
(.012)

.644

.435

.825

.434

.839

(.005)

[.019)

(.007)

(.013)

(.004)

.378
(.012)

.629
.005)

.400

.797

(.019)

.007)

.413
(.012)

.829
.004)

.349
(.011)

.644

.448

.781

.005)

(.020)

.007)

.391
(.012)

.826
,004)

Surveys

Each observation

to 11442.

.004)

(.010)

rates by economically

Population

Old

Non-Disad.

.361
(.010)

1988

25 to 29 Years

Disad.

1984

1987

Old

to 1992

Non-Disad.

Disad.

1986

and
1984

Disad.

Year

1985

Disadvantaged

18 to 29 Years,

Standard

disadvantaged

(CPSS) for 1984
is weighted

status

to 1992

and age group are estimates

based on current

by its CPS basic sampling

employment

weight.

Cell sample

from the March
status

for March

sizes vary from

errors are in parentheses.

Economically
disadvantaged
status for each individual aged 18 to 29 in the March CPS’S from March
1984 to March 1992 was imputed using the available information
on family income in the previous
calendar year and family structure combined with information
on the relevant Lower Income Living
Standard
Level by geographic
region and metropolitan
Hawaii are excluded from the samples.

area of residence.

Residents

of Alaska

and

Table
Differences-in-Differences-in-Differences
of Targeted

Jobs Tax Credit

(TJTC)

3
(DDD)
Eligibility

Employment
Before
1987-88

A, Experimentals,

23-24

Non-Disadvantaged
Difference

at Point in Time

18-22

After
1989-90

Time
Difference

.442

.423

-.019

(.013)

(,014)

(,019)

.814
(.004)

.825
(.005)

.012
(.006)

-.372
[.012)

(.012)

-.402

-.030
(,017)

and 25-29

Disadvantaged

Year Olds
.390
(.006)

Non-Disadvantaged

Disad./Non-Disad.

Rates

Rates

Difference-in-Difference

B, Placebos,

of the Impact

Year Olds

Disadvantaged

Disad. /Non-Disad.

Estimates

on Employment

Difference

at Point in Time
Difference-in-Difference

,410
(.006)

.019
(.009)

,748

,755

.006

(.002)

(.002)

(.003)

-.358
(.006)

(.006)

-.345

.013
(.008)

DDD Estimate

-.043
(.020)

Adjusted

DDD

Estimate

-.034
(.019)

Notes

to Table

3:

Cells contain mean employment
rates for the identified group and time period from the March Current
Population Surveys (CPSS) for 1987 to 1990.
Standard errors are in parentheses.
Each observation
is weighted

by its CPS basic sampling

weight.

The DDD estimate

is the difference-in-difference

from

panel A minus that in panel B. Economically
disadvantaged
status for each individual aged 18 to 29
in the March CPS’S was imputed using the available information
on family income in the previous
calendar

year and family

structure

combined

with

information

Standard Level by geographic
region and metropolitan
Hawaii are excluded from the samples.
The

adjusted

DDD

estimate

is the coefficient

on the relevant

area of residence.

on the third-order

interaction

Lower

Residents

term

Income

Living

of Alaska

of a time

and

period

(before/after)
dummy with an age group dummy (age 23-24
equals 1 ) and a disadvantaged
status
dummy in an individual level employment
regression of the form given by equation
(3) in the text
covering all 18 to 29 year olds for pooled March CPS data covering
1987 to 1990,
The other
covariates
included are 3 individual year dummies; a disadvantaged
status dummy; 11 age dummies;
2 dummies
for the interaction
of age group (1 8-22
and 25-29)
with disadvantaged
status;
a
before/after
before/after
interactions

dummy

interacted

the before/after

dummy

for interactions

of the before/after

regression

with

disadvantaged

status;

2 interactions

of age

group

and

the

dummy; dummy variables for sex, marital status, and race; 4 education group dummies;
of the sex dummy with the race, marital status, and educations
dummies; interactions
of

is 103,600.

with the education,
dummy

The regression

race, and sex dummies;
with

census

was estimated

division

50 state dummies;
dummies.

and 8 dummies

The sample

using CPS basic sampling

weights,

size for the

