                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          lMPLEMENT~G RESULTS-ORIENTED
                           TRADE POLICIES: THE CASE OF THE
                          US-JAPANESE AUTO PARTS DISPUTE




                                        Kala Krishna
                                        John Morgan




                                 NBER Working Paper 5680




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 MassachusettsAvenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    July 1996




The authorsthankEric Bond for his helpful comments and Ataman Ozyildirim for his able research
assistance. Research support from the National Science Foundation, grant SBR-9320825, is
gratefully acknowledged by the first author. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in
InternationalTrade and Investment, Any opinions expressed are those of the authorsand not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research,

O 1996 by Kala Krishnaand JohnMorgan. All rightsreserved. Shortsections of text,not to exceed
two paragraphs,may be quoted without explicit permission provided thatfull credit, including @
notice, is given to the source.
                                                                    NBER Working Paper 5680
                                                                                  Ju]y 1996



                         lMPLEMENTkG RESULTS-ORIENTED
                          TRADE POLICIES: THE CASE OF THE
                         US-JAPANESE AUTO PARTS DISPUTE



                                        ABSTRACT



       Why would the US threatenpunitive tariffs on luxury autos to implement a market share

targetin auto parts? We show thatby makingthreatsto a linkedmarket, a marketsharetargetmay

be implemented with fairly weak informationaland administrativerequirements. Moreover, such

policies can be both pro-competitive and advantageousto US firms.




Kala Krishna                                                    John Morgan
Departmentof Economics                                          Woodrow Wilson School of
PennsylvaniaStateUniversity                                       Public& InternationalAffairs
University Park, PA 16802                                       Princeton University
and NBER                                                        Princeton, NJ 08544
1. Introduction


On June 28, 1995, just twelve hours before the threat of punitive sanctions on

Japanese automobiles was to become effective, an impending trade war between

the US and Japan was averted. The threat of punitive tariffs seemed to play

a central role in the US bargaining strategy and was specifically mentioned by

President Clinton in explaining how an eventual compromise was reached.1 The

nature of the US threats is somewhat paradoxical in that they did not directly

tiect the market over which the dispute was centered. The US intended to place

prohibitively high twiffs on Japanese luxury automobiles if Japan did not agree

to market share targets in its auto parts industry.2 Thus, the US did not threaten

any action directly against the market over which the trade dispute was centered;

rather, they threatened a related market which would indirectly impact the auto

parts industry in Japan.

     An obvious question, then, is whether the threat of punitive tariffs on Japanese

    1Specifically, Clinton said, “After 20 months of negotiations, I ordered my trade representa-
tive, Ambassador Kantor, to impose sanctions on Japan unless it agreed to open these markets.
Today Japan h= agreed that it will truly open its auto and auto parts markets to American
companies. ” [8]
   ZLevinsohn [14] suggests that this policy would extensively reduce the profits of Japanese
producers,   concluding     that the threat of these tariffs led to the negotiated      agreement     in auto
parts.   In contrast,     we argue that the threat    itself could   be sufficient   to generate    volunta~
compliance   with market share targets in auto parts,




                                                     2
auto manufacturers (who purchase auto parts in Japan) is sufficient to implement

the market share target. More broadly, if the US wishes to achieve the target

(in auto parts) without any help (or hindrance) from the Japanese government,

what policy or set of policies should it adopt. This paper addresses these two

questions by developing a model which highlights the linkages between markets

and finds, somewhat surprisingly, that the credible threat of punitive tariffs on

automobile producers, who purchase goods in the auto parts market, is sticient

to implement the market share policy. In contrast to other mechanisms which

require that governments carefully choose their policies to exactly attain a desired

outcome, this policy requires relatively little information on the part of the US

government. That is, the government need only make a sticiently        large threat

to attain the desired out come. The advantages of utilizing such a mechanism in

practice are obvious.

   The role of threats in trade policy is not limited to the recent US-Japanese

trade dispute. The US has routinely publicly threatened to revoke China’s most

favored nation status if it failed to curb intellectual property rights abuses in

its markets. The US has also threatened Rance with a wide range of punitive

sanctions if it failed to open its agricultural markets to US goods. The common

factor in all of these cases seems to be that the US has been trying to effect some


                                         3
type of VIE policy in China, Japan, and France by means of threats in linked

markets. Notice that the US has always made its threats very public, perhaps

as a commitment device, so that they would be credible to the fiected                        nations;

however, in all of these cases, the need to actually impose punitive sanctions was

averted and the parties came to some agTeement.

   In the parlance of international trade, the market share or quantity targets3

discussed above represent a results-otiented trade policy; that is, a policy whose

measure is in terms of market outcomes rather than in the power of the tools

used in the implementation. For example, a conventional trade policy might call

for an x% tariff on some good, which might be anticipated to result in an a%

market share for some country in the market for the good. A results-oriented trade

policy would specify the market share target only, and leave the implement ation

to the discretion of the countries entering into the agreement. The details of the

implementation, however, can significantly impact the distribution of gains and

losses among those affected. The advantages of the use of threats to linked markets

are threefold. First, such threats result in self-enforcing agreements; that is, even

without the ability to directly intervene in the market being targeted, effective

   3The   particular   market share policy   has been dubbed   a voluntary   import expansion,   or VIE
by Bhagwati    [1].




                                                   4
control may still be exercised. Second, while many market share restrictions tend

to act as facilitsting practices, our scheme may mtually encourage competition.

Finally, this scheme does not allow the implementation procedure to be chosen in

a way which facilitate Japanese interests at the expense of US firns.

   Strategic manipulation by the government whose markets are directly affected

by the results-oriented policy has been formally modeled in several applications.

Krishna, Roy and Thursby [13] consider the case where the affected market

is imperfectly competitive.   Analogous to the results of Gruenspecht [11] and

Carmichael [3], Krishna, Roy and Thursby find that the effects of such policies

depend crucially upon the timing of the government policy rtie.         Greaney [9]

also considers an imperfectly competitive market where firms compete variously

in price or quantity. She finds the optimal policies depend crucially upon the

specification of the firms’ strategy space; however, under both specifications, the

implementation of a VIE results in reduced competition among the firms.

   In contrast to these papers, which mainly examine how imposition of market

share targets might be achieved through tariffs, subsidies and the like which affect

the targeted market directly, our scheme considers imposition via threats in a

linked market. As an illustration, consider the link between the market for auto

parts and that for automobiles themselves. We examine the effect of threats to


                                         5
impose tariffs in the automobile market on the behavior of firms in the auto parts

market (who sell to the auto market). We show that the threat of tariffs in the

auto market is sufficient to induce the competitors in the auto parts market to

adhere to the market shine requirement. Two elements are crucial to this result:

First, the markets must be linked so that threats in the auto market indirectly

affect the auto parts market. Second, the threats must be sticiently                            unpleasant

and credible4 that the competitors in the parts market prefer to abide by the

target rather than compete in the usual fashion and suffer the tmiffs. The threat

must be potentially damaging to the fires which would ultimately benefit from

the mwket share target; for example, the US auto parts firms in the dispute with

Japan. If the execution of the threatened action actually benefits these firms,

then they have incentives to behave strategically and ensure that the share target

is not met, Ironically, it is the US firms which act to undermine the market share

target when they are the beneficiaries of US government threats.

    We consider the following model: Suppose that there are two firms, one from

the US, the other from Japan, competing Cournot style in the Japanese auto parts

   4While credibility     in the sense of subgame   perfection   is not formally   modeled   in this analysis,
in the auto parts example,      there would be little reason not to implement        the threatened    tariffs.
Levinsohn [14] shows that US firms would not be affected by its imposition, and it is doubtful
whether the political “losses” from disaffected Lexus owners would have any impact on Clinton’s
reelection   prospects.




                                                     6
market where the market share target is to be implemented. The demand for these

auto parts comes from Japanese auto manufacturers who sell in both Japan and

the US. Thus, the US government can threaten to impose tariffs on Japanese auto

makers if the mwket share tmget is not met. Naturally, the imposition of this

tariff reduces the derived demand in the auto parts market thus creating a linkage

between the two markets. We find conditions such that the threat of such a tariff

leads to the implementation of the VIE as a Nash equilibrium of the game. We

contrast the results obtained via credible threats with those achievable through

direct intervention via production subsidies m well as with results achievable

through a combination of threats and direct intervention. Finally, we examine

how the minimal tariff required to implement an a% mmket share target varies

with the number of competing firms. In an appendix, we show that the main

results are unchanged when firms compete in prices instead of quantities.

   The paper consists primarily of a graphical analysis of firm best response

functions and equilibria induced by the use of credible threats on the part of

the government. Due to the discontinuities in firm payoff functions, graphical

analysis becomes advantageous in two respects: First, it makes transparent the

forces impacting on the optimization decisions of the firm, and second, it makes

the characterization of equilibria considerably easier than a purely mathematical


                                        7
treatment. Throughout, the figures used in the paper will reflect a simple linear

case; however, the qualitative characteristics of the figures are robust to more

general demand specifications.

    The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 outlines the basic model. Section

3 characterizes the equilibrium outcome under Cournot competition.      Section 4

examines how the results are affected by one-sided threats which only adversely

tiect   some of the firms, and weak threats, which do not impose large penalties

when fires do not adhere to the market share target. Section 5 compares the

results of Sections 3 and 4 to direct intervention (rather than threats) on the

part of both governments. Section 6 examines how the set of equilibria changes

with the number and composition of competing firms. Finally, Section 7 draws

conclusions.   Appendix A shows that the main results of the paper are largely

unchanged when firms compete in prices rather than quantities.       Appendix B

outlines the details of calculations for the many fim case.




2. Preliminaries


Consider the interaction between two countries, H and F, and two markets, auto

parts, which we denote u for the upstream market, and autos, denoted d for the

downstream market. Suppose that the market for autos only exists in H and that

                                        8
an F company is a monopolist in this good. 5 The parts market only exists in

F with single fires from each country competing Cournot style in this market.

The only demand for the u good comes from autos, which require one unit of u to

produce one unit of d.GThe parts firms are assumed to be identica17with constant

marginal cost, c, to produce the u good. The auto producer is assumed to be able

to costlessly convert a unit of u into a unit of d, and thus h~ a constant marginal

cost equal to the price prevailing in the parts market.

    The governments of the two countries agree to a results-oriented trade policy

consisting of a market share target for the u good. Let a denote the agreed upon

market share target. The H government can make threats such as the imposition

of a tariff on the d market if the target is not met. The F government engages in

no policies whatsoever.

    The extensive form of the game is as follows: Initially, the H government

publicly announces the policies which it will implement. Trade in the u market

then takes places and the agreed to market share target is either met or not. If

   5Alternatively,   imagine that H and F firms compete     Cournot      syle in the market for d, then
the F firm will act as a monopolist on the residual demand curve for the good d taking as given
the actions of the other players. Such an alternative specification would not qualitatively affect
the results of the model,
   ‘It is immediate that any constant   input requirement   production     technology   for transforming
the u good into d will work. A one-t~one  transformation  is assumed for analytical convenience.
   7 The ~sumPtion    of identical upstreamfirms is merely for analytical convenience and is not
crucial to the results.



                                                 9
the target is not met, pre-specified sanctions are imposed by the H government

on the market for d. Following this, trade takes place in the d market, and payoffs

for all players are determined.g

   The fires in the u market face a derived demand curve based on the needs of

the d firm in supplying the downstream market.9 Define uH to be the quantity

supplied by the home upstream firm, and uF to be the quantity supplied by the

foreign upstream firm. Let the inverse derived demand curve facing the u firns

be given by

                                           p=   P(UH+UF,     O)



if no tariffs are imposed, and




                                           p ‘p(uH    +uF,   T)




if they are.

    For a given uH + uF, the inverse demand curves have the property that p

is decreasing in ~. That is, tariffs naturally reduce the derived demand for the

   aAs usual   the particular   policies   chosen will be sensitive to the timing of the game as well
as the competitive   form and the strategy      spaces chosen for all of the players.   This example   is
meant to be suggestive of the types of policies likely to be employed in pursuing a results-oriented
policy, rather than a fully general prescription of optimal Policy implementation.
    ‘In our setting, this derived demand curve will simply be the marginal revenue curve associ-
ated with the demand    for autos.


                                                     10
upstream good.

   The profits of the d firm associated with country z = {H, F} when tariffs are

not imposed may then be written as




while when tariffs are imposed, profits are given by




                        ~~i(uH,u~)= (~(uH+ UF, ~) —c)Ui



   We assume that profit functions are concave. Note that n; (uH, uF) lies above

nTi (UH, uF), as   depicted in Figure 1. Finally, holding uF bed,    the ufi which

m~imizes   n~ (uH, uF) is greater than that which maximizes 7TTH (UH, UF); that

is, the best response function for H firms with a tariff lies below that without a

tariff. Likewise for F firms.




3. Equilibrium Analysis


In this section, we derive the best response functions for both the H and F firms in

the auto parts market. We then characterize the Na-shequilibria of the subgame,



                                         11
given the threat strategy chosen by the US (H) government.



3.1. Home         Best Response             Function


Given the output choice of the Japanese auto parts firm, the profit function of

the US firm is depicted in Figures Ia-lc.                   The curve denoted     TO   denotes home’s

profits if the threat is not carried out; whereas, the curve m7 denotes the profits

from different quantity choices, uH when the threatened tariffs are enacted. The

vertical line at uH = fiuF               denotes the threshold level of home outputs required

for the satisfaction of the market share target. Thus, the bold portions of the two

profit functions define the composite profit function facing the H firm.




    Let B~(uF) denote the optimal output choice of the H firm, given the output

choice uF by the F firm in the event no tariffs are imposed. Similarly, let BTH(uF)

be analogously defined in the event tariffs are imposed. Finally, let ~H(UF) denote

the overall best response function of the H firm.l” There are two cases:

    (z) If B#(uF)           2     &UF,     then BH(UF)       =   Bfl(uF). This case is depicted in

Figure la.

    (ii) If ~~(u~)      < fiuF,          then there are two possibilities. men,        n~ ( fiuF,     uF )

  ll)Throughout     the analYsis, we will assume that when a firm is indifferent       to two strategies,
it chooses   the strategy       which results in the market share target being adhered to.


                                                       12
(weakly) exceeds n~ H (B7H(U F ) ,uF ) ,itis optimal to adhere to the market sh~e

target; hence AH (uF) = fiuF.                    This case is depicted in Figure lb. Alternatively,

if


                               ‘0
                                   Ha
                                        (–UFUF)
                                        l–a  <T,H(BTH(UF),UF)
then BH (uF) = BTH(~F). This case is depicted in Figure lc.

      Let u;(7)         implicitly define the u. which solvesll




                               ‘:       (&“FIuF)‘nTH(BTH(uF)uF)                                             (3.1)




Then if UF > u; (T) ,flH(uF) = BTH(UF),                            and otherwise ~H(uF) = &.F                    as


depicted in Figure 2.




      Home’s best response function thus consists of determining for which outputs

uF home’s best response is given by Figures la- lC respectively. The best response

function for the H firm is as shown in Figure 2. The ray aa’ and the area lying to

     11we are ~~uming        that the solution    is unique.    In the linear demand    case, this holds since

                                                 dn~   ~ dxrH      ~ ~
                                                 du~       du~

under     case   ii.   Moreover,    at B: (UF) = *UF,          ToH lies above z T H”, hence the solution   (if one
exists)   is unique.     We will assume analogous       conditions    hold for the F firm.




                                                          13
the northwest of it represent the locus of output pairs (UF,u~) which satisfy the

market share target. For uF ~ uj in Figure 2, case (z) applies so that the best

response function is given by line segment AB. For u; ~ uF case (ii) applies. For

uF less than u>, the best response is given by line segment BC, and for u~ above

u;, the best response is given by line segment DE,



3.2. Foreign Best Response            Function


It remains to construct the Japanese auto parts producer’s best response function.

Since the market share constraint represents a minimum market share for the US

firm, the Japanese firm’s problem is not symmetric with the US firm’s problem.




   Figures 3a-3c reflect three cases for the foreign firm’s optimization problem.

All curves are identical to those of the home firm described in Figures la-lc;

however, the market share constraint, uF = ~uH            now binds in the opposite

direction.    That is, if the foreign firm’s output lies to the left of ~uH,   then

the market share constraint is satisfied; whereas outputs to the right violate the

constraint.    As in Figures la-lc,    the curve denoted no denotes F firm’s profits

if the threat is not carried out; whereas, the curve nr denotes the profits from

different quantity choices, UF, when the threatened tariffs are enacted.



                                            14
   Let B{(uH) denote the optimal output choice of the F firm, given the output

choice UH by the H fim in the event no tariffs are imposed. Similmly, let BTF (UH)

be analogously defined in the event tarfls are imposed. Finally, let ~F(uH) denote

the overall best response function of the F firm. There are two cases:

   (z) If Bf(uH)    < ~UH,    then ~F (UH) = B~(uH).      This case is depicted in

Figure 3a.

   (ii) If B~(uH)   > &uH,   then there are two possibilities. When, z;       ~uH,   uH
                                                                          (               )

(weakly) exceeds T7F (BTF(U~), uH) , it is optimal to adhere to the market shine

target; hence &F (~H) = ~uH,     This case is depicted in Figure 3b.

   Alternatively, if



                       ~f(GUHUH)
                              <TTF(BTF(UH)JUH)

then it is optimal for F to choose ~F (uH) = BTF (u~). This case is depicted in

Figure 3c.

   Let ufi(~) implicitly define the uH which solves



                       r: (GUHUH)
                               ‘~TF(BrF(uH)JuH) (3.2)


                                         15
then ifu~      < ufi(~),~~(u~)           = B~F(u~)) and otherwise ~~(u~)                 = ~u~         as

depicted in Figure 4.




     Foreign best response function thus consists of determining for which outputs

uH its best response is given by Figures 3a-3c respectively. The best response

function for the F firm is as shown in Figure 4. The ray aa’ and the area lying to

the northwest of it represent the locus of output pairs (uF, uH) which satisfy the

market share target, For uH > u~ in Figure 4, case (z) applies so that the best

response function is given by line segment AB. For uH ~ u~ case (ii) applies.

For uH greater than U;, the best response is given by line segment BC, and for

uH below U;, the best response is given by line segment DE.



3.3. Nash Equilibria


Figure 5 depicts the combination of the H and F best response functions. 12 Notice

that there is a continuum of Nash equilibria along line segment EF. Point E

represents the joint profit maximizing equilibrium choice of outputs from EF.

  12Figure   5 depicts   the case in which    the market share target    is binding   and the threat      is
sficiently   severe to rule out equilibria   in which the market share target is not met. The case in
which the market share target is binding       but the threats are not severe is depicted   in Figure 7,
discussed below, For the c=e in which the market share target is not binding,          the introduction
of the threat does not tiect the equilibrium.




                                                    16
Thus, in the presence of side payments, it seems reasonable to choose point E.




   In equilibrium, the threat by the H government is never carried out and the

market share requirements are “voluntarily” satisfied by both fires.   Comparing

point E to point G, the Cournot solution in the absence of market shine restric-

tions, shows that the total sales of auto parts fall.   In addition, the H   firms


increase its profits as a result of the VIE since both price and H’s output rise.

In contrast, the F fire’s profits decline as can be seen by drawing the relevant

isoprofit contour.

   The intuition for the nature of the equilibria is as follows: On the one hand,

firms face a discrete reduction in profits by violating the market shine target

causing them to remain exactly on the market share line over some interval; thus

permitting a continuum of equilibria to arise. On the other hand, adhering to the

market share target can become too onerous, in which case firms will ignore the

market share target and accept the imposition of the threatened action.

   To see these two forces concretely, consider the situation facing the H firm.

In the absence of the market share constraint, it will always be optimal for the

H firm to reduce its output when faced with output increasw by the F firm.

However, the threatened tariffs induce the H firm to choose the opposite action;


                                       17
that is, H must increase output in the face of F firm increases in order to ensure

adherence to the target. Eventually, the benefits of adherence are more than offset

by its costs, at which point the H fim switches to its standard best-response in

the presence of tariffs.




4. When Threats Fail


One may wonder about the limits to the effectiveness of the above policies. In

particular, under what conditions are such policies likely to work in a way con-

sistent with adherence to the market shine target? In this section, we identify

two potentially relevant circumstance     under which the use of threats can fail.

First, the execution of the threatened action may actually be desirable for one of

the parties; we will refer to these as one-sided threats. Naturally, this will create

incentives for one of the parties to ensure that the market share target is not met.

Second, the threats may not be sufficiently severe to ensure that the market share

target is met, and hence, in equilibrium, the threat will be carried out. These are

termed weak threats.




                                         18
4.1. One-sided    Threats


One-sided threats are likely to be the case when Japanese and US downstream

goods are close substitutes and US upstream firms stand to gain from downstream

output expansion when tariffs are imposed. For example, suppose that all down-

stream firms have a strong home bias in the purchase of inputs. Then, if the

introduction of tariffs leads to significant market share gains on the part of down-

stream US firms, US input suppliers wodd have positive incentives to see that

upstream market share target (in Japan) was not met.

   Thus, we ~sume that the US auto pints firm also competes in selling to US

auto manufacturers. When tariffs are in effect, demand in the segmented US auto

market expands and the equilibrium profits earned by the US parts manufacturer

increase by an amount at least k > 0, where k is large enough to compensate

for any reduction in profits due to the diminution of demand from Japanese auto

manufacturers. Now, if the H government decides to threaten to place a punitive

tariff on the F auto firm, then the tariff will have the effect of decreasing the

profits of the F auto parts firm and increasing the profits of the H firm. This

dramatically changes the incentives for the H auto parts firm to conform to the

market share target; specifically, the H firm will have positive intentives to ensure

that the target is not met.

                                         19
      The above assumptions result in the profit function in the event a tariff is

imposed lying above the non-tariff profit function for the H firm. Again, there

are two cases to consider:

      (2) If BT~(uF) < fiuF,              then ~~(uF)        = ~~~(uF).   This case iS depicted in

Fi~e      6a.

      (ii) If ~~~(uF) z fi~F,             then there are two possibilities. If mTH (AuF,      UF)


(wea~y)     exceeds 7rfl ((
                          B;        uF), uF , it is optimal to ‘just miss” the market share
                                               )

target; hence BH (UF) = ~uF                   – c where c >0.     This case is depicted in Figure

6b.

      Alternatively, if



                          ?rT
                               Ha
                                   (   ‘UF,
                                        l–a
                                                   UF
                                                        )(<T:   BH
                                                                 o (U F),uF)




then it is optimal for H to choose BH (u~) = B; (uF). This cme is depicted in

Figure 6c.

      Let u~(~) implicitly define the uF which solves



                               H
                          Tr           &uF,uFJ           ‘n~(B#(uF)uF)
                                   (




                                                        20
then ifu~ <u~(7),~~(u~)                 =B~(uF),      andotherwise~~(u~)            = fiu~-cas

depicted in Figure 7.




    Figure 7 illustrates the best response functions of each of the firms, Notice

that the foreign best response function is identical to that constructed previously.

Home’s best respome function thus consists of determining for which outputs UF

home’s best response is given by Figures 6a-6c respectively. For uF ~ u~ in Figure

7, case (i) applies so that the best response function is given by line segment DE.

For uF < u~ case (ii) applies, and for uF greater than u;, the best response is

given by line segment CD, and for uF less than u~, the best response is given by

line segment AB.

    Combining the H and F best response functions reveals an equilibrium point

(given by Z) where the market share target is not met and tariffs are imposed.”

    The intuition for the construction of the H best response function is that once

the F firm chooses a quantity exceeding u~, it pays for the H firm to choose

a quantity which fails to satisfy the market share target to take advantage of

  13A ~autionarY note: It is possible     that there will be no pure strategy equilibrium.   For exam-
ple, a severe threat (i.e. an arbitrarily large tariff) will ensure that the F firm always adheres
to the market share target; hence, there will be no pure strategy equilibrium.     Alternatively, if
the jump from adhering to the market share target to the best response function         in the event of
a tariff occurs for a sufficiently   small value of uH, then there will be no intersection   at a point
like Z.



                                                    21
increased profits from the higher demand for parts by H auto manufacturers.

Only when the F output is sticiently       small will it benefit the home fim to

produce in such a way that the market share target is met.

   In contrast to circumstance in which both firms are hurt by the imposition of

a tariff (in which case the market share target was exactly met); here, there are

no regions in which the H and F firms find it mutually desirable to see that the

market share target is satisfied. There are no pure strategy equilibria exactly on

the market share line, since, in this case, H fires will always wish to “just miss”

the target.   Obviously, there me no pure strategy equilibria where the market

share target is more than met, since this would involve an intersection of the no-

tariff best response functions in the non-binding region. By construction, this is

impossible. This leaves only cases in which tariffs will be imposed; hence, the only

possible pure strategy equilibrium occurs at the intersection of the best response

functions in the presence of a tariff.

   This result is similar to Reitzes and Grawe [15], who model the effects of the

imposition of a market share quota on imports. In a Cournot market in which

a market share quota is imposed at free trade levels, home firms choose to “hide

behind the quota” by sometimes producing less than the free trade level of output.

If foreign firms continue to produce at free trade levels, they are faced with the


                                         22
additional costs of violating the quota. Thus, the market share quota acts as a

one-sided threat.



4.2. Weak Threats


Suppose now that threats made by the H government have little effect on the

derived demand (and hence the profits) of the auto parts firms. The downward

shift of the best response functions due to the imposition of the tariffs is small.

This results in a case like that depicted in Figure 8.




   In Figure 8 the two best response functions have no intersection along the

market share target ray, aa’, instead, they intersect at point Z, the usual Nash

equilibrium given the imposition of the tariff. Since there is little movement in

the best response functions, there will be little difference between Z and the equi-

librium in the absence of tariffs. Notice that this results in both firms producing

smaller quantities than in the unconstrained case. Of interest is the fact that a

small threat does not manage to achieve the desired market share outcome.




                                         23
5. Direct Implementation


Suppose now that the H government attempts to implement the VIE directly

through production taxes/subsidies rather than through threats.       As Krishna,

Roy and Thursby [13] show, the timing of the movw in this game is crucial;

however, we shall assume that the government moves fist, followed by the firms.

Provided that the H government was perfectly informed about all aspects of costs

and demand, implement ation involves choosing trees/subsidies in such a way that

the best response functions shift to a point where they exactly intersect along the

aa’ line. This analysis closely parallels Greaney[9].




   In Figure 9, we see that by introducing a production subsidy for the H firm,

the H government shifts out the firm’s best response function (BR~) to BR~

where it intersects both with the F firm’s best response function (BRF) as well

as with the market share constraint (aa’).    Alternatively, by introducing a tax

on the F fire, we can likewise attain the market share constraint. Furthermore,

combinations of the two policies make all points on EF attainable. Notice that

EF in Figure 9 is identical to EF in Figure 5.

   It seems unreasonable to suppose that the US would be able to tax the
                                                                                      .



                                         24
Japanese firms directly; thus, only point F in Figure 9 wotid in practice be

attainable through direct intervention. We earlier rogued that point F resulted

in lower industry profits than point E; hence, direct intervention results in lower

industry profits as well as requiring considerable information for the home govern-

ment to implement. For these reasons, we argue that the H government is better

off relying on threats rather than direct intervention to implement the VIE.



5.1. Combining        Threats     with Direct       Intervention


Suppose now that we allow the H government to offer both direct incentives

w well as threats w a means of achieving the market share target in the most

favorable manner,




    In Figure 10, point Z corresponds to the highest attainable profits by the

home auto parts firm consistent with meeting the market share target. 14 While

(due to symmetry) M corresponds to the monopoly output, which maximizes

industry profits.     It seems natural to ask whether M or Z we implementable

as a Nash equilibrium. Clearly, we cannot implement either point using threats

  141n figure 10 we have drawn Z such that it lies above     M;    however,   in general Z may lie
above or below   M, Regardless,   the Z may be implemented   by a combination     of direct policies
and threats.




                                               25
or direct intervention (not involving t=es/subsidies                    on F firms) alone; however,

when threats and direct intervention are combined, both, M and Z are attainable.

   If the H government places a quantity tax on the home firm, then its best

response function is shifted back to BR’~. Thus, if a large enough threat is made,

by our usual arguments along the lines of Figure 5, line segment FZ represents

the locus of Nash equilibrium outputs. Similarly, choosing a tax which shifts the

home best response function such that it intersects with point M likewise yields

FA4 as the 10CW of Nash equilibrium outputs. Thus, a combination of threats

and direct actions can be more effective than either policy alone.

   The particulars of the direct intervention portion of this policy are surprising.

In the case of direct intervention alone, we required a subsidy on the home firm;

however, when both types of policies are wed in combination, a tux on the home

firm is required.15




6. N x M Firm Case


In this section, we extend the model to allow for N home firms and M foreign

firms, all of whom are identical, to compete in a market subject to a market share

  15This reversal of policies       relative to standard    results is similar to Spencer and Jones [16] in
examining   vertical   foreclose.




                                                       26
target. To retain tractability, we restrict attention to the linear demand case.

Of particulm interest is the minimum threat required to implement the desired

market share target as the number of firms changes.

   Since the details of the procedure for making this calculation me cumbersome

and unenlightening, we do not present them here.16 The basic idea is best under-

stood by considering the duopoly case. In this case, it is clear that the minimum

threat implementing the market shine target is one such that the home and foreign

best responses just “touch” at a point between EF in Figure 5. Notice that this

requires that both the home and foreign firms be indifferent between adhering to

the market share target and accepting the imposition of the tariffs. For the home

firm, this involves solving (3.1) to obtain u:(T) and , implicitly, u~(u~) along the

aa’ line. In Figure 2, this is given by point C. Likewise, the foreign firm solves

(3.2) to obtain ufi(T) and u~(u~) along the aa’ line; this is given by point C in

Figure 4. The minimum r, then, is such that the points C given in Figures 2 and

4 coincide. Analogously, in the N x M case, restricting attention to symmetric

equilibria enables us to follow an identical procedure.

   While it is difficult to say anything in general about the properties of the

solutions to this system of equations, we can examine numerical results from

  16DetailS
          are available   from the authors   Llpon request.



                                                27
some simple cases. The system of equations is given by (B. 1), (B.2), and (B.3) in

Appendix B. We impose symmetric outputs on the home and foreign firms and

consider a linear inverse demand curve of the form: P = 10 – Q. This reduces

to a 3 x 3 system. The results of numerical exercises are summarized in Tables 1

and 2.

   In the symmetric case, summarized in Table 1, increasing the market share

target requires higher minimum threats for implementation. As expected, lower

threats are needed as the number of firms increases for a given market share target.

As the market share target increases, output for foreign fires falls while output for

home firms rises. Industry output also rises. Moreover, industry output is larger

than in the absence of market share requirements (benchmark)-a pr~competitive

result! Finally, relative to the benchmark, home fim profits always increase and

foreign firm profits always decrease.

   In the asymmetric case, summarized in Table 2, holding fixed the total num-

ber of firms, we see that smaller threats are needed as the percentage of home

firms increases. Also, industry output is increasing in the percentage of home

firms. Perhaps more surprising is that industry output relative to the benchmark

depends upon the composition of firms. Table 2 shows that in the event that

foreign firms constitute the majority, industry output is less than the benchmuk-


                                         28
an anti-competitive outcome. In the opposite case, industry output exceeds the

benchmark-a pr~competitive           result. This suggests that having a large propor-

tion of foreign firns (domestic firms) would make the market share requirement,

when implemented with the minimal tariff, anti-competitive (pro-competitive).       In

contrast to the symmetric case, it is possible for both home and foreign firms to

gain and to lose relative to the benchmark. In Table 2, with a large proportion of

home firms (i.e. N=4 or N=5, M=l, a = .88), both lose. With a large proportion

of foreign firms (i.e. N=l, M=15, a = .1), both gain.17




7. Conclusion


We have shown that a credible threat in a linked market can be an informationally

efficient way of implementing a VIE. Moreover, the resultant equilibrium can

increase industry profits and, perhaps more importantly, the profits of all firms

when the proportion of foreign firms is large.         On the other hand, when the

proportion of foreign firms is not too large, industry output increases leading to

pro-competitive results from the imposition of market share requirements.           In

some cases this can even reduce the profits of both firms.

   If the threats tiect the H and F firms differently, or if they are not very severe,

  17This case is not given in Table 2.


                                             29
then the resulting equilibria can change dramatically. In the former case, the H

firm has incentives to slightly underproduce such that the market share target is

“just” missed. In the latter case, the equilibrium involves both firms accepting

the tarfls and playing the Nash equilibrium associated with the derived demand

curves in the presence of the tariff. Since the costs of absorbing the tariff are

not too large, firms are less willing to adjust their behavior to conform with the

market sh~e target. In the case of direct intervention, we find that the use of

threat rather than direct intervention is preferred by the country whose imports

the WE is intended to expand. Moreover, a combination of threats and direct

intervention appears to be superior to either policy alone.

   We would not advocate the use of threats in related markets w a means of

implement ing all market share targets.               The paper tries to delineate the cir-

cumst antes likely to be qualitatively important to the outcome of such policies.

Specifically, the relative size of home and foreign representation in the market,

the restrictiveness of the market share requirements, the impact of the threat

on derived demand, and the extent of home bias in downstream markets are all

import ant factors. Nonetheless, successful implementation usually results in US

firm profits rising even when industry output rises.la That is, threats can be

  Is These conditions   only hold in cases in which the proportion   of US firms is not too small.



                                                 30
simultaneously pro-competitive and advantageous to US fires.




                                      31
References


[1] Bhagwati, J., “Quid Pro quo DFI and VIES: Political Economy Theoretic

   Analyses,” International Emnomic Journal, 1 (1987), 1-14.


[2] Brander, J. and B. Spencer, “Export Subsidies and Market Share Rivalry,”

   Journal of International Economics, 18 (1985), 83-100.


[3] Carmichael, C., “The Control of Export Credit Subsidies and Its Welfare

   Consequences,” Journal of International Economics, 23 (1987).


[4] Eaton, J. and G. Grossman, “Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy under

   Oligopoly,” Quatierly Journal of Economics, 101 (1986), 383-406.


[5] The Economist, “Japan Gives its Answer,” 13 May 1995, 35-36,


[6] The Economist, “Putting a Stop to T’rade,” 27 May 1995, 18-19.


[7] The Economist, “OK, Mickey, Let’s Say You Won,” 1 July 1995, 65-66.


[8] The Economist, “Clinton’s Phoney Peace,” 1 July 1995, 13.




                                    32
 [9] Greaney, T., “Import NOW! An Analysis of Voluntary Import Expansions

    (VIES) to Increase U.S. Market Shares in Japan,” mimeo, University of Michi-

    gan, 1993.


[10] Greaney, T., “Import Now! An Analysis of Market Share Voluntary Import

    Expansions,” Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).


[11] Gruenspecht, H., “Export Subsidies for Differentiated Products,” Journal of

    International Economics, 24 (1988), 331-344.


[12] Krishna, K., “made Restrictions as Facilitating Practices,” Journal of Inter-

    national Economics, 26 (1989), 251-270.


[13] Krishna, K., S. Roy and M. Thursby, “Implementing Market Access,” NBER

     Working Paper #5593.


[14] Levinsohn, J., “Carwars: Trying to Make Sense of US-Japan made l?rictions

    in the Automobile and Automobile Parts Markets,” Forthcoming in Eflects

    of US Trade Protection and Promotion Policies, R. Feenstra, ed., University

    of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1996.


[15] Reitzes, J. and O. Grawe, “Market-Share Quotas,” Journal of International

    Economics, 30 (1994), 431-447.


                                        33
[16] Spencer, B. and R. Jones, “Vertcial Foreclosure and International Trade Pol-

    icy,” Review of Economic Studies, 58 (1991), 153-170.




                                       34
A. Price Competition


An obvious criticism to the above analysis is that perhaps the efficacy of the threat

by the H government is solely an artifact of the strategy space of the firms. That

is, with price competition, perhaps mere threats are not enough to implement the

market share target. As we shall see, this turns out not to be the case.

   Suppose now that the fires are differentiated product Bertrand competitors

and each faces demand curve



                                     Ui = Ui (pi,~j;T)




where z,j = {H, F} and z # j. The demand curve is assumed to have the usual

properties of differentiated Bertrand competition, namely ~           <0, ~     >0.   The

analogue to our earlier resumption of identical fires in the Cournot case is the

assumption of symmetric demand curves. As usual, we assume that u is decreasing

in r.


Definition       A. 1. Two demand curves Ui, Uj are symmetric it for a~~P, P’ Ui (P, P’, T) =

Uj (p’,p, T) .


                                             35
   The market share target is satisfied for all pairs (pi, pj)in which the following

inequality holds

                                UH (PHIPF1 T)
                                                         ~a
                        uH (pH, pF, T) + uF (pF,pH, T)


It is readily apparent that, given our assumptions, the locus of points, (pi, pj)

satisfying the above inequality is everywhere upward sloping. In the case where

ui is linear in its arguments, the region satisfying the above inequality is given by

a half-plane lying to the northwest of the line aa in Figure 11.




   Notice that if a high price, pi, is chosen then the best response to the uncon-

strained Bertrand game, p~, is optimal since the market shine target is satisfied.

Thus, line segment AB represents H’s best response function over this region. For

all prices less than p;, the unconstrained Bertrand best-response by the H firm

does not satisfy the market share constraint. Thus, the H firm is faced with the

choice between accepting the imposition of the tariff and best-responding to the

tariff induced demand function, or choosing a price such that the market share

constraint is satisfied. Since the tariff induced demand curve reduces profits dis-

continuously in the neighborhood of p;; whereas adherence to the market share

constraint only results in infinitesimal profit reductions, it is clear that in this
neighborhood, adhering to the constraint is a best response. Provided the tariffs

are sficiently    large, this will be the case for all prices in the interval pF ● [0,p;] .

Thus, H’s best response function in this region is given by the line segment Aa.




       Figure 12 depicts the F firm’s best-response function.            In constructing this

function for the F firm, similar economic forces color the firm’s optimal pricing

decision. As a result, in the interval pH E [0,p;], F chooses its standard Bertrand

best-response, which constitute line segment AB. For prices in the interval pH G


(pi,    FI’9)the~ firmchoos~Pric=w~chjustsatisfythemarket
                                                        share target;                         this

is represented by the interval Ba’.




       Combining the best response functions, Figure 13 shows a continuum of equi-

libria given by line segment EF.

       Qualitatively, these results are quite similar to those obtained in the case of

quantity competition suggesting that the efficacy of credible threats in enforcing

VIES is, to some extent, robust to the specification of the firms’ strategy space.

  lg~ represents the maximum    price for which adhering   to the market share requirement   yields
positive demand for the good.




                                               37
B. The N x M Case


Suppose the there are N home firms and M foreign firms competing Cournot

style in a market subject to a market share target. Suppose also that the home

government can make a “threat” which, if implemented, shifts back the linear

demand curve which these firms face by an amount t.

   We consider the simple case where inverse demand is given by



                                      P=A–     Q




Home fires simultaneously choose quantiti= xi, i = 1, ...N. Likewise, foreign fires

choose quantities yj, j = 1, ...M of outputs to supply the market.

   The market share target requires that the overall market share for home firms

must be   aYo   of the market. Thus, for the market share target to be met requires:




   Our task is to find the minimum amount t such that adherence to the market

share target is a Nash equilibrium for the firms.

   Given the actions of all other fires) if the kth home firm adheres to the market



                                          38
share target, then k’s choice satisfies




or equivalently



                             -2xil
                     ‘k=+[a(2zi+Ey’)
   If k chooses to violate the market share target, then the quantity strategy xk

chosen is simply the conventional Cournot best response




   Similarly, the lth foreign firm’s choice yl must satisfy




or equivalently




                                          39
     And violating the market share constraint yields




     Thus, it is natural to compare indirect profits of employing these two strategies

to see the locus at which k (1) is indifferent.

     Define nc (z, y) as the profits msociated with conforming to the market share

target given the quantity vector x.k = ~~~k Xz,y = ~J~l yj. Then




     Let nD(z, y) be the profits from violating the market share target given the

quantity vector z, y.



                                         A–t–(z_~+y)                       A–t–(z-k+y)
 ~D(~–k,~)=
                  ((
                   A–t–       Z–k+y+
                                                   2              ))   (              2         )



thus, we seek the locus, x, y such that mC(Z_~,y) = ~D(~_k, y)



T=
         ((
          A–      x_k+y+      &     [~ (x-k + u) - z_,]))

                                  A–t–(z_~+y)
                                                                 (+

                                                                A–t–(z_~+y)
                                                                               [a (x_k + y) - z-k])

     —
     —     A–t–      X_~+y+                                                                    (B.1)
         ((                               2            ))   (              2              )

                                              40
   Similarly, for the foreign firms, we define quantity vectors x = ELI xi, y-l =

~j~l yj . Th~




are the profits of 1 when it conforms and



                                                  A–t–(z+y_l)                      A–t–(z+y-l)
  TD(z, y_l)=
                  ((   A–t–        Z+y–/+
                                                            2               ))(              2            )


are 1’s profits when it deviates. Finding the locus of indifference yields




    7r=—        (A- (X+Y-,-:              [~(x+Y-1)         -x]))         (:[~(x+Y-1)        ‘x])=
                                         A–t–(x+y_l)                           A–t–(x+y_l)

            ((  A–t–          z+v-1+
                                                      2              ))    (            2            )
                                                                                                         (B.2)




   Thus, to find the N + M + 1            utio~            for Xi, Yj, and ~ requir=         that    we solve


the following system of simultaneous equations:

   For k= 1...N :




      ((
       A–       z_k+y+         &       [o!(z-~ +,)

                                    A–t–(z_~+y)
                                                          - ~_k]))        (+

                                                                         A–t–(z-k+y)
                                                                                    [~(~-/c + y) - z-~])

  —
  —     A–t–           x_k+y+
                                              2                 ))   (             2             )
      ((

                                                    41
For 1 = 1...A4



      —   (A-    (Z+y-,-:[a(Z+Y-[)
                         Q’
                                -z])) (:[~(z+Y-1)-zl)
                              A–t–(z+y_l)            A–t–(z+y-l)
      —
          ((
      – A–t–         Z+y./+
                                      2     ))   (           2     )


And

                                                                       (B.3)




                                    42
                               Table 1
            Changing Market Shares with Complete Symmetry

   N=M=l            t     x      Y     output   Benchmark    ~     ~
  a = .51         .0003   3.4   3.27   6.67         6.67    1.02   .98
  a=.6            .0338   4.0   2.68   6.69         6.67    1.20   .80
  ~=.7            .1411   4.7   2.03   6.76         6.67    1.38   ,59
  a=.8            .3448   5.5   1.38   6.90         6.67    1.54   .39
  Q!=.g           .7143   6.4   0.71   7.14         6.67    1.65   .18

   N=M=4            t     x      Y     output   Benchmark    ?     q
  a =.51          .0001   1.1   1.09   8.89        8.89     1.02   .98
  ~=.6            .0112   1.3   0.89   8.90        8.89     1.19   .79
  Q=.7            .0466   1.6   0.67   8.93        8.89     1.35   .58
  Q=m8            .1124   1.8   0.45   8.99        8.89     1.47   .37
  ~=. g           .2273   2.0   0.23   9.09        8.89     1.51   .17

   N=M=8            t     x      Y     output   Benchmark    :     ~
  ~ = .51         .0001   0.6   0.58   9.41        9.41     1.02   .98
  a=.6            .0059   0.7   0.47   9.42        9.41     1.18   .79
  ~=.7            .0246   0.8   0.35   9.44        9.41     1.34   ,57
  a=.8            .0592   0.9   0.24   9.47        9.41     1.45   .36
  ~=. g           .1191   1.1   0.12   9.52        9.41     1.49   .17

  t = Minimum tariff required to implement market share target
  X = Per firm output for home country
  Y = Per firm output for foreign country
  Output = Industry output under market share requirements
  Ben~chmark = Industry output in the absence of market share require-
ments
   ~ = ~tio of home firm profits under market share requirements to
ben~~mark
   ~ = Ratio of foreign firm profits under market share requirements to
ben~~mark
                                  Table 2
 ~
        o! = .75      t    x      Y     output   Benchmark    q     ~
     N=2,    M=2   .1358   3.0   1.01   8.11         8.00    1.44   .48
     N=3,    M=2   .0454   2.1   1.06   8.46         8.33    1.17   .59
     N=4,    M=2   .0137   1.6   1,08   8.66         8.57    1.07   .71
     N=5)M=2       .0025   1.3   1.10   8.79         8.75    1.02   .85
     N=l,    M=2   .4786   5.5   .91    7.29         7.50    2.37   .40
     N=l,    M=3   .6250   5.6   .63    7.50         8.00    3.52   .39
     N=l,    M=4   .7235   5.7   .48    7.63         8.33    4.88   .41
     N=l,    M=5   .7956   5.8   .39    7.71         8.57    6.49   .43

        a = .88       t    x       Y    output   Benchmark    ~     ~
     N=2,   M=1    .2001   3.5   .96    7.97         7.50    1.14   .31
     N=3,   M=1    .0796   2.5   1.00   8.35         8.00    1.01   .41
     N=4,   M=1    .0322   1.9   1.03   8.57         8.33     .97   .53
     N=5, M=1      .0117   1.5   1.05   8.72         8.57     .96   .66
     N=l,   M=2    .8898   6.5   .44    7.41         7.50    2.70   .18
     N=l, M=3      1.029   6.6   .30    7.55         8.00    4.07   .18
     N=l,   M=4    1.118   6.7   .23    7,64         8.33    5.71   .19
     N=l,   M=5    1.181   6.8   .18    7.70         8.57    7.64   .21

      Minimum tariff required to implement market share target
     t=
   X = Per firm output for home country
   Y = Per firm output for foreign country
   Output = Industry output under market share requirements
   Benchmark = Industry output in the absence of market share require-
ments
   ~ = Ratio of home firm profits under market share requirements to
ben~~mark
   ~ = Ratio of foreign firm profits under market share requirements to
ben~~mark
(a)   ‘H




                       I
                       I               To
                       I
                       I
                       I

            a UF      Bfl(u~)                UH
           G

@)    ‘H




                                             UH


(c)   ‘H




                                 \
                                       7C0


                      t          Tc,
                      I

                     Bz(u~)                  UH
                                & ‘F
                   Figure 1
UH                                 a’




                      c




     \                          Response
         \                      Function

                                           Standard




             UF‘          UF”                    UF




                   Figure 2
(a)




                                          UF


0)    “


                         I
                         I
                         I
                                     no
                         I

                         I
                  l-a IIH B; (UJ     UF   UF
                  a

(c)   “




          /

          /



                             I

          La UH         B: (UJ            UF
           a’

                      Figure     3
                   Resp~nse
                   Function




       ,——   — .
—n




a                             UF




     Figure 4,
UH                           a’              45°
                           /’




                                  ———          BRH
                                              BRF
                      /’
                  /
     L\
          \ \
              \




        /’
      ,/
       ‘
                                        ‘,

u                                                    UF
(a)   ‘H




                                          \
                                              7(T
           /
                          I
           /              I
                          I
                          I               \   no
                          I

                     B;(u~)          L UF           UH
                                     l-a




           /
                     I
           /         I                \
                     I



                                                    UH


(c)   ‘H




                      I
                      I

                      I
                 .
           x UF      B:       (UF)                  UH
           1-a
                -—-   BR~
                      BR~




a   UF*   UF’    E          UF
UH
                                      u’




                                           ———   BR~
                                                 BR,


     \N
            \ \

                  /’

                       \



     ,,/’

u                                                      UF




                           Figure 8
a              UF




    Figure 9
u~
     A




0!                   UF




         Figure 10
P~A
PF’ ,                         B



PF2,,




a                        ,’
                     ,
                ,,
            /


        /



                              PH’   PH
PFA




A
        ,/ “’
a   ‘
                         “1’
                    /.    I
                /
                          I



                         p“=   PH
PF




a




     PH
