NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTAGIOUS

CURRENCY

CRISES

Barry Eichengreen
Andrew K. Rose
Charles Wyplosz

NBER Working Paper 5681

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

The authors are grateful to: Shirish Gupta for research assistance; the National Science Foundation
for financial support; Torben Andersen, Takatoshi Ito, Ronald McKinnon, Gian Maria MilesiFerretti, and participants at the East Asia Seminar on Economics for comments. This paper is part
Any opinions
of NBER’s research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics.
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Barry Eichengreen, Andrew K. Rose and Charles Wyplosz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that full credit, including Q notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5681
July 1996

CONTAGIOUS

CURRENCY

CRISES

ABSTRACT

This paper is concerned with the fact that the incidence of speculative attacks tends to be
temporally

correlated; that is, currency crises appear to pass “contagiously”

from one country to

another. The paper provides a survey of the theoretical literature, and analyzes the contagious nature
of currency crises empirically,

Using thirty years of panel data from twenty industrialized countries,

we find evidence of contagion.

Contagion appears to spread more easily to countries which are

closely

trade linkages

tied by international

than to countries

in similar

macroeconomic

circumstances.

Barry Eichengreen
Economics Department
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER

Charles Wyplosz
GIIS
Geneva 11A, Ave. de la Paix
CH- 1202 Geneva
SWITZERLAND

I. Introduction
The scope for currency crises to spill contagiously across countries has been hotly debated
in the wake of the Mexican meltdown.
assistance provided by the ~,

A frequently cited justification for the $50 billion of

the United “States and other G-7 governments in early 1995 was

that the effects of the Mexican crisis, if allowed to play themselves out, would not be limited to
that country; rather, other emerging markets would have experienced serious repercussions,
Because the Mexican authorities had little incentive to internalize these externalities, multilateral
intervention was justified.

In support of this view observers cite the reserve losses, interest-rate

increases and weakening exchange rates suffered by countries like Argentina and Thailand in the
early weeks of 1995. The contrary view is that investors were discriminating in the countries they
attacked,

Currencies other than the Mexican peso were subjected to relatively little pressure, and

ordy muntries with large current-account

deficits, overvalued real rates and other weak

fundamentals felt much of an effect. The implication is that the Mexican bailout, to the extent that
;t was justified by fears of contagion, was uncalled for.
A similar controversy arose at the time of the 1992-3 crises in the European Monetary
System. In 1992 it was argued that the French franc and the Irish punt came under attack as a
result of the earlier crises experienced by the British pound and the Italian lira. In 1993 it was
argued that the attack on the French franc threatened to spill over to other European currencies,
The implication drawn was that foreign support of the franc was essential to prevent chaos from
spreading contagiously throughout the EMS. The rebuttal was that only European countries
whose fundamentals were weak were subjected to speculative attacks; others like the Netherlands

1

remained immune because they appropriately aligned their economic policies to the maintenance
of their currency pegs. Thus, the argument went, only countries in particular economic and
politid

circumstances were susceptible.
Clearly, the stakes for policy are immense.

kcertaining

whether there exists contagion in

foreign exchange markets – by which we mean a systematic effect on the probability of a
speculative attack which stems from attacks on other currencies, and is therefore an additional
eff~

above and beyond those of domestic “fundamentals” -- and under what conditions

contagious currency crises arise should be a high priority for empirical research in open-economy
macroeconomics.
question.

It is remarkable therefore that there exists little systematic analysis of the

Our goal in this paper is to take a first step toward filling this gap,

We use a panel of quarterly data for 20 industrial countries for the period 1959-1993 to
test for contagious currency crises. We ask whether the probability of a crisis in a country at a
point in time is correlated with the incidence of crises in other countries at the same time, after
controlling for the effects of political and economic fundamentals.

The evidence is striking: a

variety of tests and a battery of sensitivity analyses uniforrrdy suggest that a crisis elsewhere in the
world increases the probability of a speculative attack by an economically and statistically
significant amount (our best estimate is eight percentage points), even after controlling for
economic and political fundamentals in the country concerned.

This would appear to be the first

systematic evidence consistent with the existence of contagious currency crises. However, the
evidence is suggestive rather than definitive, since it could also result from shocks to an
unmeasurable but common shock (e.g., a shock to our center country which is not picked up by

2

our control variables.)
One can think of a number of charnels through which instability in foreign exchange
markets might be transmitted across countries.

One is the impact of a speculative attack on the

current and prospective international competitiveness
their current accounts.

of the countries concerned and hence on

Thus, the attack on the United Kingdom in September 1992 and sterling’s

subsequent depreciation are said to have damaged the international competitiveness

of the

Republic of Ireland, for which the UK is the single most important export market, and to have
provoked the attack on the punt at the beginning of 1993, Finland’s devaluation in August 1992
was widely regarded as having had negative repercussions for Sweden, not so much because of
direct trade between the two countries but because their exporters competed in the same third
markets.

Attacks on Spain in 1992-3 and the depreciation of the peseta are said to have damaged

the international competitiveness of Portugal, which relies heavily on the Spanish export market,
and to have provoked an attack on the escudo despite the virtual absence of imbalances in
domestic fundamentals.
Trade links may not be the only charnel of transmission, of course.

It is difficult to argue,

for example, that the Tequila Effect -- the pressure applied to currencies in Latin America and
East Asia following the crash of the Mexican peso in 1994 -- stemmed fi-om strong trade links
between Mexico and the other countries concerned.

Argentina and Brazil may have traded

extensively with Mexico, but the same was not true of Hong Kong, Malaysia, and Thailand.
Rather than focusing on trade links, commentators
macroeconomic

policies and conditions.

pointed to similarities across countries in

Thus, one can imagine a second model focusing on co-movements

in macroeconomic

policies and conditions in the countries subject to attack, Evidence that certain market
participants are skeptical about the stability of a currency may lead their colleagues to suspect that
they also skeptical about the prospects for the currencies of other countries in a similar
macroeconomic
stabilizatio~

position.

Difficulties in one country pursuing a program of exchange-rate-based

for example, might lead currency traders to revise their assessment of the likelihood

that other countries pursuing this macroeconomic

strategy will carry it off. An attack on one

currency and the issuing government’s response to the pressure may thus provide new information
relevant for expectations of how other governments will respond if placed in a similar position,
For example, evidence that a country with an unusually high unemployment rate succumbed to a
speculative attack and abandoned its currency peg out of reluctance to raise interest rates if that
meant firther aggravating unemployment might lead investors to revise their expectations of the
likelihood that other countries in similar positions would be prepared to do so.
These two interpretations

emphasizing different channels of international transmission of

currency crises have different empirical implications.

The interpretation

emphasizing trade links

suggests that currency crises will spread contagiously among countries that trade
disproportionately

with one another.

The one emphasizing economic and political commonalties

suggests that instability will instead infect countries in broadly economic and political positions.
To compare these different channels of contagion transmission, we weight crises
elsewhere in the world by country characteristics intended to capture the extent to which
mntagion

is transmitted through specific channels. We compare two different weighting schemes.

4

First, on the assumption that countries which trade disproportionately
to contagion operating through the competitiveness

with one another are prone

effects of crisis-induced exchange rate

changes, we weight crises in neighboring countries by the importance of trade with those
countries.

Second, on the assumption that crises and governments’ reactions to them lead

investors to revise their expectations of oficials’ resolve in similar ways with respect to countries
in broadly simi!ar macroeconomic

positions, we weight crises by the similarity of macroeconomic

policies and outcomes.
The results provide firther support for the hypothesis that speculative attacks in foreign
exchange markets spread contagiously across countries.

Our trade-weighted

measure of crises

elsewhere in the world is important economically as well as being significant statistically at high
levels of confidence; it is robust to a variety of sensitivity tests. Our macro-weighted
crises does not display the same level of significance.
our empirical measures of macroeconomic

measure of

Although there is always the possibility that

contagion are not capturing these phenomena

adequately, we are inclined to interpret these results as suggesting that trade, rather than revisions
of expectations based on macroeconomic

factors, has been the dominant channel of transmission

for contagious currency crises for the bulk of the sample period.
Importantly, the trade- and macro-weighted

specifications both outperform the naive

model of contagion when they are included one at a time in alternative specifications.
supports the interpretation
variables,
unweighed

This

of our results in terms of contagion rather than omitted environmental

It is nevertheless appropriate to err on the side of caution, especially since our
measure remains significant in the presence of the weighted variables,

5

The remainder of our paper is organized as follows.

Section II provides an overview of

the theoretical literature on speculative attacks in foreign exchange markets, with special
reference to contagion.

Section III reviews related empirical studies. In Section IV we present

new evidence on contagion, while section V analyzes various channels of transmission for the
contagion effect. Section VI concludes.

II. Theories of Speculative Attacks. Contagious and Otherwise
In this section we review the theoretical literature on speculative attacks in foreign
exchange markets, starting with the seminal Krugman (1979) model, proceeding to models of
multiple equilibri~ and concluding with models of contagious currency crises, 1
A. Speculative Attacks
Krugman’s contribution was to show how inconsistencies between domestic economic
conditions and an exchange rate commitment leads to the collapse of the cumency peg. In his
model, the overly expansionary stance of domestic policy causes domestic absorption to exceed
production.

The difference spills over into a balance-of-payments

deficit, which the central bank

finances by expending reserves. Eventually reserves fall to a critical threshold at which a
speculative attack is launched, eljrninating the authorities’ remaining foreign assets. Once reserves
are depleted, the exchange rate peg is abandoned, and the curency depreciates secularly over
time, reflecting the more expansionary stance of policy at home than abroad.
This theory of balance of payments crises has produced four classes of insights. First, it
helps to identi~ the relevant fundamentals,

Most obviously, these should include macroeconomic

‘ A recent survey is Blackburn and Sola (1993).
6

deterrninants of the exchange rate and the balance of payments, as embodied in aggregate models
of exchange rate determination and the literature on the monetary approach to the balance of
payments.

Given the forward-looking

nature of these models, ttis list of determinants will

necessarily include expected fiture values of the relevant series.2 At the same time, the poor
empirical performance of these models gives grounds for concern about the success with which
speculative-attack

models building on these foundations can be implemented empirically; we

revisit this point below.
Second, the Krugman mode! demonstrates how crises can erupt before official resenes,
which decline secularly over time, actually hit zero. Currency speculation takes the form of
purchases and sales of domestic currency for foreign assets. Those transactions arise as traders
exchange assets among themselves so as to equalize rates of return and, more generally, to
balance their portfolios, trading off risk and return. They provoke a crisis when no one in the
market is willing to acquire domestic currency at the prevailing price (given by the pegged rate of
exchange).

Under these circumstances, the only counterpart on the short side of the market is the

central bank. Speculators have an incentive to liquidate their holdings of domestic currency while
the central ba~ retains sufficient reserves to absorb the volume of sales. The timing of the attack
is determined such that its magnitude just suffices to eliminate the central bank’s entire stock of
reserves.
A third implication of the basic model is that the central bank can only maintain a currency
peg if it possesses adequate foreign exchange reserves.

Once their reserves have been lost in the

attack the authorities have no choice but to abandon the peg. In the standard model, crises thus

2That expectedfuture fundamentals can themelves depend on whether a speculative attack occurs is what
7

result in a transition to floating, The model thus implies that reserve stocks must be reconstituted
before the exchange rate can be re-pegged.

The standard formulation also helps us think about

the meaning of “reserve adequacy. ” To defend the currency peg, the central bank must be capable
of purchasing all of its liabilities that are put up for sale by other agents. In the standard model,
the volume of sales is small: it corresponds to the decline in monetaty base needed to rati& the fall
in money demand associated with the higher interest rates that prevail following the shifi from a
pegged to a depreciating exchange rate. Normally, domestic residents continue to hold a
significant proportion of the base following the collapse of the peg, since they need it for
transactions purposes.

But in highly dollarized economies, the transactions demand for domestic

currency can be very small, as pointed out by, inter alia, Edwards (1989); in this case, the share of
the monetary base subject to liquidation in a crisis maybe quite large. More worrisome still is the
possibility that the moneta~

authorities will also be required to purchase other domestic liabilities

(i.e., MZ) if the currency crisis provokes a banking crisis.3
A fourth implication of the standard model is that the authorities have little chance of
fending off an attack. Even if the volume of speculative sales of domestic currency is less than the
monetary base, the base still exceeds the net stock of foreign reserves of the central bank (except
in very special circumstances like a filly-backed

currency board). In principle, the authorities can

augment their gross reserves by borrowing abroad, possibly to the point where reserves exceed
the base. But if borrowed reserves are used to finance sterilized intervention, the monetary base
increases pari passu, and there is no level of gross reserves sufficient to repel an attack. If the

gives rise to the possibility of multiple qtilibri~ as we explain below.
3 The liti between fimncial and exchange crises is emplmized by Goldfajn and Valdds (1995), and is a point
to wtich we return below.
8

authorities do not sterilize, then the attack can be repelled, but only at the cost of allowing the
base to shrink and interest rates to rise. If a sizable proportion of the base is involved, the
resulting interest rate increases may be so large that the exchange rate crisis precipitates a banking
crisis. To avert the latter, the central bank may then have to resume sterilizing its interventio~
which will again undermine its capacity to defend the currency peg.
B. Multiple Equilibria
A generic feature of theoretical macroeconomic
such models typically have multiple solutions.

models with rational expectations is that

Since most of these solution paths do not converge

to a steady state, standard practice for many years was to assume away divergent solutions by
invoking transversality conditions.

More recently however this non-uniqueness

property – which

allows for multiple equilibria -- has become the basis for a literature on speculative bubbles and
sun-spot equilibria.

Obstfeld (1 986, 1995), following a suggestion by Flood and Garber(1984b),

has provided examples of multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling attacks in foreign exchange
markets.

These offer a wholly new perspective on the causes of currency crises,

The possibility of multiple equilibria arises when market participants, while not
questioning that current policy is compatible with the indefinite maintenance of the currency peg,
anticipate that a successful attack will alter policy. In these circumstances, it is expected fiture
fundamentals, conditional on an attack taking place, rather than current fundamentals and
expected fiture fundamentals absent an attack which are incompatible with the peg. Two
equilibria thus exist: the first one features no attack, no change in fundamentals, and indefinite
maintenance of the peg; the second one features a speculative attack followed by a change in

9

fundamentals which validates, ex post, the exchange-rate

change that speculators expected to take

place.
In Obstfeld (1986), pre-and post-crisis policies aresetarbitratily.
govement

issimply assumed tostifi

policy inamore

expansiona~

Ifanattack

direction.

occurs, the

The arbitrary

nature of this contingent policy process is the obvious limitation of the model. Subsequently,
Bensaid and Jeanne (1 993), Ozkan and Sutherland (1995) and Obstfeld (1995) have proposed
models of optimizing governments which find it in their self interest to follow the kind of
contingent policy processes that can give rise to multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling attacks,
Their analyses build on the literature on exchange rate escape clauses (Obstfeld, 199 1; De Kock
and Grilli, 1994; Drazen and Masson, 1994), in which it is optimal to maintain the currency peg
under some circumstances and to abandon it under others,
In these models, the behavior of governments still derives from special utility finctions.

In

this sense, the literature on multiple equilibria and self-fulfilling attacks in foreign exchange
markets is merely a collection of examples and special cases. This point is emphasized by
Krugman (1 996), who establishes two firther results. First, he suggests that multiple equilibria
are, paradoxically, less likely when the fundamentals are wrong,

When fundamentals are clearly

inconsistent with the prevailing currency peg, investors have little doubt that a crisis will
ultimately occur, and the model quickly converges to the equilibrium in which the currency is
attacked and devalued; only when fundamentals are “good enough” that there remains uncertainty
about whether a crisis will eventually result do there exist multiple equilibria.

Second, Krugman

shows that if the public does not know the authorities preferences, there may be “testing” by the

10

markets - that is, one may observe attacks that are unsuccessful but which reveal irtformation
about the preferences of the authorities.4
Models of self-fulfilling attacks imply that “good” findamenta!s

may not suffice to avert

currency crises. To prevent an attack unjustified by fundamentals, the credibility of the central
bank must be such that markets rule out a relaxation of policy once the peg is abandoned.
Obstfeld (1986) provides such an example: there, the expectation that the central bank will react
to a crisis by implementing a policy which implies an exchange rate appreciation eliminates the
risk of a self-fulfilling crisis.
C. Contagion
Relatively little theoretical work has analyzed the conditions under which currency crises
can spread contagiously across countries, though there has been some work of relevance. For
instance, Willman (1988) and Goldberg (1993) endogenized relative prices, allowing events
abroad to influence the real exchange rate and domestic competitiveness.

Flood and Garber

(1984a) and Claessens (1991) introduced uncertainty about the domestic policy process.

Flood

and Garber, followed by Obstfeld (1986), added the idea of a contingent policy process, in which
one-time events could lead the authorities to substitute one policy for another, thereby introducing
the possibility of self-fulfilling speculative attacks.
Perhaps the first systematic theoretical treatment of this question was Gerlach and Smets
(1995).

Inspired by the links between the fall of the Finnish Markka in 1992 and the subsequent

attack on the Swedish Krona, they consider two countries linked together by trade in merchandise
and financial assets. In their model, a successful attack on one exchange rate leads to its real

4 While testing is not, strictly speaking, a case of self-fulfilling attacks, since markets anticipations are not
11

depreciation

which enhances the competitiveness

of the country’s merchandise exports.

This

produces a trade deficit in the second country, a gradual decline in the international reserves of its
central b~

and ultimately an attack on its currency.

A second channel for contagious

transmission is the impact of crisis and depreciation in the first country on the import prices and
the overall price level in the second. Post-crisis real depreciation in the first country reduces
import prices in the second. In turn, this reduces its consumer price index and the demand for
money by its residents.

Their efforts to swap domestic currency for foreign exchange then deplete

the foreign reserves of the central bank. This may shift the second economy from a no-attack
equilibriu~

in which reserves more than sufice to absorb the volume of prospective speculative

sales and in which there consequently exist no grounds for a speculative attack, to a second
equilibrium in which an attack can succeed and in which speculators thus have an incentive to
launch its
Buiter et al. (1996) use an escape-clause model of exchange rate policy to analyze the
spread of currency crises in a system of N+l countries, N of which (denoted the “periphery”) peg
to the remaining country (the “center”). The center is more risk averse that the others and is
hence unwilling to pursue a cooperative monetary policy designed to stabilize exchange rates. A
negative shock to the center which leads it to raise interest rates then induces the members of the
periphe~ to reconsider their currency-pegging

policy. If the members of the periphery cooperate,

Wild
it is a case of attacks unjuti]ed by the fundamentals.
5 A similm argument is developed by Andersen (1994), building on escape< lause models of exchange-rate
~licy. In his model, the government is prompted to abandon its currency peg by a shock coming from outside tie
currency market. An exogenous deterioration in domestic competitiveness which increases domestic
unemployrnen~ for etiple,
may give the authorities an incentive to opt for a more expan.sio~
policy which
redud u.nemplo~ent through surprise inflation. Andersen argues that his model provides a plausible description
of exchange rate policy in Northern Europe in 1991-92, when the collapse of Soviet trade with the Nordic countries
12

they may find it collectively optimal to leave the system -- an extreme case of contagion.

More

generally, some subset of peripheral countries -- those with the least tolerance for high interest
rates -- will find it optimal to leave the system under these circumstances, and contagion will be
limited to this subset. Importantly, however, their decision to leave stabilizes the currency pegs of
the remaining members of the system, because monetary expansion and currency depreciation by
some members of the periphery provides an incentive for the center country, which now finds
itself with an increasingly overvalued exchange rate, to relax its monetary stance, relieving the
pressure on rest of the periphery. In this model, contagion is selective: the shock to the center
spills over negatively to some members of the periphery but positively to others.
Another paper providing an analysis of contagious currency crises is Goldfajn and Valdes
(1995).

They focus on the role of illiquidity in financial markets.

the introduction of financial intermediaries.

A key feature of their model is

These authors show how, in the presence of such

intermediaries, small disturbances can provoke large-scale runs on a currency.

Intermediaries

supply liquid assets to foreigners unwilling to commit to long-term investments; that is, they
provide maturity-transformation

services. By offering attractive terms on liquid deposits, their

presence augments the volume of capital inflows. But when, for exogenous reasons, foreign
irtvestors withdraw their deposits, intermediaries unable to costlessly liquidate their assets face the
risk of failure. Hence, a bank run can produce a self-fulfilling banking crisis (Diamond and
Dibvi~ 1983), in the same way that a run on the currency can provoke a self-fulfilling exchangerate crisis. Moreover, the run on intermediaries can spill over into a run on the currency as
foreign investors withdraw their deposits and convert them into foreign exchange,

These crises

first aggravated unemployment in Finland, leading its government to adopt a more expansion

policy which

13

can spread contagiously to other countries when international investors encountering liquidity
difficulties as a result of the banking crisis in one country respond by liquidating their positions in
other national markets.
A related literature concerned with inforrnatio~ while not directly concerned with
contagion in foreign exchange markets, provides a complementary approach to the issue. Shiner
(1995) provides a model in which financial market participants share access to much of the same
information (e.g. that which appears on Reuters screens) but interpret and process it in different
ways. What they make of their shared itiorrnation

depends on their own experience, which in

turn is shaped by local conditions which only they experience.

Consequently, one market’s

reaction to a piece of new information can provide a signal about its global implications.

It may

suggest to traders in other markets how they too should react. The fact that one market draws
dramatic conclusions from a some information may overcome local culture in other markets and
lead to a revision of expectations (an “information cascade”).

In the present context, one can see

how this effect could lead to an attack on one exchange rate to prompt traders in other currency
markets to attack those exchange rates as well.
A similar analysis, also based on ifiormational

issues, is Caplin and Leahy (1 995). In their

model, financial market participants expect a crisis but have difise

priors over its timing. It is

costly for traders to take a position in advance of a crisis, in other words to move too early. Each
trader is unsure whether others share his or her belief that a crisis will eventually occur. They
exchange “cheap talk” amongst themselves but draw inferences only from positions taken in the
market. The result is normal market conditions (“business as usual”) with no hint of crisis until it

requiredabandoningthe currency peg, and which then spilled over to the exchange rates of the rest of Scandinavia,
14

suddenly erupts.

Once it occurs, however, market participants all claim that they knew that the

crisis was about to happen and that they were readying themselves for the eventuality (they
display “wisdom tier

the fact”). This model can give rise to contagion insofar as a crisis

somewhere in the world confirms individually-held suspicions in other markets,G

III. Empirical Studies of S~eculative Attacks. Contagious and Otherwise
While the literature on crises in foreign exchange markets is replete with models that
highlight motives for and dynamics of speculative attacks, the process of systematically testing the
predictions of those theories has barely begun. We put the emphasis in this last sentence on the
word “systematically.”

Otherwise convincing studies of currency crises frequently assemble

evidence from biased samples of episodes.

It is not just that they consider a selective sample of

episodes in which currency pegs collapsed without confirming that the collapses they analyze are
representative of the underlying population.
themselves unrepresentative

It is that episodes in which pegs were abandoned are

of the population of speculative attacks.

Some pegs are abandoned

without a speculative attack. Others are repelled. Thus, studies like Dornbusch, Goldfajn and
Vald&s (1995) and Krugman (1996), while informative about the characteristics of the episodes
they consider, do not provide a representative characterization
In Eichengreen, Rose andWyplosz(1994,

of speculative attacks.

1995) we attempt to analyze currency crises

systematically by constructing a measure of speculative attacks that excludes devaluations and

G An illustrative application of this model would be to the ERM crises of 1992-93. The story would go as
follows. There was a widespread belief at the time that the ERM could not continue to operate indefinitely without
a realignment. And yet its etiordinary
stability since January 1987 led traders to accept the off]cial view that the
system codd now function without tier
realignments. Extraneous circumstan~s (the political Wlcdties of
ra~ng
the ~cht
Treaty) then triggered a crisis (which culminated in the devaluation of the Italian lira)
15

flotations not taken in a climate of crisis and includes unsuccessful attacks.

We compare these

with actual devaluations and other changes in exchange rate arrangements.

Our measure of crises

is a weighted average of changes in the exchange rate, changes in international reserves which can
be paid out in response to speculative pressure, and changes in the interest differential since
interest rates can be raised to fend off an attack.

(A more detailed description of the methodology

is presented below.) We anal yze the experience of some two dozen OECD economies since 1959,
Our findings on the causes and consequences of devaluations and revaluations are
consistent with the predictions of mainstream models.

Countries which devalue experience

problems of external balance in the period leading up to the event. Their trade deficits and
reserve losses are associated with relatively expansionary monetary policies. In addition, the
period leading up to devaluations is characterized by problems of internal balance as reflected in
relatively high levels of unemployment; the expansionary moneta~
be adopted partly in response to these domestic concerns.
mirror images of devaluations.’
generalization.

stance in these countries may

Broadly speaking, revaluations are

Other events in foreign exchange markets, in contrast, resist

For example, transitions between exchange rate regimes (like movements from

fixed to floating rates) are largely unpredictable.
We find that countries susceptible to crises are those whose governments have pursued
accommodating

monetary policies leading to high inflation and reserve losses, generally in

response to deteriorating conditions on the unemployment

fi-ont. Initially, the current account

which put paid to this belief. It revded to all traders that what they privately believed all atong was true-- that
realignments were still necessary.
7 This evidenee is consistent with models emphasizing the domestic determinants of external balance as well as
with more recent models which focus instead on the decisions of governments concerned with internal balance and
mtined
by the exchange rate in their choi~ of policy response.
16

moves into deficit, and the capital auount

worsens as the crisis nears. Countries which take last-

rninute steps to defend the currency by significantly reducing the rate of money growth sometimes
succeed in defending the rate. Those which retrench less dramatically may still be forced to
capitulate but often do so without provoking a major crisis. In contrast, governments which rely
on sterilized intervention to the exclusion of more fundamental policy adjustments are generally
unable to avoid fill-blown currency crises.
A few other studies have adopted this approach.

For example, Moreno (1995) analyzes

crises in the Pacitic Basin economies from 1980 through 1994. He finds that periods of
speculative pressure tend to be associated with large budget deficits and rapid rates of growth of
domestic credit. There is some evidence that episodes of pressure arise when slow growth and
relatively high inflation make it difficult for the government to maintain a stable exchange rate, In
mntrast, there is no evidence that indicators of external balance differ between crises and tranquil
periods.
Karninsky andReinhart(1996)

consider speculative attacks on currencies and banking

crises, analyzing connections between the two. They focus on 20 countries in Asi~ Europe, Latin
America and the Middle East that experienced banking difficulties in the period 1970-1995,

Their

index of currency crises is constructed as a weighted average of exchange rate changes and
reserve changes (because the relevant interest rate data are lacking for some countries).

In their

sample, crises tend to be preceded by declining economic activity, weakening export sectors,
falling stock markets, and high real interest rates. In addition, crises are preceded by accelerating
money ~owth

and rapid rates of growth of the liabilities of the banking system. Banking crises

17

are leading indicators of currency crises, but there are few instances where currency crises predict
bardcing crises.
By companso~

empirical analyses of contagion are few. Typical of the literature are

studies which provide informal comparisons of small groups of countries.

Burki and Edwards

(1995) contrast the experiences of Argentina, Bruil and Venezuela in the wake of the Mexican
crisis with those of Chile and Colombia, suggesting that contagion, while present, was selective.
Calvo (1996) provides a series of comparisons between Mexico and other countries in an effort to
understand why some countries were more susceptible than others to the tequila effect.
We are aware of three statistical studies of contagion.

Calvo andReinhart(1995)

report

evidence of contagion in an econometric model in which capital flows to four small Latin
American countries depend on their standard determinants but also on a contagion proxy, namely,
capital flows to four large Latin American countries.

Their results can be questioned, however,

on the grounds that the flow of capital to neighboring countries is a less-than-ideal proxy for
contagion and that the sample of countries is not random.
Schmukler and Frankel (1996) model contagion using data on closed-end country finds.
Although their dependent variable, the level of stock prices, is different from the one with which
we are wncemed,

the two are linked insofar as the rise in domestic interest rates needed to fend

off an attack on the currency will tend to depress equity prices, Their evidence suggests that
investors differentiated among countries to a greater extent tier
after its 1982 predecessor.

the 1994 Mexican crisis than

In the short run, a drop in Mexican prices tends to induce sell-offs in

other markets motivated by the desire to raise cash; while there is evidence of contagion in Latin

18

America in the long run as well, the long-run effect of a Mexican sell-off on Asian markets is
positive.8
Sachs, Tomell and Velasco (1996) analyzed the period immediately a~er the crash of the
Mexican peso in December 1994, and found that the countries hit by the “Tequila Effect” had
experienced lending booms, over-valued real exchange rates, and low reserves. Their sample is
.
fm from random (both in terms of time and country choice); in addition, they do not distinguish
between attacks which are unwarranted by fundamentals but are triggered by macroeconomic
similarity, and attacks warranted by macroeconomic factors.

lV. AnalvzinE Contagion Svstematicallv
In this section, we test for the existence of “contagious” currency crises. The contagion
effect with which we are concerned can be thought of as an increase in the probability of a
speculative attack on the domestic currency which stems not from domestic “fundamentals” such
as money and output but from the existence of a (not necessarily successful) speculative attack
elsewhere in the world.
We analyze a panel of quarterly macroeconomic

and political data covering twenty

industrial countries from 1959 through 1993 (a total of 2800 observations),

We pose the

following question: is the incidence of a currency crisis in a particular country at a given point in
time (e.g., France in the third quarter of 1992) correlated with the incidence of a currency crisis in

BIn a similar exercise, Valdds (1996) analyzes the seconda~ market prices of sovereign deb~ and shows that
there exists a strong crossauntry mrrelation of these prices even tier wntrolling for macroeconomic
tidamentals and “big news events” such as announcements of Brady Plan restructurings. This evidence of
“mntagion” in the markets for developing-country debt is much stronger than analogous evidence for the U.S.
mrporate bond market, where fundamentals explain essentially all of the observed correlation across issues, and
19

a different country (e,g., the United Kingdom) at the same point in time, even after taking into
account the effects of current and lagged domestic macroeconomic

and political influences? The

finding of a strong positive partial correlation is consistent with the existence of contagion, since
it implies that speculative attacks are temporally correlated even afier conditioning on domestic
factors.

Still it is difficult to interpret this as definitive proof of contagion, since it may in fact

reflect not contagion but an unmeasured common shock to economic fundamentals which strikes
a number of counties simultaneously (e.g., fi-om Germany, our center country), rather than actual
spillovers from one country to another. For this reason, we continue, in the next section, to
consider alternative channe]s of transmission of this contagion effect.
A. Measunn~ Curren~

Crises

The first issue that must be confronted is how to determine when a speculative attack has
occurred. Having addressed this issue in a number of previous papers (Eichengreen, Rose and
Wyplosz (1 994, 1995)), we provide only a summary of our thinking here.
Currency crises cannot be identified with actual devaluations, revaluations and instances in
which the currency is floated, for two reasons.9 First, not all speculative attacks are successful.
The currency may be supported through the expenditure of reserves by the central bank or by
foreign central banks and governments. 10 Alternatively, the authorities may repel attacks by
raising interest rates and adopting other policies of austerity.

Further, many realignments are

taken deliberately in tranquil periods, possibly to preclude fiture attacks.

than in a group of medium-sized OECD countries, where fundamentals again explain all of the obsemed
correlation of credit ratings.
9 We refer to such actual changes in explicit exchange mte policy as “events” and thiti of them as overlapping
in part with the curreney crises that we are interested in.
10 And occasionally by the actual or threatened imposition of capital controls.
20

Ideally, an index of speculative pressure would be obtained by employing a structural
model of exchange rate determination, fi-om which one would derive the excess demand for
foreign exchange.

In practice, however, empirical models linking macroeconomic

variables to the

exchange rate have little explanatory power at short and intermediate horizons. 11 In the absence
of an empirically valid macro-model, we resort to an ad hoc approach, the underlying intuition for
which is derived from the well-known model of exchange market pressure due to Girton and
Roper (1977).

The idea is that an excess demand for foreign exchange can be met through

several (not mutually exclusive) channels. If the attack is successful, depreciation or devaluation
occurs. But the monetary authorities may instead accommodate the pressure by running down
their international reserves or deter the attack by raising interest rates. As a measure of
speculative pressure, we therefore construct a weighted average of exchange rate changes,
reserve changes, and interest rate changes.

All of these variables are measured relative to those

prevailing in Germany, the reference country.

Germany is a logical choice for a center country,

since it has had a strong currency throughout the post-war er~ and has been a critical member of
all important OECD fixed exchange rate systems (including the Bretton Woods system, the EMS,
and the “snake” preceding the EMS).12
Our index of exchange market pressure is:

EMPL~= [(a YoA~,t)+ (@A(ii,t - iG,t))- (y(’??Arkt- O~ArG,t))],

11Frankel and Rose (1995) provide a recent survey.
12~ course, idiosyncratic German shocks then acquire disproportionate importance. However, German
Utication is typically considered to be the only important such shock; and our sensitivity analysis indicates that
our retits do not stem from this event.
21

where: ei,t denotes the price of a DM in i’s currency at time t; iGdenotes the short German
interest; r denotes the ratio of international reserves;13 and a, ~, and y are weights.
We define crises as extreme values of this index:

Crisi~l = 1 if EMPLt > 1.5aw

+v~

= O otherwise,

where: ~ ~

and ~Ew are the sample mean and standard deviation of Em

respectively.

A critical step is weighting the three components of the index. An obvious option is an
unweighed

average, which has the advantage of simplicity, But since the volatility of reserves,

exchange rates and interest differential is very different, we instead weight the components so as
to equalize the volatilities of the three components, thereby preventing any one of them from
dominating the index. Below we then check the sensitivity of our results to this scheme.
We identi& quarters in which our index of speculative pressure is at least one and a half
standard deviations above the sample mean as instances of speculative attacks (although we again
test for sensitivity with respect to this arbitrarily-chosen
crisis more than once, we exclude the later observation(s)
successive quarters.
parameter).

threshold).

To avoid counting the same

when two (or more) crises occur in

Thus, our “exclusion window” is one quarter (though again we vary ttis

We refer to our non-crisis observations as “tranquil” periods and use these as the

13 Folloting Girton and Roper, r is actually the ratio of reserves to narrow money (Ml).
22

mntrol group. 14
Our choice of a one quarter exclusion window (so that each country contributes no more
than two observations amually) and a 1.5 standard deviation outlier threshold produce a sample
of 77 crises and 1179 periods of tranquility. 15
The crisis observations are not randomly distributed.

There are clusters of speculative

attacks in 1973 (at the time of the breakup of the Bretton Woods system) and in 1992 (at the time
of the European currency crises), separated by long periods of tranquility,

A time-series plot of

the number of crises in each quarter is provided as Figure 1.
B. The Data
Most of the financial and macroeconomic

variables are taken from the CD-ROM version

of the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial Statistics (IFS). The data set is
quarterly, spanning 1959 through 1993 for twenty industrial countries. 16 It has been checked for
transcription and other emors and mrrected,
dtierential

Most of the variables are transformed into

percentage changes by taking differences between domestic and German annualized

fourth-dfierences

of natural logarithms and multiplying

by a hundred.

We employ the following variables: total non-gold international reserves (IFS line lld);
period-average

exchange rates (line t-f); short-term interest rates (money market rates [line 60b]

where possible, discount rates otherwise [line 60]); exports and imports (both measured in dollars,

14 Just as we do not allow crises in successive quarters to count as independent observations by excluding the
latter, we also do not allow two su~ssive periods of tranquility to tout as independent observations. We do this
by applying ow exclusion window to periods of both crisis and tranquility.
15 However, missing data will pralude use of some of these observations; thus our panel is technidly
mbaland.
16 The countries in our sample include (in order of IMF country number): the USA, UK, Austria, Belgium,
Denmark Fran=, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, Japan, Finland, Gr~,
Ireland,
Portugal, Spain and Australia, along with our center country, Germany.
23

lines 70d and 71d respectively); the current account (line 77a.d, converted to domestic currency)
and the central government budget position (line 80), both measured as percentages of nominal
GDP (frequently line 99a); long-tern

government bond yields (line 61); a nominal stock market

index (line 62, which sets 1990=100); domestic credit (line 32); Ml (line 34); M2 (line 35+ Ml);
the CPI (line 64); and real GDP (usually line 99a. r). We also use the real effective exchange rate
as a measure of competitiveness

(line reu, which uses normalized relative unit labor costs), though

this variable is only available from 1975.
We also utilize a number of labor market indicators not included in IFS. Data on total
employment, the unemployment rate, and the business sector wage rate were drawn from the
OECD’S Main Economic Indicators.

To capture political conditions we construct indicators of

governmental electoral victories and defeats, using Keesing’s Record of World Events and Banks’
Political Handbook of the World
Finally, we use a list of exchange market “events” (devaluations, flotations, changes in
exchange rate band widths and so forth). These are gleaned from the IMF’s annual report on
tichange

Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.

These volumes also provide us the basis for

constructing with dummy variables indicating the presence of capital controls.
The available data on international reserves are less than ideal for a number of well-known
reasons.

Off-balance sheet transactions, third-party intervention, stand-by credits, and foreign

liabilities, all of which are relevant for foreign exchange intervention, tend to be omitted or
incompletely reported.

In addition, short-duration

attacks (especially unsuccessful ones) may not

be evident in quarterly data. Finally, subtle changes in actual or anticipated capital controls, while

24

difficult to measure, may in fact be quite important, especially when countries are mounting
defenses against speculative attacks.
C. Statistical Analvsis
We can now test for the existence of contagion.

We test the null hypothesis that the

incidence of currency crises elsewhere in the world at the same point in time does not affect the
probability of a speculative attack on the domestic currency. While our model attempts to control
for the itiuence
structural.

of a wide range of current and lagged macroeconomic variables, it is non-

This is one reason for viewing our evidence (which turns out to be inconsistent with

the null at standard confidence levels) as consistent with, but not definitive proof o~ contagion.
We estimate a binary probit model, linking our dependent variable (an indicator variable
which takes on a value of unity for a speculative attack and zero otherwise) to our controls with
maximum likelihood, including additional regressors to capture the effects of macroeconomic
political influences which affect crisis incidence.

and

We cast our net as widely as possible, including:

1) the presence of capital controls; 2) electoral victory or defeat of the government; 3) the growth
of domestic credit; 4) itiation;

5) output growth; 6) employment growth; 7) the unemployment

rate; 8) the central government budget surplus (+) or deficit (-), expressed as a percentage of
GDP; and 9) the current account surplus/deficit (agai~ a percentage of GDP).

All these variables

are included as deviations from German values,
Since the literature on currency crises does not provide much guidance about the time
horizon for these influences, we consider a range of plausible alternatives.
spectru~

At the short end of the

we allow only contemporary influences to affect the probability of a crisis. We then

25

allow for explanatory variables lagged up to two quarters, one year, and two years. We allow
these lagged influences to operate jointly with the contemporaneous

variables or by themselves

(as would be appropriate if lags in data collection or processing preclude the consideration of
contemporaneous

developments).

To conserve degrees of freedom, we model the lags using

moving averages. Rather than including the first and second lags of inflation separately, for
example, we include only a single term which is the average itiation

differential in the two

preceding quafiers.
This leads us to estimate the following model:

Ctisisi,~= ~D(Ctisisj,~) + lI(L)i,t + ei,~ where
D(Crisisj,~)

= 1 if CIiSiSj,~= 1, for anyj * i
= O otherwise,

where: I(L)i,t is an information set often contemporaneous

andor lagged control regressors; L is

the corresponding vector of nuisance coefficients; ands is a normally distributed disturbance
representing a host of omitted ifluences

which affect the probability of a currency crisis,

The null of interest is Ho: 0=0. We interpret evidence of the null as being inconsistent
with a contagion effect.
D. Results
Benchmark results are presented in Table I. Its five columns correspond to five
assumptions about the appropriate time horizon for the regressors,

26

Since probit coefficients are

not easily interpretable, we report the effects of one-unit (percentage point) changes in the
regressors on the probability of a crisis (also expressed in percentage points), evaluated at the
mean of the data. We tabulate the associated z-statistics, which test the null of no effect.
Statistics which are inconsistent with the null at the five per cent level are printed in bold.
Diagnostics are reported at the foot of the table, including a test for the joint significance of all the
coefficients.
The results are consistent with the existence of a contagion effect which is economically
important and statistically significant. A speculative attack elsewhere in the world is associated
with an increased probability of a domestic currency crisis by around eight percentage points.
The impact of the other regressors is not dramatic, though a few effects are worth noting.
For example, higher inflation and unemployment

are associated with increases in the odds of an

attack. Generally speaking, however, the absence of robust partial correlations provides grounds
for caution against over-interpreting

the results.

Sensitivity analysis is reported in Table II. We consider six perturbations of our basic
model. First, we change the definition of a speculative attack by raising the outlier threshold on
our exchange market pressure index to two standard deviations (from one and a half) and by
widening the exclusion band width to two quarters (from one). This marginally increases the
magnitude of the contagion variable, although the change is not statistical] y significant.

Second,

we change the definition of a speculative attack by doubling the weight on actual exchange rate
changes in our tripartite index. This has no discernible impact on the coefficient on the contagion
variable. Third, we drop post-1978 data so as to focus on pre-EMS period. This increases the

27

magnitude of the contagion coefficient firther.

Fourth, we limit the sample to EMS observations;

here we get strikingly large contagion effects, with slope derivatives almost three times the size of
the benchmark result in the first column of Table I. Fifth, we employ only observations where
capital controls are present. Here, the coefficient on the contagion variable is indistinguishable
from the benchmark result. Finally, we substitute for crises elsewhere in the world exchange
market, actual “events” elsewhere in the world (e.g., actual devaluations or transitions to floating
rates), a perturbation which leaves the baseline results relatively unaffected.
Our sensitivity tests confirm a key finding of this paper. Namely, a speculative attack
elsewhere in the world seems to be significantly increase the odds of an attack on the domestic
currency. But they do not allow us to distinguish among the various theories of contagion.

For

example, the relatively large contagion coefficient for the EMS sub-sample and the fact that
“events” matter as much as crises point to the operation of the competitiveness
by Gerlach and Smets (1995) and hdersen

(1994).

theories that emphasize the information-coordination

channel modeled

But these results are also compatible with
effect of exchange market events.

We have also performed a number of firther robustness checks that are not reported here.
These include adding a lagged contagion term, which represents the incidence of a currency crisis
(in a different country) in the preceding quarter (as opposed to contemporaneously);

adding cross

products of the contagion term and the remaining regressors; adding money growth, long interest
rates, wages, exports and imports to the standard set of explanatory variables; using Huber-White
covariance estimators instead of standard ones; and separating out the effects of contemporaneous
and lagged regressors, Again, none of these tests disturbs our central finding that speculative

28

attacks in other countries significantly increase the odds of a currency crisis. 17
A limitation of this approach is that it does not allow us to distinguish the effects of crises
in neighboring countries (contagion per se) and from the effects of global shocks (unobserved
environmental factors).

This situation is familiar to epidemiologists,

for whom the problem is one

of determining whether the spread of a virus reflects the contagious nature of the germ or the
disease-conducive

nature of the environment,

Thus, our results could be the result of shocks to

an unmeasured common (German?) fundamental and are therefore not definitive. We need
therefore to place additional structure on the problem, and proceed to do so in the next section.

V. Channels of Transmission for Contagion
Having established prima facie evidence of contagio~

we now explore two alternative

channels of transmission for this effect.
A. Methodolow
We begin by extending our estimation model slightly to:

Cnsi~t = OW~,~(CIiSiSj,~)+ kI(L)~t + &i,l
Wij,l(Crisisj,)

= Wij,t if Crisisj~ = 1, for any j # i
= O otherwise,

17 One of the few indications of sensitivity stems from the inclusion of year-specific controls; this resdts in
point-estimates of@ of around 4Y0, and correspondingly marginally statistical evidence against the hypothesis Ho:
0=0. Since contagion would result in the clustering of speculative attacks over time which could be well picked up
by time-specitic fixed effects, it is hard to interpret this result. Also, conholling for the IMF’s real effective
exchange rate (computed using relative normalized unit-value costs) reduces both the sample size since the series
is ordy available from 1975 and tile magnitude of o by around a half. The estimate of o falls to around four per
=nt and is of more marginal statistical significance.
29

where: ~j,l is a weight which corresponds to the “relevance” at time t of country j for country i.
The null hypothesis of interest to us is Ho: 0)=0. We interpret evidence against the null as being
consistent with the existence of a contagion effect. 1s
Our first weighting scheme quantifies the ties between countries i and j using trade data.
We use the (MEW

weights that the International Moneta~

Fund has computed in the course of

constructing its real multilateral effective exchange rates. 19 The IMF’s methodology

derives the

weight for j in country i’s effective exchange rate as a convex combination of bilateral import
weights and double export weights, using trade in manufacturing.

The weights use unit labor

costs, which are widely considered to be reliable indicators of international competitiveness.
weights are time-invariant.

They

They have been computed for our twenty-one industrial countries by

the IMF, and were created in October 1994.
Thus, our trade-weighting

scheme is:

Wi,t = EE~j for any j #i, where

EE~j is the weight for country j in country i’s W

effective exchange rate index.

Our second weighting scheme is intended to capture macroeconomic
existence is a potential channel for contagion.
display similar macroeconomic

similarities whose

We think of two countries as being “similar” if they

conditions -- for example, if they have similar rates of growth of

18By way of conSachs, Tomell, and Velasco (1996) do not conwol for fundamentals when testing for
contagion.
19 Documentation and references regarding these weights are to be found in lnfernafional Financial Statistics.
30

domestic credit. Wethentest

thehypothesis

that reattack

onthecurrency

ofcount~jtiects

the probability of an attack on the currency of country i.
In practice, implementing this notion depends on being able to measure “similarity.” We
concentrate on seven “focus variables” that appear to be the subject of considerable attention
among participants in foreign exchange markets: 1) domestic credit growth (as always, relative to
Germany); 2) money growth; 3) CPI irdlation; 4) output growth; 5) the unemployment rate; 6) the
current account (as always, in nominal GDP percentage points); and 7) the government budget
deficit.20 We multiply the rate of GDP growth, the current account and the government budget by
minus one in order to allow for easier comparison with the other four variables; this means that
higher values are associated with greater risk. We standardize the variables by subtracting sample
means and dividing the result by the sample standard deviation.
ways: we take a country-specific

In practice, we standardize in two

approach in which a country is compared only with itself (so

that, e.g., the average rate of growth of French domestic credit is subtracted from the raw series
and then divided by the sample French credit growth standard deviation; alternatively, we take a
time-specific approach in which the observations at one point in time are compared with
observations for all 20 countries at that same point in time. The first approach is appropriate if
currency speculators compare credit growth in a country in a quarter to that country’s own past
credit growth; the second is relevant if speculators compare the count~’s credit growth to that
typical of other countries in the same quarter.
Having standardized the variables, we compute the macro weights as follows for the

20 One could imagine adding focus variables. Tl~epresence of capital controls and tl~etotal stock of externat debt
wodd be interesting, especially in the case of developing countries. However, sucl~variables tend to move slowly.
In addition, our seven focus variables turn out to be exwemely collinear in any case,
31

“country-specific”

and “time-specific” standardizations

Wij,t = ~j (1 -

respectively:

{@[(Xjt - ~i)/~i] - @[(x it - ~)l~i] }) for any j z i, and

Wij,t= ~j (1 - {@[(x

jt - k)l~

t] - @[(x it - pt)/Gt]})

for any j #i, where

0(.) is the cumulative distribution finction of the standardized normal function, vi (v,) is the
country-specific

(time-specific) sample average of variable x, ~i (ut) is the country-specific (time-

specific) standard deviation of variable x, and the x’s are the seven macroeconomic

“focus”

variables.
This specification implies that if country j is attacked at time t and it is similar to country i,
in the sense of having similar standardized growth rates of relevant macroeconomic

variables, then

it receives a high weight on the contagion variable. Ifj and i have identical (standardized)
domestic credit growth rates, the weight is unity; the more dissimilar are the growth rates (in the
sense of being distant in terms of the cumulative distribution), the lower is the weight. If i’s
credit growth is at the extreme lower-end of i’s cumulative distribution while j‘s is at its upper
end, then the weight is zero.
Since we have two standardizing techniques (country- and time-specific) and seven focus
variables, we obtain fourteen sets of macroeconomic

contagion weights.

B. Trade Weights
Table III substitutes our first set of weights – those based on the IMF’s MERM weights
and intended to capture bilateral trade linkages -- for the unweighed

32

contagion variable.

Trade weighting thecontagion
unweighed

vatiable improves the fitofthe

equation.

Incontrast

tothe

results in Table I, however, it is not easy to interpret the size of the contagion

variable, since this is no longer an indicator vatiable but is instead the product of a dummy and a
trade weight. Nevertheless, the positive sign of the coefficient on the contagion variable indicates
that an attack elsewhere in the world still increases the probability of a attack by a statistically
significantly amount. The level of statistical significance for the contagion effect is tigher than in
Table 1.
We interpret this evidence as supporting the hypothesis that currency crises are
transmitted, at least in part, via bilateral trade ties. It leads us to the belief that there is contagio~
rather than simply a shock to an unmeasured fundamental common to a number of countries.
C. Macro Weights
In Table IV we present results using the macro weights.
weighted contagion variables for the trade-weighted
The macro-weighted

We substitute all seven macro-

measure.

contagion proxies are generally insignificant at conventional

statistical levels when considered individually .21 However, the seven variables are jointly
si@cant

at high cofidence

levels (the relevant chl-square test statistic, labeled “Contagion

Test,” is at the foot of the table). This suggests collinearity among the seven contagion variables,
as one would expect,
Table V provides direct evidence on the extent of this collinearity.
on the macro-contagion

It reports coefficients

variables when the latter are included in the equation one by one. (The

21 This retit does not depend on the conditioning set - spec~lcally, on whether the traditional political and
macroeconomic tidamentals are entered only contemporaneously or with moving-avemge lags as well. It is also
insensitive to whether the macro weights are computed with variables standardized by country or time period.
33

inefficient estimates for the political and macroeconomic
of presentation.)

k

fundamentals are not repotted for ease

expected, the estimated coefficients are positive, indicating that a currency

crisis in a count~ which is sirni!ar, in the relevant macroeconomic

sense, raises the probability of

an attack on the domestic currency. The coefficients are statistically significant at standard
anfidence

levels and do not vary much across macroeconomic

focus variables, conditioning set,

or standardization technique.
We interpret this evidence as consistent with the existence of macroeconomic
But it answers only a subset of the relevant economic questions.
spread through both trade and macroeconomic

contagion.

For example, is contagion

links? Or does one channel dominate the other?

We now proceed to these issues.
D. Comparing the Trade and Macro Channels
We are interested in testing the explanatory power of the different measures of contagion
against each other. This requires dealing with the collinearity among our seven macro-contagion
variables, for which purpose we employ factor analysis,
Factor analysis both verifies the existence of multicollineanty
method of rank reduction,

We estimated a single-factor model for the seven macro contagion

variables using the method of principal factors.

The single-factor model works well for both the

country-specific and time-specific standardizations.22
ambination

and provides a convenient

of the seven macroeconomic

We use the resulting factor -- a linear

variables -- in place of the vector of standardized

z For instanm, the first eigen-value is substantially higher than the seeond (for both the country-spific and
time-specific factors, the first eigen-value is almost 6 while the second less than 0.2). In addition, the fimt factor
explains a high proportion of the data vananee (close to 10OO/O);
the individual factor uniquenesses are low (never
more than 30Yo). Finally, all the scoring Coefficients are all positive, as expected.
34

variables.z
Table VI reports estimates of the probit model when the effects of the different classes of
contagion variables are estimated simultaneously.
Tables I, III and IV, they are unweighed,
respectively.

The three variables correspond to those used in

trade-weighted,

and weighted by the macro factor,

As always, the fill set of political and macroeconomic

controls is included.

Again there is overwhelming evidence consistent with contagion; a joint test of the
hypothesis that all three contagion variables are significant, which appears at the foot of the table,
is wildly inconsistent with the null of no contagion.

The weighted measured designed to capture

trade linkages remains positive and highly significant, consistent with contagion via the trade
channel. The unweighed

measure is also positive and moderately significant at standard

cordidence levels, perhaps indicating that there is still evidence of a shock to unmeasured common
fundamentals,

But now the macro factor is negative and insignificant for all three conditioning

sets and both standardization techniques.
Thus, our results suggest that contagious currency crises tend to spread across countries
mainly as a finction of international trade links. In contrast, the influence of macroeconomic
similarities disappears when the various classes of contagion measures are included
simultaneously.

The continuing significance of the unweighed

the trade- and macro-weighted

measure of contagion, even when

measures are included simultaneously, suggests that contagion

may also spread through other charnels than those which we have emphasized.
E. Sensitivity Analysis
We have performed a number of robustness checks to investigate the sensitivity of our

Z Of course, there are two factors, one for each of tl~etwo standardization
35

(country- and time-s~ific),

6nding that trade linkages are more important than macroeconomic

similarities. For instance, we

split our sample into two parts (at e.g., 1974 and 1979) to check whether different models of
contagion dominate different parts of the sample. We have split our sample into obsemations in
which capital controls are present and absent, We have added additional macroeconomic
fundamentals, and compared macroeconomic
unweighed

and trade contagion channels without our

variable. None of these checks disturbs our basic finding that trade links are the more

important conduit for the infectious spread of currency crises.

VI. Conclusion
We have reviewed the theoretical and empirical literatures on crises in foreign exchange
markets with an eye toward the prevalence of contagion.

While the possibility of contagious

currency crises is a pressing policy issue, the debate surrounding it points up the limitations of
existing research. The literature is replete with theoretical models highlighting the motives for
and dynamics of speculative attacks on pegged currencies and potential channels of contagion, but
empirical work has lagged behind. Stories of contagion abound, but systematic empirical analysis
is lacking.
Here we have taken a first step toward such an analysis. Using data for 20 industrial
countries spanning more than three decades, a batte~
high levels of significance, the hypothesis of contagion.

of empirical specifications fails to reject, at
We find that a speculative attack

elsewhere in the world increases the odds of an attack on the domestic currency,

Without

conditioning on the size or relevance of these other attacks, our best estimate is that attacks on

36

foreign currencies raise the probability of a domestic attack by eight per cent. But this does not
disprove the hypothesis of common unobsemable
which contagion is transmitted.

shocks, nor does it narrow down the channel by

Accordingly, we have also sought to test for contagion in foreign

exchange markets using a framework that distinguishes two channels of international transmission
of speculative attacks.
The first channel is trade links, and the hypothesis is that attacks spill over contagiously to
other countries with which the subject country trades. The second channel is macroeconomic
similarities, where the hypothesis is that attacks spread to other countries where economic policies
and conditions are broadly similar, The first approach emphasizes the implications for
competitiveness

of an attack elsewhere in the world.

The second focuses on the ifiormation

content of an attack (where the assumption is that an attack on one country reveals information
. ,,

about market sentiment regarding the viability of a particular economic strategy).
Using data for 20 industrial countries spanning more than three decades, we have
compared these alternatives.
prow outperfom

Both the trade-weighted

the naive unweighed

contagion proxy and the macro-weighted

contagion measure when they are included one at a time.

We take this as confirmation that what our tests are picking up is contagion per se, and not only
the effects of omitted environmental factors common to the countries in question (although the
latter are still present).
The effect of contagion operating through trade is stronger than that of contagion
spreading as a result of macroeconomic

similarities.

When measures of both mechanisms are

included in the specification, trade-related contagion dominate macro effect. Admittedly,

37

similarities in macroeconomic policies and performance across countries are more difficult to
capture in a weighting scheme than is the intensity of bilateral trade; the stronger showing of
trade-related contagion may simply reflect our greater success in proxying this effect. At the
same time, considerable experimentation with alternative measures of macro-related contagio~

al!

of which points to the same conclusion, lends some support to our favored interpretation that it is
trade links rather than macroeconomic

similarities that have been the dominant channel for the

contagious transmission in the sample period.
In the 1960s, toward the begiming of our sample, the debate over contagion centered on
the industrial countries.

The fear was that a currency crisis in one industrial count~ might

destabilize the exchange rate pegs of the other advanced industrial nations, The fallout from the
1967 devaluation of sterling provides some retrospective justification for these fears (see
Elchengreen,

1996). Today the debate over contagion increasingly focuses on emerging markets,

in Latin Arnenca, Asia and elsewhere (e.g., Sachs, Tomell and Velasco (1996)).
the data makes systematic cross-country
emerging markets.

The nature of

analyses of the sort we undertake here more difficult for

But it is clear that this should be a high priority for fiture research.

38

Table I: Probit Results
Contemporaneous

MA of
Contemporaneous+2
Lags

MA of 2 Lags

Crisis
Elsewhere

7.45 (3.8)

8.33 (4.0)

Capital

-1.66 (.7)

MA of

MA of

Contemporaneous+4
Lags

Contemporaneous+8
Lags

8.14 (4.3)

8.72 (4.0)

8.83 (3.8)

.22 (.1)

.66 (.3)

.48 (,2)

1,24 (.4)

4.24 (1.0)

-1.71 (.3)

-.60 (.2)

5.30 (1,6)

-.45 (.2)

Government
Loss

-3,45 (,9)

-7.44 (1.3)

-3.34 (1.2)

2.49 (.8)

-.63 (.2)

Credit

.19 (1.8)

.11 (.8)

.10 (1.2)

-.00 (.0)

-,09 (.4)

.75 (3.5)

.57 (2.4)

.40 (1.9)

.59 (2.1)

.64 (1.8)

.21 (,6)

-.39 (.9)

-.50 (1.4)

-.74 (1.3)

-.36 (,4)

Employment
Growth

.37 (.7)

.86 (1.5)

.78 (1.5)

1.08 (1.6)

1.30 (1.6)

Unemploy-

.86 (3.0)

.96 (3.2)

.92 (3.5)

1.04 (3.3)

1.19 (3.4)

Budget
Position/GDP

,47 (1,9)

.41 (1.6)

.35 (1.5)

.46 (1.6)

.57 (1.8)

Current
Account/GDP

-.23 (.8)

-.36 (1.1)

-.51 (1.9)

-.42 (1.2)

-.34 (.8)

Number of
Observations

645

626

703

608

572

McFadden’s

.15

.12

.13

.12

.10

55

46

53

43

36

Controls
Government

Victory

Growth
Inflation

Rate
output
Growth

ment Rate

Rz
Joint Test for
Slopes X2(11)

Probit slope derivatives (x 100, to convert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for
h~othesis of no effect).
Model estimated with a constant, by maximum likelihood.
Slopes significantly different from zero at the .05 value are in bold.

39

Table ~: SensitiviW Analysis

2 quarter
window, 2
threshold

Increased
Weight on

Crisis
Elsewhere

9.38 (3.5)

7.42 (3.3)

12.31 (2.8)

Capitat

2.43 (1.1)

-.50 (.2)

Government
victory

5.67 (2.0)

Government
hss

Pre 1979

EMS

Only
Immobile

With
Contem-

Capital

poraneous
Events

19.90 (3.4)

7,88 (2,9)

6.99 (3.4)

5.41 (.8)

10.05 (2.0)

N/A

.18 (.1)

4.48 (,9)

-9.52 (,8)

2,22 (.3)

-1.64 (.2)

-1.13 (.2)

-1.74 (.4)

-1.90 (.3)

-14.57 (1.2)

-1.57 (.3)

-4.71 (.7)

%.60 (1.2)

Credit
Growth

.09 (.8)

.09 (.6)

.34 (1,3)

.13 (.7)

.22 (1.2)

.14 (1.0)

Inflation
Rate

.26 (1.4)

.47 (1,7)

.17 (.4)

.01 (.0)

.59 (2.0)

.58 (2.4)

output
Growth

.19 (,8)

-.07 (.1)

-.97 (1.1)

-.70 (.9)

-.68 (1.2)

-.40 (.9)

1.27 (2.6)

.52 (.8)

-.12 (.1)

1.51 (1.1)

.37 (.5)

.87 (1.5)

Unemployment Rate

.19 (.8)

.45 (1.4)

4,06 (3.0)

1.44 (1.7)

.91 (2.4)

.99 (3.2)

Budget
Position/GDP

.05 (.3)

.47 (1.7)

1.16 (1.6)

-.10 (.3)

.38 (1.1)

.40 (1.5)

Current
Account/GDP

-.47 (1.9)

-.89 (2.6)

-1.48 (1.7)

.08 (.2)

-.23 (.5)

-.36 (1.1)

Number of
Observations

326

623

233

224

425

626

McFadden’s
~z

.32

,09

.17

.21

.11

.12

Joint Test for
Slopes X2(11)

55

36

31

28

28

45

Exchange
Rates

Controls

Employment
Growth

Probit slope derivatives (x1OO, to convert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for
hypothesis of no effect).
Model estimated with a constant, by maximum likelihood,
Slopes significantly different from zero at the .05 value are in bold.
All regressors are expressed as equally weighted moving averages of contemporaneous and two
quarterly lags.
40

Table III: Probit Results

with Conta~ion

Variable

Weighted

by International

Trade

MA of
Contem + 8
La s
.74 (5.2)

Crisis
Elsewhere

-i

Capital
Controls

-1.8 (.8)

I

-.77 (.3)

-.06 (.0)

Government
vietory

-3.9 (.9)

I

.59 (.1)

.39 (.1)
-3.5 (1.2)

Government
Loss
Credit
Growth

I
I
I

-.76 (.3)

.16 (.1)

I

3.7 (1.1)

-2.0 (.7)

I

3.0 (.9)

.43 (.2)

-.09 (.5)

.09 (1.1)
+

-,10 (.5)
+

Inflation
Rate

.82 (3.8)

output
Growth
Employment
Growth

I

.81 (2.8)

.79 (2.3)

-.48 (1.3)

-,49 (.8)

-.21 (.3)

.95 (1.8)

1,12 (1.7)

.73 (3.0)

.53 (2.6)

.10 (.3)

-.39 (.8)

.44 (.8)

.99 (1.6)

I

I

1.4 (1.6)
--i

.76 (2.8)

.85 (2.5)

.97 (2.7)

.58 (2.0)

.71 (2.2)

Unemploy
Rate

.71 (2.3)

.78 (2.5)

Budget
Position/GDP

.52 (2.1)

.49 (1,8)

Current
Account/GDP

-,28 (1.0)

-,24 (.8)

Number of
Observations

645

626

I

703

I

608

572

McFadden’s
R2

.18

.19

I

.19

I

.19

.18

Joint Test for
Slopu Xz(ll)

70

70

76

I

67

I

.40 (1.6)

I

-.31 (1,1)

I

-.21 (.5)

-.33 (.9)
+

4

Probit slope derivatives (x1OO,to convert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for h~thesis
Model estimated with a constant, by maximum likelihood,
Slopes si~]cantly
different from zero at the .05 value are in bold,

41

I

63

of no effect),

Table IV: Probit Results with Contagion
Variable Weighted by Macro-Similarity
(All Seven Contagion Variables Included Simultaneously)
—

Country-Spccitic Averages —–

Contemporaneous

MAof2
Lags

---- Time-Specitic Averages —--

MA of
~ontem + 8
Lags

Contemporaneous
-2.44 (.9)

Crisis* Credit
Similarity

-.10 (.0)

1.68 (.7)

2.72 (.9)

Crisis*Money
Similarity

-.32 (.1)

1.06 (.4)

-.38 (.1)

Cnsis*Inflat
Similarity

2.54 (.8)

4.12 (1.4)

5.24 (1.5)

Crisis* GDP
Similarity

-1.97 (.8)

-3.48 (1.5)

-3.42 (1.3)

Crisis*Unemp
Similarity

-.60 (,3)

-.93 (.6)

-1.08 (.5)

Crisis *C/Ace
Similarity

2.10 (.7)

1.19 (.4)

1.72 (.5)

Crisis* Budget
Similarity

1.80 (.8)

.16 (.1)

Cap Controls

-2.56 (1.1)

Gov’t Vlctoly

-1.06 (.6)

MAof2
Lags

MA of
Contem + 8
Lags

-.10 (.0)

I

-2.57 (1.6)

.01 (.0)

I

-2.77 (1.4)

+

4.19 (1,5)

-4.86 (1.9)

-5.99 (2.0)

-.43 (.2)

-2.68 (1.1)

-.64 (.3)

-.84 (.3)

-3.81 (,9)

-.05 (.0)

-3.52 (,8)

-.36 (.1)

-2.02 (.7)

Gov’t hss

-2,62 (,6)

-3.74 (1.4)

-2.88 (,7)

-3.99 (1.4)

-.99 (.4)

Credit

..20 (1.7)

.09 (1.1)

~

.22 (1.9)

.10 (1,2)

-.18 (.7)

Inflation

.80 (3.6)

.48 (2.3)

~

.71 (3.1)

.42 (2.0)

.75 (2.1)

Growth

.10 (.3)

-.58 (1.6)

-.46 (.6)

.15 (.4)

-.58 (1.6)

-,38 (.5)

Employment

.24 (.5)

.57 (1.1)

1.08 (1.3)

.20 (.4)

.67 (1,3)

1.24 (1.5)

Unemploy’t

.86 (2.9)

.92 (2.4)

.65 (2.0)

.69 (2.4)

.91 (2.4)

Budget/GDP

.57 (2.2)

.37 (1.5)

.33 (1,1)

.20 (.8)

.40 (1.1)

C/Ace/GDP

-.23 (.8)

-.46 (1.7)

-.08 (.3)

-.29 (1.1)

-.13 (.3)

NOBS

645

703

572

645

703

572

McFadden’s

.16

.16

.14

.17

.17

.15

Slopes x2(17)

63

64

49

65

67

53

Contagion
Test X2(7)

20

27

25

21

28

27

-.39 (.2)

~
.62 (1.9)
~

Probit slope derivatives (x1OO,to mnvert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for hypothesis of no effect).
Model estimated with a mnstant, by maximum likelihood.
Slopes si~lcantly
different from zero at tl~e.05 value are in bold.
42

Table V: Probit

Results

with Contagion
Variable Weighted
(tintagion Variables Included One by One)

— buntry-Specific

Averages —--

by Macro-Similari@

---- Time-Spectic Averages -—

MA of
Contem + 8
Lags

Contemporaneous

MAof2
Lags

7.46 (4.4)

8.82 (4,1)

4.73 (2.7)

5.68 (3.4)

6.60 (3.2)

6.23 (3.8)

7.05 (4.4)

7.81 (3.8)

5.41 (3.3)

6.44 (4.0)

7.33 (3.7)

Crisis*Inflat
Similarity

7.17 (4. 1)

7.79 (4.7)

9.21 (4.4)

7.23 (4.2)

8.12 (4.9)

9.81 (4.8)

Crisis* GDP
Similarity

6.03 (3.7)

5.74 (3.8)

6,84 (3.6)

5.41 (3.5)

4.81 (3.4)

5.90 (3.3)

Cnsis*Unemp
Similarity

5.10 (3.4)

5.25 (3.6)

5.82 (3.2)

6.66 (4.3)

7.00 (4.8)

8.02 (4.5)

Crisis *C/Ace
Similarity

7.35 (4.3)

7.53 (4.7)

8,91 (4.4)

7.40 (4. 1)

7.26 (4.5)

9.05 (4.3)

Crisis*Budget
Similarity

6.15 (3.7)

5.78 (3.8)

6,13 (3.1)

5.13 (3.2)

5.40 (3.6)

5.87 (3.1)

Contemporaneous

MAof2
Lags

Crisis* Credit
Similarity

6.67 (3.7)

Crisis*Money
Similarity

MA of
Contem + 8
Lags

Probit slope derivatives (x1OO,to convert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for hypothesis of no effect).
Each model is estimated by maximum likelihood with a constant and seven political and macroeconomic controls.
All repofied slopes differ sigtilmtly
from zero at the .01 value,

43

Table VI: Probit Results with Three Different Measures of Contagion
—

Counq-Specfic

---- Time-Specfic

Averages ----

Averages —Contcmporaneous

MA Of 2
Lags

MA of
Contem + 8
Lags

Contemporaneous

MA of 2
Lags

MA of
Contem + 8
Lags

crises
Elsewhere:
Unwei@ted

4.66 (2.0)

5.18 (2.3)

4.80 (1.7)

4.74 (2.0)

4.97 (2.2)

4.44 (1.6)

crises
Elsewhere:
Int’1 Trade
Weights

.39 (3.6)

.58 (4.3)

.75 (4.3)

.40 (3.7)

.58 (4.2)

.73 (4.1)

crises
Elsewhere:
Macro Factor
Weights

-.85 (.6)

-1.87 (1.3)

-2.18 (1.2)

-.94 (,7)

-1.64 (1.2)

-1.68 (1.0)

Capital
Controls

-1.62 (.7)

.25 (,1)

.32 (.1)

-1,55 (.7)

.27 (.1)

.29 (.1)

Government
Victory

-3.70 (.9)

.29 (.1)

-1.60 (.6)

-3.70 (.9)

.32 (,1)

-1.57 (.6)

Government
hss

-2.24 (.6)

-3,32 (1.1)

.44 (.2)

-2.23 (.5)

-3.31 (1.2)

.43 (.2)

Credit

.17 (1.6)

.08 (1.0)

-,09 (.4)

.17 (1.7)

.09 (1.0)

-.09 (.4)

Inflation

.77 (3.7)

.47 (2.3)

.72 (2.1)

.77 (3.7)

.48 (2.4)

.74 (2.1)

Growth

.09 (.3)

-.53 (1.5)

-.35 (.4)

,09 (.3)

-,52 (1.5)

-.34 (.4)

Employment

.39 (.8)

.93 (1.8)

1.29 (1.6)

.40 (.8)

.89 (1.8)

1,25 (1.5)

Unemploy’t

.69 (2.4)

.76 (2.9)

.96 (2.7)

.70 (2.4)

.78 (2.9)

.98 (2.7)

Budget /GDP

.48 (2.0)

.37 (1,6)

.68 (2.1)

.47 (2,0)

.37 (1.6)

.67 (2.1)

Current
Account/GDP

-.23 (.9)

-.33 (1.3)

-.26 (.6)

-.24 (.9)

-.36 (1.4)

-.29 (.7)

NOES

645

703

572

645

703

572

McFadden’s
~2

,20

.20

.19

.20

.20

.19

Slopes x2(13)

75

81

66

74

81

66

Contagion
Test X2(3)

31

38

34

31

37

33

Probit slope derivatives (x1OO,to convert into percentages) and associated z-statistics (for hypothesis of
no effect). Model estimated with a Constanl by maximum likelihood.
Slopes significantly different from zero at the .05 value are in bold.

44

Crises Per Quarter

1

0

Figure 1

45

References
Andersen, Torben (1 994), “Shocks and the Viability of a Fixed Exchange Rate
Commitment,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 969.
Bensaid, Bernard, and Olivier Jeanne (1993), “The Instability of Fixed Exchange Rate
Systems When Raising the Nominal Interest Rate is Costly,” unpublished manuscript,
ENPC-CERAS, Pans.
B1ackbu~ Keith and Mario Sola (1 993), “Speculative Currency Attacks and Balance of
Payments Crises,” Journal o~Economic Surveys 7, pp. 119-144.
Buiter, Wille~ Giancarlo Corsetti and PaoloPesenti(1996),
Financial Marhts
International Moneta~ Cooperation, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

and

Burki, Shahid and Sebastian Edwards (1995), “Latin America After Mexico: Quickening
the Pace,n unpublished manuscript, World Bank.
Calve, Guillermo A. (1996), “Capital Flows and Macroeconomic
Lessons,” unpublished manuscript, University of Maryland.

Management: Tequila

Calve, Sara and Carmen Reinhart (1995), “Capital Inflows to Latin ~erica:
Is There
Evidence of Contagion Effects,” unpublished manuscript, World Bank and International
Monetary Fund.
Caplin, Andrew and JohnLeahy(1994)
“Business as Usual, Market Crashes, and Wisdom
&er the Fact,” American Economic Review 84, pp.548-565.
Claessens, Stijn (1991), “Balance of Payments Crises in an Optimal Portfolio Model,”
European Economic Review 35, pp.81- 101.
De Koc~ Gabriel and Vittorio Grilli (1993), “Fiscal Policies and the Choice of Exchange
Rate Regime,” Economic Journal 103, pp.347-356.
Diamond, Douglas and Phillip Dibvig (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
Liquidity,” Journal of PoliticaIEconomy 91, pp.401 -419.
Dombusc~ Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn and RodrigoVald6s(1995),
“Currency Crises and
Collapses,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~2,pp.219-295.
Draze~ Allan and Paul R. Masson (1 994), “Credibility of Policies versus Credibility of
Policymakers,” Quarter~ Journal of Economics CIX, pp. 735-754.
Edwards, Sebastian (1989), Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and A~ustment:
&change Rate Policies in Developing Countries, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
46

Eichengreen, Barry, Andrew K, Rose and CharlesWyplosz(1994),
“Speculative Attacks
on Pegged Exchange Rates: An Empirical Exploration with Special Reference to the
European Monetary System,” in Matthew Canzoneri, Paul Masson and Vittono Grilli
(eds), ~e New Transatlantic Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
EichengreeL Barry, Andrew K. Rose, and CharlesWyplosz(1995)
“Exchange Market
Mayhem: The Antecedents and Aftermath of Speculative Attacks,” Economic Policy 21,
pp.249-3 12.
Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984a), “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some
Linear Examples,” Journal of International Economics 17, pp. 1-13.
Flood, Robeti and PeterGarber(1984b),
“Gold Monetization
Journal of Political Economy 92, pp.90-107.

and Gold Discipline, ”

Frankel, Jefiey A. and Andrew K. Rose (1995) “An Empirical Characterization of
Nominal Exchange Rates,” in Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff (eds), Handbook oj
International Economics 3, Amsterdam: North Holland, pp. 1689-1729.
Gerlac~ Stefan and FrankSmets(1995)
“Contagious Speculative Attacks,” European
Journal of Political Economy 11, pp. 5-63.
Girto~ Lance and Don Roper (1977) “A Monetary Model of Exchange Market Pressure
Applied to Postwar Canadian Experience,” American Economic Review 67, pp. 537-548.
Goldberg, Linda (1993), “Predicting Exchange Rate Crises: Mexico Revisited,” Journal of
International Economics (forthcoming).
Goldfaj~ Ilan and Rodrigo Vald6s (1995), “Balance of Payments Crises and Capital
Flows: The Role of Liquidity,” unpublished manuscript, MIT.
Grilli, Vittono (1986) “Buying and Selling Attacks on Fixed Exchange Rate Systems,”
Journal of International Economics 20, pp. 143-156.
Kaminsky, Graciela and CarmenReinhart(1996),
“The Twin crises: The Causes of
Banking and Balance-of-Payments Problems,” unpublished manuscript, Federal Reserve
Board and International Monetary Fund.
Krugman, Paul (1979), “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Monev,
Credit and Banking 11, pp.3 11-325.
Krugma~ Paul (1996), “Are Currency Crises Self-Fulfilling?” NBER Macroeconomics
Annual (forthcoming).
Moreno, Ramon (1995), “Macroeconomic Behavior During Periods of Speculative
Pressure or Realignment: Evidence from Pacific Basin Economies, ” Economic Review 3,
47

Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, pp.3-16.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1 986) “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance of Payments Crises,”
American Economic Review 76, pp. 72-81.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1991), “Destabilizing Effects of Exchange Rate Escape Clauses,”
NBER Working Paper No, 2603.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1995), “International Currency Experience: New Lessons and Lessons
Relearned,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, pp. 119-220.
Ozka~ Gulcin and Alan Sutherland, “Policy Measures to Avoid a Currency Crisis,”
Economic Journal 105, pp.5 10-19.
Sachs, Jefiey, Aaron Tomell, and Andr6sVelasco(1996),
“Financial Crises in Emerging
Markets: The Lessons from 1995,” NBER Discussion Paper 5576.
Schmukler, Sergio and Jeffrey Frankel (1996), “Crisis, Contagion and Count~
unpublished manuscript, University of California, Berkeley.

Funds,”

Shiner, Robert (1995) “Conversation, Information, and Herd Behavior,” American
Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 85, pp. 181-85.
Vald6s, Rodrigo O. (1996) “Emerging Market Contagion: Evidence and Theory”
unpublished manuscript, MIT.
WillmaL Alpo (1988), “The Collapse of the Fixed Exchange Rate Regime with Sticky
Wages and Imperfect Substitutability Between Domestic and Foreign Bonds,” European
Economic Review 32, pp. 1817-1838,

48

