NBER WOR~G

PAPER SERIES

TAX POLICY AND INVESTMENT

Kevin A. Hassett
R. Glenn Hubbard

NBER Working Paper 5683

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

This paper was presented at the Conference on Fiscal Policy: Lessons from Economic Research,
Robert D. Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance, University of California, Berkeley,
February 2-3, 1996. We are grateful to Josh Gillespie for excellent research assistance, and Alan
Auerbach, Darrel Cohen, Jason Cummins, Bronwyn Hall, Charlie Himmelberg, Jim Kennedy, Sandy
Struckmeyer, John Taylor, and conference participants for helpful comments and suggestions. This
paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Growth, and Public
Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the Board of
Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Kevin A. Hassett and R. Glenn Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5683
July 1996

TAX POLICY AND INVESTMENT

ABSTRACT

In this paper, we summarize recent advances in the study of effects of tax policy on the fixed
investment decisions of firms. We attempt to identify consensus where it has been achieved and to
highlight important unresolved issues. In addition, we discuss the implications

of recent findings

for the analysis of policy options, and discuss arguments for and against long-run tax policy that
favors business investment spending.

Kevin A. Hassett
Stop 80
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Washington, DC 20551

R. Glenn Hubbard
Graduate School of Business
Columbia University
609 Uris Hall
New York, NY 10027
and NBER

1
“The~rst ship to arrive in St. Petersburg in 1701, a Dutch vessel, receivedfiom Peter the Great the
privilege of paying no custom duties for the rest of its physical life --a concession which had the
e~ect of prolonging the ship 5 ll~efor almost a century -- three orfour times the normal span.”1

I.

Introduction
Just as Peter the Great’s tax amnesty spurred substantial maintenance

investment

in that

Dutch ship, many governments have apparently believed that tax policy can be used as an instrument
to alter firms’ capital investment decisions. Indeed, investment w credits (ITCS), special investment
“reseme” tids,

or accelerated depreciation allowances have been the rule rather than the exception

in most developed countries since World War II. Against this backdrop, however, economists have
generally struggled to find a significant impact of tax policy on investment.
I

The empirical economic literature on investment finds its early ~oots in the work of Afialian
(1909), Clark (191 7), and Fisher (1930). Aftalian and Clark observed that business investment is
highly correlated with changes in business output -- providing support for the early “accelerationist”
school -- while Fisher’s neoclassical theory argued for the importance of marginal conditions.
the risk of oversimpli&ing,

At

the literature subsequently divided into two camps. One side argued that

the “accelerator” model pefiormed

so well empirically that it should be adopted as the standard

model, the other side looked to “neoclassical” models relating investment to the user cost of capital.
While the neoclassical school may have had the theoretical high ground, empirical implementations
of neoclassical models have been generally disappointing.

Indeed, while the time-series evidence

has always revealed that lags of output are highly correlated with investment,

1See Braudel (1992, page 241).

interest rates have

L
provided

very limited additional

explanatory

power. 2 The debate between these two schools

provides a usefil introduction to our review of the literature relating tax policy to investment.

Many

obsewers even recently (e.g., Clark, 1993) have argued that tax policy likely does not significantly
affect investment,
Motivated

and the arguments inevitably harken back to the accelerationist

debate.

by the hope that the simplest neoclassical models failed to explain investment

fluctuations because they were too stylized, substantial energy was devoted to the task of extending
these models to incorporate more realistic assumptions in the 1970s and early 1980s.3 Chief among
these was the incorporation

of costs of adjusting the capital stock.

investment is forward-looking,

According to these models,

and based upon rational expectations of future variables.

firms base their expectations of future variables in part on their observ~ions
identified a link between lagged variables and current investment.
growth and fiture “fidamentals”

Because

of the past, researchers

Indeed, correlation of pmt output

could be used to rationalize a strong correlation between current

investment

and past values of the growth of output.

movements

of investment,

When asked to explain the time-series

however, these new models proved very disappointing.

Additiond

variables that were meant to capture the marginal cost or return to investment seemed to be of little
use, over and above output, in predicting investment.

Moreover, structural parameter estimates

tended to be wildly implausible.

2 We update the time-series stylized facts in section III.
3 Eisner and Strotz ( 1963) offer an early discussion of adjustment costs. The theory was
developed and extended by Lucas ( 1967, 1976), Gould (1 968), Treadway (1 969, 1971), Uzawa
(1969), Mortensen (1 973), Abel (1 980), andHayashi(1982).
Researchers have generally
assumed convex costs of adjusting the capital stock; the idea is that it is more costly to
implement a given increment to the capital stock quickly rather than gradually. We discuss
alternative assumptions about adjustment costs in Section V.

It is at this point in the evolution of the literature that we begin this review.

After briefly

reviewing neoclassical theory, we summarize recent theoretical advances in section II. Section 111
updates the time-series
studies of investment

stylized facts for investment.

In Section IV, we review recent empirical

in producers’ durable equipment.

After concluding

in section IV that tax

policy designed to stimulate investment likely has done so, we turn in section V to the question of
the desirability of such intervention, highlighting the arguments that have been made for and against
stimulative tax policy. In section VI, we consider implications of our analysis for two current policy
questions--whether

lower intlation offers a significant investment stimulus and the consequences for

investment of a switch from the current tax system to a broad-based consumption

tax. Section VII

concludes.
II.

Models of Investment in the Neoclassical
Models in the neoclassical

Tradition

tradition focus on the derived demand for capital by value-

maximizing

firrns.4 This intuition is typically transformed

assumptions

about costs of changing the capital stock. For simplicity of exposition, consider the

decisions of a price-taking

into models of investment

by making

firm. Absent taxes, in each period t, firm i’s real net cash flow is given

by:
x i,t = F(Ki,_,

,Nif)-w/N,

{-p,

li,

-c(lif,

K,

(_,),

(1)

where K(-) is the capital stock, ~(~) is the real revenue function of the firm, N is the variable factor,
w is the price of the variable factor, p is the real price of investment goods, and C~) is the function

4 For a more detailed discussion of the models introduced in this section, see Abel (1 990).

4
determining the cost of adjusting the capital stock. In the absence of taxes, then, the marginal cost
of newly installed capital is p, + Cl ~IioK,,,. J.
To study investment tax policy, we add to the net cash flow expression in(1) a profits tax
at rate ~, an investment tax credit at rate k, and the present value of a dollar’s worth of depreciation
allowances, Z.5 With these additions, the marginal cost of newly installed capital is:

p, (1

-ri ,) + (1 -T,) Cl (Ii , , Kit ,.,) ,

where ri, = k, + T, z,, , and we can rewrite (1) as:

xi,

=

(1 -T,) ( F(K,

,_,, N,)

- w, Ni , - C1 (Zi ,, K.,,,.,))-P,

Under the assumption of value maximization,

(l

-r,,,)],,.

the firm maximizes the present value of its

fiture net cash flows. Letting ~ be the discount factor appropriate for the ith fin-n the firm’s value
at time t, firm value is given by:

(2)

where E,, is the expectations operator for firm i conditional on information available at time t. The

5 For the sake of simplifying the discussion, we focus hereon the U. S. tax system. For a
parallel analysis which employs a more general tax formulation which nests that of many
countries see Sinn (1987), and King and Fullerton (1984). Sweden, in particular, has had one of
the more complicated and interesting tax codes in the postwar period. For a discussion relating
their code to this model see Taylor (1982), Sodersten (1989), and Auerbach, Hassett, and
Sodersten (1 995).

<

J

firm chooses the path of investment and employment of the variable factor, given the initial capital
stock, to maximize firm value, The change in the capital stock — net investment — is given by lj, 6K,,,.,, where 5 is the (assumed constant) proportional rate of depreciation.
For investment, the solution to the problem requires that the marginal value of an additional
unit of investment

equal its marginal cost.

Denoting the shadow value of an additional unit of

investment by q:6

(3)

9,,, = P, (1 ‘ri, f) + (1 ‘T> CJ (l;, f , ‘i, f.~) ~

The shadow price q must also obey:
Aqi,

= (r, + 6, q,, ~ - (I -~i) F~ (K,, ,.l , ~,, ~ ) + (1 -’c, ) .CK (Ii. , , Ki, /-1) ~

where r is the instantaneous

rate at which marginal cash flows are discounted.

We can now use this general set up to examine two conventional
neoclassical

(4)

formulations

of the

approach, one based on the user cost of capital and one based on q.

A. User Cost of Capital
Jorgenson (1963) and his collaborators

suggested using a form of equation (4) to derive an

expression for the “user cost of capital. ” If we interpret q as the price at which a unit of capital can
be bought or sold, we can consider the thought experiment
capital.

of renting a unit of newly installed

The owner of this capital will levy a rental cost c such that the rate of return equals r, the

return available on alternative (financial) assets. me owner’s return from renting the capital equals

b Implicit in this derivation is the idea that firms can remove capital goods and sell them subject
to an adjustment cost.

‘/

6
the rental cost, c, plus the capital gain on the machine, Aqi, ., /qi,, less the depreciation
machine,

aq,,.

of the

Expressed as a rate of return and equating the rate of return with the available

alternative yields:

c;, =(l-tt)(r,

A q,
-—.
91,(

+a)q,

(5)

We can substitute for q in equation (3) to express the user cost as a function of the price of
investment goods, adjustment costs, and tax parameters.
were zero, yielding the fmiliar

c l.t‘P,

Jorgenson assumed that adjustment costs

user cost expression:

(

I -ri,
~_’T

A 0,+1 (1
)(rt+a

_

-r,j) ),

(6)

p, (1 -r,,,)

Returning to our derivation of q in (3), we can more generally express the user cost as equaling the
marginal cash flow of an additional unit of capital:

(1 ‘T,

) (FK (Kj,~., , ‘j, f) - c~ (1,,f , ‘i, ,-[)) =

Cj,f .

Jorgenson’s interest centered on isolating the effects of the user cost on the desired capital
stock and investment,

He considered a special case in which the prices p, w, and r are constant and

I,, = 5K,,, ., in steady state, (so that C, = C~ = O). Hence from (7):
(1 -Tt) FK (Ki, ,.l , ~i,l) = c,,, .

,./

7
Assuming a constant elasticity of substitution production fiction:

1

F(K,
where ~> O, 0< b <1, and 6>-1,

N)= A[bK-e+ (l-b) N-e ]-~,
one can express the marginal revenue product of capital as:

FK(K,N)=(~
A“

)(:)”8.

Returning to the Jorgensonian derivation in (7), the steady-state capital stock can be described as a
function of the user cost of capital and the firm’s real revenue:

K*

where o is the elasticity of substitution

= (:)”
A

F u (:)-”

,

(8)

(u = 1/(1 + (3)).

Equation (8) describes the steady-state capital stock, K*. As we describe in more detail
below, it is not an “estimating equation. ” To estimate investment, Jorgenson assumed that a = 1
(Cobb-Douglas

technology), so that K*,,, = @/A~[() -r,)F, /c,, J.

He then assumed that the capital

stock adjusted to the desired level at an exogenous rate dictated by, e.g., delivery lags. A substantial
empirical debate ensued, with Eisner and Nadiri (1968, 1970) claiming on the one hand that the
elasticity of substitution is nearer zero than unity, while Jorgenson and Stephenson (1969) claimed
on the other hand that an elasticity of unity is more consistent with the data.’

7 It maybe important to allow the ex an?e and ex post values of u to be different, the
argument being that the labor needed for a given piece of capital in place is fixed. This is the
“putty-clay” hypothesis, put forward by Bischoff(1971 ). In some cases, these models have been
shown to perform well empirically (see Struckrneyer, 1977).

.,/

8
More contemporary applications of the user cost model incorporate explicit adjustment costs
as opposed to ad hoc mechanism such as delivery lags. Auerbach ( 1989), for example, begins with
the Euler equation for investment and assumes a production function with productivity
adjustment

cost function.

He approximates

the optimal solution for perturbations

shocks and
by solving a

linearized version of the Euler equation. He then derives a relationship between the investment rate
(1,,,/Kr,,.,) and the user cost of capital, in which the user cost coefficient is a finction of the steadystate average user cost and a root of the linearized difference equation in K (for applications,

see

Auerbach and Hassett, 1991, 1992; and Curnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard, 1994 1996).
B. The q Theory
Tobin’s (1969) q theory of investment made more rigorous Keynes’s ( 936) idea that the
incentive to add new fixed capital depends on the market value of capital relative to its replacement
cost. Tobin represented by q the ratio of the market value of the firm to the replacement cost of its
capital stock. One can easily incorporate adjustment costs and tax parameters in the q fiarnework
(see Hayashi, 1982).
Returning
investment
finction

to equation (2), we know that equilibrium

goods, tax parameters,

and adjustment costs.

marginal q is related to the price of

If we assume that the adjustment

cost

is quadratic:

C(I, , , K.,, ,,)

Pi )2 Kf, /.l,

= :(+-

(9)

r, f-l

where p is the steady-state rate of investment and u is the adj ustrnent cost parameter, then equation
(2) can be rewritten as an investment equation:

9

(lo)

Equation (1O)offers a convenient way of estimating the responsiveness of investment to neoclassical
variables,

including tax parameters, but there is a hitch—marginal

q is unobservable.

Following

Hayashi (1982), if the firm is a price-taker in input and output markets, and the production function
exhibits constant returns to scale, marginal q equals average q, defined for each firm as tax-adjusted
q (denoted below by Q):
vi , +Bif

Q,,t=

‘

-Ait

‘

‘!

(11)

KiR,_l

where V is the market value of the firm’s equity, B is the market value of the firm’s debt, A is the
present value of depreciation

allowances

on investment

made before period t, and K~ is the

replacement value of the firm’s capital stock (including inventones).
The Q formulation

stresses a relationship

investing, m measured by the difference be~een
tax-inclusive

cost of purchasing capital.

between investment and the net profitability

of

the value of an incremental unit of capital and the

As with the user cost approach, by making assumptions

about costs of adjusting the capital stock, we can estimate effects of investment

incentives

on

investment,
C. Foreshadowing

Empirical Problem

Jorgenson (1963) investigated whether a version of equation (8) could be used to describe
aggregate fluctuations in U.S. investment.

Moving from this equilibrium relationship to an empirical

10
model, however, required a few more steps. Because output is determined

by the choice of K,

equation (8) does not relate K to a set of exogenous variables .6 Rather, it expresses a relationship
between endogenous

variables that holds in equilibrium.

investment relationship,

Indeed, equation (8) does not define an

that is, theflow of capital, but rather describes only the equilibrium stock

of capital.9 Jorgenson moved to an “investment” specification by defting
stock, K* as Y/c, and then assuming that the fm
He assumed that the rate at which the fm
given exogenously,

a firm’s “desired” capital

gradually approached this desired stock over time.

closed the gap between its actual and desired stocks was

and did not effect the level of the “desired” stock. These assumptions

yielded

the estimating equation:

(12)

Hall and Jorgenson (1967) originally used such a model to explain aggregate investment, and
concluded

that it described the data well.

model they estimated -- recognizing
capturing

Eisner and his collaborators

later pointed out that the

that ~ was the ratio of output to the user cost -- could be

accelerator effects, which had long been known to be strong explanatory

factors for

s To be more specific, Jorgenson assumed that the revenue function of the firm was CobbDouglas and that the firm set marginal revenue (with respect to capital) equal to the user cost in
order to maximize profits.
9 For example, Haavelmo (1960) writes “The demand for investment cannot simply be
derived from the demand for capital.,.1 think the sooner this naive, and unfounded theory of the
demand for investment schedule is abandoned, the sooner we shall have a chance of making
some real progress in constructing more powerful theories to deal with the capricious short-run
variations in the rate of private investment. ” (quoted in Jorgenson, 1967, page 133)

investment. In particular, if one constrained the user cost to be a constant, one could rewrite (12) as:

(13)

which is a form of an accelerator model.
contribution

When critics of Hall and Jorgenson isolated the separate

of the user cost to explaining investment, they found it to be negligible- (see Eisner,

1969, 1970; Eisner and Nadiri, 1968; and Chirinko and Eisner, 1983).
Nonetheless,

by the late 1960s, the neoclassical model developed by Jorgenson and others

had become the standard model for studying investment decisions, but empirical debates remained.
On the one hand, the neoclassical

approach offers a structural link be,~een tax policy parameters

— the corporate tax rate, the present value of depreciation allowances, and the investment tax credit
—

and investment

through the user cost of capital. 10 On the other hand, the empirical evidence

suggested that the more rigorous theory did not improve the econometrician’s

ability to explain

aggregate investment fluctuations or the response of business investment to changes in tax policy.
Partially in response to this empirical concern, models based on the Q representation

of the

firm’s investment problem occupied much of the empirical research by the 1980s.11 A key appeal
of the Q approach was that it related investment to a variable that was (under certain assumptions)
easier to observe than the user cost of capital. However, early emptical

adaptation of Q models did

‘0In an alternative representation, Feldstein ( 1982) explored the effects of effective tax rates
on investment in reduced-form models; for a critique of this approach, see Chirinko (1987).
11As we noted earlier, Hayashi (1982) provided the conditions required to equate marginal q
with average Q, which is observable because it depends on the market valuation of the firm’s assets.
Summers (198 1) incorporated additional tax parameters in the Q model.

‘.?

12
not fare well in explaining either time-series or cross-sectional
Despite such empirical titrations,
economies

policymakers

(firm-level) variation in investment.

in the United States and other industrial

evidently believe that business fixed investment responds to tax changes — given the

frequency with which they manipulate tax policy parameters.

Hence it is disturbing that models

emphasizing the net return to investing are defeated in forecasting “horse races” by ad hoc models
and that structural variables are frequently found to be economically

or statistically insignificant. 12

Recently, the investment literature has begun to make a convincing case that the fundamentals
in fact key determinants

of investment, but that they appeti to have little effect in the macro data

because of several severe econometric
problems

problems, 13 TO set the stage for the discussion

in Section IV, we first review key “stylized facts” about the time-series

business fixed investment and “fundamental
III.

are

determinants

of these

behavior of

of investment.”

Some Stylized Facts about Business Fixed Investment
In Figure

“fidamentals.”

1, we plot aggregate U.S. equipment

investment

against several investment

The top panel shows the comovement of investment and the Jorgensonian user cost.

The series rarely move together in an obvious way, and the correlation since 1960 is a statistically
insignificant -0.11. The second panel illustrates the strong comovements

between investment and

corporate cash flow. The two series are rou@y coincident, and the correlation over time is a highly

‘2See, e.g., Bosworth (1985), Bemde,
Bohn, and Reiss (1988), and the survey in Chirinko
(1993). The often poor empirical performance of Q models has led some researchers to abandon the
assumptions of reversible investment and convex costs used in testing neoclassical models in favor
of approaches based on lumpy and “irreversible” investment. See, e.g., the discussions and reviews
of studies inPindyck(1991
), Dixit and Pindyck (1 994), and Hubbard (1994).
13Taylor (1993) does find, however, that aggregate fixed investment is significantly
negatively related to the real interest rate in every one of the G7 countries.

13
significant 0.64. The bottom panel illustrates the “accelerator” effect, which relates changes in the
growth rates of output and equipment spending.

As with cash flow, the correlation is large and

highly significant, and the coincidence of the series is visually striking.
While one should be cautious interpreting

such correlations

formally, they nonetheless

suggest clear patterns. Aggregate equipment investment varies significantly over the business cycle,
and neither lags or leads the cycle; it is highly correlated with other variables that are also highly
procyclical.

The time-series correlation between investment and the user cost, on the other hand,

is quite weak. Figure 1 can be thought of as a visual summary of the early investment literature:
Accelerator effects are strong and obvious; user cost effects appear weaker and more subtle,
We focus on studies of equipment investment, in large part bqcause empirical attempts to
model investment

in structures have been more disappointing.

Figure 2, which repeats Figure 1

with the relevant “fundamentals” related to the growth rate of investment in nonresidential structures,
illustrates

the problem.

“fundamentals.”

Structures

investment

is less clearly

The correlation with the user cost is insignificant

correlated

with all of the

and has the incorrect sign, the

correlation with cash flow is about one-fourth of that between cash flow and equipment investment,
and the accelerator effect, while still noticeable, is significantly weaker.
An alternative
(1969) that investment

branch of the investment

literature has followed the suggestion

of To bin

should be related to Q, the ratio of the market value of the firm to the

replacement costs of its capital stock. Figure 3 depicts the correlation of aggregate business fixed
investment with Q. 14The top panel compares the level of real investment to the level of Q. Clearly,

14 The measure of Q plotted here is constructed from data from the Federal Reserve’s Flow of
Funds Accounts.

.,,

14
the low frequency movements in the two series are not highly correlated.

The bottom panel relates

the growth rates of these two series. Here it appears that growth in Q leads growth in investment
somewhat,

although the relationship

is weak, and the contemporaneous

correlation

is actually

negative. 15
To summarize, the tendency for a number of aggregate variables to move together over the
business cycle makes it difficult to isolate effects of individual tidamentals

on investment,

Hence

a partial equilibrium investment demand approach might have very little power to explain aggregate
investment

fluctuations.

Movements

determined

simultaneously,

difficult if not impossible.
some reason.

of the aggregate variables -- including investment

and disentangling

-- are

the marginal impact of a single driving variable is

For example, suppose that aggregate dem~d

increases exogenously

for

This shift might lead firms to be more optimistic about their sales prospects and to

purchme more investment goods;

it might also be expected -- at least in the short run --to lead to

higher interest rates. If we then examine the correlation between investment and the interest rate,
we might even find that the sign is the opposite of that predicted by the theory.
instrumental
estimator

variables

procedure

might allow us to overcome

is only as good as the instruments,

instruments for this application.

this simultaneity

While an

problem,

and it is difficult to imagine an appropriate

the

set of

Macroeconomic dam however, provide a rich additional source of

15 If we regress the growth rate of business fixed investment on many lags of the growth rate
of Q, the sum of the coefficients is about 0.1, implying that a 20 percent increase in the growth
rate of Q would lead to a prediction of about a 2 percent higher growth rate of business fixed
investment. Cochrane (1992) finds significant] y larger effects of the growth of Q on the growth
of total private investment. The results differ because Cochrane’s measure of investment includes
residential investment, which is -- perhaps surprisingly -- more highly comelated with stock
market fluctuations.

15
variation, and it is to the microdata studies that we now turn.
IV.

Estimating

Effects of Tax Policy on Investment Using Micro Data

Standard investment models emphasizing the net return to investment yield four empirical
representations.
conditions

Each begins with the firm maximizing

its net present value.

lead to an Euler equation describing the period-to-period

The first-order

optimal path of investment.

Abel and Blanchard (1986) solved the difference equation that relates investment to its expected
current and future marginal revenue products of capital; Gilchrist and Hirnrnelberg (1994) apply a
related forecasting approach to panel data. Alternatively, effects of tax parameters may be estimated
from the Euler equation (see, e.g., Abel, 1980; and Hubb~d

and Kashyap, 1992). As in Auerbach

(1983b) and Abel (1990), investment can be expressed in terms of c~ent
user cost of capital and, under some conditions,

and future values of the

expressed in terms of average q. Again, this

approach was suggested initially by Tobin ( 1969), with the necessary conditions supplied by Hayashi
(1982).
A. The Bmic Problem
To assess recent empirical work on tax policy and investment, we begin with the following
general model of investment, which follows the discussion in section II.

Ii ,

‘=SitY+ei~~

(14)

K 1,t- I

where 1 and K denote investment and the capital stock, respectively; S is an underlying structural
variable (e.g., the expected value of tax-adjusted Q or the user cost of capital) or set of variables; y
is a coefficient whose structural interpretation relates to assumptions about convex costs of adjusting

16
the capital stock; and ~ is a white-noise error term that reflects optimization

error by firms. 16

Researchers usually estimated such models using either ordinary least squares or generalized
method of moments techniques with instrumental variables. Curnmins, Hmsett, and Hubbard (1994,
1996) note that conventional estimated values of y in firm-level panel data for the United States or
for other countries are very small, ranging from 0,01 to 0.05, implying marginal costs of adjustment
of between one and five dollars per dollar of investment.
many empirical

studies (see, e.g., Summers,

Such estimates, which hav~ emerged in

198 1; Salinger and Summers,

1983; and Fazzari,

Hubbard, and Petersen, 1988a), imply very small effects of permanent investment

incentives on

investment.
Subsequently, empirical researchers have offered two general ~xplanations of the ftilure to
estimate significant tax effects on investment — (1) measurement
and (2) misspecification

error in fundamental variables,

of costs of adjusting the capital stock.

Both research programs

have

contributed to our understanding of the responsiveness of investment to changes in the net return to
investing

and have reached similar conclusions

about the likely effects of tax policy for some

important cases.
B. Mewurement

Error in Fundamental

A major problem in using equation(14)

Variables

in order to recover estimates of marginal adjustment

costs and the effect of tax changes on investment is that measurement

error in Q or the user cost of

capital may bias downward the estimated coefficient. A number of techniques have been suggested
to address this measurement

error, including:

(1) statistical corrections, (2) avoiding the use of Q

16One could, of course, incorporate more complex error structures.
assumption for ease of exposition.

We m~e this simplifying

or user cost representations,
which firm variation
modifiing

(3) using new proxies for Q, (4) focusing on periods or frequencies in

in fundamental

variables

is less subject to measurement

error, and (5)

assumptions about the financial frictions fires face. We consider each in turn below and

examine whether the techniques produce a “consensus” estimate of adjustment costs that can be used
to forecast the effects of investment incentives on business fixed investment.
Statistical Approaches.

There are at least two problems in measuring Q that might affect

estimated adjustment costs. First, to the extent that the stock market is excessively volatile, Q might
not reflect market fundamentals.

Second, the replacement

value of the capital stock in the

denominator

of Q is likely to be measured with error. Gnliches and Hausman (1986) argue that

measurement

error will lead to different biases among potential estimators that are similar in that

they control for firm-specific effits,

but differ in their signal-to-noise

place bounds on the importance of measurement

ratios, making it possible to

error. Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994)
(as opposed

to the

conventional fixed-effects, within-group estimator) to address measurement error problems.

Their

estimate

a model like (14) using first differences

and longer differences

estimated adjustment costs decline significantly.
In a time-series setting, Caballero (1 994) pursues an alternative estimation strategy, based
on a suggestion by Stock and Watson (1993). Caballero argues that small sample biases of typically
employed time-series estimation procedures are partictiarly

severe when estimating adjustment cost

models, and he shows that elasticities will generally be biased down.
and Watson for estimating the low-frequency

relationships

Using the procedure of Stock

between variables in small samples,

Caballero estimates a long-run elasticity of investment with respect to the user cost of approximately
unity.

This is much larger than the early estimate, but roughly consistent with the other studies

18
summarized in this section.
Euler Equation Estimates, The second approach departs from the strategy of using proxies
for marginal q, and relies on the firm’s Euler equation to model the investment decision.

(As long

as one makes the same assumption about technology and adjustment costs, the Euler equation can
be derived from the same model as the conventional

Q or user cost of capital models.)

relying on the “investment

one can sidestep problems

tiction”

representation,

By not

of measuring

marginal q.
Tests following this approach have frequently used panel data on manufacturing

firms to

estimate the Euler equation (Pindyck and Rotemberg, 1983; Shapiro, 1986; Gilchrist, 1991; Whited,
1992; Bond and Meghir, 1994; and Hubbard, Kashyap, and Whited, 1995). Studies using Compustat
data for the United States are unable to reject the fiictionless neoclassical model for most firms, and
the estimated adjustment cost parameters are more reasonable than those found in estimates of Q
models. For example, Hubbard, Kashyap, and Whited (1995) report estimated values of y between
1 and 2.2. Very similar estimates are reported for European manufacturing
Harris, and Hassett (1995) and for investment
corporations

in overseas subsidiaries

firms by Cummins,
of U.S. multinational

in Cumrnins and Hubbard (1995).

Alternatives

to Q.

The measure of average Q used as a proxy for marginal q in most

empirical studies is constructed as the ratio of the market value of the financial claims on the firm
(equity and debt) to the replacement cost of the firm’s capital stock. The third approach bypasses
using financial variables as proxies for marginal q by forecasting the expected present value of the
current and fiture profits generated by an incremental unit of capital — that is, the expected value
of marginal q — an idea developed (in the time-series context) by Abel and Blanchard (1986) and

19
extended for use in panel data by Gilchrist and Himmelberg
a panel-data setting by constructing
to decompose

(1995). One can extend this setup to

investment fundamentals using a VAR forecasting framework

the effect of profits or cash flow on investment into two components

— one that

forecasts fiture profitability under the fiictiordess capital markets assumed in the neoclassical model
(analogous to marginal q) and a residual component that maybe attributable to financial frictions
(analogous
Hubbard,

to the role played by cash flow in the imperfect-capital-markets
and Petersen,

fidamentals
profitability

1988a).

By including

approach of F~i,

lags of cash flow in the vector of observed

in the forecasting equations, one cm ensure that any information about fiture marginal
of capital contained in cash flow is reflected in the proxy for marginal q.

Using such an approach, Gilchrist and Himmelberg

(1995) report estimates of y that are

roughly consistent with the Eder equation estimates discussed above. In addition, they test whether
cash flow is an independent

“fundamental” variable explaining investment and find that it is for a

subset of firms that are likely to face liquidity constraints. 17 We return to a discussion of this latter
result below.
Measuring Changes in Fun&mentals

Using Tm Reforms. As we discussed in the previous

section, one reason the data do not appear to favor neoclassical models over accelerator models is
a simultaneous

equations problem:

If, on the one hand, the data were dominated by exogenous

increases or decreases in the real interest rate, then the user cost movements would lead investment

‘7This is a test of the restricted model against the alternative model that current profits have
explanatory power for investment beyond their ability to predict future profits. Gilchrist and
Himmelberg find that cash flow is an independent fidamental
and that excess sensitivity of
investment to cash flow is a characteristic of fms they identifi as constrained — measured by size,
bond rating, commercial paper rating, or dividend payout.

20
to decrease or increase, respectively.

If, on the other hand, investment rises with positive “animal

spirits,” then higher investment demand puts upward pressure on the real interest rate. Hence to the
extent that data incorporate both exogenous changes in the real interest rate and in the intercept of
the investment finction,

the positive relationship between investment and the user cost of capital

because of shifis in the investment function may dominate the hypothesized

negative relationship

between investment and the user cost of capital. In this case, the estimated coefficient on the user
cost of capiti

will be “too small,” leading to estimated adjustment costs that are “too large. ” Such

simultaneity increases apparent accelerator effects, because positive shifts of the investment function
raise both investment and output.
As we noted above, this simultaneity
remedied by the use of instrumental
lagged endogenous

problem in the estimation of neoclassical

variables,

variables or sales-to-capital

Conventional

instrumental

models is

variables (including

ratios) have not proven very helpful.

Major tax

reforms arguably offer periods in which there is exogenous cross-seclional variation in the user cost
of capital or tax-adjusted q. Cumrnins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994, 1996) demonstrate that major
tax reforms are also msociated with significant h-

and asset-level variation in key tax parameters

(such as the effective rate of investment tax credit and the present value of depreciation allowances).
Hence tax variables are likely to be a good instrument for the user cost or Q during tax reforms.
To indicate the significance

of cross-sectional

heterogeneity

in incentives to invest, we

emphasize variation across assets. Figure 5 plots the annual values of (1 - r ) for the 22 classes of
equipment capital classified by the Bureau of Economic Analysis. The peaks and valleys along the
“year” axis for a given asset reveal the time-series variation in the tax parameters, and those along
the “asset” axis for a given year reveal the cross-sectional variation.

For asset eight (metalworking

,.

21
machinery), for example, the tier-tax

cost of investing falls in 1962, 1972, and 1981, and rises in

1986,
Figure 5 reveals that the variation across assets is large within most years in our samples, as
is the time-series variation.

In addition, the positions of the peaks and valleys changes somewhat

over time. For example, following the removal of the investment tax credit and the reduction of the
corporate tax rate by the Tax Refom

Act of 1986, the cross-sectional

variation across assets fell,

consistent with the act’s stated goal to “level the playing field.”
Curnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1995) use vector autoregressions

to forecast investment

in the year following a tax reform, and then compare the forecast errors for each of the assets to the
changes in the user cost for that asset. In Figure 6, we repeat that expe~ent

and for the Tax Refom

Act of 1986, and provide a plot of the forecast errors constructed from models that exclude taxes
against shocks to the user cost of capital for each of the 22 equipment asset classes tracked by the
BEA. In addition, we draw a regression line through the scatterplot.

The idea is that the forecast

errors for investment shodd be negatively correlated with forecast errors for the user cost of capital.
The downward-sloping

line indicates a clear negative correlation.

We can now illustrate the effect of tax parameters on firm investment.
significance

of using exogenous tax changes to identifi

Table 1 shows the

changes in Q. la Taken from Cummins,

Hmsett, and Hubbard (1996), it presents estimates of the investment equation(14)

during major tax

reforms in 14 countries over the 1980s; firm-level data are taken from Compustat’s Global Vantage.
Using contemporaneous

tax variables as instrument during major tax reforms, Cummins, Hassett,

1aCummins, Hassett, md Hubbard (1994, 1995) also use this approach in a user cost model.
For U.S. dat~ they estimate a user cost coefficient of about -0.65.

../

22
and Hubbard estimate y to be 0.65 for the United States, compared with 0,048 under conventional
estimates.

The y obtained similar estimates for each of the other major U.S. tax reforms in the

postwar period using data from Compustat (Curnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard, 1994); focusing on the
T= Reform Act of 1986, Auerbach andHassett(1991

) found similar coefficients using asset level

data and cross-sectional

As Table 1 shows, applying the Curnmins-

Hassett-Hubbard

variation in the user cost.

approach in tax reform periods in other OECD countries produces

estimates

roughly similar to those for the United States. 19
Financial Frictions and the Neoclassical

Model.

In contrast to the frictionless

capital

markets in the standard neoclassical model, earlier applied research on investment, especially the
work of Meyer and Kuh (1957), stressed the significance of financiaL considerations
I
internal fids

or net worth) for business investment.

research on investment isolated “real” fm
for this shift in approach

Since the mid-l 960s, however, most applied

decisions from “fmcing.”

The intellectual justification

drew on the seminal work by Modigliani

demonstrated the irrelevance of fmcial

(particularly

and Miller (1958), who

structure and financial policy for real investment decisions

‘9Tax reforms are not the only plausible reform that can be used to estimate adjustment costs.
There is a large body of evidence suggesting that union power to expropriate returns is
significant, and that the “union tax” adjusts as the return to capital changes. If union wage
demands vary with the return to capital, then the union rent share is--in part at least--a tax on
capital, distorting the level of investment when it is introduced. Fallick andHassett(1995)
explore whether a change in the union status of the fim is another type of large identifiable
shock that affects purchases of capital. Using firm-level panel data, they document a large
negative response of investment to union certification elections. For most of the firms who
experience union certification elections in their sample, net investment turns significantly
negative in the year immediately following the election, with the mean response to union
certification being roughly the same size as that which would occur -- given the responsiveness
of investment to the user cost in Cumrnins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994) -- if the corporate tax
rate were increased 35 percentage points. This set of firms, at least, is not burdened by an ability
to adjust their capital stock downward when a negative shock to profitability occurs.

...

23
under certain

conditions.

The central Modigliani-Miller

result, which facilitated

the early

development of the neoclassical model, was that a firm’s financial structure will not affect its value
in frictionless

capital markets.

As a result, if their assumptions

are satisfied, real firm decisions,

motivated by the maximization of shareholders’ claims, are independent of financial factors such as
the availability of internal tids.
The assumption of representative fms
most research programs
equation

in the neoclassical

(14)) applies to all firms.

(in terms of trade on capital markets) is common to
tradition.

That is, the same empirical model (e.g.,

Therefore, tests could not ascertain whether the observed

sensitivity of investment to financial variables differs across firms and whether these differences in
sensitivity explain the weak apparent relationship between the meas~d
Contemporary

user cost and investment.

empirical studies of information and incentive problems in the investment process

have moved beyond the assumption of representative

fires by examining firm-level panel data in

which firms can be grouped into “high net worth” and “low net worth” categories.
category,

changes in net worth or internal fids

tiect

investment,

For the latter

holding constant underlying

investment opportunities (desired investment) .20 Following Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988a),
empirical

researchers

have placed firms into groups as a priori

“financially

constrained”

or

“financially unconstrained.”
Two aspects of the findings of this research program are noteworthy
measuring
internal

incentives to invest.

funds have explanatory

in the context of

First, numerous empirical studies have found that proxies for
power for investment,

holding constant

Q, the user cost, or

20For reviews of the theoretical literature, see Bemanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996); Hubbard
(1990); and Hubbad (1996).

accelerator variables (see the review of studies in Hubbard, 1995). This suggests that tax policy may
have effects on investment by constrained firms beyond those predicted by neoclassical approaches.
(Indeed, returning to the “accelerator” analogy, Bemanke, Gertler, and Gilchrist (1996) argue that
this literature describes a “financial accelerator.”)

In particular, the quantity of internal finds

available for investment is supported by the average tax on earnings from existing projects.

In this

sense, average as well as marginal tax rates faced by a firm affect its investment decisions.21
Second,

empirical

studies of financing

constraints

generally

find that the fiictionless

neoclassical model is rejected ordy for the groups of firms that a priori are financially constrained
(see, e.g., Calomiris and Hubbard, 1995; Gilchrist and Himelberg,

1995; and Hubbard, Kashyap,

and, Whited, 1995). Hence while the shadow value of internal funds may not be well captured for
some firms in standard representations

of the neoclassical approach, the neoclassical model with

convex adjustment costs yields reasonable estimated values of marginal adjustment costs for most
firms.
Measurement Error and A~ustment Costs: Nearing Consensus?

To summarize, a variety

21Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen(1988b) and Gertler and Hubbard(1988b) illustrate this point
in examining the affect of the investment tax credit on investment. Calomiris and Hubbard (1995)
focus on a tax experiment in which retained earnings are taxed more heavily than distributed profits.
In frictionless capital markets, firms would take advantage of the incentive to change their payout
policies. Working against this response for some firms is the potential difference in the cost of
internal and external fids.
To the extent that the marginal cost of external tids is high, a growing
firm with profitable investment opporhmities might choose to pay the undistributed profits tax and
invest its internal finds, rather than distribute tids and then reacquire them in the capital market.
me U.S. Undistributed Profits Tax of 1936-1937, which imposed a graduated surtax on corporate
retention offers a usefil experiment. Because the maximum marginal tax rate on corporate retention
was 27 percent, most firms had large incentives to alter their payout policies. Using firm-level panel
data from the 1930s, Calomiris and Hubbard find that a neoclassical investment model with no
explicit capital-market frictions is rejected ordy for firms with high ex anfe surtax margins.

25
of empirical implementations
to mitigate measurement

of the neoclassical model with convex adjustment costs have attempted

error and other econometric problems in conventional

OLS and GMM

estimates of equation (14) in panel data. The methods described above generally yield estimated
values of y of 0.50 or higher, implying marginal costs of adjustment in the range of $0.10 per dollar
of additional

investment

(using the estimate in Cummins,

Hassett,

and Hubbard,

1995 as a

benchmark), and elasticities of investment with respect to the user cost of capital between -0.5 and
-1.0.
C. An Alternative

Interpretation:

Misspect~~ation

of Adjustment

Cos&

The emphasis in many recent empirical studies of investment on sources of mismeasurement
of explanatory

variable acting as proxies for the net return to investing accepts the conventional

belief that costs of adjusting the capital stock are convex.

The Q, user cost of capital, and Euler

equation approaches can all be derived from the same intertemporal
common assumptions

about technology, competition,

ma.ximi=tion

problem, given

and adjustment costs. An important recent

line of inquiry focuses on modeling and testing the effects of irreversibility and uncertainty on firms’
investment decisions (see, e.g., the excellent survey by Dixit and Pindyck, 1994). 22 If this literature
is correct, then there may be important

regions wherein tax policy has little or no effect on

investment, and knowledge of which region an economy is currently in is an important prerequisite
to any policy analysis, Finally, these models can possibly explain a key remaining pwle

in the

22 The seeds of this literature are much older. For example, Rothschild(1971)
writes:
“’’Convex cost-of-adjustment fictions
may help to explain why Rome was not built in a day.
However, there is no clear saving and maybe some loss to spreading the work of installing a
button on a shirt over several weeks.” His “bang-bang” model of investment provides an early
example of a “lumpy investment” model.

.,,.

26
literature -- that is, why firms report in surveys that they use such high hurdle rates (see Summers,
1987).
Neoclassical models implicitly assume that there is an efficient secondary market for capital;
hence irreversibility poses no problem.

If a firm purchases a machine today, and the output market

turns sour in the future, the firm can recoup the purchase price of the machine at that time.

If,

however, investment is irreversible, then the firm faces the chance that it cannot sell the machine in
the future.

In this setup, there is a gain to delaying investment and allowing the random price

process to move either into a region far enough above the neoclassical “breakeven” point that the
probability of the “bad state” becomes low enough, or into a region where it clearly does not make
sense to purchase the machine. An investment extinguishes the value qf the call option of delay, an
option that has positive value when prices are uncertain.

In this approach, the value of the lost

option is a component of the opportunity cost of investment.

In the tetiology

the threshold
maintaining

criterion for investment
the call option to invest.

requires that marginal
As a consequence,

of the Q framework,

Q exceed unity by the value of

high “hurdle rates” may be required by

corporate managers making investment decisions.
Indeed, at least part of the interest in option-based investment models has been the problem
raised in many time-series studies that indicated that the response of investment to changes in Q or
the user cost of capital are implausibly
varies but investment
adjustment costs—such

small, implying, perhaps, that there are regions wherein Q

does not. In addition, it is not difficult to suggest examples of nonconvex
as retooling in automobile plants or the adoption of more energy-efficient

kilns in cement plants.
How Much Investmen/ IS Irreversible?

Before turning to models with alternative adjustment

‘.?

27
cost specifications, we present in this subsection aprimafacie

case that pure irreversibility

may not

be of overriding importance at the aggregate level.
There is a large literature (see, e.g., Hulten and Wykoff,

979; Jorgenson, 1994; Fraumeni,

1995; and Oliner, 1996) that focmes on the estimation of economic depreciation rates for different
types of machines.
machine prices.

For the most part, researchers estimate rates of decay from the patterns of used
This literature is relevant to the debate concerning the form of adjustment costs

because irreversibility results most plausibly from either the absence of resale markets, or from the
presence of significant “lemons” problems in resale markets.
To examine the extent to which resale markets are limited, we surveyed the depreciation
literature

and cataloged

depreciation
proportion

types of equipment

rate. Using disaggregated

for which we could find an estimated

economic

data on investment by asset type, we than calculated the

of aggregate investment that is made up of assets that have clearly identifiable resale

markets. Figure 4 plots this proportion from 1950 to 1994. The proportion of investment in assets
that have easily identifiable resale markets is about 0.7 over most of the period. This is not to say
that the remaining assets are necessarily “irreversible,” of course; depreciation studies may not yet
have fomd data for those assets.
Hence in order to demonstrate that irreversibility is an important property of most investment
goods, researchers
problems.

must show that the market for used capital goods is plagued with lemons

To our knowledge, there is no existing evidence that lemons are important in markets for

equipment goods. Indeed, Hulten and Wykoff(1981 ) argue that estimated secondary market prices
in depreciation studies are inconsistent with a major role for lemons problems.

One reason for this

finding may be that the market for used capital goods is one where the participants

possess

significant asset-specific expertise.

The typical purchaser of a machine tool, for example, may have

worked in a factory filled with machine tools for many years, and would easily recognize a “lemon.”
If this is the case, there is little asymmetric information, and the resale market functions well.
Models with More General A@ustmenl Costs. Abel and Eberly (1994) provide a general
framework that encompasses reversibility,
cost specidcations.
be characterized

fixed costs, and a wide array of alternative adjustment

They show that, under certain conditions, the investment behavior of firms can
by three distinct regimes: (1) regime in which gross investment is positive; (2)

regime in which gross investment is zero; (3) regime in which gross investment is negative.
responsiveness

of investment to tidarnentals

The

differs across regimes, and their more general model

predicts that there is a region in which gross investment will stay zero for a range of unfavorable
values of Q. Because this model nests the more traditional q models, it provides a usefil empirical
framework, and we review attempts to estimate this model below.
Researchers

are begiting

to study the impact of alternative adjustment cost assumptions

within structural investment models with panel data. Barnett and Sakellaris (1995) use Compustat
data to investigate the implication of the model of Abel andEberly(1995)
between regimes of insensitivity to Q and regimes of responsiveness

that investment alternates

to Q. The region of inactivity

should be close to the region for which the model predicts that investment is negative.
thresholds

for these regions are unknown, conventional

asymptotic

distributions

Because the
do not apply.

Barnett and Sakellaris use a statistical framework that allows them to estimate the threshold points
and the coefficients on Q simultaneously

in the different regions given the threshold points.

They

find evidence of a nonlinear relationship between investment and Q; in particular, they estimate the
largest responsiveness of investment to Q for low values of Q, and the smallest for very high values

...

29
of Q. On average, they estimate that the elasticity of investment with respect to Q is about unity,
but that the aggregate elasticity varies considerably over time, depending on the average level of Q.
Barnett and Sakellaris argue that their results imply that adjustment cost may not be quadratic, but
that the most likely cause is not firms’ inability to disinvest, but rather, their reluctance to make
“large” changes.
Barnett and Sakellaris’s results we not necessarily inconsistent with the measurement

error

story. Some firms in their Compustat universe have values of average Q that are astronomical

(one

firm actually has a q of 40,000!), presumably because the capital stock measure is missing important
goodwill or human capital components,

If one accepts that Q is a poor measure of fidamentals

for

these firms, then the result that investment does not respond as much to Q for these firms is not
surprising.

In the more “normal” range of Q values, the investment response seems to accord well

with the predictions of the convex adjustment cost model.
Finally, Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger ( 1995) explore adjustment costs in a more general
framework.

Using a subset of 7000 U.S. manufacturing

plants from the Census Bureau’s

Longitudinal Research Database (LRD), they explore whether cross-sectional patterns of investment
are consistent with symmetric, convex adjustment cost models, or whether the data imply that there
are nonconvexities ,23 They proceed in two steps. First, they assume that there are no adjustment
costs and that the Jorgensonian

model adequately describes a firms “desired” capital stock (~). 24

23 In earlier work, Doms and Dunne (1994) report that plant-level investment data exhibit
skewness and kurtosis that is consistent with investment being somewhat “lumpy.”
24 To calculate the desired capital stock for each firm, Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger use
plant-level output data, and two-digit Jorgensonian user costs constructed from the tax data used
in Cummins, Hassett, and Hubbard (1994) and Goolsbee (1995).

‘r<

30
They then compare in each period a firm’s beginning-of-period

capital stock to its desired stock and

call the difference (~-K,., ) “mandated investment. ” Second, they explore how firms actually adjust
their capital stocks.

In this step, they find that the relationship

between actual and mandated

investment is highly nonlinear. If mandated investment is negative, then firms do not quickly adjust
their capital stocks downward,

If mandated investment is small and positive, then firms also do not

respond very much. If mandated investment is very large, then fms

adjust their capiti

stocks very

quickly. They conclude that an (S, s) model, in which furns have a range of inaction, and ordy adjust
their capital stocks to their desired levels when the gap between current and desired capital stock is
“large enough” offers a good description of the data.
Using firm-level data from Compustat, Abel andEberly(1996)

estimate that the relationship

between investment and fundamental determinants (Q and the tax-adjusted price of capital goods)
is concave;

that is, the response

of investment

to fi.lndamental determinants

is positive,

but

monotonically declining. The results of Abel and Eberly suggest that the distribution of tax-adjusted
Q or the user cost of capital maybe a determinant of aggregate investment.

However, the caution

that applied to Barnett and Sakellaris conclusions applies here as well: Large observed values of Q
may not coincide with high levels of inves~ent
rather than extraordinary

because the high Q values reflect rnismeasuremen4

fidarnentals.

Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger also illustrate how to construct aggregate implications
from their microeconornic results.

Integrating over the macroeconomic distribution of plants, they

calculate a predicted aggregate elasticity of investment with respect to the user cost of capital. The
estimates of this elasticity vary considerably over time: If, on the one hand, many plants are near
the region for which mandated investment is very large, then small changes in the user cost can have

.,,.

31
large effects on aggregate investment.
investment

If, on the other hand, the bulk of the distribution of mandated

is in the region of low responsiveness

of investment to fundamentals,

then changes in

the user cost will have little impact. They concur with the main conclusion of Cummins, Hassett,
and Hubbard (1994) that the aggregate elasticity of investment

with respect to the user cost is

between -0.5 and -1, and also conclude that tax reforms appear to have generally had large effects
on investment.

They caution, however, that the reforms have had large effects because they

coincidentally occurred during periods in which the plant-level distribution of mandated investment
was aligned in such a way to allow a large effect of changes in tax parameters.

This would happen

if, for example, investment tax credits were removed in booms, when mandated investment is very
large, and an increase in the user cost can cause firms to canceI significant investment plans. As a
consequence,
distribution

Caballero,

Engel, and Haltiwanger

argue that researchers must consult the micro

of mandated investment before predicting the likely impact of future tax reforms on

business investment.25
Alternatively,

Curnmins,

Hassett,

and Hubbard

(1994,

1996) argue that recovering

“reasonable” estimates of the response of investment to Q or the user cost of capital is easiest during
periods in which large exogenous changes in the distribution

of structural determinants

occur, as

during tax reforms. In response to the alternative interpretation that firms respond only to changes
in fidamentals

when these changes are large, Curnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard use firm-level data

25 Because their mandated investment measure is the same as that in a frictionless
neoclassical model, their tests -- while suggestive -- neither confirm or reject the presence of
convex adjustment costs. First, mandated investment itself depends on adjustment costs.
Second, if adjustment costs were present, mandated investment also depends on fiture values of
tax parameters

.,/

32
to investigate whether there was evidence of “bunching” of investment around tax reforms.
estimate transition probabilities

They

among various ranges of (l/K) over the year prior to, of, and after

the tax reform, and find no evidence that firms with large investment were likely to have lower
investment

in prior or subsequent years. Indeed, only a very tiny fraction of the sample was ever

found to transit from high investment to low investment states.
In part, the conclusions
aggregation.

of these studies may differ because of differences in the level of

At a sufficiently fme level of disaggregation,

level evidence

suggests that investment

corroborate this. However,

all investment looks lumpy.

appears lumpy, but the firm-level

The plant-

evidence does not

there may be interesting differences between the investment behavior

of plants and firms, as might be the case if, for example, managerial auention is limited and only a
fraction of a firm’s plants adjust their capital in a given year. Clearly, reconciling the plant-level and
firm-level results is an important topic for future research.
D. Summing

Up: The Partial Equilibrium

Eflects of Investment

Tax Policy

Recent studies appear to have reached a consensus that the elasticity of investment

with

respect to the user cost of capital is between -0.5 and -1.0. Indeed, recent studies using convex costs
of adj ustment and studies using nonconvex costs of adjustments agree that the long-run elasticity
of investment to the user cost is high by the standards of the early empirical literature.

This range

of estimated responses of investment to tax parameters is well above the consensus of only a few
years ago, and suggests that investment
aggregate capital formation.

tax policy can have a significant impact on the path of

One should be cautious, however, in moving from the macroeconomic

evidence to aggregate predictions.

Caballero, Engel, and Haltiwanger demonstrate a technique for

aggregating the micro distribution of fms

to calculate aggregate investment demand, but very little

33
continues to be known about the general equilibrium effects of major policy changes.

v.

Arguments For and Against Investment Incentives
Thus far we have argued that: (1) tax incentives for investment are important components

of the net return to investing,
pemanent

and (2) the short-term and long-term responses of investment

to

tax incentives are large. We now turn to the deeper policy question of whether we should

have permanent incentives for investment even if such incentives increase the stock of business fixed
capital.

(We then address the question of the desirability

generally argue against intervention.

of short-run incentives.)

Under what circumstances

Economists

might one advocate distortionary

investment incentives?
A. Do Investment Incentives Affect the Price of Capital Goods?
One scenario under which investment incentives might have an especially large impact on
the quantity of investment without dissipation in prices of investment goods is one in which firms’
demand for capital is responsive to changes in the user cost of capital and in which capital goods are
supplied perfectly elastically.

While it is implausible that the supply function for most individual

capital goods manufacturers

is perfectly elastic, the effective supply of capital goods to a given

domestic market might well be highly elastic in the long run if the world market for capital goods
is open. Investment incentives would raise prices of capital goods in the short run if the supply of
capital goods is highly inelastic.
Using data for the United States and ten other countries, Hassett and Hubbard (1995) find
that local investment tax credits have a negligible effect on prices paid for capital goods, indeed, they
find that the capital goods prices for most countries are very highly correlated,
movements

of these over time are consistent

with “the law of one price.”

and that the

In addition, using

34
disaggregated data on reset-specific investment good prices and tax variables for the United States,
they find that tax parameters have no effect on capital goods prices. ‘b The conclusion that tax policy
in the United States does not affect the world price of capital goods is especially meaningful, given
the relative size of the U.S. economy.

Taken together, these tests suggest that the effects of

investment tax policy have not been muted in a significant way by upward-sloping supply schedules
for capital goods.
B. Is the Capital Stock Too Small?
While it is instructive to ask how effective investment incentives are at increasing the fixed
capital stock, a more important question remains:

What is the social value of the increase in the

fixed capital stock?
Theoretical

research

has demonstrated

that perfectly

competitive

economies

necessarily converge to the “correct” capital stock. Indeed, Diamond (1965) demonstrated

do not
that a

competitive economy can reach a steady state in which there is “too much” capital, in the sense that
the economy is investing more than it is earning in profit.

In this case, individuals can be made

better off if they are forced to consume a portion of the capital stock. When evaluating investment
incentives, it is crucial for policy analysis to evaluate whether the economy is operating with “too
much” or “too little” capital.

26 Goolsbee (1995) argues that U.S. tax shocks are positively correlated with capital price
movements. The difference in the two sets of results arises from two sources. First, Goolsbee
uses the ITC as a measure of the tax change, rather than the fill user cost of
capital. Second, Goolsbee’s price regressions relate the level of the price to the level of the ITC,
while Hassett and Hubbard use the first-difference of the price (because the price series used are
highly nonstationary).
When the model is estimated in levels, the uncorrected regression errors
contain unit roots.

The classic “golden rule” literature offers benchmarks

for guidance.27 In the golden rule

approach of Phelps (196 1), the golden rule level of the capital stock relative to output is achieved
when the marginal product of capital (R) net of depreciation (5) equals the sum of the rate of growth
of the labor force (n) and the rate of labor-augmenting

technical change ~), or:

R=6+n+g.

Alternatively,

(15)

in the optimal growth literature, Ramsey (1928) golden rule levels require that the

marginal product of capital net of depreciation equal the sum of the social rate of time preference
(p) and the elasticity of marginal social utility with respect to per capita consumption

R=6+P+(#)g.

(0) OPS
(16)

Depending on the values of p and (#),the Ramsey golden-rule levels of capital can be less than the
Phelps golden-rule levels.
Following the conventional in neoclassical models of the capital stock, we assume a CobbDouglas technology, so that the ratio of the steady-state golden-rule capital stock (K*) to output (~
eqtis

the ratio of capital’s share in output (a) to the marginal product of capital (R). Moreover,

golden tie

the

level of net investment (~ relative to output equals (n + g) times the capital-output ratio.

27 Another argument for subsidies to equipment investment has been advanced by Judd
(1995), who concludes that the optimal tax on equipment investment is negative. He argues that,
to the extent that capital-goods-producing
industries are imperfectly competitive (owing, say, to
the presence of patents), equipment prices contain significant markups. Hence to return firms’
input mix to the optimal level, the government should design an investment subsidy that equates
the price paid for equipment to its marginal cost.
“ See, e.g., the analysis in Blanchard and Fischer (1989).

36
Hence:

K“=fi
Y

(17)

R’

and

I*
—=(n+g
Y

)$.

(18)

One can account for different types of capital by noting that, in equilibrium,

the net rates of return

on the alternative types are equal. Hence one can substitute into (17) measures of a~ for each type
of capital k and the relevant R (given differences in depreciation), and solve for the golden rule levels
of the capital stocks.
Using a range of parameter values in the golden rule expressionsin(17)

and ( 18), Cohen,

Hassett, and Kennedy (1995) compare golden rule and actual levels of the capital stock or net
investment relative to output to their acti
we excerpt

values over the period from 1980-1994.

from several tables in that study indicates that for benchmark

parameter

equipment investment and capital stocks are below their golden rule levels (assuming
sufficiently

long to characterize a steady state), while residential investment

Table 2, which
values,

1980-1994 is

and the residential

capital stocks -- which have received significant tax subsidies over this time period -- are near or
above their golden rule levels. Cohen, Hassett, and Kemedy

also show that these conclusions

not changes if the key parameters are allowed to vary across a broad range of plausible values.

are

37
Alternatively,

several authors have attempted to evaluate the optimality of the U.S. capital

stock by relating various interest rates to the rate of economic growth.
(1965), Solow (1970), and Feldstein (1977) argue that the maginal

One the one hand, Tobin
productivity

of capital one

obtains from accounting profits estimates is about 10 percent, and thus conclude that the economy
is dynamically

efficient.

On the other hand,

Ibbotson (1987) calculates a mean return on U.S.

Treasury bills from 1926-1986 of only 0.3 percent, suggesting dynamic inefficiency.

The answer

to the question using interest rates depends critically on assessing the impact of risk, of course.
Abel,
evaluating

Mankiw,

Summers,

and Zeckhauser

(1989) pursue

an alternative

strategy

for

whether the U.S. capital stock is greater or less than the optimal level. In a stochastic

setting with a very general production technology, they demonstrate that an economy is dynamically
inefficient

if it invests more than the returns from capital.

They show that the economy

is

dynamically efficient -- and hence in the range in which stimulative tax policy might have positive
social returns -- if the returns from capital exceed investment.

Using their terminology,

the key

question is whether the capital stock is on balance a “sW’ or a “spout.” This observation is a useti
contribution because it allows one to base judgment about dynamic efficiency on readily observable
cash flows. Abel, etal,conclude that the economy is dynamically efficient. Thus, both capital stock
data and “cash flow” data suggest that, by raising the stock of equipment

capital, investment

incentives have positive social returns.29
C. Should We Use Temporary Investment Incentives?
The discussion

thus fw pertains to permanent changes in investment

incentives.

Even a

‘9 Because the golden rule models are developed for a closed economy, it is difficult to
extend the comparison to domestic versus foreign fixed capital.

38
casual obsemation
of considering

of the history of investment incentives since the 1950s suggests the usefulness

temporary investment incentives.

Since 1962, the mean duration of a typical state

in which an ITC is in effect has been about three and one-half years, and the mean duration of the
“no-ITC” state has been about the same length. Most recently, President Bush advocated a modified
ITC, known as the “Investment

Tax Allowance”

in 1992, and President

Clinton proposed

an

incremental ITC in early 1993; neither of these measures was enacted. What is the likely impact on
aggregate capital accumulation

of temporary investment incentives?

Temporary investment incentives can have even larger short-run impacts on investment than
permanent investment incentives (see, e.g., Auerbach, 1989). Consider, for example, a temporary
ITC known to last for one period.

The expression

for the user cost of capital in equation (5)

indicates that the ITC lowers the current user cost both through its effect on r,,~ and through the
consequences of its removal on ri ,~+1,More generally, anticipated future changes in tax policy affect
the current value of the user cost and investment.
The large potential effects of tempor~

tax incentives on investment do not imply that they

are desirable tax policy -- even if one believes that long-run investment incentives are sound tax
policy.

In the presence of uncertainty and adjustment costs, there is little reason to believe that

policymakers can “time” investment incentives for the purposes of stabilization policy. Moreover,
the use of temporary incentives increases uncertainty in business capital budgeting, making it more
difficult for firms to forecast the path of the user cost of capital.
D. Does Uncertain@ About Tax Policy Affect Investment?
What if firms do not know the exact timing of changes in investment incentives -- that is, if
tax policy is uncertain?

There is a substantial literature evaluating the effects of price uncertainty

on investment,

and the lesson from this literature is that the sign of the effect of uncertainty

on

investment depends crucially on assumptions about adjustment costs and returns to scale. Hartman
(1972) shows that uncertainty generally increases investment in a model with constant returns and
convex adjustment costs. Abel (1983) derives a similar result in continuous time. Pindyck (1 988),
however,

shows

that uncertainty

can significantly

irreversible and if returns to scale are decreasing.

lower capital formation

We described Pindycks

if investment

is

intuition earlier: In an

uncertain world, there is a gain to delaying investment -- the option value of waiting -- and these
gains are higher the higher is the variance in the output price.
Thus, one might be tempted to conclude from the early contributions
the predicted effect of ti

to this literature that

policy uncertainty will depend on what we believe about the reversibility

.- or lack thereof -- of capital investments.

However, strictly speaking, tax policy uncertain y can

even increase investment in the models of H-an,

Abel, and Pindyck (see Ha.ssett and Metcalf,

1994, 1995).
This difference
important

way.

continuous-time

arises because tax policy uncertainty

Researchers

ofien introduced uncertainty

is urdike price uncertainty

in an

by assuming that the price follows a

random walk (Brownian motion or geometric Brownian motion).

When prices

follow a random walk, the appropriate rational expectations forecast for the price at any time in the
future is today’s price, and the fiture path of the price is unbounded.

Urdike most prices, t=

parameters tend to remain constant for a few years, arid then jump to new values. In addition, jumps
in the ITC tend to be mean-reverttig:

When the credit is high, it is likely to be reduced in the fiture;

when the credit is low, it is likely to be increased in the future.
normal gain to waiting in a model with irreversibility

Because of these properties, the

is reduced significantly when an investment

40
tax credit is “on”: Because the firm fears that the credit might be eliminated, it is more likely to
invest today while the credit is still effective.

Hassett and Metcalf demonstrate

that this effect

dominates the reverse effect in the state in which there is no investment tax credit, and conclude that
increasing tax policy uncertainty raises aggregate investment.
As with the case of temporary investment incentives generally, this result does not imply that
random tax policy is desirable.

Most existing studies analyze investment in a partial equilibrium

setting wherein there are no utility costs to bunching capital formation.

In a general equilibrium

setting, Bizer and Judd (1989) show that welfme is reduced significantly by random investment tax
policy. The randomness has a negative impact because consumers wish to smooth consumption, and
fluctuations
VI.

in investment credits make smoothing costly.

Policy Implications
Our finding of significant short-term and long-term effects of the user cost of capital on

equipment investment suggests applications to current policy debates.
this section consequences

In particular, we evaluate in

for the user cost and investment of a reduction in inflation and a switch

from a income tax to a broad-based consumption

tax.

A. Low In~ation as a “Costless” Investment Subsidy
Many economists (see, e.g., Feldstein, 1976; and King and Fullerton, 1984) have argued that
under fairly general assumptions,
stimulus
expression

a reduction in the rate of inflation provides a relatively costless
Returning

to the

for the user cost, there are two channels through which expected inflation

affects

to business fixed investment

investment decisions.

by reducing the user cost of capital.

First, for given values of r and 5, the user cost varies positively with the level

of expected inflation n because the present value of depreciation

allowances — which is formed

‘/

41
using the nominal rate, r + n, as a discount rate — varies inversely with inflation owing to
historical-cost depreciation.30 Second, inflation affects the real cost of finds, r. In this section, we
briefly illustrate this second channel (following Auerbach, 1983b), and calculate the extent to which
lower inflation over the past decade had led to a reduction in the user cost of capital.
In a small open economy, the real cost of debt would be determined in world capital markets,
and would be exogenously given to firms. If the capital market were closed, then the marginal tax
rate of the holder of debt would affect the interest rates that firms pay. That is, local debtholders
require a fixed real afier-tax return, r, where:
r=

i (1 -Tp)

-

7C,

(19)

where i is the nominal interest rate on corporate debt, ~Pis the marginal personal tax rate on interest
income, and x is the expected rate of inflation. The inflation premium component of interest income
is taxable to bondholders.

The fro’s real cost of debt, p~, depends on its own marginal income tax

rate, ~C:

Pd

= i(l-~C)

-

n,

(20)

because under current U.S. tax law nominal interest payments on corporate debt are fi.dly deductible.
Combining the two previous expressions relates the fms

real cost of debt to the investor’s required

30That is, the present value of depreciation allowances is given by:

where DEP (a) is the depreciation allowance permitted an asset of age a, discounted at a
nominal rate that includes the expected inflation rate n.

42
return and marginal tax rate:

Pd

n.

=(r+rc)u.
(1 -Tp)

Alternatively,

r(l -rc)+(Tp-Tc)7t

pd.

(1 -Tp)

(22)

-

The firm’s real cost of equity finance, p., is defined as:

P,

.D~E-~,

(23)

;

where D is the dividend-price ratio and E is investors’ required ex-dividend nominal return to equity.
Note that, for a given r, inflation has very little effect on the cost of debt finance if--as
likely the cme in the United States -- rC is approximately
reduces the nominal interest deduction
amount.

is

equal to rP. In this case, lower inflation

but lowers the tax liability of bondholders

by the same

Note also that the effects of inflation on the cost of debt finance depend crucially on the

assumption

that the marginal debt holder is taxable.

If the marginal debtholder is a pension fund

(whose income is not taxed under current law), then lower inflation unambiguously
cost of debt finance. Firms receive smaller interest deductions, and pension fids

increases the

do not accrue an

offsetting reduction in tax liability .31

31There is no clear consensus regarding the effects of marginal tax rates on domestic real
interest rates, or on the question of whether the “Fisher effect” implicit in equation (21) holds.
This is an important area for future research in this context.

43
Individuals receive the afier-tax real return:

pi

= (l-Ti)D

+ (1-C)E

-

n.

(21)

where ri is the individual’s marginal tax rate on dividend income, and c is the individual’s accrual
equivalent tax rate on capital gains. Combining terms, the firm’s real cost of equity finance is:

(Ti -c)

Pe=—

~

pi

—
(1 -c)

(1 -c)

Higher inflation unambiguously

+

c
+ —
n.
(1 -c)

(22)

increases the cost of equity finance by the factor c/(1-c).

This term captures the “inflation tax” paid by shareholders

who reqeive purely nominal gains;

taxation of real capital gains would eliminate this effect. 32
The total real cost of investment tids

is simply the weighted average of the cost of equity

and the cost of debt, where the weights are the share of each in marginal finmce.

Using this

approach, one can examine the effect on investment of recent declines in expected inflation. Cohen,
Hassett, and Hubbard (1996) calculate the marginal effects on the user cost of lowering inflation.33

32For the calculations described below, we do not include the first term reflecting the tax on
dividends. In effect, we adopt the “tax capitalization” view of equity taxation (summarized in
Auerbach, 1983b) which suggests that the relevant tax rate is the effective capital gains tax rate,
regardless of the amount of dividends paid. This view assumes that marginal equity funds come
primarily from retained earnings rather than from new share issues and that earnings distributions
to shareholders are primarily through dividends rather than share repurchases.
33 Earlier empirical studies of the effect of inflation on real business tax burdens include
Feldstein and Summers (1977) and Auerbach (1983 b). Cohen, Hassett, and Hubbard (1 996)
also allow for inflation to increase taxes paid because of the effects of inflation on the cost of
carrying inventones.

,.

44
They estimate that, under plausible assumptions,
investment
inflation

the current value of the user cost for equipment

is about 0.22, and they conclude that a one-percentage-point
lowers the user cost by about one-half a percentage

incremental
same.

permanent decrease in

point. In their calculations,

the

effect of each additional percentage point reduction in inflation is approximately

the

Thus if the aual

inflation rate were reduced from four percent to zero, the user cost of

capital would decline about two percentage points -- proportionally by about ten percent. Given the
elasticity

estimates reviewed in the previous section, this “tax cut” would provide a significant

stimulus to investment.
B. Moving to a Consu~tion

Tax

Under the income tax, the user cost of capital is itiuenced

by the corporate tax rate,

investment tax credits, and the present value of depreciation allowances (see equation (4)). Under
a broad-based consumption tax, firms pay tax on the difference between receipts and purchases from
other firms. That is, there is no investment tax credit, and investment is expensed (z= 1). In this
case (assuming

that the corporate tax rate does not change over time), the user cost of capital

simplifies to:

Cit = p,[r,

+h

AP,+,
- —lPt

Comparing the user cost expressions in (4) and (4’) leads to two observations.
a consumption

tax, taxes do not distort business investment decisions; investment

breed on nonta.x tidarnentals.
a consumption

(4’)

First, under
decisions are

Second, given current U.S. tax policy, the user cost is lower under

tax than under an income tax.

.,.

45
By how much? Under current law, and assuming that the output price and the capital goods
price are both equal to unity, then for assets with seven-year lives, (assuming that the expected real
interest rate is four percent, the expected inflation rate is three percent, and the marginal machine
is financed half with equity and half with debt), the value of (1-r)/(1-~)

under 1996 U.S. tax law is

1.148, and the user cost of capital is equal to 0.234. The move to the consumption
the value of the user cost to 0.205, a reduction that would lead, celerisparibus,

tax would lower

to about a 10 percent

increase in equipment investment given the consensus estimates of y in equation (14).
Of course, other aggregate variables are also likely to change in response to such a large
change to the tax code were adopted. For example, nominal interest rates and the supply of savings
are likely to change. While it is difflcdt to say how Iwge, the net stimvlus to investment would be,
the consensus of the recent investment

literature suggests that the partial equilibrium

impact on

investment may be quite large.
VII.

Conclusions
Economists

and policymakers

have long been concerned about the effects of business

taxation and investment incentives on the equilibrium capital stock and the timing of investment.
Such concerns figure prominently
on fundamental

determinants

capital stock or investment;

in research programs: (1) identifying impac~ of tax parameters

of investment;

(2) describing links between fundamentals

and the

and (3) testing models of those links. Studies within the neoclassical

tradition offer rigorous applications of(1) and (2), but, until recently, have not produced reasonable
empirical estimates of effects of fidamental

on investment. Indeed, the poor empirical performance

of neoclassical factors led some researchers to conclude that “taxes don’t matter” and still others to
question assumptions

of the neoclassical paradigm.

‘)

46
Our principal conclusions

are four.

.-

First, neoclassical

models that use convex costs of

adjusting the capital stock to derive investment equations yield economically
and long-run effects of tax policy on investment.
a number of complementary
biases downward
investment,

conventional

predictions

approaches,

important short-run

This result reflects recent research which, through

demonstrates

estimates of tax effects.

that measurement

error in tidamentals

Second, at least for data on firm-level

of models with nonconvex adjustment costs are no more consistent with

observed links between fidarnentals

and investment than those of models with convex adjustment

costs. Third, recent studies conclude that U.S. business investment is below its “golden rule” level.
Finally, consensus estimates of the impact of the user cost of capital on investment indicate that two
cment policy suggestions

-- pursuing a monetary policy that would ryduce expected inflation and

switching from an income tax to a consumption tax -- would significantly

stimulate investment.

The current state of research on business investment decisions suggests the desirability of
developing

tests to distinguish

Different adjustment

among alternative models of costs of adjusting the capital stock.

cost specifications

imply different time paths of the response of the capital

stock to tax policy, making such tests usefil for policymakers.

Nonetheless,

most recent studies

imply a high long-run elasticity of the capital stock to the user cost of capital, so that tax policy
clearly has the potential to have a powefil
the long run.

effect on equipment investment and the capital stock in

...

47
PREFERENCES
Abel, Andrew B. (1990). “Consumption and Investment.” In Benjamin M, Friedman and Frank H.
Hahn, eds., Handbook ofA40rzeta~ Economics, Volume 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Abel, Andrew B. (1983), “Optimal Investment Under Uncertainty.” American Economic Review
73 (March): 228-233.
Abel, Andrew B. (1980). “Empirical Investment Equations: An Integrative Framework.” Journal
of A40neta~ Economics 12 (Spring), 39-91.
Abel, Andrew B., and Olivier J. Blanchard. (1986). “The Present Value of Profits and Cyclical
Movements in Investment.” Economelrica 54 (March), 249-273.
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly. (1995). “me Effects of Irreversibility and Uncertainty on
Capiti Accumulation,” Working Paper No. 5363, National Bureau of Economic Research,
November.
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly. (1996). “Investment and q wit
Analysis.” Mimeograph, The Wharton School, January.

Fixed Costs: An Empirical

Abel, Andrew B,, and Janice C. Eberly. (1995). “Optimal Investment with Costly Irreversibility.”
Working Paper No. 5091, National Bureau of Economic Research, April.
Abel, Andrew B., and Janice C. Eberly. (1994).
“A Unified Model of Investment
Uncertainty.” American Economic Review 84 (September), 1369-1384.

Under

Abel, Andrew B., N. Gregory Mankiw, Lawence H. Summers, and Richard J. Zeckhauser. (1 989).
“Assessing Dynamic Efficiency: Theory and Evidence.” Review of Economic Studies 56,
1-20.
Aftalian, A. (1909). “La re~it& des surproductions generales, essui d’une theorie des crises
generales et periodiques.” Revue d’Economic Politique.
Auerbach, Alan J. (1983a). “Corporate Taxation in the United States.”
Economic Activi@2,451 -513.

Brookings Papers on

Auerbach, Alan J. (1989). “Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment
Market Value.” International Economic Review 30,939-962.

and

Auerbach, Alan J. ( 1983b). “Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy, and the Cost of Capital.”
Journal of Economic Literature 21 (September), 905-940.

48

Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett. (1991). “Recent U. S. Investment Behavior and the Tax
Reform Act of 1986: A Disaggregate View. ” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on
Public Policy 35 (Autumn), 185-215.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin A. Hassett, (1992). “Tax Policy and Business Fixed Investment in
the United States.” Journal of Public Economics 47, 141-170.
Auerbach, Alan J,, Kevin A. Hassett, and Jan Sodersten.
(1995). “Taxation and Corporate
Investment: The Impact of the 1991 Swedish Tax Reform.” Working Paper No. 5189,
National Bureau of Economic Research, July.
Barnett, Steven A., and Plutarchos Sakellaris. (1995). “Nordinear Response of Firm Investment to
Q: Testing a Model of Convex and Nonconvex Adjustment Costs.” University of Maryland
Working Paper No. 95-11, October.
Bemanke, Ben, Henning Bohn, and Peter C. Reiss. (1988). “Alternative Nonnested Specification
Tests of Time-Series Investment Models.” Journal of Econometrics 37 (March): 293-326.
Bemanke, Ben, Mark Gertler, and Simon Gilchrist. (1996). “The financial
Flight to Quality.” Review ofEconomics and Statistics, forthcoming.

Accelerator and the

Bischoff, Charles.
(1971). “Business Investment in the 1970s: A Comparison
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1:13-63.

of Models.”

Bizer, David, and Kemeth Judd, (1989). “Taxation and Uncertainty.” American Economic Review
79 (May), 331-336.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, and Sta.rdey Fischer.
MIT Press.
Blundell, Richard, et al. (1992).
257.

(1989). Lectures on Macroeconomics.

Cambridge:

“Investment and Tobin’s Q.” Journal of Econometrics

57,233-

Bond, Stephen, and Costas Meghir. (1994). “Dynamic Investment Models and the Firm’s Financial
Policy.” Review of Economic Studies 61:197-222.
Bosworth, Barry P. (1985). “Taxes and the Investment Recovery.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activi@ 1, 1-38.
Braudel, Femand.

(1992).

The Wee/s

of Commerce.

Berkeley: University of California Press.

Cabellero, Ricardo J. “Small Sample Bias and Adjustment Costs.” (1994). Review of Economics
and Statistics, 52-58.

,/

49
Caballero, Ricardo J., and John V. Leahy.
Mimeograph, MIT, December.

(1995).

.A
“Fixed Costs: The Demise of Marginal q.”

Caballero, Richard J., Eduardo M. R. A, Engel, and John C, Haltinwanger. (1995). “Plant-level
Adjustment and Aggregate Investment Dynamics.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
2, 1-54
Calomiris, Charles W., and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1995). “Internal Finance and Investment: Evidence
from the Undistributed Profits Tax of 1937- 1938,” Journal of Business 68 (October), 443482.
Chirinko, Robert S. (1993). “Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies, Empirical
Results, and Policy Implications.” Journal of Economic Literature 31 (December), 18751911.
Chirinko, Robert S. (1987), “The Ineffectiveness of Effective Tax Rates on Business Investment:
A Critique of Feldstein’s Fisher-Schultz Lecture.” Journal of Public Economics 32,
369-387.
Chirinko, Robert S., and Robert Eisner. (1983). “Tax Policy and in Major Macroeconomic
Models,” Journal of Public Economics 20, 139-166.
Clark, J.M. “Business Acceleration and the Law of Demand.
Economy 25 (March), 217-235.
Clark, Peter K. (1993). “Tax Incentives
Economic Activi@ 1,317-339.

and Equipment

(1917).

Investment.”

“ Journal OJPolitical

Brookings Papers on

Cochrane, John. (1991). “Production-Based Asset Pricing and the Lti Between Stock Returns and
Economic Fluctuations.” Journal of Finance 46 (March): 209-237.
Cohen, Darrel, Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1996). “Inflation and the User Cost of
Capital: Does Inflation Still Matter?” Mimeograph, Columbia University, December.
Cohen, Darrel, Kevin A. Hassett, and James Kennedy. (1995). “&e U.S. Investment and Capital
Stocks at Their Optimal Levels?” FEDS Working Paper No. 9532, Board of Governors of
the Federal Resewe System.
Cummins, Jason G. Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glem Hubbard. (1995). “Have Tax Reforms
In James M. Poterba, ed. Ta Policy and the Economy, vol. 9.
Affected Investment?”
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cummins, Jason G,, Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1994). “A Reconsideration of
Investment Behavior Using Tax Reforms as Natural Experiments.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activi~2, 1-74.

.’

50
Cummins, Jason G., Trevor S. Hanis, and Kevin A. Hassett. (1995). “Accounting Standards,
Information Flow, and Firm Investment Behavior.” In Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines, and
R. Glenn Hubbard, eds., The E#ects of Tnation on Multinational Corporations. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Cummins, Jason G., Kevin A. Hassett, and R. Glenn Hubbard.
(1996). “Tax Reforms and
Investment: A Cross-Country Comparison.” Journal of Public Economics, forthcoming.
Cummins, Jason G., and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1995). “The Tax Sensitivity of Foreign Direct
Investment: Evidence from Firm-Level Panel Data.” In Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines,
and R. Glem Hubbard, eds., The E#ects of Tmation on Multinational Corporations.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Diamond, Peter A. (1965). “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model.” American Economic
Review 55 (December): 1126-1150.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Robert S. Pindyck. (1994).
Princeton University Press.

Investment Under Uncertain~.

Princeton:

Doms, Mark, and Timothy Dunne. (1994). “Capital Adjustment Patterns in Manufacturing Plants.”
Discussion Paper 94-11. Washington, D. C.: Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of
the Census.
Eisner, Robert. (1969), “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior: Comment.”
Review 59 (June), 379-388.
Eisner, Robert. (1970). “Tax Policy and Investment
Economic Review 60 (September), 746-752.

American Economic

Behavior: Further Comment.”

Eisner, Robert and M. Ishaq Nadiri. (1968). “Investment
Review of Economics and Statistics 50:369-382.

Behavior and Neoclassical

Eisner, Robert and M. Ishaq Nadiri, (1970). “Neoclassical Theory of Investment
Review of Economics and Statistics 52 (May): 216-222.
Comment.”

American

Theory.”

Behavior: A

Eisner, Robert, and Robert H. Strotz. (1963). “Determinants of Business Investment.” In Impacts
of Moneta~ Poli~, studies prepared for the Commission on Money and Credit. Englewood
Cliffs, N. J.: Prentice-Hall.
Fallick, Bruce C., and Kevin A. Hassett. (1995). “Union Certification and Investment,”
Mimeograph,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. (1988a). “Financing Constraints and
Corporate Investment.” Brootings Papers on Economic Activi~ 1, 141-195.

Fazzari, Steven M., R. Glenn Hubbard, and Bruce C. Petersen. ( 1988b). “Investment, Financing
Decisions, and Tax Policy.” American Economic Review 78 (May), 200-205.
Feldstein, Martin S. (1977). “Does the United States Save Too Little?”
Review 67 (May): 116-121.

American Economic

Feldstein, Martin S. and Lawence H. Summers,
(1979). “Inflation and the Taxation of Capital
Income in the Corporate Sector.” National Tm Journal 32 (December): 445-470.
Feldstein, Martin S, (1976). “Inflation, Income Taxes, and the Rate of Interest: A Theoretical
Analysis.” American Economic Review 66 (June): 8809-820.
Feldstein, Martin S. (1982). “Inflation, Tax Rules, and Investment:
Econometrics 50 (July), 825-862.

Some Econometric Evidence.”

Fisher, h-ving. The Theory of~nteres(. (1930). New York: Macmillan.
Fraumeni, BarbaraM.(1995).
“The Measurement of Depreciation in the U.S. National Income and
Wealth Accounts.” Mimeograph, National Science Foundatio ~ January.
Gertler, Mark, and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1988). “Financial Factors in Business Fluctuations.” In
Financial Markt Volatility: Causes and Consequences. Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank
of Kansas City.
Gilchrist, Simon. (1991).
“An Empirical Analysis of Corporate Investment and Financing
Hierarchies
Using Firm-Level Panel Data.” Mimeograph, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Gilchrist, Simon, and Charles P. Himrnelberg. (1995). “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow in
Reduced-Form Investment Equations.” Journal of Moneta~ Economics 36:541-572.
Goolsbee, Austan.
Mimeograph,

(1995).
“Investment Tax Incentives
University of Chicago.

Gould, John P. (1968). “Adjustment
Economic Studies 35,47-55.

and the Price of Capital

Goods.”

Costs in the Theory of Investment of the Firm.” Review of

Griliches, Zvi, and Jerry A. Hausman. (1986).
Econometrics 31 (February, 141-154.
Haavelmo, Trygve. A Stu@ in the ~eo~
Press.

“Errors in Variables in Panel Data.” Journal of

oflnvestment.

(1960), Chicago: University of Chicago

Hall, Robert E., and Dale W. Jorgenson. (1967). “Tax Policy and Investment Behavior.” American
Economic Review 57 (June), 391-414.

52
Hartman, Richard. (1972) “The Effects of Price and Cost Uncertainty on Investment.”
Economic Theory 5:258-266.
Hassett, Kevin A,, and R. Glenn Hubbard. (1995).
Local Policy Affect Prices?” Mimeograph,

Journal of

“The World Market for Capital Goods: Does
Columbia University, December.

Hassett, Kevin A., and Gilbert E. Metcalf. (1994), “Investment with Uncertain Tax Policy: Does
Random Tax Policy Discourage Investment?” Working Paper No. 4780, National Bureau
of Economic Research, June.
Hassett, Kevin A., and Gilbert E. Metcalf.
Working Paper, Tufts University.

(1995). “Random Taxes and Continuous Investment.”

Hayashi, Fumio. (1985). “Corporate Finance Side of the Q Theory of Investment. ” Journal of
Public Economics 27,261-280.
Hayashi, Fumio. (1982). “Tobin’s Marginal q and Average q: A Neoclassical
Econometrics 50 (January), 213-224.

Interpretation. ”

Hayashi, Fumio, and Tohru Inoue. (1991). “The Relation Between Firm Growth and q with
Multiple Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese
Firms.’’Econometrica 59 (May),731 -753.
Himmelberg, Charles P. (199 1). “A Dynamic Analysis of Dividend and Investment Behavior Under
Borrowing Constraints.” Mimeograph, New York University.
Hubbard, R, Glenn. (1995). “Capital-Market
Columbia ‘University, December.

Imperfections

and Investment.”

Mimeograph,

Hubbard, R. Glenn. (1990). “Introduction.” In R. Glenn Hubbmd, ed. Asymme&ic Information,
Corporate Finance, and Investment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Hubbard, R. Glenn. (1994). “Investment Under Uncertainty: Keeping One’s Options Open.”
Journal of Economic Literature 32 (December), 1816-1831.
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and til K. Kashyap. (1992). “Internal Net Worth and the Investment Process:
An Application to U.S. Agriculture.” Journal of Political Economy 100 (June), 506-534.
Hubbard, R. Glem, Anil K. Kashyap, and Toni M. Whited. (1995). “Internal Finance and Firm
Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 27 (August), 683-701.
Investment.”
Hulten, Charles R., and Frank C. Wykoff. (1981), “The Measurement of Economic Depreciation.”
In Charles R. Hulten, cd., Depreciation, Inf7ation, and the Taation of Income>om Capital.
Washington, D. C.: Urban Institute.

..,.

53
Hulten, Charles R., and Frank C. Wykoff. (1979). “Tax and Economic Depreciation of Machinery
and Equipment: A Theoretical and Empirical Appraisal. ” Working Paper, U.S. Treasury
Department, Office of Tax Analysis, July.
Ibbotson, R.G. (1987). Stocb,
Ibbotson and Associates.

Bonds, Bills, and Inflation: Market Results for 1926-1986.

Jorgenson, Dale W. (1963). “Capital Theory and Investment
Review 53 (May), 247-259.

Behavior.” American Economic

Jorgenson, Dale W, (1971). “Econometric Studies of Investment Behavior: A Smey.”
Economic Literature 9 (December), 1111-1147.

Journal of

Jorgenson, Dale W. (1967). “Theory of Investment Behavior.” In Robert Ferber, cd.,
“Determinants of Investment Behavior.” New York: Columbia University Press.
. ., .Jorgenson, Dale W., and Calvin D. Siebert. (1968). “A Comparison of Alternative Theories of
Corporate Investment Behavior.” American Economic Review 58 (September),681 -712.
Jorgenson, Dale W., and Stephenson. (1969). “Issues in the Development
Model.” Review of Economics and Statistics 51:346-353.

of the Neoclassical

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Martin A. Sdlivan. (1981). “Inflation and Corporate Capital Recovery. ”
In Charles R. Hulten, cd., Depreciation, lnj7ation, and the Tmation of Income@om Capital.
Washington, D. C.: Urban Institute.
Jorgenson, Dale W. (1994). “Empirical Studies of Depreciation.” Working Paper, Harvard Institute
of Economic Research No. 1704, December.
Judd, Kenneth L. (1995). “The Optimal Tax Rate for Capital Income Is Negative.”
Hoover Institution, April 1995.
Keynes, John Maynard. (1936).
York: Harcourt Brace.

Working Paper,

~e General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money. New

King, Mervyn A., and Don Fullerton, eds. (1984). The Taxation of Income from Capi[al: A
Comparative Study of the United States, United Kingdom, Sweden, and West Germany.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1967), “Adjustment Costs and the Theory of Supply.” Journal of Political
Economy 75 (August),321 -334.
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1976). “Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique. ” In Karl Brunner and
Allan Meltzer, eds., ~e Phillips Curve and Labor Marbts, Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy 1:19-46.

..?

54

..

Meyer, John R., and Edwin Kuh. (1957). The Investment Decision. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Modigliani, France, and Merton H. Miller. (1958). “The Cost of Capital, Corporation Finance and
the Theory of Investment.” American Economic Review 48 (June ), 261-297.
Mortenson, Dale T. (1973). “Generalized Costs of Adjustment
Theory,” Econometrics 41:657-667.

and Dynamic Factor Demand

Nickell, Stephen J. (1978). The Investment Decisions of Firms. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Oliner, Stephen D. (1996). “New Evidence on the Retirement and Depreciation of Machine Tools. ”
Economic Inquiry, forthcoming.
Phelps, Edmund S. (1961). “The Golden Rule of Accumulation:
American Economic Review 51:638-643.

A Fable for Growth Men.”

Pindyck, Robert S, (1988). “Irreversible Investment, Capacity Choicel and the Value of the Firm.”
American Economic Review 78 (December): 969-985.
Pindyck, Robert S. (1991). “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Investment.”
Lilera/ure 29 (September): 1110-1148.

Journal ofEconomic

Pindyck, Robert S., and Julio J. Rotemberg.
(1983). “Dynamic Factor Demands Under Rational
Expectations.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 85:223-238.
Ramsey, Frank P. (1928).

“A Mathematical

Theory of Saving.”

Economic Journal 62:543-559.

Rothschild, Michael. (1971 ). “On the Costs of Adjusting the Capital Stock.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 85, 6056-22.
Sakelltis,
Plutarchos.
(1996). “Investment Under Uncertain Market Conditions. ” Review of
Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Salinger, Michael A., and Lawrence H. Summers. (1983). “Tax Reform and Corporate Investment:
A Macroeconomic Simdation Study.” In Martin Feldstein, cd., Behavioral Simulation
Methods in Tm Po[icy Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Shapiro, Matthew D. (1986). “The Dynamic Demand for Capital and Labor.” Quarterly Journal
of Economics 101 (August): 513-547.
Sinn, Hans-Werner. (1987). Capital Income Tmation as Resource Allocation.
North-Holland.

Amsterdam:

55
Sodersten, Jan. (1989). “The Investment Funds System Reconsidered.”
Economics 91 (December), 671-87
Solow, Robert.

(1970).

Scandinavian Journal oj

Growfh Theory. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson. (1993). “A Simple MLE of Cointegrating
Higher Order Integrated Systems.” Econometrics 61 (January): 111-152.

Vectors in

Struckmeyer, Charles S. (1983). “Capital, Energy, and Economic Growth: A Vintage Approach. ”
Doctoral Dissertation, Yale University.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1987). “Investment Incentives and the Discounting of Depreciation
Allowances.” In Martin Feldstein, cd., The E#ects of Taxation on Capital Accumulaiton.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Summers, Lawrence H. (1981). “Taxation and Corporate Investment:
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1,67-127.

A q-Theory Approach.”

Taylor, John B. (1993). Macroeconomic Policy Design in a World &onomy:
Design to Practical Operation. New York: W.W. Norton.

From Econometric

Taylor, John B. (1982). “The Swedish Investment Funds System as a Stabilization
Brookings Papers on Economic Activi~ 1,57-101.

Policy Rule. ”

To bin, James. (1965). “Economic Growth as an Objective of Government Policy.” In Essays in
Economics, Volume 1: Macroeconomics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Tobin, James. (1969). “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory.” Journal ofMoney,
Credit, and Banking 1 (February), 15-29.
Treadway, A. B. (1970). “Adj~ent
Cost and Variable Imports in tie Theory of the Competitive
Firm.” Journal of Economic ~eo~ 2,329-347.
Treadway, A. B. (1969). “On Rational Entrepreneurial Behavior and the Demand for Investment.”
Review of Economic Studies 36,227-239.
Uz.awa, H. (1969). “Time Preference and the Penrose Effect in a Two-Class Model of Economic
Growth.” Journal of Political Economy 77:628-652.
Whited, Toni M. (1992). “Debt, Liquidity Constraints,
Finance 47 (September), 1425-1460.

and Corporate Investment.”

Journal of

TABLE 1
Estimties of Tax-Adjusted Q Model for
Country
Dependent

Conventional Panel Data
Estimated Coefic ient on 0

FourteenCountries’

Estimated Coefficient with ContemDOr aneous Tax Instru mentsc

Variable: I/K.

0.050
(0.019)

(0.153)

Belgium

0.103
(0.044)

0,587
(0.422)

Canada

0.041
(0.009)

0.521
(0,127)

Denmark

0.104
(0.085)

0.765
(0.308)

France

0.085
(0.042)

0.388
(0.116)

Germany

0.095
(0.040)

0.784
(0.296)

Italy

0.051
(0.018)

0.180
(0.120)

Australia

Japan

0.029

(0.008)
The Netherlands

Norway

0.289

0.086
(0.035)

0.069

0.633

(0.044)

(0.150)

0.069

0.512

(0.031)

(0.295)

Spain

0.044
(0.028)

0.404
(0.233)

Sweden

0.051
(0.047)

0.293
(0.169)

United Kingdom

United States

Notes:

‘Y

a Source:

0.062

0.589

(0.013)

(0.078)

0.048
(0.006)

(0.077)

:

0.650

Calculations in Curnmins, Hassett, and Hubbard ( 1996) using Global Vantage data.

b See Table 5 in Cummins, Hass~ and Hubbard (1996), GMMestimates.instrumentsincludetwice-and
thrice-lagged values of Q, (//K), and the ratios of cash flow to capital.
c See Table 7 in Cummins, Hmsett, and Hubbard ( 1996), GMMestimates. Instruments include twice- and
thrice-lagged values of (//~ and the ratio of cash flow to capital, twice-lagged value nontax components of q, and
contemporaneous values of tax parameters.

Benchmark Golden-Rule and Actual Levels of F’/Y and WY

Type of Capital

Golden-Rule Level
Phelps

Actual Level

Ramsey

(1980-1994 average)

Net Investment as Percent of GDP:
Total fixed

8.3%

6.0%

4.2%

Business fixed

4.8

3.6

2.4

2.4

2.0

1.3

Nonresidential structures

2.0

1.3

1.2

Residential

2.7

1.6

1,8

Producers durable
equipment

Ratio of Capital Stock to GDP:
Total fixed

3.3

2.4

1.9

Business fixed

1.9

1.4

1.0

1.0

0.8

0.5

Nonresidential structures

0.8

0.5

0.5

Residential

1.1

0.6

0.9

Producers durable
equipment

Source: Cohen, Hassett, and Kemedy

(1995, Table 2).

Note: Benchmark parameter values are:
Labor force growth rate = 0.01
Rate of labor-augmenting

technical change = 0.15

Social discount rate =0, 12
Social intefiemporal

elasticity of substitution

(~)=

= 0.30, a~uine,,~Xd= 0.24, amUiP~m,= 0.18, ~~~~,

aToml fixed

3

= 0.06, aRMld.n~ia[
= 0.06

Figure

1

Fundamental Determinants of Equipment Spending
,./
User Cost of Captil
percent change

Fourquarter

r

1

Correlation coefficient: -.11

50
40
30

20
10
+
o
10
20
1960

1965

1970

Real Domestic Co~rate

1975

30

1980

1985

1990

1995

Cash ~w
Fourquarter

percent change
30
20
10
+
o
10
20

1960

1965

“ Denotes @atical

1970

1975

30

1980

1985

1990

1995

eignitice.

Acceleration of Business Output
Four-gustier percent change

50

Percentage points

r

1

Correlation coefficient: .70”

40

30
20

..
v,.:.:.
......
......
...
,.:.:.

......
......
......
......
......

,...
......
......
......
......
.....
....
......
..
!%::

.........
.....
.............
.....
.............

......
......
......
......
......
......
......

.........
~:;:;{; Accelerator

......
......
......
...

................
.........

..
:.:.
....
..
....

.........
.............
.. .. .
.............

....
...
..

. ......
..
...
-. ....

,.:.
:::

..
:.:.
....
,.:.:

..............
.::::
....

30

20

,...
.....
:.:.
....
..

10
+
o
10
20

.:.
:.:.
-.,.:.:.
......
......
,... ,
..

1960

I

1

1

1

1

1965

Note. The -rotor

I

1

....

1

1970
is the -t-r

1

1

.... .

1

1

I

I

1975
percent change m b--

I

1

1

I

1980
1985
o~ut less the ywarlier

1

1

I

....
::..

1990
ei~t-r

1

1

1

1

I

1995
percent chang.

20

Figure

2

Fundamental Determinants of NRS Spending
f
NRS Cost of Capital
Fourquarter percent change

I

Correlation coefficient: .36”

/
/1

i

1

45
30

15
+
o

15

1960

1965

1970

1975

1960

1985

1990

1995

‘-

“ Denotes sralisticalsignificance.

Real Domestk

Corporate

CaA

%W
Fourquarter

percent change
30
20
10
+
o
10

20
30
1970

1965

1960

Acceleration of Business

1975

1980

1965

r

Correlation coeffmient: .31

Percentage points

1

●

20
10
+
o
10
20
1960

1965

Note. The timtor

‘-

Output

Four-quarter percent change
40

1995

1990

1970

u IhuI
ai@t_r

1975

1980

percentchan~ m b~eea

1985

output Iaee the y=-tier

1990
ei@tquatir

1995
percant chanm.

30

Figure

3

Tobin’s Q and the UK Ratio
,/
Index, 1987=1 00

200

160

120

so

a

1
1960

1972

1966

1978

1984

1990

Fourquarter

1996

percent change
50

40

30

20

10
+
o

10

20

30

40

50
1960

1965

1970

1975

198o

1985

1990

1995

—
.-0

I

z

U

1

—

I

I

1

I

I

I

I

.-

-

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .......................................................................................
......................................................................................................................................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...................................................................................... .

........
.......

. . .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .

. . .. . .. . . . .. .. . .. .. .. . ... . . .. . . .. . . .. . . .. . .. .. .. .. . . . .

b

. . . .

. . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .....

. . . . . . . . .

.....................

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ................
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .................
. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
. . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . .

. . . . . .

. . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . .. . . .. . . .. . . . . . . .. . . .. .

. . . .

. . . . . . . . .
. . -

. . .

..

.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .. . . .. . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. . .. . . . . .. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.. .. .. . . .. . . . . . . .. .. . . . . . . . . .. . . .. .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ..
. . . . . .. . .. . . . .. . .. . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . .. .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...........................
.............
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

.
. . .
.

I

I

I

.-

I

I

1

1

I

1

..

Figure ~

After-Tax

Cost of One Dollar of Equipment Investment, 1953-89

Tax wedge’
0.778

0.686
f

J
2
>

0.595

r

0.503
22

989

‘
15
L

Equipment
categoryb

‘ 1953

I

Murcc: Aulhors” calculauons based upon dala from [he Bureau of ECommk Analysis.
a. llle
[ax wedge IS cticulal~
from r. which is [hc sum Of ine pmSCOI value of lax wvin~
from depreciation
tax cmdi[. Higher VXJUCSfor ( I - n ~~
10 highw after-lax COSISof investing.
diowances
and I he invfi[~nl
b. See table

2 for BEA

claswficauons.

0.05 ~

.

0.04

I

0.03
0.02 I
●✎

0.01
✎
✎

✎

✎

✎
✎

-0.M
-0.05
-0.06 1
4.07
-0.02
0.01

I
.
0.02

0.03

0.04
Uwr Cost

005

0.06

I
I
J
0.07

f
!

FIGURE k Cmss-Se&”onal Relationship Betwesn lnvcstmsnt and

User Cost Forecast Emrs: 1987.

