NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONTROL OF THE PUBLIC DEBT:
A REQUIREMENT FOR PRICE
STABILITY?

Michael Woodford

NBER Working Paper 5684

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

I would like to thank Ben Bemanke, Michael Bordo, Guillermo Calve, Michael Dotsey, Peter Kenen,
William Perraudin, Julio Rotemberg, Erich Streissler, and Lars Svensson for helpful discussions,
Eduardo Loyo for research assistance, and the National Science Foundation (U. S.) for research
support. I would also like to thank Bob King and Mark Watson for supplying the program described
in King and Watson (1995). This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Growth, and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author
and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Michael Woodford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @ notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5684
July 1996

CONTROL OF THE PUBLIC DEBT:
A REQUIREMENT FOR PRICE
STABILITY?

ABSTRACT

The paper considers the role of limits upon the permissible growth of public debt, like those
stipulated in the Maastricht treaty, in making price stability possible,

It is shown that a certain type

of fiscal instability, namely variations in the present value of current and future primary government
budgets, necessarily results in price level instability,

in the sense that there exists no possible

monetary policy that results in an equilibrium with stable prices. In the presence of sluggish price
adjustment, the fiscal shocks disturb real output and real interest rates as well.
On the other hand, shocks of this kind can be eliminated by a Maastricht-type
value of the public debt. In the presence of the debt limit (and under assumptions

limit on the
of frictionless

financial markets, etc.), “Ricardian equivalence” holds, and fiscal shocks have no effects upon real
or nominal variables.

Furthermore, an appropriate monetary policy rule can ensure price stability

even in the face of other kinds of real shocks. Thus the debt limit serves as a precondition

for the

common central bank in a monetary union to be charged with responsibility for maintaining a stable
value for the common currency.

Michael Woodford
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER

Reduction of government deficits and controlling the rate of growth of the outstanding public debt has moved to the forefront among the economic policy challenges
facing many of the leading industrial nations in recent years. This has come to be of
particular concern among the members of the European Union, nearly all of whom
must modify their present courses if they are to satisfy the requirements laid down
in the M~stricht
treaty for participation in the proposed European monetary union.
An obvious question raised by the fiscal requirements of the Maastricht treaty – and a
pressing one, given the difficulties that many aspiring members of such a union face in
satisfying these requirements – is why controls over the degree to which governments
resort to deficit finance should be essential to a successful monetary union. 1
Indeed, conventional macroeconomic models provide little reason to suppose that
the public debt is an important determinant of the value for a country’s currency,
and by extension, little reason to suppose that individual member nations’ fiscal
policies should interfere with the ability of a common European central bank to
maintain a stable value for a common currency. Such a conclusion might be reached
on any of several grounds. First, some would maintain that monetary policy is the
sole, or at least the main, determinant of the equilibrium price level; such a strong
monetaist
position implies that control of fiscal policy is unnecessary in order to
achieve price stability, as long as fiscal policy can be prevented from having any effect
upon monetary policy. Monetarists recognize that fiscal problems are often the root
cause of high inflations, owing to the seignorage revenues that can be obtained from
rapid money growth, But it is often doubted that such concerns have much effect upon
monetary policy in low-inflation countries (where seignorage revenues must remain
a small fraction of the government budget, unless a truly radical change in policy
occurs); and in any event monetarists generally argue that it suffices to ensure the
independence of the central bank and that it is charged with a proper mission, in
order to achieve price stability, regardless of the nature of fiscal policy.
Second, even if one admits a richer menu of factors as determinants of aggregate
demand, it may be argued that government deficits should be one of the least important, because of the doctrine of “Ricardian equivalence” (Barre, 1974, 1989). It
is argued that if households correctly understand the future consequences of current
changes in the government’s budget, they will adjust private saving so ~ to exactly
offset any change in the level of national saving, with the consequence that there is no
change in aggregate demand at existing prices and interest rates. It follows (though
such analyses are often conducted in complete abstraction from the determination
of nominal variables) that government deficits should cause no disturbance to price
stability.
And finally, even if one admits that the government budget is able to affect aggregate demand, one may nonetheless ague that an appropriate monetary policy
should be able to ensure price stability, by offsetting the effects of fiscal policy on
lThe rewonab]eness of these r~uirements has been challenged by many academic commentators;
see, e.g., Buiter et al. (1993).

1

aggregate demand as necessary. (The standard textbook IS-LM-AD analysis clearly
implies this: the central bank need simply adjust the level of nominal interest rates
so as to coincide at all times with the point on the “IS curve” corresponding to p~
tential out put.) Under such an analysis, fiscal instability complicates the task of the
central bank, but a desire for price stability need not require that fiscal policy be
subordinated to that end.
I shall argue that these analyses all understate the obstacle posed to price stability
by failure to control the path of the public debt. I will argue not only that variations
in the government budget can be an important source of macroeconomic instability,
but that the instability is not eliminated when the central bank follows a monetmy
policy rule that is completely unresponsive to the size of the public debt. Nor may it
be eliminated simply by an appropriate monetary policy response to the fiscal shocks.
In the presence of nominal rigidities, as are assumed in the model developed here,
the fluctuations in aggregate demand resulting from fiscal shocks cause variations in
the level of real economic activity and in real interest rates, as well as variations in
the rate of inflation. These effects thus represent a violation of Ricardian equivalence.
This occurs despite the fact that the analysis assumes rational expectations, identical
infinite-lived households, pure lump-sum taxation, and frictionless financial markets.
These idealized assumptions are made exactly to clarify that the channel through
which fiscal policy affects aggregate demand here is a different one than those stressed
in more familiar analyses (having to do with myopic expectations, intergenerational
redistribution,
government borrowing on terms not available to private households,
and the like), and so not subject to the familiar critiques.
The reason that the usual arguments for Ricardian equivalence fail here lies elsewhere. These arguments assume that fiscal policy necessarily has the property that
whenever the level of the outstanding public debt changes, the present value of future
government surpluses changes by exwtly the same amount, regardless of the path
that prices and interest rates may follow. And when fiscal policy has this “Ricardian” property, it is indeed true (under the idealized assumptions referred to above)
that changes in the path of the government budget and of the public debt have no
effect upon aggregate demand. But there is no reason that fiscal policy must be Ricardian in this sense; a wide range of non-Ricardian policy rules are perfectly consistent
with rational expectations equilibrium, and it is in particular hardly obvious that
governments that appear to be unable to rein in chronic budget deficits are nonetheless capable of ensuring that the condition just mentioned will always be satisfied.
If fiscal policy is not Ricardian, and shocks that change the expected present value
of current and futme government budgets occur, a rational expectations equilibrium
may well exist, but will not involve stable prices or output. This is because under
a non-Ricmdian’ regime, fiscal shocks do change households’ intertemporal
budget
constraints, at what would otherwise have been equilibrium prices and interest rates;
hence markets fail any longer to clem at those prices. 2 An explicit example of
‘This channel for the effects of fiscal variables is discussed in the context of a simpler model in

2

rational expectations equilibrium under such a regime is presented below.
These results provide a reason for a country that cares about price stability to
be concerned about the prospect of sharing a common currency with a country that
is unable to control its public debt, in the precise sense of following a Ricardian
fiscal policy rule. Adherence to a Ricardian fiscal policy by one country, or even
maintenance of a balanced budget at all times, will not protect it from price level
instability generated by variations in the budget of the other government, even if
the monetary policy rule adopted by the common central bank ignores the paths
of both countries’ public debts. The only way that the fiscally responsible country
could insulate itself, in principle, from instability of that kind would be by varying
its own budget surplus in such a way to counteract the budget variations of the other
country, so as to keep the total public debt of the monetary union on a steady path.
But this would amount to offering to finance the other country’s budget deficits, so
as to eliminate the need for borrowing – a type of blank check that no government
will be willing to extend to neighbors lacking in fiscal discipline! The analysis thus
provides some support for the concerns of the architects of the Maastricht treaty with
the viability of a monetary union in the absence of demonstrated
capacity for fiscal
discipline on the part of all member countries.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 presents a simple closed-economy general
equilibrium macroeconomic model, in the context of which the analysis is conducted.
Section 2 illustrates the effects of fiscal shocks upon inflation, output, and interest
rates in the case of a non-Ricardian
fiscal regime. Section 3 discusses the way in
which a constraint upon fiscal policy – specifically, a commitment to keep the public
debt within some ceiling forever - could eliminate this source of instability, and make
it possible for price stability to be achieved by a suitable monetary policy. Finally,
section 4 extends the analysis to the case of a monetary union with independent
national fiscal policies.

1

A General Equilibrium Model with Sluggish Price
Adjustment

In order to assess the degree to which an appropriate choice of monetary policy is able
to achieve price stability, it is useful to adopt a theoretical framework in which pricelevel instability affects the real allocation of resources. For that reason, I here develop
a simple general equilibrium model with nominal price rigidity, as a result of which
Woodford (1995). There the concern is solely with price-level determination in a world of perfectly
flexible prices, with both output and real interest rates exogenously given. See also the related
analyses of Leeper (1991), Sims (1994, 1995), and Bergin (1995), to which the same comment
applies. The introduction here of nominal price rigidity allows for a richer analysis. In particular,
the nominal rigidities allow for variation in real interest rates, which has important consequences
for the interaction between monetary policy and the government’s budget.

3

the level and pattern of economic activity is distorted by price level variations over
time. The model of nominal price rigidity that I will use is a discrete-time variant
of a model introduced by Calvo (1983). 3 In this model, it is assumed that each
period a fraction 1 – a of goods suppliers get to set a new price, while the remaining
a must continue to sell at their previously posted prices (for some O s a < 1).
The suppliers that get to set new prices are chosen randomly each period, with each
having an equal probability of being selected. Thus the probability of a price change
is independent of both the time that has elapsed since the last price change, and
of the degree to which costs and other market conditions have changed since then.
This is obviously an unrealistic simplification, but it does make the model’s dynamics
very simple (in part icular, only a small number of state variables need be tracked
over time), while allowing for an arbitary degree of price rigidity (anywhere between
complete price flexibility, in the limit of a = O, and complete price rigidity, in the
limit as a approaches 1).
Let the economy consist of a contimum
of identical infinite-lived households,
indexed by j c [0, 1], each of which specializes in the production of a single differentiated good, of which it is the monopoly supplier. 4 There is thus also a continuum
of differentiated goods each period, indexed by z s [0, 1], with z = j denoting the
good supplied by household j. Each household consumes all of the goods, and indeed
household preferences over consumption bundles are assumed to be identical. Each
household’s own purchases are only an infinitesimal share of the total demand for any
of the goods that it produces, and the prices that it sets make only an infinitesimal
contribution to its overall costs of obt aining consumption goods; hence the household
sets prices without regard to the effect of such decisions on its own cost of obtaining
consumption goods.
Let us assume that each household j seeks to maximize a lifetime objective
~

~oB’[u(c:
+ v(~//~t)–
Gt) +

{

w(Yt(~))]

)

(1.1)

}

where u and v are increasing concave functions, w is an increasing convex function,
and @ is a discount factor between O and 1. Here y~(j) is the household’s supply of
3This haa become something of a standard baaeline model of nominal rigidity in quantitative
general equilibrium business cycle models. See Yun (1994), Kimball (1995), King and Watson
(1996), and King and Wolman (1995) for examples. The exposition given here does not follow
exactly any of those cited; in particular, unlike any of those papers, it does not explicitly model
firma, the labor market, or the dynamics of capital accumulation, in order to focus more clearly
upon the equilibrium relations that are of central importance for the issues addressed here.
4The model is one of monopolistic competition, so that suppliers have the power to set prices,
following Svensson (1986) and Blanchard and Kiyotaki (1987). Like these authors, we model monopolistic competition along the lines of Dixit and Stiglitz (1977). The resumption of “yeoman farmers”,
as, for example, in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995), allows us to”model the pricing/supply decision without having to explicitly introduce firms and factor markets. An aggregate supply relationship of
essentially the same kind can be derived in the more explicit model; see, e.g., Yun (1994).

4

its product,

and C: is an index of the household’s

consumption

defined by
(1.2)

where ~(z) indicates household j‘s consumption of good z in period t, and 0 > 1
is the (constant) elasticity of substitution
among alternative goods. Similarly, Gt is
an index of public goods provision in period t. The additive way in which Gt enters
(1.1) implies that public goods are a perfect substitute for private consumption.
This
is obviously a special case, but has the advantage of allowing us to abstract from
any effects of fiscal policy upon the economy other than those that follow from its
effect upon the path of the public debt. Finally, M: denotes the household’s money
balances at the end of period t, while Pt is an index of goods prices at date t defined
by
(1.3)
where pt (z) is the price of good z at date t. This price index has the property that the
minimum expenditure required to purchase goods resulting in a consumption index of
C’: is given by PtCj, The v term in (1.1) indicates the existence of liquidity services
from wealth held in the form of money, increasing in the real purchasing power of the
money, as in the model of Sidrauski (1967) and Brock (1974).
Let us suppose that households can trade each period in a range of securities
that is large enough to completely span all states of nature, (In particular, it allows
households to insure against idiosyncratic variations in the time at which they are
able to change the prices at which they supply goods, which is the only householdspecific type of uncertainty in the model. ) Then in any period t, the flow budget
constraint of household j may be written
1

J
~

Pt(z)d(z)~z
<

+

M; +

~t[~t,t+IB;+l]

w:+p~(j)yt(j)

– T~.

(1.4)

In the final term on the left-hand side, B~+l denotes the nominal value at date t + 1
of the bond portfolio (i.e., the non-monetary
part of its financial wealth) that the
household holds at the end of period t. Rt,~ denotes the stochastic discount factor,
such that the mmket price at date t of a portfolio yielding a random nominal value Q~
at subsequent date T is given by Et [Rt,TQT]. In order for no arbitrage opportunities
to exist, securities prices must be chmacterizable in terms of such discount factors;
and because markets me complete, the household can obtain any random payoff B~+l
that it likes in the following period, at a current price of Et [Rt,t+lBf+l]. On the righthand side of (1.4), W: denotes the nominal value of the household’s financial wealth
at the beginning of period t, given by
W; = M;.l + B;.
5

(1.5)

Finally, T~ denotes net nominal t= obligations of each household during period t.
These are assumed to be lump-sum, again so as to eliminate effects of fiscal policy
changes other than those that result from changes in budgets.
Let us furthermore assume a limit on borrowing that rules out “Ponzi schemes”.
5 In this case, the sequence of flow budget constraints (1.4) are equivalent to the
sequence of intertemporal budget constraints
~

Et

{~t,,[~’p,(~)d;(z)dz

+

-~;l}

T=t

m

—

<

~

Et

{Rt,TbT(j)YT(j)~z

-

~Tl}+ ~;

(1.6)

T=t

looking forward from each date t, where it denotes the nominal
riskless one-period nominal bond purchased in period t, i.e,,
1 + it= [Et{

interest

rate on a

Rt,t+l}]-l.

(The second term on the left-hand side of (1.6) represents the interest lost each period
as the cost of holding some of the household’s wealth in non-interest-earning
assets. )
Let us now define a monopolistically competitive equilibrium for an economy made
up of households of the sort just described. It is clear that an optimizing household
allocates its consumption spending across alternative differentiated goods at date t
so as to minimize the total expenditure required to achieve a given value of the index
C:. Given (1.2), expenditure minimization requires that
~(z) =

c: Pt(z)
~ ‘e

()

(1,7)

for each good z, (It will be observed that the required minimum expenditure
is
just PtC~, where Pt is the index defined in (1.3).) Let us suppose furthermore that
the government has a constant-el~ticityof-substitution
production function of the
form (1.2) for the supply of public goods ;then if the government also allocates its
expenditure so as to minimize the cost of producing a supply of public goods Gt, it
will allocate its expenditure in the same proportions as do consumers. It follows that
total demand for a good j is given by

Yt(j)

= Yt

()
Pt(j)
—

P~

‘e
‘

(1.8)

where
Yt = Ct + Gt,

(1.9)

5See Woodford (1994) for discussion of the type of borrowing limit that will work, and of the
equivalence between the flow and intertemporal budget constraints in the presence of such a limit.
6

and Ct a j; C$dh is an index of aggregate demand at date t.
We suppose that the household makes its own pricing and spending decisions taking as given those of the other households. Because its own prices and goods demands
make only a negligible contribution to the indices Pt and Yt respectively, it therefore
treats the paths of these two variables as given in making its own decisions. Hence,
in deciding upon the price to set for each of its own goods (j, z), it takes as given
that its sales each period will depend upon the price charged in the way indicated
by (1.8), where Pt and Yt are parameters that it cannot affect through its own decisions. Given a specification of monetary and fiscal policy, a rational expectations
equilibrium with monopolistic competition is then a specification of stochastic processes such that each household chooses the prices for the goods that it supplies, its
consumption spending, and its portfolio of money and other assets, so as to solve the
maximization problem just stated, given the evolution of {Pt, Yt, Tt } and the rates
of return on financial assets; such that the indices {Pt, Yt} are determined by (1,3)
and (1. 9), given individual households’ decisions; and such that the net demand for
all financial assets, including money, by private households equals the supply of such
assets by the government. G We proceed to derive a set of equilibrium conditions that
characterize such an equilibrium.
Note that because households have identical preferences, and because complete
cent ingent claims markets are assumed to exist, if households start with identical
initial wealth, they will choose to completely pool their idiosyncratic income risk
(due to setting prices at different dates), maintaining identical wealth levels at all
times, and choosing identical consumption plans and money balances. The sense in
which we assume identical initial wealth levels is not that W; is the same for all j,
but rather that the entire right-hand side of (1.6) has an identical value for each j.
(Households with a lower present value of expected revenues, because of initial goods
prices p-1 (j) that are farther from being optimal, are assumed to have a larger value
of W; to compensate for this – exactly because they had insured themselves against
that misfortune. ) Because it simplifies the characterization of equilibrium, we assume
symmetric initial conditions of that kind. Equilibrium then involves identical values
of c:, Mj, and so on for all j; and so we drop the superscript j in referring to these
variables from now on.
Under standard boundary assumptions on household preferences, necessary and
sufficient conditions for an optimal consumption and portfolio plan for the representative household are (i) that
~T_tu’(YT) P,
~t =
—.
=
u’ (Y~)P~
‘

(1.10)

‘This combination of market power with non-strategic behavior represents the sense in which the
equilibrium is “monopolistically competitive”,

7

foranydate

tandany

subsequent

date T; (ii) that
7J’(M~/P~) =

it
l+a~

u’(Y~)

(1.11)

at each date t; and (iii) that the intertemporal budget constraint (1.6) for date O holds
with equality, In writing the household’s first-order conditions in the forms (1.10) –
(1.11), I have used (1.9). Note also that (1.10) implies that the short-term riskless
interest rate it must satisfy
(1.12)
Finally, it
with equality
(1.6) for each
households j

E
T=t

‘t

can be shown that condition (iii) implies that (1.6) must similarly hold
at each date t. Because of complete risk-pooling, the right-hand side of
household takes the same value, which must equal the integral over all
of the expression given in (1.6). Thus one must have

{Rt,T[pTcT

+

&

MT]}

=

~m
T=t

Et {Rt,~[p~yT – TT]} + Mt-l + Bt,

(1.13)

where now Mt denotes the money supply at the end of period t, and Bt the nominal
value of net government debt at the beginning of period t. Given that net government
debt evolves in accordance with the flow budget constraint for the government,
Et[Rt,t+lBt+l] = Bt + PtAt – (Mt – Mt-l)
for each t z O, where At a Gt – (T’/Pt) is the real primary deficit, condition
is equivalent to the transversality condition
lim Et[Rt,TW~] = 0,

(1.14)
(1.13)

(1.15)

T-m

Next, let us consider the household’s optimal pricing decisions, in its capacity
as supplier of certain of the differentiated goods. Recall that the household expects
to sell a quantity of each good each period given by (1.8). Now suppose that the
household is able to set a new price for its good at date t. The price applies in period
t with certainty, in period t + 1 with probability a, in period t + 2 with probability
a2, and so on. This price p is therefore chosen to maximize
~

a’

{At~t[~t,t+,pyt+k(~)]
- @kEt[W(gt+k(~))]}
,

k=O

where yT (p) denotes the demand at date T indicated by (1.8), and At denotes the
marginal utility for the household of additional money income at date t. (Because the
revenues from the sale of an individual good z make only an infinitesimal contribution
8

to the household’s total intertemporal budget constraint (1.7), one can treat At as a
constant for purposes of this decision. )
The optimal choice Tt satisfies the first-order condition
~

ak~t{R,,t+,fi+~(Pt/~t+~
)-e[pt-

Pst+k,t]}

=

0,

(1.16)

k=O

where p G & > 1 is the factor by which price exceeds marginal revenue as a result
of the household’s market power, and S~,t denotes the marginal cost of production at
date T of a good the price of which was set at t, given by
sTt =

W’(YT(Pt/PT)-o)
U’(YT)

~T

(1.17)

Note that condition (1. 16) says, in effect, that the price Pt is given by a desired
markup p times a weighted average, over future dates and states in which the price
may still apply, of the household’s expected marginal cost of supplying its good. One
observes that the optimal price ‘P~ is the same for all goods the prices of which are
changed at date t. Equation (1.3) then implies that the price index {Pt } evolves
according to
P~ = [aP:_-: + (1 – Q)P;-@]*.
(1.18)
This completes the set of conditions that must be satisfied by a rational expectations equilibrium. Equations (1.9) – (1.13) constitute the “aggregate demand block’
of the model. These equations determine the evolution of asset holdings, private
consumption demand, aggregate demand, and rates of return, given a path for prices
{~,} and monetary and fiscal policy. (In the case of a flexible-price Sidrauski-Brock
model, as treated in Woodford (1995), these equations determine the equilibrium
price level {Pt }, given an exogenous specification of aggregate supply {Y~}; but here
it is most useful to think of them as determining aggregate demand {Yt} given the
path of prices. ) Equivalently, the aggregate demand block may be given by equations
(1.9) - (1.12) and (1.14) - (1.15).
Equations (1.16) - (1. 18) then comprise the “aggregate supply block” of the model.
These equations determine the evolution of marginal costs, new prices {Pt }, and the
price index {Pt }, given the variation in aggregate demand. Note that in the flexibleprice limit (the case a = O), (1.16) becomes simply Pt = ySt,tl and (1.18) simply
Pt = Pt. Hence in this case, equilibrium requires that Yt = Y* for all t, where Y* is
the solution to
U’(Y*) = pw’(Y*),
(1.19)
regardless of the path of prices. But when a > 0, it is possible for output to deviate
from its “potential” level Y*; this, however, must be associated with a discrepancy
between Pt and Pt, and hence with prices changing over time.
These two groups of equations comprise a complete general equilibrium model.
We turn now to the effects of fiscal policy upon macroeconomic equilibrium.
9

2

Fiscal Policy as a Source of Macroeconomic Instability

In order to illustrate how, in the absence of any constraints upon fiscal policy, stochastic variation in the government’s budget can interfere both with price stability and
with macroeconomic stability more generally, even under such ultra-Ricardian
assumptions as have been made above, I shall here restrict attention to a simple case.
This is the case in which the real primary deficit {At} follows an exogenous stochastic
process; neither the accumulated level of the public debt, nor other variables such as
the rate of inflation or the level of interest rates, have any effect upon it. Under
this assumption, one can show not only that innovations in the deficit process may
disturb the paths of inflation, interest rates, and output. Rather, one can show that
in the case of almost any such process, fiscal disturbances must have such an effect,
regardless of the nature of monetary policy.
This is easily shown by contradiction.
Suppose that a monetary policy rule exists which results in stable prices, despite exogenous fluctuations in the government
budget. Because of (1.18), an equilibrium with stable prices would have to involve
Tt = P, at all times. It then follows that substitution of (1.10) and (1.17) into (1.16)
yields an equilibrium condition of the form

where
e(Y) = Y[U’(Y) – pw’(Y)]
Now it follows from the definition of Ot that

hence (2, 1) implies that 13(Yt)= O at all times. It is easily seen that this requires that
Yt = Y* at all times, where Y* is defined by (1.19). It then follows from (1.12) that
it is constant at all times, and from (1.11) that M~ is constant at all times as well,
Substituting
these constant values, together with (1.9) - (1. 10), into (1. 13), the
latter equilibrium condition reduces to
m* – bt = Wt/P*,

(2.2)

where P* is the constant price level, m* is the constant level of real money balances
sat isfying (1.11), Wt is the beginning-of-period
financial wealth defined by (1.5), and
al
(2.3)

10

memures the present value of curent and future primary deficits, using the discount
factors (1. 10) associated with such an equilibrium. But note that Wt is a predetermined state vmiable. If the government issues only riskless one-period nominal bonds
(as assumed in the simulations below), then B, (the nominal value at the beginning
of period t of bonds issued in period t – 1) is a predetermined variable, and so is Wt.
But even if the government issues indexed debt or long-term debt, the market value
of such debt at the beginning of period t cannot depend upon any fiscal innovation at
date t, given that (by hypothesis) the price level never changes and (by implication)
the discount factors {Rt,~} never change. 7 It then follows from (2.2) that a fiscal
shock at date t can never change the expected value of the present value of future
government budget deficits, C5t,either. Thus a fiscal policy that implies random variations in that variable (as in the case of most exogenous stochastic processes {At})
is necessarily inconsistent with price stability, regardless of the form of the monetary
policy rule. 6
Now it might be supposed that this inconsistency with a zero-inflation equilibrium
reflects the fact that such a fiscal policy is inconsistent with any rational expectations
equilibrium – in other words, it might be supposed that I have postulated an “unsustainable” fiscal policy, But this is not so, or at any rate not necessarily; for many
specifications of monetary policy, the assumption of an exogenous primary deficit is
consistent with equilibrium, though the resulting equilibrium necessarily does not involve stable prices. To illustrate this possibility, I further specify the policy regime.
First, I shall assume that monetary policy is formulated in terms of a feedback rule
for short-term nominal interest rates, of the form
it =

@(7r~,Yt),

(2.4)

where nt - Pt/P~_ 1 measures the rate of inflation, and Yt is the index of aggregate
activity defined in (1.9). 9 Note that this represents an autonomous monetary policy,
in the sense that the central bank’s choice of its policy instrument is not conditioned
upon the size of the public debt, or any other fiscal variables; the central bank responds only to changes in the rate of ifiation, and to the level of real activity (which
it may care about, if only because this indicates inflationary pressure because of (1. 16)
- (1. 17)). Thus the effects of fiscal shocks demonstrated below do not result from any
intent ion of the central bank to “monetize” the public debt, or to meet a seignorage
target that vmies with the government’s budget deficit. Second, I shall assume that
the government issues only riskless, one-period nominal debt. As a result, Bt is a
7Here it is assumed, of course, that the amount that the government
its debt is not itself contingent upon subsequent fiscal shocks.
Sone cm think of non-trivi~ stochastic processes for which d~ never

commits itself to pay on

varies, such ss At = ~t—

process.But these are extremely special cases.
‘Many central banks appear to implicitly determine their policies ~cording to an interest rate
rule of this general type; see, e.g., Taylor (1993), Clarida and Gertler (199.5).
P- lEt-I,for {ct } another stationary stochastic

11

predetermined

state variable at date t, that evolves according to the law of motion
Bt+l = (1+ zt)[Bt + ptAt –

(~t – ~t-1)],

(2.5)

given the initial conditions B. and M-1. (This is simply the form taken by (1.14)
under this particular assumption about the nature of government debt. ) Neither of
these special assumptions is necessary in order for the exogenous deficit policy to be
sustainable; but some assumptions must be made in order to compute the equilibrium,
and these are intended to be relatively realistic for advanced industrial nations with
low average rates of ifiation.
To demonstrate the consistency of such a policy mix with rational expectations
equilibrium, it suffices to consider equilibria in which all state variables follow paths
that are close to the values they would have in a stationary deterministic equilibrium.
Such equilibria can exist in the case of stochastic disturbances (in the present case,
stochastic variation in the government budget), if these disturbances are small enough;
we shall restrict attention here to that case. In order to characterize equilibria of this
kind, it suffices to consider a linearization of the system of equilibrium conditions set
out in section 1, with the linearization performed around the stationary values of the
state variables that represent an equilibrium in the absence of disturbances.
Let us suppose that “the absence of disturbances”
means some constant level
of real primary deficit A*, and. a determinist ic feedback rule of the form (2.4) for
monetmy policy. Let us suppose furthermore that the rule (2.4) is such that (i)
@(l, Y*) = ~-1 – 1, and that (ii) A* <0 (i.e., there is a constant primary surplus
in the absence of disturbances).
These conditions are necessary for the policy regime
in the absence of disturbances to be consistent with complete price stability (zero
inflation with certainty), assuming that the initial government debt B. is positive.
Given them, one can show that such a stationary equilibrium exists, with a constant
level of output Y* (defined in (1.19)) of all goods, and a constant nominal interest
rate of Z*= ~-1 – 1.
Under this specification of policy, the aggregate demand block of the model reduces
to the system of equations (1,11) – (1.12) and (2,4) – (2.5) each period, to be solved
for the paths of {K, it, “M,, Bt+l} from period t = O onward, given the path of {Pt},
the exogenous process {At }, and the initial conditions Bo, M_l, P_l. 10 We may
linearize these equations in terms of the deviations of the variables m, [a Mt/Pt],
Yt, it, nt, At, and bt[s Bt/Pt_l], from their stationary values, denoted m“, Y*, and
so on. It is useful to write the equations in terms of “deflated” variables such as
mt and bt because no equilibrium conditions actually involve the absolute levels of
nominal variables, as opposed to their ratios. And as we shall see, there very generally
exists an equilibrium in which the “deflated” variables, including Xt, vary only a small
amount around their stationary values, while the price level (and, correspondingly,
10Note that we may iaore

condition (1.15), as we are in any

event considering

onlY

solutions

in which interest rates, inflation, and real financial wealth remain forever near their stationary
equilibrium paths, in any of which (1.15) will necessarily be satisfied.

12

other nominal quantities) may eventually drift far from any given value (following
a random walk with small conditional variance over any short horizon, but large
variance over long enough horizons). The value of government debt is deflated by the
previous period’s price level so that bt, like Bt, is a predetermined
state variable at
date t.
The linearized aggregate demand block is given by 11
tit

x[a-lYt– (p/l – B)it],

=

Y~=

(2.6)

EtYt+l– O(it
– Etfit+l),

(2.7)

and
Bt+l = it + p-l(bt

– it) + (0-1 – l)At + ~(fit-1

– fit – fit),

(2.9)

.

where fit, Yt, ~t,fit, ~t denote percentage deviations of mt, Yt, 1 + Zt, ~t, and bt respectively from their stationary values, and At - (A* – At)/ A*. (The alternative definition for At is used so that At has the same sign as At, and so that At is defined even
if the sign of At is not the same as that of A*. ) The coefficients of these equations
are written in terms of the preference parameters 12
U’(Y*)

x~–

o = –U’’(Y*)Y* ‘

v’(m”)
v“(m”)m”’

the monetary policy parameters #T, @V,indicating
to its two arguments, and the parameter

the elasticities

of @ with respect

m“

indicating the relative importance of money and bonds in overall financial wealth.
One may similarly linearize the aggregate supply block of the model, equations
(1.16) - (1.18), obtaining
m
@t = (1 –

a~)

t+k

~(o!@)kEt{~t+k,~
+ ~ i,},

(2.10)

g=t+l

k=O

(2.11)
and
(2.12)
llThese equations represent linearization of (1.11), (1.12), (2.4), and (2.5) respectively.
12The parameter a me~ures the elasticity of substitution between consumption at different dates;
x measures the elasticity of the demand for money with respect to the “cost” it/1 + it of holding
money balances.

13

where @~denotes the percentage deviation of Tt/Pt from its stationary
and ~~,t denotes the percentage deviation of ST,t/1’T from its stationary
In (2.11), use is made of the additional preference parameter 13
_

value (one),
value (1/M).

W’(Y*)

u = W“(Y”)Y*”
These equations may be reduced to a single “aggregate supply curve” as follows.
Substituting
(2. 11) into (2. 10) and rearranging terms, one obtains

k=l

‘—uk=O

where
(1-a)

~~

(l-ap)

U+a

QThis may equivalently

O(ti + e)”

be expressed in the qumi-differenced

form 14
(2.13)

Substituting
obtains

(2. 12) into (2. 13) in order to eliminate
fit = pEtfit+l + KYt

the variable

{@t}, one finally
(2.14)

as an equation to determine the equilibrium path of inflation associated with a given
path of deviations {Yt} of output from potential output Y*. Note that equation (2,14)
represents a form of expectations-augmented
“Phillips curve”. 15
Our complete equation system then cons~sts of equations (2.6) - (2.9) and (2.14),
to be solved for the p~ths of {fit, ~, it, tit, bt} given an exogenous process for {At}
and initial conditions 60 and h– 1. In considering the solution of this system, it is
useful to rewrite (2.9) as

where

m
,A

~t

=

(1 – P) ~D3EtAt+j
j=l)

measures the percentage deviation of the variable bt defined in (2.3) from its steadystate value. It is also useful to eliminate the state variable it by substituting
(2.8)
13The parameter u indicates what the elasticity of supply of a price-taking household would be
to a change in the price at which it could sell one of the goods that it produces.
14The two forms are equivalent given that we care only about bounded solutions, and given that
Iap[ <1.
15S= Roberts (1995) for econometric support for this specification in the case of the U,S. economy.

14

into the other equations. The resulting
can be written in vector form as

system of four stochastic

difference equations

Etzt+l = Mzt,

(2.16)

where the vector of state variables Zt is the transpose
z:=

[*,

Z

h,-,

t,+

of
8,],

and M is a 4 x 4 matrix of coefficients. In. rewriting the equations in this form, it is
to be understood that Etfit = fit, and Etbt+l = ~t+l,
As usual, the existence or not of a unique bounded solution for the vector of
state variables {zt}, given an arbitary bounded forcing process {At}, depends upon
the number of eigenvalues of the matrix M that lie inside the unit circle (see, e.g.,
Blanchard and Kahn, 1980). Specifically, since there are two predetermined
state
variables, local determinacy of the rational expectations equilibrium depends upon
their being exactly two such eigenvalues, 16 Note that M may be w-ritten in block
form as 17
M_AO
—
() CD’
where each block is 2 x 2. Because of the block triangularity, the eigenvalues
are just the two eigenvalues of A and the two eigenvalues of D. Since
D=oo

() 7

8-1

of A4

‘

two of the eigenvalues are O and ~-1, and since O < ~ <1, only the first of these lies
inside the unit circle. Thus determinacy requires that the block A have one stable
and one unstable eigenvalue as well. It can be shown that this condition is satisfied
if and only if 18
(2.17)
16Technically, this result depends upon certain generically valid regularity conditions, that I do not
further discuss here. Numerical solution of the model indicates that these conditions are typically
satisfied in the present c~e. For discussion of a general approach to solution of a broader class of
models, see King and Watson (1995).
171nthis form, the four rows of the vector of equations correspond to equations (2.14), (2.7), (2.6),
and (2.9) respectively. Equation (2.8) is first substituted into the last three equations to eliminate
the interest rate, and equation (2. 14) is substituted into (2.7) to eliminate Etfit+l from the second
equation.
lsNote that in the flefibl~price
]imit(K + m), these conditions come to coincide with those

found by Leeper (1991), i.e., that I@=
I <1, Leeper calls monetary policies satisfying this require
ment “passive”. This condition is required for existence of a bounded solution because, in Leeper’s
terminology, our ~sumption of an exogenous process for the primary deficit is an example of an
“Mtive” fiscal policy.

15

Note that a pure interest rate peg (@== @g= O) satisfies these requirements, as will
any policy of the form (2.4) that involves sficiently
moderate responses of nominal
interest rates to changes in the rate of inflation and economic activity,
If the monetary policy rule satisfies conditions (2.17), a unique solution to equations (2. 16) can be found, in which bounded fluctuations in the path of the government
deficit lead to bounded fluctuations
in the other variables. The solution can be written
.
in the form tit = (mz~, Yt = ~Vz~,where
.
.
Zt = b~+b~ +~~fit.1,
with the evolution

of the state variable {zt } given by
Zt+1 = Az~+

[;t+l– Et8t+l]
,

where A is the eigenvalue of A with modulus less than one. These equations describe
a unique bounded solution for the variables {fit, Yt}, given an exogenous bounded
process {$t}, Equations (2.6) and (2.8) – (2.9) then imply unique bounded paths for
the variables {it, tit, ~t} as well.
One observes that disturbances to the path of the real primary deficit {At}, and
hence to the path of the public debt, will in general result in disturbances to the
paths of itiation,
interest rates, and output. Note, however, that a fiscal shock at
date t affects ifiation,
interest rates or output at that date - or the conditional
expectation at date t of future values of any of these variables – only if it changes the
expect ed present value of future government deficits ~t. What determines whether a
fiscal shock is expansionary or contractionary is the sign of its effect upon ;t, rather
than its effect upon the current deficit At alone.
The effects of a disturbance to the value of ;t may usefully be illustrated by numerical solution of the model. 19 In Figures 1 and 2, impulse responses are reported for a
20% positive innovation in the size of the real primary deficit, under the assumption
that the deficit follows an exogenous, stationary first-order autoregressive process
At = pAt-1 + v~,
where {vt } is an i. i.d. random variable wit h“mean zero and bounded support, and
[pl <1. In these simulations, the model parameters are given the values@= .95, ~ =
and~=
.1. 20 The serial correlation coefficient for the deficit
.3,0 = l,x=l,
lgThe program of King and Watson (1995) is used in computing the impulse responses reported
in Figures 1 and 2.
‘“The value assumed for ~ implies a rate of time preference of 5% per year, a value that is
roughly consistent with observed real rates of return. The value assumed for ~ is consistent with
the econometric estimates of Roberts (1995). The value ~sumed for o is the one that would
result if u(C) = log C, and implies an intertemporal elasticity of substitution of consumption of
1; this value is standard in calibrated grotih models. The value assumed for x is the one that
would result if v(m) = log m, and implies an income elasticity of money demand of one; this value
is roughly consistent with many studies of money demand, especially ones that emphaske lowfrequency movements in money demand. The value assumed for -y is roughly consistent with the
relative sizes of the monetary b~e and the government debt of the U.S,
16

process is assumed to be p = ,6. In Figure 1, nominal interest rates are assumed not
to be adjusted much in response to variations in inflation and economic activity; the
parameters of the monetary policy rule (3.4) are assumed to be @r = @v= .1.
The six panels of Figure 1 display the impulse responses of real output (Y~), the
inflation rate (fit), the short-term nominal interest rate (it), the ex-ante real rate
(;, - E, fi,+l), the real government debt (6,), and the real primary deficit (~,), The
periods represent years, and zero indexes the year in which the innovation to the
deficit process occurs. The lower right panel indicates the exogenous rate of mean
reversion assumed for the primary deficit. Because {bt} is a predetermined
state
variable, there is no response of this variable until the following period; the other
variables jump immediately when the shock occurs, then return gradually to their
steady-state values.
One observes that the unexpected increase in the primary deficit, not offset by
any expected reduction in future primmy deficits, stimulates aggregate demand, temThis shows that “Ricardian equivaporarily increasing both inflation and output.
lence” does not hold here, despite the assumptions of rational expectations, identical
ifinite-lived
households, pure lump-sum taxation, and frict ionless financial markets,
and despite the fact that the monetary policy rule (2. 4) does not imply any direct
dependence of monetary policy upon fiscal variables. The reason why an increase in
the present value of government budget deficits (at the prices and interest rates that
would otherwise clear markets) increases aggregate demand is simple. An increase
in the present value of the government deficit increases the present value of “total
consumption” that the representative household can afford, if prices and interest rates
do not change, and thus induces an increase in the aggregate demand for goods (at
those given prices). 21 Nor can an increase in output relative to potential, by itself,
succeed in restoring equality between demand and supply in the goods market. For
increased sales mean increased incomes (as Keynes observed), and so as long as the
value of government liabilities exceeds the present value of expected government budget surpluses, households will be able to tiord “total consumption” with a present
value greater than the present value of the economy’s output. Equilibrium therefore
requires adjustment of prices and/or interest rates so as to preserve equality between
the value of outstanding government liabilities and the present value of future government surpluses (counting seignorage income).
This equality may be restored through adjustments of three sorts. First, due to the
endogeneity of the money supply under a policy regime of the kind specified in (2.4),
seignorage revenues may increase, as the money supply expands to accommodate the
increased demand w a result of inflation. Second, given the existence of nominal
government debt, unexpected itiation
as a result of the fiscal shock may reduce the
21The existence of this wealth effect depends upon the fact that the assumed fiscal policy does not
have the “Ricardian” property discussed in the next section, and implicitly ~sumed in the literature
on Ricardian equivalence.

17

blr=+~=.l.
Output Level

Inflation Rate
1.4

‘“2~
1

1.

0.8 “

0.8 “
0.6 “
0.6 .
0.4 -

0.4 .

0.2 -

0.2 “
i

0

o

0246810

?
0246810
Public Debt

Nominal Interest
U.5

0“25~
0.2 -

0.4

0.15 .

0.3

0.1 “

0.2

0.05 .

0.1

0

0

0246810

0

2

Real Interest

4

6

8

10

8

10

Primary Deficit
20

15
-0.2
I

10

-0.3
5

-0.4
.05~

k
0246810

0

0

24

6

real value of outstanding government liabilities. 22 And third, a reduction in the real
interest rate that must be paid on government debt allows the government to service
its debt (even without a drop in its real value) with smaller primary surpluses.
Both increased inflation and lower real interest rates naturally occur in the present
model, as a result of the increase in aggregate demand; and the extent to which demand actually increases, in equilibrium, is exactly the extent that suffices to produce
a capital loss and a real interest rate decline that suffice to prevent households from
being able to afford more goods than the economy supplies. Unexpected inflation occurs as a direct result of increased demand for goods; output above potential implies
a “marginal cost” higher than v -1 times the general price index, so that the prices of
goods that are newly set at the time of the shock (Tt) are set higher than the index of
existing prices (Pt_l ), result ing in inflation. The monetary policy rule assumed here
implies that nominal interest rates are raised as a result of both higher output and
inflation; but they are not raised as much as the increase in itiation,
and the ex ante
real rate declines. This does not require any violation of the equilibrium relation that
must exist between the real rate of interest and households’ int ert emporal marginal
rate of substitution. Because of the price adjustment that eventually occurs, output
does not remain above potential forever. The fact that it is temporarily high means
that real interest rates must fall, so as to induce households to consume a relatively
greater amount in the period immediately following the fiscal shock.
In the simulation reported, a 20% unexpected increme in the primary government
budget deficit results in a 1% increase in itiation
(i.e., from zero to 1% per year),
and slightly more than a l~o increase in real GDP. Nominal interest rates rise by
only a little more than 20 basis points, implying a decline in the real rate of more
than 40 basis points. The capital loss on existing nominal government liabilities due
to the increased inflation is not sufficient to prevent an increase in the real value of
outstanding
government debt at the beginning of year 1. (Some of the increase in
the value of government debt in the hands of the public also comes about due to the
sale of government debt by the central bank, in the open market operations through
which it raises nominal int crest rates. ) The real government debt declines back to its
steady-state level over the next several years, however, both as a result of increased
seignorage revenues, and w a result of the decreased real interest rates at which the
government is able to roll over its debt in those years.
Figure 2 shows how the outcome differs if the central bank is more aggressive about
increasing nominal interest rates when inflation accelerates. All model parameters are
the same as in Figure 1 (including the assumed serial correlation of the deficit process),
except that the parameters of the monetary policy rule are now O. = .9, #V = ,5. 23
22This is the channel emphasized in the flexible-price model discussed in Woodford (1995); only
these first two channels are operative in that model.
23These values are close to the upper bound given in (2.17), for existence of an equilibrium in which
all state variables remain forever near their steady-state values, so that our linearization technique
can be used.

18

Output Level

Inflation Rate
2.1
2-

0’4~
0.38

1.9 -

0.36 “

1.8 -

0,34 .

1.7 -

0.32 “

1.6 -

0.3 -

1.5 -

0,28 “

1.41
0

20

40

60

0.26 I
o

20

Nominal Interest

40

60

Public Debt

2.1

61

2

5-

1.9

4

1,8
3
1.7
2

1.6

1

1.5
1.4

0

-1.4

x

20

10-3

40

60

o

0

20

40

60

20

40

60

Real Interest
20

-1.6

15

-1.8
10
-2
5

-2.2
.24

\

~
o

20

40

60

0
0

As a result of this kind of monetary policy, the increase in inflation results in only
a small decline in the real interest rate on government debt. But the consequence
is simply that inflation increases to a greater extent, and that it remains high for a
much longer time. The real government debt grows by much more under this policy,
because the central bank must sell much more government debt to the public in order
to raise interest rates. And because the central bank prevents the real rate of interest
from declining much, it takes a very long time for the real government debt to return
to its steady state level. (For the period of 60 years plotted in the figure, the debt
level remains far from steady state over the entire period.) Thus an attempt on the
part of the central bank to keep nominal interest rates more closely aligned with
inflation does not prevent a pure fiscal shock from disturbing the paths of inflation,
int crest rates, and output – in fact, as far m inflation and nominal interest rates are
concerned, it greatly increases the volatility of these variables resulting from a given
degree of volatility of the fiscal shocks {vt}.
The finding that an exogenous primary deficit can force an increase in the rate
of itiation – and even more, the finding that a less accommodative monetary policy
results in more, rather than less, inflation under such circumstances – recalls the
much-discussed
“unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” of Sargent and Wallace (1981).
My argument here is indeed very much in the spirit of theirs. Yet a number of novel
features of the analysis are worth emphasizing.
One is that Sargent and Wallace’s analysis assumes an upper bound upon the size
of the real government debt, presumably to be justified (in terms of the overlapping
generations model that they discuss) by the maximum quantity of resources that a
young generation can possibly transfer in order to acquire the public debt from its
elders. It might then be suspected that their analysis should not apply to an economy
in which wealth is passed on to subsequent generations through bequests. But here
we obtain similar results for an economy made up of infinite-lived households (which
we may understand to represent families made up of successive finite-lived households
linked by altruistic bequests, as in the model of Barre, 1974), and no limit upon the
size that the public debt may reach is assumed. In fact, as is discussed in the next
section, the result that fiscal shocks force the price level to increase actually depends,
in a sense, upon the fact that the government is not constrained to keep the level
of the public debt within any upper bound ~ for this is what allows a violation of
Ricardian equivalence.
A more important difference is that in Sargent and Wallace’s analysis, an exogenous primmy deficit causes inflation because the central bank is sooner or later forced
to monetize it. Many macroeconomists
feel that this scenario is unlikely in a lowinflation country, 24 First, Sargent and Wallace depict monetary policy as eventually
being subordinated
to the need to achieve a particular level of real seignorage revenues. But many find it unlikely that this would ever become the main consideration
in setting monetary policy in a low-idation
country, given that seignorage revenues
ZdKing (1995) c]early expresses this common View.

19

make such a small average contribution to government revenues in such countries. In
addition, Sargent and Wallace depict this = coming about because the central bank
is constrained to choose a policy that is consistent with the government’s fiscal needs,
a a result of its being a Stackelberg “follower”, or the party that flinches in a “game
of chicken” between the monetary and fiscal authorities.
This suggests that a sufficiently independent central bank can avoid such consequences, if it credibly commits
itself in advance to a monetary policy rule that ignores the size of the public debt, so
that it becomes the Stackelberg “leader”. 25
The analysis here shows that the inflationary consequences of an exogenous fiscal
policy cannot be so easily dismissed. In the model presented above, the central bank
does commit itself in advance to an autonomous monetary policy rule (described by
equation (2. 4)), and it is never forced to deviate from that policy. The inflationary
effects of an increased primary deficit come about, not because the central bank
changes its policy, but as a result of the effects of government fiscal policy on private
spending decisions (through the wealth effect discussed above). Thus mere confidence
in the independence of a country’s central bank (or that of the proposed European
central bank) or in its single-minded concern with inflation is not sufficient ground
to exclude the possibility of inflationary pressures resulting from fiscal policy shocks.
Not only is the central bank’s policy not geared to the achievement of a seignorage
target in these simulations, but the creation of seignorage revenues is not essential to
the mechanism through which inflation restores the equilibrium that is disturbed by
an exogenous increase in the primary deficit. Integration of (2.15) forward in time
yields
(2.18)
j=o

j=ll

where ~t - fit —tit– 1 + fit denotes the percentage deviation in the rate of growth of
the nominal money supply (Mt/filt-l ). Fiscal shocks that change the present value
of government budget deficits (at what would otherwise be the equilibrium rates of
return) – i.e., that perturb it – are possible in equilibrium, because of the possibility
of simultaneous
adjustment
of each of the three terms on the right-hand side of
(2.18). These three terms correspond to the three channels of adjustment discussed
above: reduction in the real value of existing nominal government debt by unexpected
ifiation, increased seignorage revenues, and a reduced real debt service burden of the
exist ing government debt, respectively.
In the simulation reported in Figure 1, ~t increases by 2.33%; this is balanced
by an increase in the first term on the right-hand side of 1.01%, an increase in the
25For example, Buiter et al. (1993) discuss the argument that Ma~tricht treaty’s fiscal norms are
needed for a European monetary union on the ground that “the new ECB [European Central Bank]
will effectivelybe forced to monetize the budget deficits of countries without fiscal discipline,” They
argue that “the possibility seems remote. The Treaty is very clear about the ‘independence’ of the
ECB, the primacy of the goal of ‘price stability’, and the elimination of any privileged financing of
budget deficits by the ECB” (p. 80).

20

second term of 0.22%, and an increase in the third term on the right-hand side of
1.10% . Thus only arather small part of the total adjustment (nine percent of the
total adjustment, in this simulation) comes about through an increase in seignorage
revenues. The true fiscal significance of inflation – and hence the true reason why an
exogenous primary deficit results in inflation in equilibrium – in the case of parameter
values like these ones (intended to be realistic for a low-inflation country) relates
instead to the capital losses that unexpected inflation causes on nominal government
debt, and to the reduced debt service burden resulting from lower real interest rates.
Indeed, if we assume that the monetary base is negligible as a share of total government liabilities (by setting ~ = O in the above calculations), the simulation reported
in Figure 1 is changed very little, t bough in this limiting case inflation results in no
contribution to the government budget through seignorage revenues. In fact, leaving
the other parameter values unchanged, the predicted increase in inflation in the first
year is only slightly larger than in Figure 1 (about 1.lYo), and its persistence is also
similar to that shown in Figure 1. Thus the mechanisms at work in these simulations
are fully consistent with the fact that seignorage revenues are an unimportant
part
of government finances in low-inflation countries, and that monetary policy is not in
fact made with seignorage revenues in mind.

3

Constraints on the Public Debt and Fiscal Policy Neutrality

The results of the previous section allow an answer to the question posed in the title
of this paper. Control of the government’s budget is necessary for price stability, in
a certain sense. It is not necessary for either the government budget deficit or the
size of the public debt to be constant over time (let alone for either of them to be
zero) in order for price stability to be possible; nor has any particular upper bound
for either been shown to be necessary. But it has been shown that variations in the
government budget can easily be a source of disturbances to the rate of inflation, and
to interest rates and real activity as well; in particular, this has been shown to result
if (as can easily be the case) fiscal shocks imply a change in the expected present
value of the government budget over the indefinite future, at what would otherwise
have been equilibrium rates of interest.
In such a case, the fiscal shocks not only
the disturb the price level if monetary policy is not adjusted in response to them; we
have seen that they necessarily disturb the price level, regardless of the nature of the
monetary policy response,
On the other hand, the kind of restrictions upon fiscal policy that are necessary
in order to eliminate this source of macroeconomic instability are, in principle (and
under the various idealized wsumptions made in the model of section 1), not very
severe. In particular, the path of the government budget over any finite horizon does
not matter, as long as households can expect offsetting adjustments
to eventua~ly

21

be made. This is because a “Ricardian equivalence” proposition does hold for this
model, under a particular restriction on the character of fiscal policy.
I shall say that monetary policy is “autonomous” if it is described by an nterestrate rule of the form
(3.1)
it = @(Pt, Yt, Mt, Pt_l, Yt_l, . . .)7
where @does not explicitly depend upon any of the fiscal variables {Bt, Gt, 7“ ~Bt_ 1, . .}
Clearly, we cannot in general expect fiscal shocks to be irrelevant, except under such
an assumption; otherwise, fiscal shocks may affect the economy, if only through their
effects upon monetary policy. ‘G Note that the rule (2.4) considered in the previous
section is an example of an autonomous policy in this sense; but the debt neutrality
result to be stated here applies to a much broader class of monetary policies as well,
including policies that involve a target path for the money supply.
And I shall call fiscal policy “Ricardian” if it is determined by a rule that adjusts
the size of the real primary budget deficit {At} so as to prevent the real value of
outstanding government debt from exploding, regardless of the paths of prices, interest rates, output, or the money supply. (I propose this terminology on the ground
that the assumption that policy is of this kind is implicit in in familiar arguments
for Ricardian equivalence. ) To be precise, the fiscal policy rule is “Ricardian” if it
implies that the path of outstanding government debt {Bt} satisfies
lim Et[Rt,~B~] = O

T~m

(3.2)

regardless of the paths that may be followed by the non-fiscal variables just mentioned.
Under these two stipulations - that monetary policy be autonomous and that
fiscal policy be Ricardian - one can show that the path of the government debt is
irrelevant for the determination of macroeconomic equilibrium, To be precise, the set
of processes {Pt, Yt, it} that constitute a rational expectations equilibrium, given the
monetary policy rule, is independent of the specification of fiscal policy – except for
the stipulation that it is Ricardian – and in particular, is independent of whether or
not the government’s budget varies in certain random states.
The reasoning may be sketched as follows. Given (3.2), equation (1.15) may
equivalently be written
(3.3)
A rational

expectations

equilibrium is then a collection of processes {U, Ct, Gt, Tt, Bt,
Mt, ~t,T,it,Pt,~t,st,T} that SatlSfy eqUatiOnS (1.9) - (1.12), (1.14), (1.16) - (1,18),
(3.1), (3,3), and the fiscal policy rule. 27 Now suppose that {~t, Ct, . ..} represent an
2GSeeAiyagari and Gertler (1985) for an important early discussion of this.
27The &cal policy rule includes a specification of G~ and Ttssfunctions of other current state

variables, and a specification of the composition of the government debt. For example, in the policy
regime considered in section 2, {Gt } is an exogenous stoch~tic process, Ttis equal to Pt times
an exogenously evolving level of real tax collections, and the government debt consists entirely of
riskless, on-period nominal bonds.

22

equilibrium in the case of a particular Ricardian fiscal policy rule. 3, and consider
instead an alternative fiscal policy rule 3’. One
— —can find a rational expectations
equilibrium for 3’ by leaving the processes {Y~,Mt, Rt,~, it, ~t, ~t, ~t,~} unchanged,
and using equations (1.9), (1. 14), and the fiscal policy rule to solve for the implied
evolution of the variables {Ct, Gt, Tt, Bt }, given the processes {~t, tit, . ..}. These
latter equations can in fact be solved for a very general class of fiscal policy rules; and
given such a solution, the remaining equilibrium conditions are necessarily satisfied
as well, since none of them involve the variables {Ct, Gt, Tt, Bt},
Under such circumstances, fiscal policy disturbances cannot be a necessary cause
of price level instability, as in the simulations of section 2. For if price stability is
consistent with any Ricardian fiscal policy – say, with a fiscal policy that results in
zero government debt at all times – then it is consistent with every Ricmdian fiscal
policy, including Ricardian rules that involve random variations in the government
budget and in the path of the public debt, without, however, violating (3.2).
One can furthermore show that in the case of a Ricardian fiscal policy, it is possible
to choose a monetary policy rule (3.1) that is consistent with price stability, even if
household preferences are subject to random variation, and the government budget is
also subject to exogenous stochastic shocks. In order to find a monetary policy that is
consistent with Pt = P* forever (for an arbitrary choice of P“ > O), one simply solves
equations (1.10) – (1.12) and (1.16) – (1.18) for the processes {Yt, Mt, R~,T, it,~~, StIT}
that are consistent with the constant price level P*. (As discussed at the beginning
of section 2, these equations have a unique solution when preferences are not subject
to stochastic disturbances; they will continue to have a solution in the case of a broad
class of disturbances. ) One must verify that the solution satisfies (3.3). (Again, this
is necessarily true in the unperturbed case, and will continue to be true in the case of
a broad class of preference shocks. ) Monetary policy may then be specified by setting
the nominal interest rate {it } equal to the (possibly state-contingent)
process just
solved for (or, alternatively, setting the money supply {Mt } equal to the process just
solved for). The processes {C~, G~, T~,Bt} are then determined by equations (1.9),
(1.14), and the fiscal policy rule, as above.
o
Neither of these two conclusions held in the example of section 2, because the fiscal
policy assumed there (an exogenous stochastic process for the real primary deficit)
was not Ricardian. This does not mean the fiscal policy assumed there necessarily
violates (3, 2); to the contrary, (3.2) holds in the equilibrium that is constructed above.
But the fiscal policy rule is not Ricardian, because it (together with the government’s
flow budget constraint (1.14)) would imply an explosive path for the government debt,
violating (3, 2), under other possible paths of prices and interest rates, that happen
not to be those that obtain in equilibrium – in particular, (3.2) would be violated
in the case of a constant price level, and the associated constant level of interest
rates, which is why this cannot be a rational expectations equilibrium under that
policy. The relevant distinction here, between Ricardian and non-Ricardian
fiscal
policies, is thus not the same w the common distinction between “sustainable” and

23

“unsustainable”
fiscal policies. A non-Ricardian policy is one for which (3.2) does
not hold as an identity, as a consequence of the fiscal policy rule; but there may exist
price-level and interest-rate processes that result in (3.2) being satisfied under such a
policy, and thus a non-Ricardian policy need not be inconsistent with the existence
of rational expectations equilibrium, or a policy that must necessarily be expected to
be abandoned at some future date.
Discussions of Ricardian equivalence generally take (3.2) for granted, and thus
arrive at a fiscal policy neutrality proposition of the kind stated above, without any
qualification as to the nature of fiscal policy. 28 Condition (3.2) is indeed generally
a necessary condition for a rational expectations equilibrium – for it follows from the
transversality condition (1.15) for household optimization, under any regime in which
the government debt is at all times non-negative. But this does not mean that a policy
rule must guarantee that (3. 2) holds in order for that policy rule to be consistent with
existence of an equilibrium. In order for a fiscal policy to be consistent with existence
of an equilibrium, there must be prices and interest rates at which the public would
choose to hold the debt that the government issues, but this need not be true for
all possible prices and interest rates. Under a non-Ricardian fiscal policy rule (that
implies a non-negative public debt), condition (3.2) is an equilibrium condition, but
it is not an identity. 29 As a consequence, fiscal policy is not inevitably neutral in
its effects upon inflation, interest rates and economic activity, though that neutrality
can be assured (under the various idealized assumptions of the model of section 1) if
the government commits itself to ensuring that (3.2) will hold.
What kind of constraint upon the nature of fiscal policy is needed in order to
eliminate the source of macroeconomic instability illustrated in section 2? Plainly,
nothing so severe as annual budget balance is needed. It suffices that fiscal policy
be Ricardian (assuming that households understand this to be the case, and so do
not change their expectations regarding their intertemporal budget constraint (1. 13)
as a result of a disturbance to the government budget in a particular year), and this
is only a constraint upon the asymptotic behavior of the public debt. It thus might
seem that constraints upon the size that deficits or the public debt may reach in the
nem term are completely unjustified as a response to this concern.
However, a government’s commitment to a Ricardian policy cannot easily be made
‘sDiscussions of Ricardian equivalence in monetary economies do generally contain a qualification
regarding the possible effect of fiscal policy upon monetary policy; for example, the proposition
stated by Sargent (1987, Prop. 5.3) applies only to fiscal changes that leave unchanged the path
of the money supply, This, however, is the qualification expressed above in our stipulation that
monetary policy be “autonomous”; Sargent takes (3.2) for granted and is concerned only to exclude
the possibility that a fiscal change affects the price level through its effect upon monetary policy.
But the violation of Rlcardian equivalence illustrated in section 2 is not a consequence of a monetary
policy that allows the money supply to be endogenous (a case not allowed by Sargent’s proposition),
for in fact Ricardian equivalence holds for autonomous monet ary policies more generally, when fiscal
policy is Ricardian.
2gSee Woodford (1995) for further discussion of this issue.

24

credible to the public, if the commitment does not in any way constrain the path of
the public debt over, say, the next twenty years. Thus acceptance of a commitment
to constrain the path of the government budget deficit and/or the level of the public
debt, in the nem term as well as later, is probably necessary in order to obtain the
benefits of fiscal neutrality, even though such a constraint is tighter than would be
necessary for a policy to be Ricardian. 30 In fact, a commitment to a ceiling upon
the real level of the public debt, like the debt guideline set out in the Maastricht
treaty, would seem a plausible way of eliminating the type of fiscal disturbances
illustrated in section 2. On the one hand, such a limit allows considerable variation
from year to year in the degree of government budget balance, as long as deficits in
some years are balanced by a sufficient number of surpluses in other years to keep the
public debt from ever exceeding the ceiling; and since our analysis implies that such
year to year variations in the government’s budget need pose little threat to price
stability, it seems reasonable to allow them (to simplify fiscal planning, to allow for
tax smoothing on efficiency grounds, and – in the context of the European monetary
union – to minimize the necessary interference of the central authority with individual
countries’ fiscal policies. )
On the other hand, a ceiling for the real value of the public debt,
(3.4)
for all t, does suffice to guarantee that (3.2) must hold for many price-level and
interest-rate paths (for example, any in which the real rate of return remains bounded
above zero forever). Under such circumstances,
(3. 2) may not be quite an identity,
but at any rate places only very weak restrictions upon possible equilibrium paths.
In particulm,
a constant price level and the associated constant interest rate (as
discussed at the beginning of section 2) will imply that (3.2) is satisfied, given such
a constraint.
This means that in the model of section 2, with the monetary policy
rule assumed there and a fiscal policy that guarantees that (3.4) holds, a rational
expectations equilibrium will exist with stable prices. 31 Furthermore,
in the case
30The theoretical analysis here gives no grounds for choice among alternative fiscal policy rules
that share the property of being Ricardian; indeed, the irrelevance proposition just stated implies
that, under the idealized ~sumption made here, all such policies are equivalent in their consequences
for price stability and for macroeconomic stability more generally. The practical choice would depend
upon elements abstracted from in this model: reasons for a government to care about policy flexibility
on the one hand, and reaons why it is difficult to establish credibility with the public on the other.
Both of these issues are obviously of considerable importance for practical policy choice, and there
would seem to be a tension between them: for it is e~iest to establish credibility if the government
commits itself to a tough requirement, that thereby allows the government frequent opportunities
to show that it is serious about the commitment. Analysis of this trade-off is beyond the scope of
this paper.
31This does not mean that this is the ody rational expectations equilibrium consistent with such
policies. But the existence of stochastic fluctuations in the government budget from year to year
will not interfere with this equilibrium, and one may suppose that it will be possible under such
circumstances to lead the public to expect prices to be stable.

25

of (a very large class of possible) stochastic disturbances to household preferences,
there will continue to exist a monetary policy rule that makes a rational expectations
equilibrium with stable prices possible, as long as the fiscal policy rule guarantees
(3.4). For in the absence of preference shocks, the discount factors implied by (1.10)
in the case of a constant price level are given by Rt,T = DT–t. Even with preference
shocks, it will continue to be the case, for a large class of such disturbances, that the
implied discount factors satisfy

which is sufficient, together with (3.4), to imply (3.2). 32
Thus a constraint upon fiscal policy is needed, even when the independence of
the central bank is absolute and its concern for price stability undoubted,
if price
stability is to be possible. And while this need not take the form of a ceiling of the
form (3.4) for the growth of the public debt, 33 such a restriction is a simple example
of a rule that should suffice, and that has the advantage of being a commitment that
is easily explained to the public, and that may be observed to affect policy choices
over a finite horizon. In this way, the Maastricht guidelines do eliminate a source of
price level instability that might easily be important in their absence.
This does not, of course, imply that the precise formulation of the guidelines
given in the Maastricht treaty is necessarily the best one. The main reason why the
Maastricht guidelines pose a serious obstacle to many of the signatory nations’ participation in the envisioned monetary union is the limits placed on their public debts
and budget deficits between now and 1999, which in many cases would require severe
fiscal adjustment over a very short time horizon. The required adjustment would
be very painful for these countries, even though in many cases the countries already
project more gradual fiscal adjustments that imply that their policies would satisfy
the transversality condition (3.4), if currently projected government budgets were to
be extrapolated into the future (Uctum and Wickens, 1996). Since our analysis implies that it suffices that governments commit themselves to satisfy (3.4), it provides
no j ustificat ion for the much more onerous requirement of significant adjustment by
1999, except to the extent that immediate adjustment
is necessary in order for a
government to make credible its commitment to the longer-term goal. In particular, this analysis suggests that it would be appropriate to place more stress on the
commitment to control of one’s public debt afier admission to the monetary union
than in the period leading up to formation of the union. 34 The analysis here also
provides no defense for the Maastricht guidelines’ emphasis upon gross as opposed
32Here I assume also that the fiscal policy rule implies non-negative government debt at all times.
33See Bergin (1995) for discussion of other types of fiscal rules that suffice to imply condition (3.2).
34The treaty does provide for monitoring of member countries’ deficits and public debt after the
formation of the union (Kenen, 1995, chap. 4). However, concern is sometimes expressed that the
enforcement provisiona associated with the monitoring that is envisaged after entry into the union
are comparatively weak (Issing, 1995).

26

to net debt, or upon their use of a debt measure that does not count government
pension obligations (aspects of the Maastricht guidelines that are sensibly criticized
by Buiter et al., 1993).

4

Public Debt and Price Stability in a Monetary
Union

Let us now consider the consequences of the above analysis for the design of a monetary union. Suppose that a group of countries use a common cwrency, issued by a
common central bank. Does it suffice for price stability in the union that the common central bank pursue a steady, non-inflationary monetary policy, with fiscal policy
left to the discretion of the individual countries? Or is coordination of fiscal policy
necessary as well?
We can consider this issue in the context of a model of a two-country monetary
union. Suppose, as in section 1, that there is a continuum of households indexed by
j G [0, 1], but that these households are not all taxed by the same government, nor
does the same government supply public goods for all of them. Instead, let households
j E J1 = [0, 1/2] belong to “country 1“, while households j c J2 = (1/2, 1] belong
to “country 2“. The government
of each country i levies lump-sum taxes in the
amount of 2T~ per household in period t, upon each of the households in J~, and
produces public goods in the quantity G~ in period t, which public goods benefit
only the households in Ja. (Note that taxes due per household are 2T~, so that total
of public
tax revenues of government i are T;.) Let the technology for production
goods by each country be the same CES technology as in section 1, so that all of
the goods produced in each country are used by both governments, and the cost of
public goods provision is the same at all times for both governments (and given as
before by the price index Pt defined in (1.3)). Each government issues public debt
denominated in units of the common currency. Finally, let us assume as in section 2
that each government issues only riskless, nominal one-period debt. Let B~(tOt)denote
the nominal value (in units of the common currency) of the public debt of country i
at the beginning of period t, counting both debt in the hands of the public (of either
country) and debt held by the common central bank. This quantity then evolves
according to the flow budget constraint
B~~)

= (1 +i~)~Bt
~ ‘(tot) + PtA;] ,

(4.1)

where it is the common nominal interest rate for both countries, and A; s G: – T’/Pt
is the real primary deficit of country i in period t.
Each household receives liquidity services, as before, from holding the common
currency. This currency is supplied by the central bank in whatever quantity the
households of the two countries wish to hold, at the level of short-term nominal
interest rates fixed by the central bank’s monetary policy. Monetmy policy is again
27

assumed to be described by a policy rule of the form (2,4). The int crest rate is
controlled through exchanges of currency for bundles consisting of an equal quantity
of bonds issued by the two governments; this bundle constitutes the only asset in
terms of which the central bank conducts open market operations. Since the central
bank’s holdings of the two governments’ bonds also earn the same interest rate at all
times, the values of the central bank’s holdings of the two countries’ debt are always
the same. Letting B~(cB) denote the nominal value at the beginning of period t of the
l(c~) = B~(CB) at all times.
central bank’s holdings of the debt of country i, we have Bt
The evolution of the central bank’s holdings of either kind of debt must furthermore
be related to the path of the money supply through the relation
B;~)

= (1+ Z,)[B;(CB)+ ;(Mt – Mt_l)],

(4.2)

where Mt is the total supply of the common currency at the end of period t. Combining (4. 1) and (4.2), we observe that the debt of country i in the hands of the public,
Bit s B~(tOt)– B~(cB), evolves ~cording to the law of motion

B;+l = (1+ z,)[B; +

ptA; - ;(Mt -

This equation generalizes the flow budget constraint
35

Mt-1)].

(2.5) for the single-country

(4.3)
case.

Household objectives and budget constraints remain as in section 1, except that
in the household objective function (1.1), Gt must be replaced by 2@t for all j E Ji,
and in the intert emporal budget constraint (1.6), Tt must be replaced by 2T/ for
all j E Ji. (The factors of 2 appear because these are the per household levels of
government purchases and tax obligations.) With these modifications, the necessary
and sufficient conditions for optimization presented in section 1 continue to apply.
Now, as households in both countries have the same preferences (for “total” consumption {C; + 2G{ }, rather than for private consumption alone) and face the same
prices, rates of return, and demand for their products, it is clear that households
in both countries would choose at all times the same level of “total” consumption,
the same level of money balances, and the same prices for their goods, if their initial
wealths were such as to allow them identical lifetime budget sets, and they begin with
the same distribution of existing prices for the goods that they supply. (This does not
mean an initial wealth W; identical for all households, but rather that initial wealths
are different, between the two countries, to exactly the extent needed to offset any
differences that may etist with respect to the expected fiscal policies of the two governments, as well as differences in expected revenues due to differing initial prices. )
35Note that (4.3) could equivalently be derived by assuming that the central bank distributes
its seignorage revenues to the two governments, in tied 50-50 shares. Under the operating rules
described here, the central bank is in effect helping to finance the two governments by accumulating
their debt and never seeking repayment; the extent to which the two governments share in the
subsidy depends upon the extent to which the central bank accumulates each type of debt.

28

Again, our analysis is simplified if we assume that initial wealths are such that this
is so.
We thus consider an equilibrium in which
C: + 2G; = C;+

2Gf

at all times, where for each country C; denotes the common index of private consumption, defined in (1.2), for all households in country i. We may let this common
level of “total” consumption be denoted U; it is just the index of aggregate demand
defined in equation (1,9) - which is still valid if we now define Gt = G; + G: - and
that appears in the demand functions (1.8) for the differentiated goods. In such an
equilibrium, money holdings are also identical for all households at all times, and may
thus be simply denoted Mt. Households in both countries have an identical marginal
cost of production defined by (1.17), in the cme of goods with the same price; it
thus follows that the optimal price Tt for goods that receive a new price at date t,
is the same in both countries. Hence t~e evolution of the price index Pt defined in
(1.3) continues to be described by (1.18). The first-order conditions for household
optimization continue to be given by equations (1.10) - (1.12) and (1.16) – (1.17).
The only condition for household optimization in section 1 that does not apply
equally in the tw,~country model is (1.13). This condition now takes the form
~

T=t

Et

w

—MT]
{Rt,T[PTCk
+~~i,

} = ~ Et {Rt,T[PTYT – 2T~]} + W;
T=t

(4.4)

for each household j G Ji, where W; represents per capita financial wealth of the
households in Ji. (Note that the aggregate wealth of households in country i need not
coincide wit h the value of total outstanding liabilities of government i.) Subtracting
the sum on the right-hand side of (4.4) from both sides of the equation yields

~Et{RtT[l+i
~MTT

– 2PTA~]

T=t
Integrating

both sides of (4.5) over all households
~

T=t

‘t

{RtIT[l
—MT
~i.

}

= W;.

(4.5)

yields, finally,

– PTAT]

= Mt.l + Bt,

(4.6)

}

where At - A: + A? is the consolidated real primary deficit of the two countries,
Bt - B; + B; is their aggregate public debt, and where we have made use of the
bond market equilibrium condition 36

1,
J
o

Wfdj – Mt-l = Bt.

36Note that there is a zero net supply of all financial assets other than the riskless nominal bonds
issued by the two governments, even though exh country may have non-zero aggregate holdings of
other types of contingent claims, in order to ahieve the risk pooling discussed above.

29

Now condition (4.6), which is equivalent to (1.13) of the single-country model, would
be a requirement for equilibrium even if we did not assume that households in both
count ries can afford the same level of “total” consumption; the additional requirement
in the latter case is that (4.5) hold for each country individually.
The assumption
made earlier about the initial wealth distribution is that W;, W; be such that be such
that (4.5) holds for each country, rather than only when one aggregates across the
two countries. Given, however, an initial wealth distribution
of this kind, we need
make no further reference to conditions (4.5) in our characterization
of equilibrium;
only the aggregate public debt of the union, {Bt }, and the consolidated deficit {At}
matter for the determination
of the equilibrium paths of inflation, interest rates, and
output .
A complete system of equations for the determination
of rational expectations
equilibrium is then given by (1.10) – (1.12), (1.16) – (1.18), (2.4), and (4,6), Note
that these are exactly the same equations as determine the equilibrium paths of
the variables {Pt, Pt, Yt, it, Mt, Bt } in the single-country model, except that now the
variable {At } is the consolidate ed deficit of the two governments, rather than that
of a single government. It follows that the analysis in sections 2 and 3 above again
applies. If both countries follow Ricardian fiscal policy rules, then changes in the path
of either country’s public debt has no effects upon inflation, interest rates, or output.
However, if either has a non-Ricardian policy, then fiscal shocks in that country will
generally imply a disturbance to inflation, interest rates, and output in both countries
—since the latter variables all co-move perfectly in the two countries.
In particular, if each country chooses an exogenous process for {A;}, then the
consequences are as in section 2, except that it is only the consolidated defi’cit {At}
that matters for the determination
of inflation and so on. It follows that even if
one government is fiscally responsible, and keeps its real primary deficit at some
sustainable constant level, variations in the budget deficit of the other government
will result in price level instability for that government as well. Thus there is a clear
reason for a government concerned to maintain stable prices to care about the fiscal
policies of other governments with which it shares a common currency.
Note that in an equilibrium of the kind just described, (1.15) again holds, where
Wt - (W; + W~)/2 = Mt-l + Bt denotes aggregate financial wealth of the two
countries. In the case of an equilibrium in which the aggregate government debt of
the countries of the union is always non-negative, this implies that
lim Et{R,,~B~}

T+m

= O.

(4.7)

But the same is not true, in general, for the present value of each country’s public debt
individually. 37 Suppose that in country 1, the primary deficit is forever constant, at
a level A*/2 consistent with stable prices, while in country 2, there is a larger deficit,
37Here I disagree with the analysis of Bergin (1995), that imposes M an equilibrium condition a
condition like (4.6) for ewh country individually.

30

A; = A*/2 + c in period t, for some e >0, with A; = A*/2 at all other dates T # t.
AS prices, interest rates, and seignorage revenues are the same for both countries in
each period, it follows from (4,3) that

Et{RtT[B; – B;]} =

Ptf

for all T > t. Thus the present value of the public debt cannot approach zero
asymptotically
for both countries. Instead, in the case of an equilibrium for which
(4.7) holds, one has
lim E~{Rt,~B~} = Pte/2,
T~ca

lim Et{ Rt,TB~} = –PtE/2.
T+~
This means that the outstanding public debt of country 2 grows at the rate of interest
forever, while the government of country 1 becomes a net creditor, with the amount
credit extended by that government similarly growing at the rate of interest forever.
In effect, the government of country 1 lends to that of country 2, purchasing a quantit y
Pte/2 of the debt issued by government 2 at date t, and rolling the loan over forever,
never demanding repayment. 38 It does this w a result of a fiscal policy that requires
it to run the same size of primary surplus forever, regardless of the fact that the deficit
of government 2 in period t results in inflation and a reduced real rate of return, thus
reducing the size of the real surplus needed to service the existing debt of government
1.
Now it may seem unrealistic that the government of country 1 should follow a
fiscal policy of this sort, in the face of the consequences just mentioned. Instead, one
might suppose that a government that finds that it hu paid off all of its debt and
is even accumulating a growing stock of financial ~sets will reduce the size of its
budget surplus. But refusal on the part of government 1 to “cooperate” in financing
the profligacy of government 2 would not diminish the effects of fiscal instability in
country 2 upon prices, interest rates and output in the two countries. Instead, the
pursuit of a Ricardian policy by a fiscally responsible government actually amplifies
the macroeconomic disturbances originating in changes in the present value of the
partner’s government budget.
Let us restrict oti attention to equilibria in which (4.7) holds. 39 Then condition
(4.6) can equivalently be mitten
~

Et {Rt,T[(MT - MT_l) - P~AT]} = Bt.

(4,8)

T=t

3sNote that government 1 need not actually lend to government 2; it may lend to the households
of country 1, who borrow from their government in order to accumulate the debt issued by the other
government.
3gNote that this would always have to be the case if we consider only equilibria involving fluctuations around a deterministic growth path, aa in section 2.

31

Furthermore,

if government
~

Et

1 follows a Ricardian

fiscal policy, this ensures that

{~t,T[;(~T
- ~T-,) - PTA4]}
=~;,

(4.9)

T=t

regardless of the path of prices and interest rates. (The factor 1/2 enters as the money
holdings of households in country 1 equal Mt/2. ) In this case equilibrium condition
(4.6) reduces to
(4.10)
Note that while (4.8) holds regardless of the paths of prices and interest rates, as a
result of the rule that determines the path of {A}}, (4.9) is a restriction upon the
paths of those v~iables, given an exogenous process for {A;}.
Now, equilibrium condition (4.9) might equivalently be written

T=t

But this is exactly the form that (4.6) takes in the case that the fiscal policy rule
of government I is given by A: = A$ at all times, so that B; = B? at all times as
well. That is, adherence to a Ricardian policy by government 1 has the same effects
as if government 1 were to vary its own budget in perfect lock-step with that of
government 2, so that the public debts of both countries always grow at exactly the
same rate. This would mean that whenever government 2 reduces the present value
of its budget surplus, government 1 reduces its own as well, by the same amount,
thus doubling the inflationary impact of the expansionary fiscal policy on the part of
government 2. Intuitively, if government 1 chooses not to “cooperate” by financing
some of the budget deficit of government 2, then prices and interest rates must adjust
even more in order to restore equilibrium between private sector purchasing power
and the quantity of output available for households to purchase.
The only way that government 1 can act in order to minimize the macroeconomic
instability resulting from fiscal instability in country 2 is for it to adjust the size of
its own budget deficit inversely with that of government 2, for example, by choosing

at all times. 40 As long as the present value of the consolidated government budget
never changes, no macroeconomic instability will result from variation in the composition of the total public debt w to country of issuance. However, such a policy
401t is actually not necessary that government 1 adjust its budget simultaneously with that of
government 2. What matters is that government 1 always reduce the present value of its future
deficits by exactly the same amount M the present value of the deficits of government 2 has increased;
this could be accomplished entirely through reductions in the deficit of government 1 in subsequent
periods to the time at which the deficit of government 2 increases.

32

means that whenever the deficit of government 2 increases by an amount e >0 (without any offsetting expected reduction in future deficits), government 1 reduces the
present value of its own planned deficits by exactly that amount. This is equivalent
to government 1 financing alJof the increased deficit of government 2, by purchasing
the debt issued by government 2 and never asking for repayment. But a commitment
to do this would, of course, mean extending a “blad check” to government 2, to run
as large a deficit as it may please, with the assurance that government 1 will pay for
it. This would clearly be an unacceptable arrangement from the point of view of the
citizens of country 1.
We thus may conclude that a country that consents to share a common currency
with another does indeed expose itself to price level instability, and to the fluctuations in economic activity that follow from this, resulting from fiscal instability in the
other country, if the partner is left free to follow a non-Ricardian fiscal policy. This
is true even when the common central bank is perfectly independent of political pressures, and commits itself to a monetary policy rule that is completely independent of
fiscal developments in either country. The common currency allows fiscal instability
in one country to tiect the value of the currency used by the other countries, even
when they are models of fiscal probity themselves. But even worse, the existence of
the common currency increases the temptations of reckless fiscal policy, as it allows
the profligate government an opportunity to redistribute wealth away from the citizens of its fiscally responsible partners and toward its own; the partners can protect
themselves from this only by choosing fiscal policies that match the recklessness of
the profligate, and that therefore amplify the price level and output fluctuations resulting from fiscal instability in that country. For these reasons, it is obvious that a
country contemplating such a monetary union should care about the fiscal policy of
its partners.
Explicit constraints upon member countries’ fiscal policies provide an obvious
solution to this problem. Detailed coordination of fiscal policy among the members of
a monetary union would not be necessary, at least not under the idealized assumptions
of the model presented here. Instead, commitment on the part of all member countries
to maintain the values of their respective public debts forever within some finite ceiling
(a multiple of each country’s GDP), as envisioned in the Maastricht treaty, would seem
to be sufficient, if such a commitment can be made sficiently
credible.

33

REFERENCES

Aiyagari, S. Rae, and Mark Gertler, “The Backing of Government Bonds and
Monetarism,” Journal of Monetary Economics 16: 19-44 (1985).
Journal of Political
Barre, Robert J., “Are Government Bonds Net Wealth?”
Economy 82:1095-1117 (1974).
—, “The Neoclassical Approach to Fiscal Policy,” in R.J. Barre, ed., Modern
Business C~cle Z’heory, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1989.
Bergin, Paul R., “Fiscal Restrictions in a Currency Union: ~rther Lessons on the
Interactions of Monetary and Fiscal Policies,” unpublished, Yale University,
April 1995:
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Charles M. Kahn, “The Solution of Linear Difference Equations under Rat ional Expect at ions,” Econometrics 48: 1305-1313
(1980).
and
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, “Monopolistic Competition
the Effects of Aggregate Demand,” American Economic Review 77:647-666
(1987).
Brock, William A., “Money and Growth: The Case of Long-Run Perfect Foresight ,“ International Economic Review 15: 750-777 (1974).
Buiter, Willem, Giancarlo Corsetti, and Nouriel Roubini, “Excessive Deficits:
Sense and Nonsense in the Treaty of Maastricht,” Economic Policy 16: 57100 (1993).
Framework,”
Calve, Guillermo A., “Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing
Journal of Monetary Economics 12:383-398 (1983),
Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler, “HOWthe Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
Policy,” unpublished, Columbia University, October 1995.
Dixit, Avinash K., and Joseph E, Stiglitz, “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product Diversity,” American Economic Review 67:297-308 (1977).
Issing, Otmar, “EMU Forces Hard Choices on Europe’s Future,” Wall Street Journal Europe, March 22-23, 1996,
Kenen, Peter B., Economic and Monetaq Union in Europe: Moving Beyond
Maastricht, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1995.
Kimball, Miles S., “The Quantitative Analytics of the Basic Neomonetarist Model,”
Journal of Moneg, Credit and Banking 27:1241-1277 (1995).
Monetary Policy Implications of Greater Fiscal
King, Mervyn, “Commentary:
Discipline, ” in Budget Deficits and Debt: Issues and Options, Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City, 1995.
King, Robert G., and Mark W. Watson, “SYstem Reduction and Solution Alg~
rithms for Singular Linear Difference Systems Under Rational Expectations, ”
unpublished, University of Virginia, May 1995.
and — — —, “Money, Prices, Interest Rates and Business Cycles,”

34

.

.

Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming (1996).
King, Robert G., and Alexander L. Wolman, “Inflation Targeting in a St. Louis
Model of the 21st Century,” unpublished, University of Virginia, September
1995.
Leeper, Eric, “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary Policies,” Journal
of Moneta~ Economics 27: 129-147 (1991).
Obstfeld, ~Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff, “Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux,” Journal of Political Economy 103: 624-660 (1995).
Roberts, John, “New Keynesian Economics and the Phillips Curve,” Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking 27:975-984 (1995).
Sargent, Thomas J., Dynamic Macroeconomic Theory, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1987.
— — and Neil Wallace, “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic ,“ Quafierly
Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fall 1981. [Reprinted in Rational Expectations and Inflation, 2d ed., New York: HarperCollins College
Publishers, 1993.]
Sidrauski, Miguel, “Rational Choice and Patterns of Growth in a Monetary Economy,” Ametican Economic Review 57(2): 534-544 (1967).
of the Price Level
Sims, Christopher A., “A Simple Model for the Determination
and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theo~ 4:
381-399 (1994).
— —, “Econometric Implications of the Government Budget Constraint ,“ unpublished, Yale University, October 1995.
Svensson, Lars E. O., “Sticky Goods Prices, Flexible Asset Prices, Monopolistic
Competition, and Monetary Policy,” Review of Economic Studies 53:385-405
(1986).
Taylor, John B., “Discretion Versus Policy Rules in Practice,” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 39:195-214 (1993).
Uctum, Merih, and Michael Wickens, “Debt and Deficit Ceilings, and Sustainability of Fiscal Policies: An Intertemporal
Analysis,” unpublished, Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, April 1996.
Woodford, Michael, “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-inAdvance Economy,” Economic Theo~ 4:345-380 (1994).
—— — “Price Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,”
Car’negie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43:1-46 (1995).
Yun, Tack, “Nominal Price Rigidity, Money Supply Endogeneity, and Business
Cycles,” unpublished, University of Chicago, December 1994.

35

