NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DEMAND SHIFTS, POPULATION
ADJUSTMENTS, AND LABOR MARKET
OUTCOMES DURING THE 1980S

John Bound
Harry J. Holzer

NBER Working Paper 5685

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996
An early version of this paper was prepared for the Poverty Research Seminar sponsored by the
Institute for Research on Poverty (University of Wisconsin) and the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services in May, 1994. Much of the work on the current version was completed while both
authors were visiting scholars at the Russell Sage Foundation. We would like to thank the Poverty
Institute, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and the University of Michigan for their financial support
of this work. We would also like to thank Susanna Loeb, Jess Reaser, and Sarah Turner for excellent
computational assistance. Helpful comments were provided by seminar participants at the National
Bureau of Economic Research, the Economic Demography group at the Population Association of
America meetings, the Russell Sage Foundation, Baruch College, Columbia University, Princeton
University, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. We are especially grateful to Timothy
Bartik, Charlie Brown, Chinhui Juhn, Jim Rauch, Sarah Turner, and Hal Winsborough for helpful
comments, to Bartik for providing us local employment data, to Lisa Neidert for help with the census
data, and to Sandra Crump for help with preparation of the manuscript. This paper is part of
NBER’s research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by John Bound and Harry J. Holzer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5685
July 1996

DEMAND SH~S,
POPULATION
ADJUSTMENTS, AND LABOR MARKET
OUTCOMES DURING THE 1980S

ABSTRACT

In this paper we explore the effects of labor demand shifts and population adjustments across
metropolitan

areas on the employment

and earnings of various demographic

groups during the

1980s. Results show that, although earnings and employment deteriorated for less-educated

and

black males in most areas in the 1980s, there was a good deal of geographic variation in the
magnitudes of these changes. Shifts in labor demand across local areas contributed to this variation,
and had greater relative impacts on the earnings and employment of these demographic groups. We
also find that population shifts across areas, presumably due to migration, at least partially offset the
effects of these demand shifts. But less-educated workers showed substantial y lower population
adjustments
contributed

in response
importantly

to these demand shifts.

These limited supply responses

to relatively greater deterioration

of employment

apparently

and earnings of these

groups in declining areas during the 1980s.

John Bound
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER

Harry J. Holzer
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
101 Marshall Hall
East Lansing, MI 48824

1

I. Introduction
It is by now well known that the earnings and employment rates of less-educated workers
and blacks in the United States suffered during the 1980s in both relative and real terms. Some
consensus on the causes of these declines has begun to emerge in the research literature.
Specifically, the demand for less-educated labor has declined for a variety of reasons, while the
growth in supply of educated labor hm slowed (e.g., Bound and Johnson 1992; Katz and Murphy
1992). In addition, there appears to be major geographic variation in both the extent of these
demand shifts and the changes in labor market outcomes that they have caused for these different
groups. For instance, Topel (1994) and Karoly and Klerman (1994) have pointed to major
regional variation in employment and earnings outcomes for less-educated workers. Bound and
Freeman (1992) found that during the 1980s between blacks and whites grew most rapidly in the
North-Central

region where employment and earnings were declining more generally.

There are a variety of reasons for the declining employment status of less-educated and
black workers in particular markets, especially those experiencing

declining employment overall.

Shifts in labor demand away from these groups might be greater in areas with declining overall
employment either because they are highly industrialized

areas and industry is declining, or

because these workers are highly concentrated in declining industries.
in supply shifts might play an important

Alternatively, differences

role. In particular, out-migration

from declining areas

and immigration to growing ones may be slower for minorities or less-educated groups, who
would then be more hurt by demand shifts away from particular areas, even if the shifts
themselves were skill-neutral (Topel 1986). Indeed, the tendency for earnings and employment
inequali~

across groups to worsen in areas where overall employment

levels are declining (e.g.,

Freeman 1982, 1991, Bartik 1991, 1992 is consistent with both the relative demand and the
relative supply adjustment explanations.

2
On the demand side, areas in which manufacturing

accounts for a disproportionate

share

of employment (such as the Midwest) suffered large employment losses in that industry and
overall during the 1980s. The pro-cyclical nature of the construction industry implies that it too
will lose more than its proportionate

share of employment in declining labor markets. As these

are both industries in which less-skilled workers have traditionally been heavily represented and
relatively well-paid, their earnings and employment declined more than proportionately
where overall labor demand was declining. Given the heavy concentration

in areas

of blacks in central-

ity manufacturing jobs in the Midwest during the 1970s, this should have been (and apparently
was) particular y true for them. 1 In addition, the effects of any given demand shift might be
relatively more adverse for the more “marginal” groups (such as blacks, the young, or the leastskilled workers) within any industry or area.2
On the supply side, lower geographic mobility among older and/or less-educated workers
has been widely documented

(e.g., Schwartz 1973; Greenwood 1975; and Long 1988).

Migration rates have been lower among blacks than whites over the last three decades (Lansing
and Mueller 1967; U.S. Commerce

Department

198 1), although the opposite was true around

the period of the two World Wars and in the 1920s (primarily because of the exodus of blacks
from the rural South to the urban North). However, we have very little evidence to date on
differences across groups in population adjustments to demand shifts, or on the implications

of

‘Particululy negative effects of declining manufacturing employment (especially in the central cities) on the
earnings andor employment of black males have been found by Kasarda (1989), Acs and Danziger (1992), Bluestone
Q
(1992), Bound and Freeman (1992), Bound and Holzer (1993), Holzer and Vroman (1992), and Johnson and
Oliver (1992). Juhn (1994) focuses on the effects of industrial structure on less-educated males more generally.

2The effects of overall labor demand shifts on the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor will also
depend on a variety of other factors such as the degree to which capital and skilled labor are complements, the relative
mobility of capital and labor, the extend to which technological change is embodied in capital, and the extent to which
technological change is skill-biased.

3

these differences for relative changes in employment and earnings. 3
Supply adjustments through migration in response to local demand shifts have been
analyzed in some recent studies. Bartik (1991) and Blanchard and Katz (1992) have found
substantial mobility in response to demand shocks. Blanchard and Katz suggest that the impact of
these shocks (in terms of employment rates and wage levels) should be completely dissipated in
less than a decade because of population adjustments, while Bat-tik’s work suggests somewhat
greater persistence.4

But these studies all used aggregate measures of the overall population in

local areas when measuring adjustment processes, without differentiating

by race or education.

In this paper, we present evidence on these issues for the period of the 1980s. After
documenting

the demographic and geographic variation in labor market outcomes and local

demand and supply shifts during this period, we estimate the effects of demand shifts on wage
and employment changes for a variety of demographic groups (defined by education and
experience as well as race and gender). We also analyze differences across these groups in
population adjustments to these demand shifts, and how these supply adjustment differences
might have contributed to observed differences in relative wages.
To analyze labor market and population outcomes at the local level for such detailed
demographic

groups, we use data from the Public Use Micro Samples (PUMS) of the Census of

Population in 1980 and 1990. We use the 5% samples for each of these years, which give us
vastly more individual observations with which to disaggregate outcomes by demographic group.
Furthermore, the PUMS data enable us to analyze demand/supply

shifts as well as outcomes

3mong the earlier studies, only Lansing and Mueller analyze differences across education and racial groups in
the responsiveness of migration rates to personal experiences of unemployment or income loss as well as local mea
unemployment. But they provide no general measures of responsiveness to labor demand shifts; and their results are quite
dated (as they are based on survey data from the early 1960s).
4See Bartik ( 1993) for a discussion of possible explanations for the discrepancy between his estimates and those
of Blanchard and Katz.

4

across metropolitan

areas, rather than at the much broader state or regional levels that others have

examined using data from sources such as the Current Population Survey (CPS).5 On the other
hand, the analysis of cross-area changes over a single decade (rather than annual time-series
analysis of broader geographic units) prevents us from studying the dynamics of the adjustment
process that has been the focus of earlier work (e.g., Topel 1986; Bartik 1991; Blanchard and
Katz 1992).
Our primary results are these: (1) While relative wage and employment declines for the
less-educated

occurred in most MSAS, these effects were much more severe in some areas (such

as the industrial centers of the Midwest) than others. (2) Local labor demand shifts contributed
to the deteriorating outcomes of these groups in declining areas. The effects of demand shifts on
wages and employment

were greatest among the young, the less educated, and black workers.

(3) Population adjustments did occur in response to labor demand shifts in the 1980s, with
workers moving out of declining areas into growing ones. But less-educated workers had
relatively low rates of migration in response to these demand changes; and there is some
evidence that this was also true for blacks, even within educational groups. The limited
adjustments in labor supply for these groups appear to have contributed importantly to the
relatively greater deterioration of their employment and earnings in declining areas during the
1980s.

II. Hypotheses,

Data, and Equations

A. Conceptual Framework
To aid in the interpretation

of our empirical work we start by developing a simple model

5We abstract here from intra metropolitan shifts in the location of employment
as been emphasized in the literature on “spatial mismatch” (e.g., Holzer 1991).

or population,

of the type that

5
of local labor markets.

Our notion is that for historical reasons different metropolitan

areas

specialize in the production of different goods (e.g., Detroit has been the center of the auto
industry, which they then “export”

to other areas (Krugman 1991).

Thus, the kind of demand

shocks that hit the U.S. during the 1980s (e.g., the decline in the auto industry)

will have

differential effects on local areas. At the same time, demand shocks to a metro area’s export
industries will have spillover effects on other sectors of the local economy (e.g., the shutdown of
an auto plant will affect local service industries as well).

The combined effects of the initial

demand shock to the export sector and these spillover effects will then determine the overall
effects of these shocks on the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor in the local area.
Consider the economy in metro area k. Using constant returns to scale, technologies
firms produce both for export, Xk, and for local consumption,

Ck,

using skilled (L.,) and

unskilled ( LU~) labor. In the short term, labor is supplied exogenously to a local area, but it is
mobile across industries.
competitive.

The area also imports Mk.

Factor and product markets are

While incorporating either sector-biased of factor-biased technological change into

our model would be straightforward

(Jones 1965), doing so would complicate the model

considerably without affecting its basic implications.

For this reason we assume fixed

technologies.
Let yij,

represent the share of the i ~h demographic group’s workforce employed in the

j ~h sector ( ~jyi ~,=1 ), and Si j, represent the i ~h skill group’s share of the total wage bill in
the j’ ~h sector ( ~iSi jk=l ) . While not essential to the model, to help fix ideas we will also
assume that the export sector is intensive in unskilled labor (yUX >y~X ; S’ux > Suc ).6 It will be
k
k
k
k
useful to have notation for the differences in factor intensities.

Define

bThis will tend to be true for metro areas that “export” manufactured goods, but not necessarily those that export
services (e.g., Omaha and Hartford export insurance).

6
&k=

YUX,-Y.K,

Ifwelet

= Y.= k -Yuc

k

and dSk = SUx -suc

k

w~, and wUkrepresent thewages

prices of exports and local consumption

k = s~c k-s,x k

ofskilled

andunskilled

labor, pXkandpCk the

goods (in terms of the price of imports), and dots over

variables the percent changes in those variables, then:

( Y.ckck+Y.xkxk)

-~.k =

(1)

b,k ( W.k- Wuk)

( Yuckc~+Yuxkx~)
-Luk= -~uk(W,k-Wuk)

(2)

where 5 ikrepresents the aggregate percentage saving in the i ~h input at unchanged outputs
associated with a 1 percent rise in the relative wages of the i~hinput.

The 5s are themselves

functions of the elasticities of substitution between the two labor inputs in the two sectors.

The

terms in parentheses on the left of(1) and (2) represent shifts in the demand for the two labor
inputs. Subtracting (2) from (1) gives:

( dYkck-@kxk)
- (i,k-

iuk) = (b~k+buk)

Shifts in the industrial composition

(W,k-wuk) .

(3)

of a local area or shifts in the composition

of the workforce

affect the relative wages of skilled and unskilled workers in similar ways. Output prices are a
share- weighted linear combination of the shift in wages of skilled and unskilled labor inputs:

s~ckw,+Suc Wuk= pck
k
k

(4)

s~xkw,+Sux Wuk= pxk.
k
k

(5)

Together, equations (1)-(5) describe the production side of the model. To close the model
we need to specify the demand for output and inputs.
in the kthmetro area have Cobb-Douglas

For simplicity, we assume that consumers

utility functions and spend a constant share of their

7

income, u, on Ck (and the rest on Mk). The implication of this assumption is that:

(Ck-xk) = -

(pck-pxk)

(6)

Equations (1)-(6) determine relative wages and prices and hence output and factor allocations.
In particular, shifts in the supply of skilled and unskilled labor have deterministic effects on
product and factor prices as well as on output:

(Xk-ck)

(pxk-pck)

‘

=

*+(iU-i.)
-A*k .Ao~k+l

(iu-i,)

(7)

(8)

(9)
auk+b~k

where o

‘k

=

&,dS~ “

The demand for exports is a function of their price and a demand shifter :

Xk=gk.ep

‘k

(lo)

where ~ represents the elasticity of demand for x~ and Ok the demand shifter. The effects of a
demand shock to exports (Ok) on local labor demand in this model can be either skill-biased or
skill-neutral.

On the one hand, negative (positive) demand shocks alone will shift demand away

from (toward) skilled labor in that area, and will therefore raise (lower) the relative wages of
skilled workers there. But local spillover effects on the demand for the non-traded good will tend
to neutralize the skill-bias of the original shock.

8

Under the assumption of Cobb-Douglas

utility functions, demand shocks raise the price of

locally produced goods (both Ck and X~) and thus wages by b ~/ e, but leave relative wages and
the allocation of inputs across sectors alone (due to the constancy of consumers’ income shares
spent on Ck). The cost of living rises by a fraction, ~, of the rise in wages. Thus POSitiVe
demand shocks leave local area workers better off, while negative demand shocks have the
opposite effect. Under different assumptions about the nature of the local demand for goods,
demand shocks will affect the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor, with the net effect
depending, among other things, on the degree of substitutability

between locally produced and

imported goods and services.
Regardless of whether or not the net effect of the demand shift in the local area is skillbiased, positive overall demand shocks to a local area will create incentives for labor to migrate
there from other areas, while negative shocks will create incentives for labor to migrate out. As
Topel has emphasized (1986), the magnitudes of such supply shifts will depend on expectations
of the future (shocks that are expected to persist will have larger effects) and on the costs of
moving.

To the extent that such costs and therefore migration rates vary across skill groups,

demand shocks that do not affect the relative demand for skilled and unskilled labor in an area
will still have effects on relative wages there through their effects on the relative local supplies of
different kinds of labor. Thus, negative demand shocks to an area will lead to growing inequality
across demographic groups if geographic mobility is higher among the more highly skilled
groups.
The latter possibility is illustrated in Figure 1. Here we find a negative overall labor
demand shift (of magnitude AI) away from a particular local market that equally affects unskilled

9

and skilled workers (denoted by u ands respectively).’ WOand LOdenote starting wage and
employment levels for both groups (which have been set equal here for the sake of simplicity).
But workers from both groups migrate away from this area. In this case, the magnitude of
the resulting labor supply shift among skilled workers (CD) exceeds that for unskilled workers
(FG), as does the change in total employment levels (BD and EG respectively). But this also
results in smaller wage losses for the skilled (AB v. AE) as well as smaller average employment
losses among those who remain in the area (BC v. En.
Thus, groups with more limited population mobili~ shouid show greater wage and
employment rate deterioration
Alternatively,

in local areas when negative local demand shifts occur.

these groups will experience greater wage and average employment increases in

areas where labor demand is growing. If mobility is correlated with skills or income levels, labor
market inequality will move inversely with local demand growth.

B, Empirical Specz$cation and Data
We test these notions first by estimating reduced-form equations for the effects of overall
demand shifts across local area on labor market outcomes and labor supply adjustments for
various groups in those areas. With these estimates, we hope to gauge the extent to which overall
demand shocks differentially affect various segments of the workforce, without trying to
distinguish between various possible explanations for such effects. Subsequently,

we try to

estimate the extent to which differential supply adjustments to these demand shocks might
explain the differential wage outcomes

we find between more- and less-educated workers across

7 The overall demand shift includes the initial effects (induced by product demand shifts) as well as any
spillover effects, including those induced by labor supply responses. We abstract away from differences in the
demand elasticities for the two kinds of labor.

10

these areas.
We have analyzed data for 132 metropolitan statistical areas (MSAS) from the 1980 and
1990 PUMS files of the U.S. Census. In order to have consistent definitions of our geographic
areas over time, we use the 1990 definitions of metropolitan areas in terms of counties in both
years.g While these definitions are more geographically inclusive than are those from earlier time
periods (especially for a few MSAS such as Boston and New York), our empirical estimates do
not appear to be strongly affected by these changes.9
We have two measures of changes in labor market outcomes for various demographic
groups that we try to explain below: hourly wages and average per capita annual hours of
employment.

In addition we measure population adjustments for each group with changes in

population size, and we measure total labor adjustment with changes in total hours worked
(which is defined as population x annual hours for the group). All of these are measured as
changes in logs between 1979 and 1989. These four outcome measures are the dependent
variables in our reduced-form equations,

estimated across MSAS, for the effects of overall labor

demand shifts across local areas.
All of the above variables are defined for the non-enrolled,

non-institutionalized

civilian

population above the age of 16. Most results below are presented by education level (i.e., for
workers with college or more versus high school or less) and experience (less than 10 years
versus all groups) as well as by race and gender within education and experience groups.
The kinds of overall local labor demand shifts represented by AI in Figure 1 are not

“In a few cases, the available data did not allow us to perfectly match MSA definitions over time. But the net
changes in population attributable to these matching problems rarely account for more than a few percentage points of
the original population.
‘Estimates that we generated using the 1970 rather than the 1990 definitions
quite similar to those presented below.

of MSAS in both years were

11
directly observable. Therefore we use total local employment growth as a proxy for such demand
shifts. But an additional problem here is that total employment growth in the MSA can be driven
by shifts in local labor supply (through population growth, etc.) as well as demand. Therefore,
following Bartik as well as Blanchard and Katz, we create an index for demand based on
nationwide employment growth in industries, weighted by the MSA-specific
in those industries

employment shares

- i.e.,

(11)

where H~ represents predicted employment growth in the area, yjkrepresents

the share of total

hours worked accounted for by sector j in MSA k (averaged over the beginning and end of the
decade), and q ~ represents the change in the log of total hours of employment in the same sector
nationally over the decade. 10 Sectors are defined on the basis of 47 roughly two-digit industry
cells.
The index is a weighted average of employment growth during the 1980s in each MSA,
where the weights represent the different distributions
MSA. 11

of employment across sectors in each

They measure the extent to which demand was shifting away from the industries in

which workers were employed.

The index should capture exogenous shifts in local labor demand

that are predicted by the city-specific industry mix, while avoiding the endogeneity associated
with local employment growth rates. We use this index as an instrument for the overall local
employment growth.

As a point of comparison, we also present some equations in which our

outcome measures are regressed on total employment growth in the MSA estimated by OLS.

1°Essentially, ~ ~ represents the share component in the kind of shift- share analysis often performed by urban
aonornists when studying metropolitan growth (Bradbury, Downs, and Small 1982; Terkla and Derringer 1991; Coulsen
and Rushen 1995.
llVariation in fi ~ arises primarily due to variation in the fraction of a metro area’s workforce in manufacturing.
The correlation between these two variables is 0.75,

12

Given the fact that we are examining changes that occur over the space of a decade, it is
not possible for us to distinguish between the short-run and long-run effects of demand shocks in
the way that those using annual data have done (Bartik 1991; Blanchard and Katz 1992).
Intuitively, it seems natural to assume that our estimates represent some kind of average between
the two. 12 Furthermore,

the major demand shocks to local areas in the 1980s (e.g., the negative

shocks to the industrial areas of the Midwest) occurred toward the beginning of the decade and
persisted throughout it. Thus, changes in labor market outcomes over the course of the decade
should reflect the decadal responses to these shocks. 13
Finally, we note the procedures by which all of these equations were estimated. We began
by categorizing individuals into cells on the basis of six education groups, four experience
groups, and eight race-by-gender groups within each MSA in each census year.14 Changes in
labor market outcomes and in supply adjustments were then defined for each cell and regressed
on a set of dummies for MSAS and demographic groups.

In particular, letting yijlmk

represent

the change in an outcome for the i ~h education, the j ~h experience, the 1 ~h race and them~h sex
group in the kth metro area, we estimate equations of the form.

‘ijlmk

= aijlm

+ ~k+

‘ljlmk

(12)

121n fact, Bartik (1993) has shown for a model similar to our own that, under plausible assumptions, long
difference estimated effects will represent a weighted average of the long-run and short-run effects estimated from a
distributed lag model,
The required assumption is that changes over time in the explanatory variable (in our case
employment growth) have to be positively correlated (i.e., across MSAS, those areas that are growing more rapidly
early in the period will be doing so throughout it), Using ES-202 data provided to us by Bartik, we confirmed that this
condition is, in fact, true for our MSAS over the 1979-1989 period.
130il price shocks did not follow this general pattern. For this reason, one might imagine that our model would
not apply very well to metro areas in the Southwest that are heavily dependent on oil, We estimated many of our
equations on samples that eliminated metro areas located in Texas, Oklahoma, and Louisiana. These resul~ differed
negligibly from those presented below.
l“The education groups were based on the following numbers of completed years of schooling: 0-8,9-11, 12,
13-15, 16, and 17 or more. Experience groups are O-9, 10-19, 20-29, and 30 or more. The race-by-gender groups include
Hispanics and a residual category as well as white and black non-Hispanics.

13

Regressions were weighted using the shares of the relevant demographic group in total hours
worked in the MSA, averaged between 1979 and 1989, Earnings weights produced virtually
identical results, These regressions were run separately for each of the subgroups for whom we
present separate results below -- i.e., by education (college or more versus high school or less)
and experience (O-9 years versus all levels), and then for white and black males and females
within each educational group. 15
Coefficients on the MSA dummies (the Pks) can then be interpreted as average local
wage, employment,
in the composition

and population shifts, standardized for demographic differences across areas
of local area workforces.

and/or supply measures

These dummies were then regressed on the demand

to generate the results that are reported below. The second-stage

regressions were weighted using the share of overall population in the sample accounted for by
the MSA (averaged between 1980 and 1990). ‘b This two-stage procedure was used to take
account of the multi-level nature of our data (Amemiya 1978).
potential heteroskedasticity

using procedures

Standard errors are corrected for

proposed by White (1980, 1982), among others. 17

Since all dependent and independent variables are measured as changes in logs, all coefficients
can be interpreted as elasticities.

III. Results
A. Summaty
Summary data on changes in the logs of our four outcome measures over the 1980s

15 In all tabulations and estimated equations for specific race-by-gender subgroups within education
experience groups, we limited the sample to the 87 MSAS with no race-by-gender of less than 250.
lGFor comparability

and/or

across groups, we used the same MSA weights for the analysis of all subgroups,

17Eicher-White standard errors are known to be biased in small samples. Mackinnon and White ( 1985) argue
in favor of Jackknife standard errors. Using our data, we compared the two for the models reported in Tables 3 and 6.
In all such cases, Jackknife and Either-White standard errors are very similar.

14

appear in Table 1.18 Separate estimates are presented by education and experience group, and
also by race and gender within those categories. The results are generally consistent with those
that have previously appeared in the literature on recent trends in earnings inequality (see
Footnote 1). Less-educated

workers suffered substantial declines in their real wages during this

period, both in absolute terms and relative to those with college degrees. Hours worked also grew
for the more-educated

relative to the less-educated. Both wage and hours changes are more

positive for females than for males, and for whites than for blacks within each gender and
education/experience

group.

In fact, less-educated black males lost roughly 6-7% in annual earnings relative to lesseducated white males, even though the latter experienced real earnings losses as well; while lesseducated black females lost 18~o in annual earnings relative to white females in all experience
groups combined (and somewhat less among the least-experienced).

Overall, the generally

positive correlation between wage and hours worked changes across race, gender, and education
groups suggest a primary role for relative labor demand shifts in generating these outcomes.
Population changes also exhibit some interesting relative patterns. We generally find
declining relative population growth for the less-educated within each race-by-gender group,
reflecting the demographic effects of rising school enrollment rates over time. These trends are
particularly strong among white females, for whom the declines in population among the lesseducated are much sharper than they are for males. The rise in relative educational attainment for
white females likely contributed to the change in their position in the labor market. 19

18Nominal wages in this table have been deflated using changes in the national CPI-U-X 1 over this period.
‘%e data also indicate that the growth in population with college or more education was relatively lower among
blacks than whites. See Hauser (1993) and Kane (1994) for more evidence on this topic. But there was also a more
pronounced rise in high school graduation rates and in the fractions of people with 1-3 years of college among blacks
that are not apparent in these data, thus resulting in changes in average educational attainment that are more comparable
across the two groups.

1!)

Evidence on the geographic variation in our supply and demand shift measures and in
wage and employment outcomes appears in Figure 2 and Table 2. Figure 2 graphically presents
wage growth for high school and college graduates for MSAS with 1990 populations of over 2.5
million.

Table 2 presents data for the 21 MSAS in our sample with populations of 1 million or

more in 1990 and for which local price indices were available,20 The real wage and hours
outcomes are presented by education group and for less-educated white and black males. The
demand measures presented include shifts in total demand (as defined above) as well as changes
in the shares of employment

accounted for by manufacturing

and construction. The supply

measure presented is the relative change (i.e., difference in logs) in total hours worked between
college graduates and those with high school or less education. As with our measures of total
demand shifts, we present predicted values of these relative hours changes, based on equations in
which they are regressed on the fi ~ measures; thus we are measuring relative supply responses to
exogenous demand shifts (rather than overall supply changes) .21
The data in Figure 2 and Table 2 show that both wage and hours changes for the collegeeducated exceeded those for high school graduates in virtually all of these MSAS, and changes in
outcomes for white males exceeded those for black males in most cases as well. However,
appears to be considerable

there

geographic variation in these outcomes. We find relatively strong

wage growth for the less-educated in such areas as Boston and New York, while it was weakest
in traditional industrial areas such as Pittsburgh, Detroit, Cleveland, and Chicago (as well as in

2%ere are 23 MSAS with population above 1 million in 1990 but local price data are not available for either
Phoenix and Tampa, so these MSAS have been omitted from Table 2 and Figure 2.
21The reasons for presenting the predicted rather than the actual supply changes here me discussed more fully
in Section C below. The magnitudes of relative supply shifts are all greater than those of relative demand shifts since the
latter measure only between-industry components of increases while the former measure total increases.

16

Houston) .22 Less-educated

black males did particularly poorly in all of the areas in which the

relative earnings of high school workers fell.
The increases in the relative supply of college graduates and in total demand were
somewhat larger in Boston and New York than in the industrial areas, while the growth in the
relative demand for college graduates and the declines in manufacturing

employment were

generally smaller in the former. More generally, we find relatively strong simple correlations
(above .6 in absolute value) between relative wage changes and our relative supply (or total
demand) variables.

B. Reduced Form Estimates
Tables 3 and 4 present the results of reduced-form equations estimated across MSAS, in
which our two labor market outcome measures and two supply adjustment measures are the
dependent variables, and overall employment growth in the MSA is the independent variable.
Estimates appear separately by education and experience group in Table 3, and also by race and
gender within those groups in Table 4.
Results in Table 3 are presented for both OLS and Instrumental Variables (N) estimation
(where the latter uses the H~ measure as the instrument for total local employment growth),
while Table 4 presents them only for IV.23 It is of some interest to examine the first stage
equation for our estimates.

Both the reliability and validity of our IV estimates depend on the

reliability and validity of the first-stage estimates (Nelson and Startz 1990a,b; Bound, Jaeger, and
Baker 1995). Furthermore,

in our case, the first-stage equation is of some independent interest.

‘zThe weakness of the labor market in Houston, and in MSAS of the southwest
probably attributable to the collapse of the price of oil during the 1980s.

region more generally,

is

23The R* measures for IV equations reported in these tables are from the reduced-form equations, and therefore
represent the fraction of the variation in the dependent variable explained by measured exogenous factors.

17

The first-stage equation for the IV estimates in Table 3 (with standard errors in parentheses
below coefficients) is as follows:

qk=-o.22+2.12fik

R2=0

.21

(0.51)

where q ~ reflects total local growth in hours of employment. The estimated coefficient on the
instrument indicates that national demand shifts at the industry level have a multiplier effect of
roughly 2 on employment

at the local level. The equation also indicates that industry mix has a

fair amount of explanatory power with regard to local employment changes, although, obviously,
there is also a good deal of additional variation in the latter that is not accounted for by the
former.
The results of Tables 3 and 4 show several clear patterns. Total demand growth within the
MSA generally has significant positive effects on changes in both hourly wages and hours
worked (per person) over the decade. The magnitudes of these effects are generally larger for
younger than for older workers (especially on wages), larger for less-educated than for moreeducated workers, and larger for blacks than for whites (especially on hours worked),

The

overall pattern of results generally holds for females as well as for males. These results are
largely consistent with others in the literature (e.g., Bartik, 1992; Freeman, 1991) to date, and
indicate that falling overall labor demand contributes to higher inequality in the labor market.
Comparing the lV estimates to those of OLS, we find that the former are generally quite a
bit larger than the latter, although the estimated sampling variability of the IV estimates is
sufficiently large to imply that the differences are generally only marginally statistically
significant.24

This is consistent with our notion that the latter estimates confound the effects of

24Differences between our OLS and IV estimates are somewhat larger than those found by Bartik and by
Blanchard and Katz with comparable instruments. These differences might be due to larger supply shift biases in our
analysis of a single cross-section of geographic areas rather than deviations from trend in time-series data,

18

labor supply and demand shifts, leading to downward biases in the estimated effects of demand
on market outcomes. Despite the fact that standard errors on the IV estimates are also
substantially larger than on those from ON, most of the differences described above in
magnitudes of effects across demographic groups are statistically significant.25
Overall, these estimates imply that a 10% shift in demand away from an area would lead
to nominal wage declines in all experience groups of 7% and 470 respectively among those with
high school and college education.

Among the least-experienced

workers, the declines would be

11% and 6% respectively in the two education groups. Using data on price indices for the subset
of our MSAS for which these data are available, we estimate that the decline in demand would
lower price levels by roughly 2% in an area.zb Thus, much of the nominal wage declines noted
above appear to reflect changes in real wages. The magnitudes of estimated effects on real wages
of black workers in each category are even larger, and there are additional effects on hours
worked, as well as on real wages for each group, that reinforce these findings.
With regard to labor supply adjustments, we find that changes in both population and
total hours worked by group also are positively related to labor demand shifts.27 In general,
population adjustments are larger among the more-educated
cohorts.

an~or the least-experienced

The IV estimates of population adjustments are generally smaller than those from OLS,

which is once again consistent with the idea that the latter confound the effects of demand shifts

25Differences in wage coefficients between the all experience and the O-9 years categories are significant at the
.05 level for both education groups. Differences in coefficients for hours worked between whites and blacks are
significant at the .05 level among those with high school or less education for both experience groups and both genders;
the difference in wage coefficients is significant only for males in the O-9 years category.
*’Using price indices for 26 of our MSAS, we find elasticities of price levels with respect to local demand shifts
of about .16 using OLS and about .26 using IV. These are comparable to Bartiks (1991) estimated long-run effects of
about .2. Blanchard and Katz found somewhat larger effects that were dissipated after 10 years. One might worry that
one should not use the same cost of living adjustments for the more- and less-educated, but work by Idson and Miller
(1995) suggests that consumption bundles vary little by educational attainment.
“The coefficients from the total hours equations are simply the sums of those from the relevant equations for
population adjustments and hours per person.

19

and those of supply, in this case leading to upward biases in estimated effects. The IV estimates
show quantitatively
adjustments

large and generally statistically significant

differences in population

across education and experience groups. The estimates imply that a 1070 shift in

demand away from an area would lead to declines in population for all experience groups of
about 570 among college graduates and nothing among those with high school or less; in the
youngest cohort, the corresponding

declines would be roughly 1170 and 6Y0.

When comparing the population adjustments of whites with those of blacks within
education, experience, and gender groups (Table 4), the picture is somewhat less clear. The
estimates here generally indicate larger adjustments for whites only among less-educated and
more-experienced

males. In other ewes, adjustments among blacks are comparable or even larger

than among whites.zg Furthermore,

at least some of the point estimates for blacks maybe

implausibly large, although they are estimated quite imprecisely .29
An alternative explanation for these results would stress the likelihood (explained on p. 3)
that any given change in total labor market demand in an MSA implies larger effects on the
group-specific

labor demand facing blacks than whites.30 Thus, population adjustments to unit

changes in total market demand that are comparable or greater among blacks than among whites
might actually constitute smaller responses to unit changes in their respective group-specific
demands.

2nThe larger effects for blacks are significant between
levels, except that the one for less-educated and least-experienced
males, the estimates are not significantly larger for blacks, except
experience (t=l .36). The larger estimate for less-educated white
significant (t=l .31).

females at both education levels and both experience
women is marginal (t= 1,24). Between white and black
marginally among less-educated workers with O-9 years
males in all experience groups is also only marginally

29For instance, the estimates suggest that a 10% decline in local demand would generate declines in the
populations of the youngest experience groups of 13% among less-educated black males, 17% among more-educated
black males, and 19% among more-educated black females.
‘~is is also consistent with the generally larger effects of total market demand on the wages and employment
of blacks than whites that we observe in Table 3.

20

It is also of some interest to compare the nature of the supply adjustments made by the
various populations

-- that is, to what extent do these adjustments occur via a change in average

hours per person and to what extent via population shifts.

To provide evidence on this issue, we

present an additional set of estimates for population adjustment in Table 5. These estimates are
from regressions of population changes for a particular group on changes in total hours worked
by that group (instead of the MSA overall), where the latter is once again instrumented by fi ~gl.
Since the change in the log of total hours worked is the sum of the changes in the logs of
population changes and in hours per person, the regression will measure the shares of observed
changes in total hours worked of that group accounted for by population adjustment (with the
remainder accounted for by changes in hours per person). The IV estimates

can be interpreted as

measures of the extent to which exogenous demand shifts for a particular group result in
population (as opposed to per person employment)

adjustment.

For the cases in which H~ has

little impact on total hours (e.g., white women) the IV estimates will not be very meaningful.
Such cases have been noted in Table 5 with a “*”.
The results of the table show that population adjustment generally accounts for more of
the observed changes in total hours among the more-educated

and/or younger workers, which is

consistent with our earlier estimates. Indeed, the relative lack of population adjustment among
older, less-educated workers is particularly striking.

Within the less-educated groups, we now

find that population adjustments for blacks account for smaller shares of adjustments to demand
shifts than they do for whites. This is true among both males and females, and at all experience
levels. In contrast, population adjustments among more educated blacks are roughly comparable

31These coefficients could be obtained by dividing the estimated IV effects of demand on population adjustment
by those on total hours for any particular group in Table 3 or 4.

21

to those observed among their white counterparts.
These results are largely consistent with the fact noted earlier that gross migration rates
are generally lower for blacks than for whites, even within education level.32 Together they
suggest that supply responsiveness

to labor demand shifts of a given magnitude is lower among

blacks than whites, even after controlling for educational levels.
By how much might the differential wage response across skill groups to demand shocks
contribute to the observed growth in wage inequality between them?

The N results from Table

3 suggest that a 1090 shift in labor demand between areas would contribute roughly 2.7% to the
difference in wages between the two groups in the declining areas.

Using numbers from Table

2, this estimate implies that our exogenous demand shift measure can account for roughly 2025% of the difference between

Boston and Detroit or 40% of the difference between New York

and Detroit in terms of the growth in the college/high school wage differential.

A visual sense

of the explanatory power of our demand shift measure can be obtained from Figure 3, where
we plot relative wages against predicted overall demand for the same set of MSAS that we use in
Table 2.
More generally, the R 2s reported in Table 3 suggest that our exogenous demand measure,
fi ~, can explain 14 percent of the variation in relative wages.

However, our calculations show

that even using the large Census samples, there is a considerable amount of sampling error in our
mean wage change measures.

Adjusting for this measurement error boosts the R 2 to above 20

32For instance, in the 1975-1980 period, Census data show gross migration rates among white and black MSA
residents was 0.17 and 0.09 respectively. Among high school drop-outs the corresponding rates were 0.10 and 0.07;
among high school graduates they were 0.15 and 0.10 (U.S. Department of Commerce 1981). We found similar results
using NLSY data. The NLSY data show 19.690 of young white male high school graduates, but only 13,0% of black
make high-school graduates moving across metro areas between 1979 and 1988 (Bound and Holzer 1995).

22
percent.33 Moreover, our exogenous demand measure presumably picks up only a component of
demand.

Thus, it is possible that demand shifts can explain a large fraction of the true variation

in relative wages across the MSAS in our sample.

However, the fact that many of the MSAS

that experience large relative wage changes were also those that experienced large increases in
their immigrant population during the 1980s (e.g., Miami) at least suggests that immigration
may have also played a role (Topel 1994; Jaeger 1996).

C. Effect of Supply and Demand Factors on Relative Wages
The reduced-form regression results presented above show that local demand shifts have
larger effects on labor market outcomes among less-educated

workers, while supply adjustments

to these demand shifts are lower among these groups. In fact, the estimated

different

supply

adjustments are large enough to at lemt potentially explain the entire differential impact of local
demand shocks on the wages of college- and high school-educated
reported in Table 3 suggest that a 10 percent demand-induced

workers.

The lV estimates

drop in employment will lower the

relative supply of college graduates to the local labor market by 3.6 percent, while raising their
relative wages by 2.7 percent. For such relative supply adjustments to be able to fully explain the
relative wage adjustments,

the elasticity of substitution between high school- and college-

educated labor would have to be no greater than 1 1/3, which is well within the range suggested
by conventional

wisdom.

To more directly estimate the effects of relative supply adjustments on relative wages
between skill groups, we present estimates from regressions of the latter on the former across

33Comparing the (weighted) average of estimated variances of the first-stage ~ks to the variance of the ~ks
themselves, we calculate that 3770 of the apparent variation in relative wages is “noise”.

23
MSAS (Table 6). These equations
more- and less-educated workers.

also include controls for relative demand shifts between
These measures are designed to capture the notion that

changing industrial structure of employment might shift demand across groups even if total labor
demand in an area remains unchanged (for reasons described in Section 1).J4
Differences in changes in logs of wages between workers with college or more and those
with high school or less education are the dependent variables here, while differences in changes
in supply and demand measures between these groups are the independent variables.

The supply

measures used here are total hours worked by each group. Because of the endogeneity of supply
shifts, we instrument them with fi ~. This supply measure should therefore capture the
differences across groups in the extent of supply responsiveness

to demand shifts that we

observed above, and should enable us to estimate the effect of these differences on relative wages
across groups.
To proxy for changes in relative demand we have used a number of different measures,
all based on changes in the industrial structure of an area. For our first measure we use a variant
of the fixed-coefficient

measure of demand often used in the literature (e.g., Katz and Murphy,

1992). We calculate the demand shift in favor of group i in areak as

fiik = Zj

(13)

yijkrljk,

where i indexes skill groups, ]“ industries, and k metro areas, As before

yijk

represents the

share of the i~hdemographic group in the j ~h industry in the kth metro area, while

q jk

34We have no explicit measures of rates of capital inflows or technological change across metropolitan areas.
Correlations between these unobserved factors and our relative supply and demand measures are potential sources of
bias in our estimated effects of the latter, though the signs of these biases are not clear a priori.

24

represents the growth rate of industry j in area k. Thus, we now use industry shares of local
employment for specific skill groups, which weight local (rather than national) indust~
employment

growth. We use the difference between the bik for workers with college or more

education versus those with high school or less as our relative demand measure.
Alternative measures of relative demand are based exclusively on two industries in which
many less-educated
- i.e., manufacturing

workers have traditionally been employed, often earning a premium in wages
and construction.

Indeed, declining employment in manufacturing

has

specifically been linked to declining employment levels among blacks and declining earnings
among the less-educated

more generally in several previous studies (noted above). In some

equations below, we therefore use changes in the shares of employment that are accounted for by
one or both of these industries between 1979 and 1989 in place of the relative demand indices.
The results reported in Table 6 confirm expectations

that relative supply responses to

exogenous demand shocks have large effects on relative wages. The inclusion of the demand
shift measures tends to mute but not eliminate the estimated effect of relative supply. This
suggests

that, while changes in the relative supply may be an important factor affecting the

change in relative wages, demand factors may also play a role. Relative demand shifts have the
anticipated positive effects and are at least marginally significant. When the change in the share
of employment
generates

in manufacturing

alone is used in place of the relative demand measure,

it

the anticipated negative effect on the relative wage difference, although its effect is not

significant. The inclusion of construction along with manufacturing

generates much stronger

effects.
Unlike Topel (1993, 1994), we find effects of relative demand but not supply in the OLS
versions of these equations.

However, when we performed

our analysis at the division level

25
(defining wage outcomes

at the division level in a way exactly analogous to the way we defined

them at the MSA level), we find a strong correlation between wage and supply changes. At the
division level, a regression of the change in the college/high school wage differential on the
change in relative hours gives a coefficient on the relative supply measure of -.52 (.16),

R 2=.59.

One interpretation

of this difference is that labor supply shifts are more exogenous

with respect to larger geographic units.35

IV. Conclusion
In this paper we explore the effects of changes in the economy’s geographic, industrial
and occupational structure on the earnings and employment of white and black men and women
during the 1980s. We also explore how population adjustments (primarily through migration
across metropolitan areas) vary across these groups in response to these economic changes.
The results show that earnings and employment deteriorated the most for less-educated
and/or black males in the 1980s. These effects occurred in almost all MSAS nationwide, although
they were most severe in the industrial areas of the Midwest. Overall labor demand shifts had
relatively large effects on the earnings and employment on these groups in these areas during that
time period.
We also found evidence of supply effects on local labor market outcomes, working
through population adjustments in response to shifts in labor demand. However, older and lesseducated workers have the most limited short-run labor supply adjustments to these demand
shifts in terms of intermetropolitan

migration; and there was some evidence of lower response

35A similar point was made by Borjas,
immigration on wages.

Freeman, and Katz (1996) when considering

results on the impact of

26
among blacks as well, even within education group. These limited adjustments appear to
contribute to the relatively greater deterioration of their earnings in declining areas during the
1980s.
There are a number of plausible reasons for why these groups might migrate less in
response to demand shifts: less information about alternative labor market opportunities

in other

areas; fewer social contacts in growing areas; or lower assets with which to finance the fixed
costs of a move.3b Although there have been historical periods in which less-educated workers in
the U.S. migrated in very large numbers (such as the south-to-north

migration of blacks between

the 1920s and the 1960s), it may take fair] y dramatic shifts in regional economic conditions to
overcome the costs and barriers faced by potential migrants across these areas .J7 Regardless of
their causes, the implications

of these shifts for employment and earnings differences among

groups may be quite substantial.
We must note several caveats in presenting these findings. Given the nature of our data,
we could only analyze the part of labor demand shifts that are between sectors (defined by twodigit industries) rather than within them. Our ability to distinguish changes in total labor demand
in an MSA from shifts in relative demand across different groups was also limited, given the

“For instance, Greenwood (1975) notes that college-educated migrants are much more likely to have a job
lined up prior to a move than are migrants with less education, which is consistent with the idea that the former are better
informed about job opportunities in other areas because their labor markets are often regional or national in scope.
Lansing and Mueller (1967) note that college-educated migrants report a greater role for economic factors in their
decisions to move than do the less-educated; and that blacks cite family/community reasons for moving or not moving
more frequently than do whites. Consistent with this, Stack (1996) presents a description of blacks returning to families
and communities in economically depressed areas of the rural South after having migrated northward in earlier periods
(though Frey (1995) also documents the return migration of blacks to metropolitan areas in the South, where economic
conditions are presumably more favorable). For evidence on the importance of informal networks among both whites
and blacks when searching for jobs, see Holzer (1987); and for evidence of much lower assets among blacks than whites,
see Blau and Graham (1990). Relative immigration rates across skill and racial groups might also be affected by relative
rates of marriage and differences in the presence of dual-earner families across these groups.
~7See Uhlenberg (1973) and Trotter (1994) for more discussion of the role of economic and social forces in
generating the out-migration of Southern blacks in the 1920s, and the relative lack of out-migration before that time.

27

fairly small number of MSAS for which we had sufficient numbers of blacks and whites within
education and experience groups.
Since we are analyzing data on population adjustments over a 10-year period we cannot
distinguish between short- and long-run responses to demand shifts. Nor can we distinguish
between expected and unexpected shifts. Nevertheless, the results presented here strongly
suggest that both demand shifts and supply adjustments contributed to the labor market problems
of less-educated

and black workers in declining areas in recent years. Further research on why the

adjustment mechanisms

are used more or less frequently by different groups (i.e., whether the

differences are caused by information, financial costs, etc.), and on the potential effects of
various policy options, should be high on our agendas.

28

Bibliography
Amemiya, Takeshi. “A Note on a Random Coefficients Model. ” International
Review 19( 1978): 793-96.

Economics

Acs, Gregory and Danziger, Sheldon. “Educational Attainment, Industrial Structure, and
Earnings: 1973 -87.” Journal of Human Resources 28 (1993): 618-48.
Bartik, Timothy. “Economic Development and Black Economic Success. ” Report to the
Economic Development Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 1992.
Bartik, Timothy. Who BenefLts from State and Local Economic Development Policies?
Upjohn Institute, 1991.

W.E.

Bartik, Timothy. “Who Benefits from Local Job Growth: Migrants or the Original Residents?”
Regional Studies 27 (1993): 297-311.
Blanchard, Olivier and Katz, Lawrence.
Activity (1992): 1-61.

“Regional Evolutions. ” Brookings Papers on Economic

Blau, Francine D., and Graham, John W. “Black-White Differences in Wealth and Asset
Composition.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (May 1990): 321-38.
Bluestone, Barry, Mary Stevenson, and Tiny, Christopher. “An Assessment of the Impact of
Deindustrialization and Spatial Mismatch on the Labor Market Outcomes of Young
White, Black and Latino Men and Women Who Have Limited Schooling. ” Report to the
National Science Foundation, 1992.
Bound, John and Freeman, Richard. “What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative Earnings and
Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980’s. ” Quarterly Journal of Economics
107 (Feb. 1992): 201-32.
Bound, John and Holzer, Harry J. “Industrial Structure, Skill Levels, and the Labor Market for
White and Black Males.” Review of Economics and Statistics 75 (Aug. 1993): 387-396.
Bound, John and Holzer, Harry J. “Structural Changes, Employment Outcomes, and Populations
Adjustments, 1980- 1990.” Institute for the Research on Poverty Discussion Paper #1 05795 Feb. 1995.
Bound, John, Jaeger, David A., and Baker, Regina M. “Problems with Instrumental Variables
Estimation when the Correlation Between the Instruments and the Endogenous
Explanatory Variables is Weak, ” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 90 (June
1995): 443-450.

29

Bound, John and Johnson, George. “Changes in the Structure of Wages: An Evaluation of
Alternative Hypotheses.” American Economic Review 82 (June 1992): 371-92.
Borjas, George J., Freeman, Richard B. and Katz, Lawrence F. “Searching for the Effect of
Immigration on the Labor Market. ” American Economic Review 86 (May 1996): 246251.
Bradbury, Katharine L., Downs, Anthony and Small, Kenneth A. Urban Decline and the Future
of American Cities. Washington, D. C.: The Brookings Institution, 1982.
Coulsen, Edward and Rushen, Steven. “Sources of Fluctuations
Journal of Urban Economics 38 (Feb. 1995): 74-93.

in the Boston Economy. ”

Dickens, William and Katz, Lawrence. Industry Wage Differences and Industry Characteristics. ”
In K. Lang and J. Leonard eds., Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets.
London: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Freeman, Richard. “Economic Determinants of Individual and Geographic Variation in
Employment Outcomes of Youth.” In R. Freeman and D. Wise, eds., The Youth Labor
Marker Problem. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Freeman, Richard. “Employment and Earnings of Disadvantaged Young Men in a Labor
Shortage Economy. ” In C. Jencks and P. Peterson eds., The Urban Underclass.
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1991.
Freeman, Richard B. “Manpower Requirements and Substitution Analysis of Labor Skills: A
Synthesis”, in Ronald Ehrenberg cd., Research in Lubor Economics 1 ( 1977): 151-184.
Frey, William. “The New Geography of Population Shifts. ” In R. Farley cd., State of the Union,
Vol. 2, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1995.
Greenwood, Michael. “Research in Internal Migration in the U.S. A Survey. ” Journal of
Economic Literature 13 (June 1975): 397-433.
Hamermesh, Daniel. Labor Demand.

Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1993.

Hauser, Robert. “Trends in College Entry Among Whites, Blacks, and Hispanics. ” In C.
Clotfelter and M. Rothschild eds., Studies of Supply and Demand for Higher Education.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Holzer, Harry J. “Informal Job Search and Black Youth Unemployment. ” American Economic
Review 77 (June 1987): 446-52.
Holzer, Harry J. “The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Has the Evidence Shown?”
Studies 28 (Feb. 1991): 105-22.

Urban

30

Holzer, Harry J. and Wayne Vroman. “Mismatches and Urban Labor Markets. ” In G. Peterson
and W. Vroman eds., Urban Labor Markets and Job Opportunities. Washington, D. C.:
Urban Institute, 1992.
Idson, Todd and Cynthia Miller. “The Implications of Demographic-Specific Inflation Rates for
Trends in Real Educational Wage Differentials. ” Manuscript, Columbia University,
1995.
Jaeger, David A. “Regional and bcal Area Impacts of Immigration on Natives Wages, ”
Manuscript, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 1996,
Johnson, James and Melvin Oliver. “Structural Changes in the U.S. Economy and Black Male
Joblessness: A Reassessment. ” in G. Peterson and W. Vroman eds., Urban Labor
Markets and Job Opportunities. Washington, D. C.: Urban Institute, 1992.
Jones, Ronald W. “The Structure of General Equilibrium Models.”
Economy 73 (Dec. 1965): 557-72.

Journal of Political

Juhn, Chinhui. “Wage Inequality and Industrial Change: Evidence from Five Decades. ” NBER
Working Paper 4684, 1994.
Kane, Thomas. “College Entry by Blacks Since 1970: The Role of College Costs, Family
Background, and the Returns to Education. ” Journal of Political Economy 102 (Oct.
1994): 878-911.
Karoly, Lynn and Jacob Klerman. “Demographics, Sectoral Change, and Changing Relative
Wages: A Regional Approach, ” Rand Corporation DRU-795-NICHD, 1994.
Kasarda, John. “Urban Industrial Transition and the Underclass. ” Annals of the American
Academy of Political and Social Science 501 (Jan. 1989): 26-47.
Katz, Lawrence and Kevin Murphy. “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-87: Supply and Demand
Factors.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (Feb. 1992): 35-78.
Krueger, Alan and Lawrence Summers. “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage Structure. ” In
K. Lang and J. Leonard (eds.), Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets.
hndon: Basil Blackwell, 1987.
Krugman, Paul. Geography and Trade, Cambridge: MIT press, 1991.
Lansing, John and Eva Mueller. The Geographic Mobili~ of Labor.
Research, University of Michigan, 1967.
Levy, Frank and Mumane, Richard.

Institute for Social

“U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings hequality:

A Review of

31

Recent Trends and Proposed Explanations. ” Jouma[ of Economic Literature 30 (Sept.
1992): 1333-81.
Long, Larry. Migration and Residential Mobili@ in the United States, New York: Russell Sage
Foundation, 1988.
MacKinnon, J.G. and White, H. “Some Heteroskedasticity-Consistent
Covariance Matrix
Estimators with Improved Finite Sample Properties.” Journal of Econometric,s 29
(Sept. 1985): 305-25.
Nelson, C. R., and Startz, R. “Some Further Results on the Exact Small-Sample Properties of the
Instrumental Variable Estimator.” Econometrics 58 (July, 1990a): 967-76.
Nelson, C. R., and R. Startz. “The Distribution of the Instrumental Variable Estimator and its tRatio when the Instrument is a Poor One.” Journal of Business 63 Part 2 (Jan. 1990b):
S 125-S 140.
Schwartz, Aba. “Interpreting the Effects of Distance on Migration. ” Journal of Political
Economy 81 (Sept. -Ott., 1973): 1153-69.
Stack, Carol. Call to Home: African-Americans
Books, 1996.

Reclaim the Rural South. New York: Basic

Terkla, David and Doeringer, Peter. “Explaining Variations in Employment Growth: Structural
and Cyclical Change among States and Local Areas.” Journal of Urban Economics, 29
(May 1991): 329-48.
Topel, Robert.
S143.

“Local Labor Markets. ” Journal of Political Economy 94 (June 1986): S111 -

Topel, Robert. “Wage Inequality and Regional Labor Market Performance in the United States. ”
Manuscript, University of Chicago, 1993.
Topel, Robert. “Regional Labor Markets and the Determinants
Economic Review 84 (May 1994): 17-22.
Trotter, Joe ed.. The Great Migration in Historical Perspective.
University Press, 1991.

of Wage Inequality. ” American

Bloomington:

Indiana

Uhlenberg, Peter. “Noneconomic Determinants of Nonmigration: Sociological Considerations
for Migration Theory. ” Ruraf Sociofogy 38 (Fall 1973): 296-311.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. “Geographical Mobility, March 1975March 1980.” Current Population Reports Series P-20, No. 368, 1981.

32
White, Halbert. “Heteroskedasticity-Consistent
for Heteroskedasticity.”
Econometrics

Covariance Matrix Estimation and a Direct Test
48 (May, 1980): 817-38.

White, Halbert. ” Instrumental Variables Regression with Independent Observations.”
Econometrics 50 (March, 1982): 483-499.

Figure 1: Lubor

Market

Adjustments

to an Adverse

Demand

Shock

I

D
.—

-

L;

L,,l
NO~.

_,_

__

“U”

—.——— —

~1

and “S” refer to unskilled

.-.. —.

.—.-— --- ----

L

Lo

and smcd

workers

respectively

Figure 2: Real Wage Growth for High School and College Graduates
Metro Areas with Populations over 2.5 Million in 1990

❑

❑

Change In Real Wages: HS

Change In Real Wages: Col

.1

0

nn
1

-

-

-

-.1

-.2

-.3

Phi

Bos
NY

LA

Chi
Dc

Det

Hou

SF

Figure 3: Effect of Demand on the Wages of College Relative to High School Graduates
Metro Areas with Populations over One Million in 1990

Pit
.2Cle

HOU Dal

Cin

Chi ‘L

Det

SF
Mia

Sea

.15Bal
Phi

Mln

NY
Dc

I

I
.15

Bos
I

,2

I

.25

Predicted Change In Demand

I

.3

I

.35

Labor Market Outcomes
by Demographic Group: 1979-89
(Means and Standard Deviations)
School or J,esS

Collepe or More

~

T, Hrs,

@

m

All Exp. Groups

-.14
(.09)

.00
(.04)

-.42
(.13)

-.41
(,14)

.01
(.06)

.04
(.02)

-.08
(.14)

-.04
(.14)

O-9 Years Exp.

-,12
(.13)

.00
(.05)

-.38
(.15)

-.38
(.18)

.02
(.08)

.04
(.02)

.00
(.19)

.04
(,20)

-.13
(.10)

.01

(.03)

-.43
(.13)

-.43
(.14)

.01
(.06)

.04
(.02)

-.08
(.14)

-.04
(.14)

Black Males

-.15
(.11)

-.02
(.09)

-.15
(.16)

-.17
(.20)

.01
(.11)

.03
(.06)

,04
(.21)

.07
(,23)

White Females

-,02
(.08)

.08
(.04)

-.59
(.14)

-.51
(.1 5)

.12
(.07)

.19
(.03)

.05
(.14)

.24
(.13)

Black Females

-.11
(.09)

-.02
(.09)

-.33
(.15)

-.35
(.1 7)

.03
(.10)

.17
(.07)

.10
(.18)

.27
(.19)

-.IO
(. 15)

.01
(.04)

-.40
(.16)

-.39
(.18)

.02
(.08)

.05
(.03)

.03
(. 18)

.08
(,19)

Black Males

-.[3
(.18)

-.04
(.14)

-.08
(.20)

-.12
(.28)

-.04
(.15)

.07
(.09)

.07
(.35)

.15
(.35)

White Females

-.01
(.11)

.07
(.05)

-.57
(,15)

-.50
(. 17)

.12
(.08)

.19
(.03)

.14
(,17)

.32
(.17)

Black Females

-,08
(.16)

.03
(.16)

-.26
(.16)

-,23
(.24)

.04
(.13)

.16
(,09)

.11
(.28)

.26
(.30)

All Experience Groups:
White Males

O-9 Years Experience:
White Males

Sample: 132 largest MSAS for the top two rows, 87 MSAS with the largest Black populations

for the rest.

Note: Observations are weighted by the average of 1980 and 1990 population shares, All variables are
memured as changes in logs, 1979-89. “T, Hrs.” represents Total Hours, which is the product of
population (“Pop.”) and the average hours per person (“Hours”). Calculations are based on the nonenrolled
and noninstitutional ized civilian populations aged 16 and over. Nominal wage changes have been deflated
by the log of the change in the CPI-U-X1 index between 1979-89.

7

,,
>U
mbD

00
-0

,,,,,,
ooooo~oo
Nw+m+.um

,,

0000

Wlulvlu

.1”

ooo~
Nul+o

.’

-o

.0000

0=

ul-m-

,,

.1

---NW

.,
N-

0000
mwwm

,,,,,,

OLOOOOOL

,

Wwumuowco

0000
0---

LWLW

Owow

0 o&
o 0 0
ooO-N-O-

00

,,,,
0000

Ommul

0000
----

.1

Table 3
Effects of Demand on Outcomes:
By Education and Experience
(Either-White Standard Errors in parentheses)

w
All Experince Groups:
College

R2
High School

R2
College

- H.S.

R2

0-9

Years Experience:
College

R2
High School

R2
College

- H.S.

R2

Sample:

m

~

T.Hrs\

.16
(.04)

,03
(.01)

.83
(.07)

,86
(.06)

,42
(.19)

.12
(.05)

.44
(.14)

.56
(.11)

.13

.07

.68

.71

.20

,19

.04

.06

.20
(.06)

.09
(.02)

.74
(,06)

.82
(.06)

.69
(.31)

.24
(,10)

-.05
(.29)

.20
(,22)

.09

.11

.57

.62

.24

.18

,00

.01

-.04
(.03)

-.05
(.02)

.09
(.06)

.04
(.06)

-.27
(.14)

-.13
(.06)

,49
(.23)

.36
(.21)

.02

.05

.02

,00

.14

.06

.10

.05

.18
(.05)

.01
(,02)

.95
(.09)

.97
(.09)

.58
(.24)

.Io
(.07)

1.14
(.29)

1,24
(.35)

.11

.0I

.46

.44

.24

.06

.14

.15

.32
(.09)

.04
(.04)

.88
(.06)

.92
(.08)

1.11
(.45)

.22
(.15)

.60
(,19)

.82
(.28)

,11

.01

.62

.51

.29

.06

.06

.08

-.13
(,05)

-.03
(.03)

.07
(,10)

.04
(.10)

-.53
(.23)

-.12
(.11)

.54
(,30)

.42
(.27)

.06

.O1

.00

.00

.20

.02

.05

.03

132 largest MSAS.

Note: A II regressions are population weighted. See text for details. The R2 memures for IV
from reduced-form equations where the dependent variables were regressed directly on the
The instrument used for IV estimates involves employment growth in the MSA as predicted
national growth of the local area’s industries, For details, see the text. The first stage R2 for
is 0.21, while the first stage F is 34.1.

estimates are
instrument.
from the
these estimates

Effects of Demand on Outcomes:
By Education, Experience, Race and Gender
Instrumental Variable Estimates
(Either-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)
Hi~h School or Less
All Experience Groups:
All Race/Sex
Populations

-

~

~

m

.79
(.37)

,25
(,11)

.09
(.30)

.34
(,22)

.46
(.22)

.11
(.05)

.41
(,17)

.52
(.14)

Whites Males

.82
(.44)

.22
(,07)

-.05
(.33)

.17
(.29)

.38
(,20)

.16
(.07)

.34
(.20)

.50
(.16)

White Females

,83
(.34)

.13
(.10)

-,34
(,40)

-.21
(.35)

.64
(.27)

.02
(.06)

.06
(,Q8)

,08
(.25)

Black Males

.98
(.40)

.62
(.30)

.50
(.25)

1.12
(.38)

.72
(.34)

,05
(, 10)

1.25
(.39)

1.30
(.40)

Black Females

.73
(.28)

.61
(.32)

.24
(,26)

.85
(.32)

.54
(.35)

.20
(,17)

1.18
(.44)

1.39
(,52)

1.24
(.53)

.21
(.17)

.84
(.20)

1.04
(.33)

.63
(.29)

.09
(.08)

I .04
(.28)

1.13
(,34)

White Males

1.39
(.66)

.12
(.09)

.73
(,26)

.86
(.32)

.58
(.29)

.18
(.10)

1.08
(.30)

1.26
(,37)

White Females

1.08
(,44)

.03
(.10)

.37
(.25)

.41
(.26)

.68
(.29)

-.02
(.08)

.54
(.21)

,52
(.24)

Black Males

1.86
(.67)

.66
(.38)

1.32
(.56)

1.97
(.88)

.83
(,40)

.26
(.13)

1.64
(.91)

I .90
(.93)

Black Females

1.27
(.47)

.75
(.57)

.81
(.28)

1.57
(.79)

,76
(.33)

-.01
(.17)

1.95
(.81)

1.94
(.91)

O-9 Years Experience:
All Race/Sex
Populations

Sample: 87 MSAS with the

largest Black populations. For details see the text.

Note: All regressions are population weighted. See text for details. The instrument used for estimates
involves employment growth in the MSA as predicted from the national growth of the local area’s
industries. For details, see the text. The first stage R2 for these estimates is ,21, while the first stage F is
22.4.

Table 5
Share of Total Hours Changes
Accounted for by Population Adjustments
Instrumental Variable Estimates
(Either-White Standard Errors in Parentheses)
!) -9 Years Experience

All Fxpe rience Grou~s
h Sc h 00~
gr Less
.24*

~eh
~

Sc hool
9r J,ess

pr mo re

(1.72)

.79
(,10)

.73
(.13)

.92
(.04)

-.27
(2.37)

.68
(.21)

.86
(.08)

.86
(.05)

1.60*
(.89)

.79*
(1.20)

.918
(.22)

1.04*
(.17)

Black Males

.45
(,17)

.96
(.08)

,67
(.08)

.87
(.08)

Black Females

.28
(.28)

.85

(.10)

,52
(.14)

1.01
(.09)

All Race/Sex Populations

mite

Males

White Females

Sample:

132 largest MSAS for the top two rows, 87 MSAS with the largest Black populations

for the rest.

Note: All regressions are population weighted. See text for details. Instrument used for estimates involves
employment growth in the MSA as predicted from the national growth of local area’s industries. With the
exception of those estimates indicatedwith a “*”, all first stage F’s are above 8.

Table 6
Relative Demand and Supply
Effects on Relative Wages:
College - High School
Instrumental Variable Estimates
(Either-White
Standard Errors in Parentheses)

1

2

L

A

Rel. Supply
(C - HS)

-.75
(.45)

-.49
(.28)

-.51
(.24)

-.34
(.21)

Rel. Demand
(C - HS)

.-.

.34
(.20)

---

...

Share of Mfg.

...

---

-.37
(.32)

---

Share of Mfg. + Cons.

---

..-

---

-.64
(.28)

R2

.14

.14

.20

.14

Sample: 132 largest MSAS.

regressions are population weighted. See text for details. In the IV estimates reported relative
supply is treated as endogenous, while all other variables are treated as exogenous.The R2 measuresare

Note: All

from reduced-formequations where

the relative wage memure is regressed directly on the relevant

exogenous variables. Excluded instrument used for

IV estimates

as predicted from the national growth of local area’s industries.
0,25, while the first stage F’s range from 7.0 to 31.8.

involves employment growth in the MSA
First stage partial R2’s range from 0.05 to

