                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             ASSESSING THE EFFECTIVENESS
                                 OF SAVING INCENTIVES




                                        R. Glenn Hubbard
                                       Jonathan S. Skinner




                                   NBER Working Paper 5686




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996



We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Alan Auerbach, Doug Bemheim, Dave Bradford, Eric Engen,
Martin Feldstein, Bill Gale, Douglas Joines, Andrew Samwick, Karl Scholz, Tim Taylor, Steve
Venti, and David Wise for helpful suggestions. Financial support from the Faculty Research Fund
of the Graduate School of Business of Columbia University, the American Enterprise Institute, and
the Securities Industry Association is gratefully acknowledged.    This paper is part of NBER’s
research program in Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by R. Glenn Hubbard and Jonathan S, Skinner, All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                           NBER Working Paper 5686
                                                                                         July 1996


                                  ASSESSING THE EFFECTWENESS
                                      OF SAVING INCENTIVES



                                               ABSTRACT


        In this paper, we argue that there is more to be learned from recent research on the

effectiveness     of targeted saving incentives than is suggested by the wide variation in empirical

estimates.      First, we conclude that characterizations   of “all new saving” or “no new saving” are

extreme; IRAs and401 (k) plans appear to stimulate moderate amounts of new saving. Second, we

suggest a cost-benefit approach to ask: What is the incremental gain in capital accumulation       per

dollar of foregone revenue? We find that for quite conservative measures of the saving impacts of

IRAs or 401 (k)s, the incremental gains in capital accumulation per dollar of lost revenue are large.




R. Glenn Hubbard                                                         Jonathan S. Skinner
Graduate School of Business                                              Department of Economics
Columbia University                                                      Dartmouth College
609 Uris Hall                                                            Rockefeller College
New York, NY 10027                                                       Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                                                 and NBER
   The past two decades have witnessed the introduction of a n@er       of ptilic

~licies   designed to provide incentives for hous~old saving. Individual

Retirement Accounts (IRAs)were first permittd     in 1974 to provide a tax-

preferred saving program for employees without pension plans.     The tax

advantage was the ability to defer paying taxes on tie “pension” contribution

until the assets were withdrawn at retirement. Espite    the fact that half of

all workers were eligible to contribute (because they had no pension plan at

that time), fewer than one    percent of taxpayers contributed.

   The Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981 expanded IRA eligibility to allow

virtually all working taxpayers to contribute, and IRA limits were increased.

In one year, IW    contributions rose from $5 billion to $28 billion.   Gver “Je

1982-1986 pericd, households contributedmre    than $170 billion to IRA

accounts; by 1986, IW    contributions were abcut one–fifth of aggregate

personal saving. The Tax Refom Act of 1986, however, excluded higher–income

taxpayers with qloyer-provided    pensions from making tax-deductible

contributions. Total tax-deducttile contributions fell by 62 percent in 1987,

and have r~ined     low since then.

   Another targeted saving program, the 401(k) plan, has become prominent in

recent years.    ;fiile401(k) plans became available since 1978, it was only

after the Bparment     of the Treasury clarified rules for their use in 1981

that ‘Aey attracted substantial interest. Like traditional 1-,     401(k) plans

involve tax-ceducribie contributions, no taxes paid on acmulated      interest

until the fun~    are withdraw, limits on annual contributions, and


                                        1
restrictions on early withdrawals. There are differences, however. A 401(k)

plan is available only to qloyees        of organizations tiat elect to s~nsor

such plans.     ~loyee    contributions to a 401(k) ocu    through regular payroll

deductions, whereas IRA contributions my       be made at the qloyee’s

discretion.     Finally, qloyers   can (and often do) supplment qloyee

contribution rates to a 401(k).

   A recent out~uring of research has analyzed the effectiveness of I=            and

401(k) plans in stimulating saving. Some researchers have found large and

significant ~sitive      effects of I-   and 401ks on saving behavior (see

Hubbardf 1984; Venti and Wise, 1986, 1987, 1988, 1991; and Poterba, Venti, and

Wise, 1994, 1995); the evidence favoring this view is marshaled       in Poterba,

Venti, and Wise (1996) in this s-sim.l           Others examine the same data and

find little or no saving effects of 401(k)s and I=,        as in the Engen, Gale,

and Scholz (1996) contribution to this s=sim.           In this paper, we first

revisit the tangled dbate over the effectiveness of saving incentives, and

suggest there is gd      reason to believe that the truth lies somewhere between

tie extremes of “no new saving” and “all new saving.”

   More fundamentally, even if one could broker an agreaent        among tie

warring factions on the ma@tude      of how IW    and 401(k) contributions affect

personal saving, further questions need to be answered. Suppcse, for exmple,

one settles on an intermediate esttite tiat 26 cents of every dollar ir,1~

contributions represents new saving. ~es       this mean that IRAs are a rousing

success? A corrrplete
                    faillxe? One cannot answer this question without knowing

something *ut     the cost of tie program, in tem      of foregone tax revenue. We


                                           2
develop    a cost-benefit approach which focuses on the incremental gain in

long-term capital acmulation     per dollar of foregone government revenue from

offering the savings incentive program. For even ~ite     conservative measures

of the saving effects of IRAs or 401ks, this approach estimates that the

incremental gains in capital accumulation per dollar of lost revenue are

generally large.

     Finally, even cost-benefit analysis of this sort does not allow one to

judge whetier saving incentives are a success, which we mean an irrtprovement
                                                                            in

welfare. To mke    this judgment, one must first isolate ~tential market

failures that cause people to save too little in the first place.    Gne than

can assess whether such failures are sufficiently serious to    justify the cost

of   targeted saving programs. We consider economic arguments that tight

justify having targeted saving incentives in the first place-- like social

benefits from increasing the size of the capital stock, relaxing the

intert-rai     distortion of cons~tion    and saving decisions made by

households, or @roving     the financial health of households to reduce the

govement’s    cost of welfare spending for @verished     elderly. While it is

difficult to attach a precise estkte     to the value of overcoming these

ptential   mrket   failures is difficult, the mst   compelling rationale for

saving incentives, in our judgent, is that such incentives help to overcome

what appears to be inade~ate financial planning for retiraent.
Individual Wti ~t      hu.n=:    What   Do We Know’?

     Households who contribute to IP.Aaccounts tend to be wealthier, older, and

have higher incomes than those who do not. A detailed pictwe    of the typical

1~   contributor, based on 20,000 observations from the Survey of Income and

Program Participation, canbe    taken from Venti and Wise (1991). In 1985, for

ex~le,    four percent of households with incomes less than $20,000 and witi

household heads between the ages of 25 and 34 enrolled in 1-.     Holding

income constant at less than $20,000, this fraction rises to 18 percent among

those between the ages of   55 and 64. Holding age constant, IP,Acontributions

rise dramatically with income. For exarrrple,
                                            among those age 55-64 and with

income of $20,000 to $40,000, contribution rates were 50 percent (compared to

18 percent for those with income less than $20,000, as noted tive);   for

people of the same age with income over $40,000, contribution rates were Wve

70 percent.   Contributors also tend to hold mre   wealth than noncontributory.

In 1983, at the outset of the 1~ program, median non-I~ wealth of

contributors (age 65 and younger) was $13,500 (Venti and Wise, 1992). By

1986, media   non-I~weal~    of contributors had risen to $21,695 (Gale and

Scholz, 1994), largely because IRA contributors also tend to save more in non-

1~   assets.: By contrast, the median noncontributoryheld only $3,000 in

liquid assets.   IRA contributors clearly have a greater taste for saving than

noncontributory.




                                         4
Indiviti     Wti ~t     munts      ~    Ho@old    ~ving   :   ~=ry

      Much of the analysis by economists of households’ cons~tion        and saving

decisions is conducted using versions of the life-cycle model. In its mst

basic form, the model implies that households save during their working lives

to finance retirement cons~tion.         The pattern of saving over an individual’s

lifetime depends on the rate of return to saving, that individual’s

preferences over present and future cons~tion,        and the time profile of

earnings. The current generation of life-cycle mdels           adds two feat~es   to

the basic approach: imperfect markets for lending, so that households face

lfits on their ability to brrow        against future resources to finance current

spending, and @erfect     markets for insurance, so that uncertainty over, inter

alia, future length of life, earnings, or medical expenses, can generate

“precautionary saving” by households.3

      In the context of the life–cycle mdel,     a savings incentive like an IR4 or

a 401(k) plan    raises the rate of return for saving done through the      mechanism


of tiat account or plan. However, econotic tieory teaches that the incentive

raises a household’s total saving only if the higher rate of ret~          affects

the household at the mrgin      -- that is, for an incremental dollar of saving.

Roughly three-fourths of all contributors in any given year depsit         the full

IR4 limit in tieir account. Several corrunentators
                                                have used this fact as prti

facie evidence that IW     could not generate new saving, because they offer no

marginal ir,c~ntiveto save after the limit is reached (see, for exan-tple,

B~,       Cordes, and Ozanne, 1990; and Gravelly, 1991).


                                           5
      But this conclusion is too quick. ~    analysis of cons~tion     (and saving)

decisions over a lifetime requires a focus on lifetime limits, not annual

ltits .    From a lifetime perspective, the relevant limit on 1~       contributions

is not the annual limit of, say, $2,000 or $4,000, but the lifetime ltit.~

Gale and Scholz (1994) d~nstrated     that only 30 percent of 1~       contributors

contribute at the limit for each of three years, implying that the remaining

70 percent of 1~    contributors faced a mrginal    incentive in at least one of

the three years. This evidence suggests that the IRA lfits are binding for

few households, even in the relatively short term. Raember,      even if no

contributions are made during the intervening year, the IRA provides a

marginal, if unused, incentives

      Some economists eschew the ass~tions    of life–cycle mdel,    and focus

instead on psychological issues of self-control and myopic cons~tion

behavior (Thaler, 1994). This focus suggests tiat households are not

optimizing life–cycle agats,    respnding to marginal saving incentives as &.e>-

mke    lifetime cons~tion   and retirement plans.    Instead, they are myopic

decisionmakers who have trouble saving for retirement and who res~nd        to

programs that encourage self control in setting aside assets future

cons~tion.      In this view, IRAs and 401(k)s mtivate    saving bth    because of

the tiediate    reward of the tax deduction (includingthe pleasure of denying

the IRS its due) and the fact that money is placed “off limits” for current

consqtion.     There is some evidence consistent with this view. For ex~le,

taxpayers are far more likely to contribute to an IRA if they owed money to

the IRS in excess of taxes withheld (Feenbergand Skinner, 1989). Apparently,


                                        6
taxpayers would rather write a tineckfor $2,000 to an 1~           tian a heck   for

$800 to the IRS.’ Similarly, the life-cycle @el          predicts that optimizing

agents should contribute early in tie year to their 1~         to maximize t=

benefits.    However, roughly 40 percent of IRA contributors during tie 1984 tax

year filed quite late, actually in calendar year 1985 (Statistics of Income,

1984).7

       Dth   the life-cycle and the behavioral saving tiels        suggest that 1~

and 401(k)s have at least the ptential to promte         saving even in the short

term. However, the magnitude of such an effect can only be detetined by

linking at qirical     evidence.



Individual wti~t        ~     m    ti     Ho*old   Saving: Evib=

   Asessing how much I-      affect saving in tie short term is more difficult

than it might first appear. A complete analysis would require a significant

munt    of information -ut    households: their taxable assets and tax-favored

assets, along with earnings, age, and demographic characteristics like marital

status or ntier    of children ‘&at affect consqtion       and saving decisions.

Households are also likely to have different underlying preferences for saving

that are not observable. me    means of controlling for different household

preferences is to use panel &ta         on the same households over time, thus

tracking partialar    househol&, but even this approach will not help if

preferences tiut    saving vary over time. Some of the differing opinions of

savings incentives-–and the tiiguities in results–-reflect data ltitations
that have constrained the ways in which economists have been able to examine

effects of saving incentives on household saving.

   Before delving into econometric issues, it is useful to consider what

people say when asked but    how they funded their 1~       contributions. In a

1983 survey of 1~    contributors, Johnson (1985) found that: “hut      half of the

respondents said they would have saved it an~ay.      hut     10 percent said they

would have spent it all, while but      40 percent said they would have spent

some and saved some.” He estimated that of the $32 billion in 1~

contributions in 1983, $10 billion co~rised new saving, or 31 cents per

dollar of IM    contribution. Of course, economists are trained to treat sud.

survey evidence with skepticism unless supprted by structural or econometric

studies. While the range of econometric estimates of effects of IRAs on

saving is broad, we argue below that the qirical      evidence is roughly

consistent with this survey data.

   At the high end of the range of effects are the results of Venti and Wise

(1986, 1987, 1988, 1990, 1991). They tiel      the choice among three qti:

cons~tion,     tax-favored (IRA) saving, and taxable (liquid) saving. They

reason that if IRA saving is a perfect substitute for taxable saving, ther.hk.e

individual will Mediately    shift taxable saving into I-,       because IRAs of~ec

the higher net-of-tax rate of return.       If, however, 1~    are imperfect

substitutes, for oti.erfom    of saving, then some IRA contributions will ccr.e

not at the expense of taxable saving, but at the expense of current

consqtion.     In this case, 1~ contributions represent new saving. In

evidence from a series of papers, Venti and Wise estimate that 45–66 percenr


                                        8
of the increase in 1~     contributions comes at the expense of current

cons~tion,    while hut     30 percent comes from the tax subsidy, and between 3

and 20 percent comes from a reshuffling of existing saving.       (Note that we

subtract   the tax break –– the 30 percent tive      -– in assessing what part of

the IRA is new saving. Hence our reprted net saving effect could be -30

percent–-for ex~le,      if the individual funded 70 percent or the IRA with

shuffled saving, and spent the remaining 30 percent from the reduction in tax

liability.)

   my   might 1~    and non-IF.Asaving be ~rfect      substitutes? Gale and

Scholz (1994) make an @rtant       advance by focusing explicitly on the

illiquidity of 1~ balances. A household may be concerned that, at some

futme pint,     its savings will be locked up in an IRA when the funds are

needed, perhaps to respnd to a a medical mergency or a decline in future

income. The earlier approach of Venti and Wise implicitly treats hth       saving

and consqtion      as “goods.” By contrast, in the approach of Gale and S&olz,

saving 1s not an end in itself, but a means to tie end of future con.s~tion.

   To sort out the explanations for the observed relationships among 1~

contributions and savings, Gale and Scholz (1994) derive the @lied        saving

function for a particular set of household preferences, where saving is a

function of wealth and age. Their ~el        is also more general than ti.atof

Venti and Iiiseby allowing for a difference in tastes saving by 1~

contributors compared to noncontributory. Gale and Scholz compare saving

behavior of contributors who are at the IRA limit with contributors who are

not at the limit –- assuming that bcth groups have a comn       tasted for savings


                                         9
-- to identify the effect of changes in the 1~ contribution ltit       on national

saving. Their estfites show that IRAs have a negative, or at best, zero

effect on saving for tie sqle       as a whole. These results suggest that 1~

contributions come ahst       entirely from saving that would have been done in

the absence of any incentives.

      What’s going on here?    The intuition behind the Venti and Wise result is

that My     households, even those with very high income, do not contribute to

I-.      According to the logic of the Venti-Wise mdel,    if IRAs and taxable

saving were perfect substitutes, then everyone should contribute. However,

even among high–income households, roughly one–fourth do not contribute.

Hence 1~     must be @erfect     substitutes for non–IRA saving, whiti -lies

that 1~    contributions are coming from reducing current cons~tion     and

increasing overall savings.       However, in the Gale and Scholz approach, the

fact that some househol& do not contribute to I-        is interpreted as evidence

that those households have little or no taste for saving.      If so, then (as

Gale and Scholz suggest) the Venti and Wise results my      be biased upward.     IW.

contributors save more not because of the existence of an IR4 prograrr,,
                                                                       but

because they like to save, in bth      IP.Aand non-I~ vehicles.

      In contrast, the Gale and Scholz (1994) estimates that IRAs have no irrpact

on saving are probably biased downward, given the extreme fragility of their

result.    In “he Gale and Scholz estfites, they aclude households who

re~rted more (in absolute value) than $100,000 in saving. Using this same

exclusion criterion, Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996) reprogrammed the Gale and

Scholz econometric model, and ticked       tie Gale and Scholz benchmark result


                                          10
that I-     have zero (or negative) effects on total saving for this same

$100,000 ~clusion    rule.    However, when Poterba, Venti, and Wise reduced the

exclusion limit to $90,000, or increased it to $110,000, thereby adding or

subtracting just a few observations, the estimated coefficient flipped around

-- in kth     cases –– @lying    that 1~    were atirely new saving.

      Because there are so my    probl~    with estimating specific models of IP.A

contributions, a ntier      of authors have turned to longitudinal studies of

saving behavior, using repeated sqles           over a ntier of years to assess the

extent to which households “reshuffle” existing saving into IP.As. The basic

idea is to use saving and 1~      inforrrationon the same (or similar) households

over time. In one such study, Feenberg and Skinner (1989) used the

IRS/University of Michigan longitudinal survey of taxpayers over the period

from 1980 through 1984.      They found that, even after controlling for initiai

assets in 1980-81, taxpayers who contributed to 1~          also saved substantially

mre    in non–IRA assets.    While this evidence weighs against the simplest

story of shuffled saving between taxable balances and 1~ balances, it car~not

be interpreted as proof that I-      generate new saving. One cannot control fo~

all pssible    reasons leadng to a change in the taste for saving.        If a

household decided to increase its overall saving because of mending

retirement, for ex~le,       it tight be expected to do so in a variety of

investments including IP.As,even if 1~          have no independent effect on their

tastes or saving choices.

      In a different test of the h~thesis        that IRA contributions represent new

saving, Joines and Manegold (1995) co~are assets and income of new 1~


                                           11
contributors with those who purchased 1~    before the expansion of eligibility

in 1982, also using the IRS/University of Michigan taxpayer panel.    The thrust

of the Joines–Manegold test is the following: If IRA contributions are new

saving, then new contributors in 1982 should increase tieir saving by mre

than continuing contributors. They find that the marginal effects on saving of

increasing the ltit   on IRA contributions by one dollar are 26 cents or 29

cents of new saving. In addressing a slightly different question, they find

that 19 cents to 26 cents out of each dollar of the typical IRA contribution

is financed by new saving. Their confidence intervals, however, are wider––

between -16 cents to 54 cents in the first case, and -8 cents to 60 cents in

the second. “

     In another recent salvo on this subject, Attanasio and E   Leire (1994)

compare saving behavior of households just opening an IRA (“new” contributors)

with that of households previously making contributions (“old” contrtiutors).

Their approach is therefore stilar in spirit to Manegold and Joines –– in

that they co~are   only new IRA contributors with old IRA contributors -- but

they have mre   coqlete   data on both changes in assets and changes in

cons~tion    for the two groups. Using data from Consmer Expenditure Survey,

they test to see whetier newly contributing households decrease their non-1~

assets or their cons~tion     to fund contributions. They find that new

contributors do not have slower cons~tion    growth, but do experience slower

gro~ti of non-IRA assets, whiti they interpret as sup~rting tie claim that

1~   contributions largely represent reshuffld, not new, saving.




                                       12
   However, this interpretation evaluates evaluating only the reshuffling

that takes place in the first year for a “neti contributor. Even if one

assumes that nearly all 1~     contributions by new contributors are shuffled,

one still finds tiat the old contributors –- in the steady state, the vast

majority of all contributors –– are barely shuffling at all.    When we

reinterpreted the Attanasio and D    Leire results in this light, we found as

much as 49 cents of new saving per $1 contribution to an IF.Aaccount (Hubbard

and Skinner, 1995).

   We have argued that the econometric studies finding very large saving

effects are probably biased upward, and the econometric studies finding very

small or negative saving effects are probably biased downward. Cotiined witi.

survey data and other studies suggesting an intermediate impact of I-      on

saving, we believe that a conservative estimate of the effect of I-       on

personal saving would be hut     26 cents per dollar of IRA contribution.”



401k Plans: What Do We fiow?




   Enrollees in 401(k) savings plans lcok muti different from 1~

contributors. Rrrployeeswith low levels of income are far more likely to

participate in a 401k saving plan (when their qloyer     offers su~. a plan),

then they are to have an IRA. ~ng     workers eligible for a 401(k) plan making

between $15,000 and $20,000 annually in 1993, the participation rate was 55

percent, rising to 83 percent for workers eamingmre      than $50,000. ~ng

younger workers at fim   with 401(k)s, contribution rates in 1993 were 55


                                        13
percent for 21-30 year-olds, rising to 67 percent for 31-40 year-olds, and

over 70 percent for older groups to age 65 (Yakohski, 1993).     In other words,

the participation rate for 401(k)s is far higher, especially mng      low-income

workers and younger workers, than was the participation rate for IRAs.

   Esttiting   how 401(k) plans affect household saving should be easier tian

it has proven for IP..As.
                        Individuals who contribute to I-     are likely to be

more favorably dispcsed toward saving than those who do not contribute, which

makes the task of distinguishing the mrginal   effect of IRAs on saving

difficult. By contrast, some firms offer 401(k) plans to qloyees,     and others

do not.   It is more appealing to assert that two different groups -- those who

are eligible for 401(k)s and tiose who are not eligible -– are households that

share cortunon
             characteristics, the saving behavior of workers eligible and not

eligible for 401(k)s.

   Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1994) co~are the saving khavior     of workers

eligible and not eligible for 401(k)s. They include in their s~le     the wy

workers who are eligible to contribute to a 401(k) plan, but choose not to CO

so, to avoid the criticism that individuals who choose to contribute to

401(k)s were eager savers anyway. Gne finding illustrates the flavor of their

results: In 1984, median financial assets excluding 401(k) and 1~. balances,

for those households earning in the $40,000 to $50,000 income range, were

roughly the same for the two groups. Those assets remained generally Unti.anged

between 1984 ad   1991, Between 1987 and 1991, however, median financial

wealti of tiose eligible for 401(k) plans rose drmtically,    largely because

of ~Ol(k) contributions. (Unfortmately, no infomtion    is avail~le    in the


                                      14
Poterba-Venti-Wise data for 1984 on 401(k) balances.) Assting         that the two

groups -- 401 (k)-eligibleand 401 (k)-ineligiblehouseholds with equal incomes

-- hold stilar    tastes toward saving, and assting the co~sition       of these

workers did not change by much between 1987 and 1991, one might conclude that

401(k)s are entirely new saving.

   One pssible    problem with this conclusion is tiat, if firms replace

defined benefit pension plans with 401(k) plans, workers may show an increase

in assets without any effects on overall (pensionplus individual) saving.

The actual munt    of such substitution is likely to be =11,     however. Papke

(1995) estimates that there is a~st    no substitution of 401(k) for defined

contribution plans ~ng    large fire, but that mng     smaller firms, the

introduction of a 401(k) plan increases the probability of a termination of a

defined benefit pension plan by tiut    9 percentage pints.    However, such

small fim    account for fewer than one-fourth of all ~loyees     with 401(k)

plans .

   ~   additional difficulty witi tie Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1994)

co~arisons   is that ‘be 1984 survey data do not include information tiut

existing 401(k) plans.   ~gen,   Gale, md   Scholz (1996) for ex~le     argue that

many of these early 401(k) plans were s@ly     converted from taxable thrift

plans organized prior to 1981, but shifted into 401(k)s to take advantage of

their tax-preferred status. Hence the apparent rise in wealth affect 401 (i:)-

eligible househol& ‘between1984 and 1987 could be illusory,      (This pint    does

not affect comparisons between 1987 and 1991, of course.)      Gne problem with

assessing this bias is that while we bow    tiat a large fraction of 401(k)


                                       15
plans were converted from thrift plans (Engen,Gale, and Scholz, 1996), we

know nothing ~ut     the size of tie balances shifted.

   A third difficulty is that firms whose qloyees     are eager savers might

also be the ones most likely to @laent      a 401(k) plan.   Then workers

eligible for 401(k) plans would be systatically     different from those not

eligible, a pint    stressed by Engen and Gale (1995) and by and Engen, Gale,

and Stiolz   (1996). This h~thesis    is very hard to test because one cannot

co~are   saving behavior of the two groups after the 401(k) plans have been

@lemated,      since such co~arisons would be contaminated by the “treatment”

of having offered the 401(k). The likelihood of this “self selection” of

401(k)s by ~loyees     who are eager savers is plausible for small firms, though

unlikely for workers at very large firms.

   A fouti problem is the “dilution” effect of comparing 401(k) contributors

and noncontributory over time. For example, suppse that there are “eager”

savers and “causal” savers in the ppulation. The earliest participants in

401(k) plans are likely to be the eager savers, so tiat in 1987, a high

proprtion    of 401(k) participants would be eager savers. By 1991, however,

causal savers would account for a larger fraction of 401(k) participants

(Bernheim, 1994b). In otier words, given the expansion of 401(k) accounts

between 1984 and 1991, the typical 401(k) contributor by 1991 my    be less

inclined toward saving tian the typical contributor circa 1984, so the PO1      of

savers is “dilutd.”     For example, Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) found a

decline in total financial wealth among 401(k) contributors between 1987 and

1991; they interpret ‘his to mean that 401(k) contributions were entirely


                                       16
offset by declines in otier aspects of financial wealth. A more likely

explanation, however, is that the P1     of 401(k) contributors became diluted

during this perid.    The fraction of 401(k) contributors who also have an 1~

account –– a rough indicator of a prior taste for saving --     declined from 48

percent in 1987 to 37 percent in 1991.

   Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996a) and ~gen      and Gale (1995) bth    find that,

                is separated into two groups-–those who had an 1~
when the sarriple                                                        account in

1987 and those who did not––there was an increase in financial assets among

401(k) contributors in each group.l” This latter co~arison does not prove,

of cowse,   that 401(k) contributions increase net wealth, because other

aspects of dilution may be biasing these co~arisons      (see Bernheim, 1996).

Econometric estimates of how 401(k)s affect saving behavior are bedeviled by

tie same problem encountered in the IM      researchs--the difficulty in

controlling for unobsemable tastes for saving in the ppulation.

   Fifth,   recent research by Engen and Gale (1995) suggests a different path

by which 401k assets could be shuffled -- through home equity lines of cretit.

Their results suggest that the rise in 401k contributions since 1987 have been

rratd,ednearly dollar for dollar by an increase in home equity debt, implying

that people with 401(k) plans are much more likely to use their home equity

line of credit.   In fact, developments in tie banking industry have made it

increasingly easy to tap into home equity. However, the Engen-Gale finding

has been criticized, first by Bernheim (1996) on a priori groun&        that tfie

percentage of 401 (k)-eligible households with home equity lines of credit (or

whc hught   a house) is too -11   to give rise to the very large extent of the


                                       17
housing equity offset.        Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996) offer an empirical

criticism ; they find no difference in the ~rcentage changes in housing

equity between the two groups.:~

    Overall, the evidence supprts the view that 401(k) balances have not been

offset by a demulation        of financial assets such as stocks, hnds,   and

checking accounts. Whether 401(k) contributions are offset by decreases in

home equity is, however, still an open question. Our reading of the evidence

is that 401(k)s largely represent new saving, if only because there is so

little in the fom   of other financial assets, or home equity among low income

and younger 401(k) contributors. We nonetheless recognize that the precise

fraction of 401(k)s representing new saving is still under debate.




A ~st-~it~rcach           b    Saving   In~tives

    Even if targeted saving incatives have only moderate effects on saving, a

puzzle remain. Suppse    that a particular saving incentive generates only four

cents of new saving per dollar of contribution to the savings plan.        Is this a

successful program?   The correct answer is: It depends on the cost.       If this

program loses only one cent of tax revenue per dollar of contribution, then

the answer might well be yes -- after all, the ~licy      results in fom   dollars

in new saving per one dollar in revenue cost.

    For the 1~ program, we can capture this benefit-cost intuition by

defining a



                                                                      1
ratio:             A Private Capital Accumulation  per $1 IRA
                  [       A Net Tax Revenue per $1 IRA



                                            18
Bth    the nmerator   and denominator are stocks rather than flows, and are

defined for a particular time period after the initial IRA contribution. For

exqle,     suppse   that the taxpayer is in the 36 percent tax bracket, and that

26 cents of the 1~    contribution represents new saving, as estimated by Joines

and Manegold (1995). Recall that the 26 cents of new saving is in addtion       to

the 36 cent tax break which is also depsited in the IRA.:Z      The growth in

net capital acmulation      in the equation tive would therefore be 62 cents (36

cents saved through reduced tax liability plus 26 cents of new saving),

divided by the revenue loss of 36 cents. The benefit-cost ratio for the first

year after the IRA contribution is therefore 62/36, or 1.72.    In other words,

there is an increase in private saving of $1.72 per $1 loss in government

revenue.    If the 1~ program were financed through deficit spending, the net

impact of the IRA on capital accumulation in the first year would be $0.72 per

dollar of revenue loss--or the increase in private saving ($1.72) less the

increase in government debt ($1.00).

      However, the benefit-cost ratio in just the first year is rnisleadng. IR~s

lose additional revenue over time, because taxes are pst~ned     on fur.dsthat

would have been saved in taxable fore, but IRAs tien generate revenue when

funds are withdrawn. In calculating the benefit-cost ratio, we therefore foc~s

on the change in the stcck of private wealth accumulate over the period for

whiti the II?Ais held, divided by the accumulated tax revenue loss over the

same period.




                                        19
   Such calmlations require ass~tions         tiut   interest rates, tax rates, the

length of time for which the 1~      is held, and the tax treatient of the saving

had it been saved in a taxable form. Because most of the esttites        from

existing studies are based on data from the 1982–1986 ~riod,       we use the tax

regime for that period in our benchmark calculations. We assne       a holding

period of 22 years--which corres~nds to buying the IRA at age 50, and cashing

it out at age 72i3-–foran initial marginal tax rate of 36 percent (Joines and

Manegold, 1995), a final retiraent tax rate of 28 percent, an average tax

rate on interest and dividend income of 32 percent, and a 60 percent exclusion

for capital gains.     The representative portfolio, whether invested in an IRA

or taxable assets, is assmed    to be 29 percent in equity initially, with the

rminder    in a combination of long-term and short–tern hn&       an aggregate

~rtfolio   consistent with 1985 data (~RI, 1994).’4 During the period from

1900 to 1990, the gmmetric mean of the nominal return in the stock market was

9.35 percent, and the gmmetric mean of a portfolio with one-half short–tern

knds   and one-half long-term hnds    was 4.0 percent (Siegel, 1992).

   Assur@ptionstiut     the discount rate used for government debt are crucial

in these evaluations; if we use the low yield on government debt during this

period, saving incentives exhibit very large (or even self-financing) effects

on capital acmulation,     largely because of the arbitrage that ocoxs     when ~he

govement   can hrrow    at a low rate of interest, but tax the higher equity

returns of tie IM or 401(k) investors.l~ Instead, we use a higher nominal

discount rate for government d&t     of 5.55 percent; this corresponds more




                                         20
closely to the historical returns on stocks and hnds    noted tive, with a 29

percent share of equity and 71 percent share of knds.

   Table 1 presents calculations of our measure of the additional private

capital acmulation    per dollar of foregone tax revenue, for a wide range of

e~tfites.   The first row in Table 1 shows how the marginal @act    of IR4s on

capital accumulation depends on ass~tions    but   the fraction of IRA

contributions that are new saving. When there is no new saving from the IRA

contribution –– in other words, 64 percent of the IRA is funded by existing

saving, and 36 percent funded by the reduction in tax liability -——    an 1~

program lea&   to an increase in private saving of only   $0.22. Under the

ass~tion    that the 1~   is d~t-financed, the net national capital stock would

fall by 78 cents (22 cent increase in private saving, one dollar reduction in

government saving).                   estimate of 26 cents in new saving, as
                      At a corrrpromise

suggested by Joines and Manegold (1995), the -lied     increase in private

capital accumulation is $2.21 cents per dollar devoted to the 1~   program.

Thus, even for a deficit-financed IRA, the net capital stock increases by

$1.21. A relatively tiest    saving effect of IRAs can translate into a

substantial “bang for the buck” in terms of capital growth ~r   dollar of

foregone tax revenue. The estimated effects are even larger when the marginal

saving effect is 40 c~.ts per $1 1~   contribution ($4.31 increase in the

private capital stock) or 60 cents ($12.01 increase in the private capital

stock),

   However, this calculation omits a @tentially ~rtant       effect: The

increased supply of lc~~tile funk provided by I-     will likely be used by


                                       21
                        Ne\vPrivate            of Revenuebss
                                 SavingperDollar


                   o     10        19      26        40         60
                 Cents Cenk       Cents   Cents    Cents       Cents
  Baseline      SO.22    $0.81   $1.51    $2.21    $4.31    $12.01



  Include        0.22     0.97    2.33    4.84    self-     self-
  eorporate                                       fiancing fmarlcing
  inmme Wx
  revenue

  Current
        t~~    0.04       0.63    1.35    2.09      4.45       15.51
  rates
      and
  portfolio
         share




Table 1: Change in Net Capital Accumulation Per Dollar Incrcnse in
Government Revenue Lost on Individual Retirement Accounts
Sozirce: Authors’ calculations.
co~rations    for increased investment, which in turn will generate income and

co~rate    tax payments. Feldstein’s (1995) analogous calculations to measure

the dyntic   revenue loss of the IRA program include this co~rate     tax effect.

We include the effect of co~rate     taxation in our model by assting    that only

e~ity   investments are subject to the 34 percent mrginal   co~rate     tax rate

used in Feldstein (1995). Because combined (co~rate    plus individual) tax

revenue losses are roller in this scenario, the predicted -act        on private

capital acmulation     of one dollar in tax revenue is $4.84 at the benchmark

saving effect of 26 cents per dollar of IRA contribution. For sufficiently

high contributions to new savings, the 1~ becomes self–financing; as

Feldstein notes, it can actually generate revenue rather than losing revenue.

   The tax regime has changed substantially since the mid-1980s.      The third

row of Tabie 1 repeats the calculation using more current tax parameters. In

these scenarios, we assume a marginal tax rate of 28 percent for contrtiutors,

a 24 percent mrginal   tax rate at retiraent, no exclusion for capital gains,

and an average 26 percent tax rate on dividends and interest. To reflect the

increasing aggregate share of equities in IW     (EBRI, 1994), we also assume

that plan assets are divided equally between stocks and tinds.   The estimated

incraental @act      is quite similar ($2.09) to the pre–1986 tax rules for our

assmed mi~int     esttite of 26 cents of new saving.

   To smarize,    IW    need not stimulate very substantial amounts of new

saving per lost dollar of revenue to generate favorable marginal increases in

tie capital stock per dollar of initial revenue loss. The intuition is that

even if the aggregate effects of a given 1~ program are not large -– in terms


                                       22
of overall increases in net saving -- the revaue costs can be even smaller,

especially once the offsetting effects of higher coprate       taxes are taken

into account.

   Similarly, est-ting     the effectiveness of 401(k) plans depends on how

they affect capital acmulation    per dollar of foregone revenue. However,

since there are fewer estimates of how 401(k)s affect saving behavior,

developing a benchmark estimate is mre   difficult. Gn the one hand, if

401(k)s did not crowd out any other types of saving, the incremental private

capital accumulation per dollar of revenue cost would be $94, which is likely

to pass nearly any threshold of effectiveness.l~ If sorting or reshuffling

accounts for fully half of tie observed increase in wealth acmulation,          the

401(k) program still generates a net increase of $3.60 in private saving Per

dollar of revenue cost.



AWelfm-Th~~tic      ~mch      b   Satings In=ti=

   Suppse   for the sake of arwent    that by rtisin~
                                                   t=es by $1.00 and using

the revenue to expand the 1~ program, private saving would rise by $2.21. (B\/

raising taxes and then distributing that mney      as a t=   break, no public

dissaving is created, so the entire *act    of the plan is on private savings,

as in the first row of Table 1.) This increase in the capital stock is not

rr-a   from heaven; rather, it is the consequence of households consuming less

today in anticipation of consuming additional resources in the future (at

retiraent) . my   fund “Mough distortionary taxes a program which shifts

househol&   away from their presently favored level of cons~tion      to one that


                                       23
favors retir~~t   cons~tion      to a greater extent? TO offer an economic

justification for the existence of saving incentives, one must identify a

distortion that the saving incentives are designed to overcome. We consider

several pssibilities.~’

    A figh Social Value of &pital Accumulation. To argue for substantial

external effects of increased capital acaulation,     one must appeal to models

in whiti capital or invesdent yield psitive external effects on productivity

or output, as in the models of    Romer (1986) or King and Rebelo (1990).

Others have noted the close correlation between saving and inveshent    rates,~’

and between inveshent rates and Solow residual measures of productivity

growth (see Schultze, 1992, page 242). Hence the notion that a larger capital

stock yields social external &nefits    is certainly a valid one, but it is

difficult to quantify. me     problem with this rationale is that current saving

incentives are not well-suited to this purpose. They include restrictions on

contributions and the forced withdawal of assets at older ages, med.ani.m

not designed to entice the wealthiest households -- those who accoun~ for the

bulk of the nation’s saving -- to save much more.

   Reducing the Distortion Between Current and Retirement Cons~tion.

Standard life-cycle models predict that tie tax on interest income distorts

consumption at retirement years (see, for exarriple,
                                                   Feldstein, 1978). Shiftir.g

one dollar of current cons~tion     to the future at the gross return should

provide a first-order welfare gain approximated by the wedge between the gross

and net return. However, the IRA and 401(k) program is a leaky bucket in




                                        24
effecting this transfer from ~rent     to retiraent cons~tion    since to the

extent revenue is lost because of partial shuffling.

   We use this intuition to consider the ex~le     in the section tive,    using

the baseline parameter ass~tions     and a marginal saving effects of 26 cents

per dollar of IW   contribution. First, we assme that cons~tion       in the year

of the 1~   contribution, say 1996, declines by 26 cents per dollar of 1~

contribution. Based on our calculations of the returns to this IRA,

cons~tion   at the end of the 22-year holding period, in 2020 rises by 94.5

cents after all taxes are paid.lg By tie first-order conditions, the

individual is just indifferent to consuming 26 cents today, or putting that 26

cents in the bank to acmulate    at the taxable rate of return, yielding 70.2

cents in the future period.   The private individual gain from the the IR4 is

an extra 24.3 cents in the year 2020 (the 94.5 cent benefit less the

(accumulated) foregone cost of consuming today, equal to 70.2).

   While the indiviauai is better off, the government loses revenue.      The t=

loss, acmulated    up to the year 2020, is 55.6 cents per dollar of

contribution. Raising tiat revenue is likely itself to entail a dea~eight

cost, whiti Ballard e~ al. (1985) calculate to be *ut     30 cents per dollar cf

revenue. Hence the total resource cost of funding the 1~ program under Lhese

assumptions is 55.6 x 1.3, or 72.3 cents, which exceeds the benefit to the

individual of 24.3 cents; hence the saving incentive would fail tie cost

benefit test judged solely on reducing tax distortions.

   A larger saving effect would, of couse, make the 1~     a more efficient

means of encouraging saving. The breakeven @int    for justifying the 1~


                                       25
program on the basis of reducing intertqral      distortions is approximately 46

cents of new saving per dollar of contribution. When tie co-rate         t=   wedge

is included in these calculations, however, the 1~ program attains the

breakeven pint    at about our ben-rk    estimate of 26 cents.

   Keeping the Elderly Off Welfare Prcgrarias.Welfare progrm       such as

Supplemental Security Insuance    (SS1) and Medicaid are designed to assist

elderly witi ltited    assets and income. Encouraging households to contribute

money into I-     and 401(k)s could save the govement    mney   in tie long–tern

by reducing the chance that individuals would qualify for means-tested welfare

programs (see Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes, 1995).      It is difficult, however,

to place a value of the incremental reduction in future government

expenditures because households participate in I-       or 401(k)s today. Mother

problem with this explanation for saving incentives is that the programs are

typically voluntary rather than mandatory.    Those most likely to end up on

welfare at retirement are probably also those least likely to contribute to

any new pension or saving program.

   ~opia    and Self-Control. We have thus far restricted our attention to

individuals facing well–defined, dynamically consistent utility fur,ctions. %

Befieim    (1996) e~hasizes, some available evidence indicates tiat people

stumble tiough    their planning for retiraent with little idea of what they

require at retiraent and, perhaps, little mtivation      to meet those

requiraents.     For ex~le,   Bernheim (1994a) suggests that saving rates on

average are only one–third what they should be for households to consume

during retirement at levels commensurate with their pre-retiraent cons~tion


                                        26
patterns.       If households made dyntically inconsistent plans (in the sense

of bibson,     1994; or Posnerr 1995), there my   be an intrinsic value to

retiraent     saving programs that assist in self control.   In this case,

encouraging people to save helps to offset an “individual failure” or time–

inconsistency in planning for the future, which could well yield substantial

individual and social benefits.

       The difficulty or inability of many individuals to save enough for tieir

retirement may well be the most persuasive justification for encouraging

saving incentives. mile      intuitive, such benefits are difficult to quantify.

If one cannot describe preferences in a dynamically consistent way, it is

harder still to attach dollar-e~ivalent values to the shift in the allocation

of cons~tion.      A   noted hve,   one problem witi viewing IP..As
                                                                  and 401(k)

plans as a way to encourage self control is that such programs are voluntary,

so that the people who have the mst    trouble saving for retirement my           be tie

ones least likely to enroll.



ticlusions

      We have followed the pattern of much of the recent studies of targeted

saving incentives by focusing prtirily on short–tern effects of i~        ~nd

401 (k) programs. We find that, even under conservative assurriptions
                                                                    hut            tie

extent to which contributions to saving incentives represent new saving,

saving incentives generate   substantial net capital ac~ulation    over   ti~Le     per




dollar of foregone tax revenue. However, the long-term effects are arguabiy

mre    relevant in assessing the desirability of a permanent targeted saving


                                        27
program.    Life-cycle simulation exercises that attqt   to quantify the

magnitude of IRA and 401(k) progrm     on the long-tern capital stock perfomeci

in Engen and Gale (1993) and Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1994) esttite very high

benefit-cost ratios of increased private capital stock per dollar of lost

revenue (or, in their case, per dollar of increased government debt) –– five

dollars of increased capital stock per dollar of tax revenue loss associated

with expanding 1~    contribution limits, and $17 of expanded capital stock per

dollar of tax revenue loss associated with expanded 401(k)s. The resources

are careful to qualify these long–tern predictions, noting for example that

the period of transition is ~ite    lengthy, taking nearly 50 years (after a

short–term decline in net capital accumulation) before these benefits are

realized.a Nevertheless, their exercise qhasizes     the @rtance    of

focusing on tie long–term steady–state @act    of these saving progrm,     which

might be quite different from their short–term or transitory effects.

   Given mre    than a decade of data on the @act   of targeted saving

incentives on saving behavior, it is somewhat s~rising    that economists still

tisagree on the fundamental question of whether such incentives work.    me

reason why disagreements r-in    is that economists are just beginning to

realize how little is understood hut    cons~tion   and saving behavior, and in

particular tiut    the wide variation in saving behavior among people who are of

sfilar   age, education, and income. As research on saving incentives provide

a better picture of their effectiveness at influencing saving behavior, we

hope and qect     that it will develop a better picture of why households save.




                                       28
   We are grateful to Orazio Attanasio, Alan Auerbach, hug    Bernheim, Dave

Bradford, Eric Engen, Martin Feldstein, Bill Gale, ~uglas    Joines, Andrew

Smick,    Karl Scholz, Tim Taylor, Steve Venti, and David Wise for helpful

suggestions. Financial suppcrt from the Faculty Research Fund of the Graduate

Schml    of Business of Col@ia   University, the American Enterprise Institute,

and the Securities Industry Association is gratefully acknowledged.




                                       29
   Attanasio, Orazio, and Thomas De Leire, “IM        and Household Saving

Revisited: Some New Evidace, ” Working Paper No 4900, National Bureau of

Econor@icResearch, C!ctober1994.

   Bernheim, B. buglas.        “Personal Saving, Information, and Econotic

Literacy: New Directions for Public Policy,” in Tax Policy for Economic

Gro~   in the 1990s. Washington, D.C.: Merican Council for Capital

Formation (1994a).

   Bernheim, B. ~uglas.        “Comments and Discussion,” Brookings Pa&rs    on

Econotic Activity (1994b:l): 152-166.

   Bernheim, B. buglas.                   in David A. Wise, cd., Stu&es
                               “col-flment,”                                in tie

Economics of Aging.    Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994c.

   Burman, Leonard, Joseph Cordes, and ~rry       Ozanne, “1-   and National

Saving,” National TaY Jourml 43 (September 1990): 259-284.

   ~loyee   Benefit Research Institute, “1~         and Keogh Assets,” EBRll\rotes

15 (@tober 1994).

   Engen, Eric M., and William G. Gale,        “IRAs and Saving in a Stochastic

Life-Cycle Model,”    Mimeograph, Brmkings     Institution, 1993.

   Engen, EricM.,     anu William G. Gale, “~t,     Taxes, and the Effects of

401(k) Plans on Household Wealth Accumulation,” ~eograph,        Brmkings

Institution, &tober    1995.




                                          30
   ~gen,   Eric M., Willis    G. Gale, and John Karl Scholz,   “~   Saving

Incentives Work?” Brookings Pa~rs on Econofic Activity (1994: 1): 85-151.

   Feenberg, Daniel R., and Jonathan Skimer.      “Sources of IW    Saving,” in

Lawrence H. Smers,     cd., Tax Policy and tie Econoq, vol. 3.      Cambridge: MIT

Press, 1989.

   Feldstein, Martin, “The Welfare Cost of Capital Income Taxation,” Journal

of Political Economy 86 (April 1978): S29–S52.

   Feltitein, Martin, “The Effects of Tax-Based Saving Incentives on

Government Revenue and National Saving,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110

(May 1995): 475-494.

   Fel&tein, Martin, and Daniel R. Feenberg, “Alternative T=         Rules and

Personal Saving Incentives: Microeconotic Data and Behavioral Simulations, in

Martin Feldstein, cd., B~avioral Simulation Methods in Tax Policy Analysis,

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.

   Gale, William G., Testimony before tie United State Senate, Cotittee       on

Finance. Mimeograph, Brmkings      Institution, February 2, 1995.

   Gale, William G., and John Karl Scholz, “IRAs and Household Saving,”

American Econotic Revie[~84 (Ec-er      1994): 1233-1260.

   Gravelle, Jane G.,    “~   Individual Retirement Accounts Increase Savings?”

Journal of Economic Per~ctives     5 (Spring 1991): 133-148.

   Hassett, Kevin A., and R. Glenn Hubbard, “Tax Policy and Investment,”

Mimeograph, Columbia University, March 1996,

   Hubbard, R. Gle~r., “b     IW   and Keoghs Increase Saving?” National Tax

Jour,nal37 (March 1984): 43-54.
   Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Kenneth L. Judd,     “Social Security and Individual

Welfare: Precautionary Saving, Wrrowing Constraints, and the Payrcll Tax,”

American EconofnicReview77     (Sept-r    1987): 97-112.

   Hubbard, R. Glenn, and Jonathan S. Skinner, “The Effectiveness of Saving

Incentives: A Review of the Evidence,” Mimeograph, Coltiia      University,

Nov~er     1995.

   Hubbard, R. Glenn, Jonathan S. Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes,        “The

~rtance      of Precautionary Motives in Explaining Individual and Aggregate

Saving,”     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Fublic Policy 40 (June

1994): 59-125.

   Hubbard, R. Glem,     Jonathan S. Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes,

“Precautionary Saving and Social Insurance,”       Journal of Political Economy 103

(April 1995): 360-399.

   Johnson, Alfred P., “Individual Retirement Accounts Help best        Saving in

the U.S.” Testfiny    to the Conunitteeon Finance, U.S. Senate, in Tax Reform

Pro@sals     (99-246, part XIII): 129-149. 1985.

   Joines, buglas     H., and James G. Manegold,    “IRA and Saving:   Evidence

from a Panel of Taxpayers,” tieograph, University of Southern California,

February 1995.

   Kennickell, Arthur B., Martha Starr–Mtiluer, and Annika E. Suncen, “Saving

and Financial Planning: Some Findings from a Focus Group,” Mimeograph, bard

of @vemors     of the Federal Reseme System, January 1996.




                                         32
   King, Robert G. and Sergio Rebelo, “Public Policy and Economic Groti:

Bveloping Neoclassical @libations, ” Journal of Political Economy 98

(mto~r     1990, Part 2): S126-150.

   Laibson, David, “@lden Eggs and Hyperhlic Discounting,” Mimeograph,

Harvard University, 1994.

   Papke, Leslie, “~es    401(k) IntroductionAffect Rfined Benefit Plans?”

National Tax Association Procedngs    (1994): 173-77.

   Posner, Richard A.    Aging and Old Age.   Chicago: University of Chicago

Press, 1995.

   Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise,    “401(k) plans and

Tax-Deferred Saving.“In David A. Wise, cd., Studies in the Econotics of Aging.

Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1994.

   Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “B    401(k)

Contributions Crowd Out Other Personal Saving?” Jourml of ~lic      Econotics 58

(1995): 1-32.

   Poterba, James M., Stevm   F. Venti, and David A. Wise, “~   Retirement

Saving Programs Increase Saving?,” Journal of Econotic Per~ctives,       this

issue.

   Romer, Paul, “Increasing Returns and brig-Run Growth,” Journal of

Political Economy94   (&tober 1986): 1002-37.

   Siegel, Jeremy J. “TF,eReal Rate of Interest from 1800-1990: A Study of

the U.S. andU.K.    Journal of bnetary Econotics, Vol. 29, No. 2 (April 1992):

227-252.




                                       33
   Schultze, Charles L., *OS       to the President. Washington, ~:       Brookings

Instititution, 1992.

   Thaler, Richard H.,    “Psychology and Savings Policies,r’ American Econofic

Review84    (May 1994): 186-192.

   Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise,      “Tax-Deferred kcounts,   Constrained

Choice, and Estimation of Individual Saving,” Review of Economic Studes          53

(1986): 579-601.

   Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise,      “1~   and Saving.”    In Martin

Feldstein, cd., me   Effects of Taxation on Gpital Accumulation. Chicago:

University of Chicago Press, 1987.

   Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise,      “The DeteWnants     of IRA

Contributions and the Effect of Lfit Changes,” in Zvi Bodie, John B. Shoven,

and David A.Wise, eds., Pensions and tie U.S. Economy. Chicago: University of

Chicago Press, 1988.

   Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise,      “Have I-   Increased U.S. Saving:

Evidence from Consmer Expenditure Surveys,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

105 (Wgust 1990): 661-698.

   Venti, Steva    F., and David A. Wise,    “The Saving Effect of Tax-@ferred

Retiraent Accounts:    Evidence from SIPP,” in B. buglas Bernheti and John B.

Shoven, eds., National Saving and Econotic Perfomnce.          Chicago: University

of Chicago Press, 1991.

   Venti, Steven F,, and David A. Wise,      “@vernment Policy and Personal

Retiraent   Saving,” in James M. Poterba, cd., Tax Policy and tie Economy, vol.

6. C~ridge:     MIT Press, 1992.


                                        34
   Venti, Steven F., and David A. Wise, “The Wealth of Cohorts: Retirement

Saving and the Changing Assets of Older ~ericans, ” Working Paper No. 4600,

National Bureau of Econotic Research, l)ec~er 1993.




                                     35
Endnotes

1.   See also    Bernheim     (1996)   and Hubbard     and Skinner     (1995).

2. The Gale and Scholz (1994)measure  of non-IRA wealth also
includes the cash value of life insurance,   and includes
households with heads age 68 and younger.

3. For models along these lines, see, for example, Hubbard and
Judd (1987); Engen and Gale (1993); Engen, Gale, and Scholz
(1994); and Hubbard, Skinner, and Zeldes (1994, 1995).

4. The presence of annual limits may in fact induce individuals
to begin saving in IRAs earlier to allow them to make larger
lifetime contributions.

5. Another way to see that IRAs tend to provide marginal
incentives   in the long term is the insight from Feldstein    and
Feenberg   (1983) , that, given the low levels of household  holdings
of financial assets, it would not take long for most households
to exhaust their ability to contribute     if contributions were
drawn exclusively    from existing (taxable) assets.

6. Of course,   this  result   does not prove that the $2,000
contribution   represents    new saving; it could have been shuffled
saving.    In a pure life-cycle model, however, taxpayers     should
not need the prodding of a check due to the IRS to shuffle their
saving; they should have done it anyway.

7.One criticism      of this     “behavioral”    approach      is that     self-
-control  should    be a problem       among the   relatively       affluent     group
of IRA contributors       (Gale,     1995) .    However,      a recent focus group
conducted     by the Federal Reserve Board, and limited to households
with net income of more than $250,000 or net worth in excess of
$600,000,     found frequent mention of “the need to put money ‘out of
reach’ to avoid the temptation             to spend it”        (Kennickell,      Starr-
McCluer, and Sunden, 1996, p. 7) .

8. Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1996) and Bernheim     (1996) argue
they are biased downward.   Engen, Gale, and Scholz (1996) argue
that they are biased upward, in part by assuming   IRA contributors
over 65, excluded  from the Joines and Manegold analysis,   shuffle
all their contributions   from existing saving.

9. Our     own suspicion     is that    the saving    effect    is somewhat
larger.

10. Another possible bias         pointed out by Engen,         Gale, and Scholz
(1996) is that the 401(k)         balances are pre-tax,         in that they


                                          36
reflect the tax break but not the future tax liabilities.                 A bias
may result from using changes in 401(k) balances to infer
something about individual  saving.
                                                               I
11.   This point was first made by Leslie Papke.   See the other
papers in this symposium  for a discussion of these issues.

12.   This is why it is     quite possible for Gale and Scholz (1994)
to estimate a negative      coefficient   of IRAs on saving if, for
example the individual      shuffled taxable saving into the IRA, and
spent the tax break as      well.   Joines and Manegold   (1995) were
careful to net out the      tax break before arriving at their
estimates.

13. Assuming the contributor plans to smooth           withdrawals    between
age 65 and 80, age 72 is a midpoint.

14. Because of the higher return on stocks, the share              of stocks
in the portfolio rises over the life of the IRA.

15.   See Feldstein (1995).  For example, if the government   funds
an IRA program using deficit financing at 4 percent, and the IRA
is invested in equity paying 12 percent, the government   could
make money on an IRA program when it taxes the appreciated    return
on the IRA, even if the IRA is funded entirely out of existing
taxable saving.

16. The marginal  tax rate at retirement   is assumed to be 24
percent; the assumed equity share is 50 percent; and the average
tax rate on interest, dividends,   and capital gains is 26 percent.

17. See Lazear (1994) and Bernheim   (1994c) for a detailed
discussion  of whether there are social benefits of higher             saving
rates and a larger capital stock.

18. Hassett and Hubbard    (1996) review empirical evidence which
suggests that the U.S. capital stock is below its golden rule
level.   For this conclusion   to suggest the need for saving
incentives,  one would need to argue that increases    in domestic
saving fund domestic   investment.

19.   Details   available   from   the authors.

20. See Hubbard and Skinner        (1995)   for a detailed   discussion    of
these simulation estimates.




                                      37
