                               NBER WOR~G           PAPER SERIES




                         DEREGULATION AND LABOR EARNINGS
                              IN THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY




                                            David Card




                                    NBER Working Paper 5687




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 1996




I am grateful to Peter Reiss for comments on a much earlier draft, to my colleagues in the Industrial
Relations Section for many useful comments and discussions, and to Tom Cunniff, Gordon Dahl,
and Jeff Wilder for outstanding research assistance. This paper is part of NBER’s research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by David Card. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to
the source.
                                                                       NBER Working Paper 5687
                                                                                     July 1996


                         DEREGULATION AND LABOR EARNINGS
                              IN THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY


                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper uses a variety of data sources to study the effect of deregulation on the structure

of wages in the airline industry. Microdata from the 1980 and 1990 Censuses show a 10 percent

decline in the relative earnings of airline workers after deregulation, with roughly similar declines

for industry-specific occupations (pilots and flight attendants) and general occupations (managers

and secretaries). Union contract data for pilots, flight attendants and mechanics at the major firms

show similar trends in the levels of earnings along with a rise in inter-firm wage inequality --

especially for pilots. Finally, data from the displaced worker surveys reveal that airline workers

experienced similar wage losses to job-losers from other industries over the 1980s. Taken as a

whole, the evidence suggests that the rent premiums earned by airline workers in the regulatory era

were relatively modest, and comparable to the wage premiums earned in many other sectors.



David Card
Department of Economics
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
       The psage     of the 1978 Airline Deregulation Act launched a new era in the air transport

industry. 1 After d-des     of regulation-induced inertia, the number of U. S. airline firms tripled

in just a few years.      The new entrants competed aggressively with the incumbent airlines,

offering lower fares, new routes, and low-cost “no frills” flights.           The advent of open

competition in the airline industry coincided with a rapid rise in energy prices and a prolonged

recession. In the newly deregulated marketplace this combination of supply and demand shocks

proved too much for many incumbents: by 1985 the output share of the 11 original ‘trunk”

airlines had declined substantially, and several firms were in bankruptcy. 2

       Deregulation of the product market and the adverse economic conditions of the early

1980s had an immediate impact on the labor market for pilots, flight attendants, and other airline

employ=s.     Several of the wtier       incumbents negotiated wage cuts with their unionized

workers.3    Many start-up firms broke with industry tradition by hiring non-union flying

personnel and adopting flexible work rules. In a highly publicized move, Texas International (a

former “local service” airline) purchased Continental Airlines and then used bankruptcy

protwtion laws to abrogate Continental’s union contracts.      Some of tie profitable incumbents




     ‘Throughout this paper, I use the term “air transport industry” to refer to the group of firms
that are legally permitted to ~     passengers or cargo in interstate commerce. For a summary
of the events leading up to deregulation of the industry, see Keler (1981), Graham and Kaplan
(1982), Bailey, Graham and Kaplan (1985) and Brown (1987). Caves (1962), Eads (1975) and
Douglas and Miller (1974) describe the airline industry in the pre-deregulation era. Morrison
and Winston (1986) describe the deregulated industry.

     2Under regulations established in the late 1930s, 11 firms were given the right to operate
national or international flight schedules. These were known as “trunk” airlines. Another 13-15
firms were allowed to offer short-haul flights in specific regional markets -- these were known
as “local service” carriers.

    3See Capelli (1985, 1987) for a thorough discussion of industrial relations in the airline
industry in the early 1980s.
                                                2

attempted to lower their marginal costs by instituting lower pay scales for newly-hired

employees.     Unionized airline workers fought hard against these developments: the industry

experienced a series of bitter labor disputes throughout the 1980s.

       The post-deregulatory wave of downward pressure on labor costs was anticipated by many

analysts, who had argued that the structure of airline regulation, coupled with the high rate of

union coverage in tie industry, led to super-competitive wages4.           IndA,   tabulations by

Helwege (1992, Table 1) show that airline employees were among the most highly-paid industry

groups in the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Censuses. To the extent that workers were able to capture

some of the rents generated by airline regulation, one might have ex~ted     deregulation to lower

equilibrium wages in the industry, especially for the highly unionized industry-specific

occupations.   Nevertheless, some of the downward pressure on wages in the early 1980s was

likely a transitory phenomenon caused by adverse business cycle conditions, high oil prices, and

short-run adjustments to the newly competitive environment.

       After n~ly    two decades it is now possible to reach some firmer conclusions on the long-

run labor market effects of airline deregulation. 5 This paper uses a variety of data sources to

address two s~ific   questions: How has deregulation affected the ~    of airline workers’ wages,

relative to other wages in the monomy?     And how has deregulation affected the ~is~rsion of

wages within the airline industry?   With respect to the first question, I find that the relative



    40ne of the earliest studies of union wage effects was conducted on airline pilots. Lewis
(1961, pp. 99-105) re-analyzed the data used in this study and concluded that airline pilot
earnings were 24-30 percent above “competitive” rates in the mid- 1950s.

   ‘There is an extensive literature on airline deregulation and earnings: see for example
Hendricks, Feuille, and Szerszen (1980), Card (1986), Cremieux (1996), and Hirsch and
McPherson (1994a).
                                                 3

mings     of airline employees have declined modestly since 1978: on the order of 10 percent.

Perhaps surprisingly, the d~lines have been similar for most occupation groups. The relative

earnings of secretaries and managers in the airline industry fell by about the same percentage as

the relative earnings of pilots. Airline mechanics are a notable exception: their relative wages

have been roughly constant since the late 1970s. These patterns suggest that pre-1980 airline

wages mntained a modest regulatory rent component that was shared by employ~s in most

occupations.

        With respect to the ~ond     question, the available data show a rise in the dispersion of

wages in the airline industry after 1980. Nevertheless, the increase in inquality    in the airline

wtor is comparable to the economy-wide rise in wage inequality over the past decade (s& e.g.

Levy and Mumane (1992)). Some of the inter-firm and intra-firm wage differentials that opened

up in the wly - 1980s have been eliminated with the bankruptcy or sale of “low-wage” entrants

and the elimination of two-tier wage schedules at the surviving incumbents. While a few low-

wage firms still survive, the fraction of employment at such carriers remains small.

        Finally, an interesting perspective on the effects of airline deregulation is obtained by

studying workers who lost jobs in the industry over the 1980s. Although the fraction of such

workers is small, the use of a pooled sample from the six Displaced Worker Surveys conducted

betwmn 1984 and 1994 yields an important conclusion.        On average, workers displaced from

the airline industry experienced very similar wage changes to workers displaced from other

industries.    Moraver,   workers who lost jobs in the airline industry and moved to new jobs in

other industries fared as well as those who found new jobs in the airline industry. These findings
                                                4

reinform the conclusion that the effwts of deregulation on airline workers’ wages were relatively

modest.



J. R~ulation and Labor Earn in~s in the Airline Industn : A Review of Alternative HYN these$

       There is no general theory of the relation betw~n product market regulation and labor

earnings. A widely-held view is that regulation creates potential rents which are then shifted in

part to employees, Trade unions may be instrumental in rent shifting and also may play a role

in the actual creation of rents by raising costs among regulated firms. s        Nevertheless, as

Hendricks (1975, 1977) has emphasized, the effect of regulation depends on the nature of the

product market and on the regulatory process. The predicted effect of a change from a regulated

to an unregulated environment also depends on the structure of the unregulated industry. In this

section I briefly describe the regulated and unregulated airline industries and summarize some

of the possible predictions for the effwt of deregulation on labor earnings.



a. The Repulatow Em

       Prior to 1978 airline passenger fares and cargo rates were set directly by the Civil

Aeronautics Board (CAB), and entry into the industry was highly restricted.      In fact, the CAB

allowed no new trunk ctiers   to enter after 1938, and no new local service airlines to enter after

1951 (Keeler, 1981). In addition to setting prices the Board also controlled the route structure

of each airline.   The CAB permitted only a limited number of carriers to offer competing

services in each major market, and one or two firms to serve the smaller markets. As existing



    6See Moore (1978) and Rose (1985, 1987) in the context of trucking regulation.
                                                 5

markets expandd     or new ones developed, the CAB often follow a compensatory policy of

awarding more lucrative routes to w~er       or less profitable firms (Caves, 1962, pp. 192-231).

        Despite the regulation of routes and fares, individual airlines were free to vary the number

of flights on their allottd routes. Industry analysts (e.g. Douglm and Miller (1974), DeVany

(1975)) argued that airlines with parallel routes competed by offering more frequent flights,

driving down marginal revenues per flight to the level of marginal cost. Perhaps the strongest

evidence for this h~thesis    took the form of low “load factors” in the regulated airline industry

relative to the unregulated intrastate market. 7 In the early 1970s the CAB attempted to bolster

industry profits by approving the formation of capacity-limiting agr~ments among the trunk

airlines, although such agreements were only reached in a few markets (Graham and Kaplan,

1982, p. 13). Airline firms also competed on other dimensions of service, including the use of

more modem aircraft and the provision of more comfortable seating. During the regulated era

the average return on investment in the airline industry was relatively low (Bailey, Graham, and

Kaplan, 1985, Table 1.2) suggesting that the overall degree of non-price competition was strong.

        Although most obseners      believe that CAB regulatory policies created a favorable

environment for raising airline workers’ wages above competitive levels, the ~         of the effect

is uncl~.   On one hand, the fact that fares were based on a markup over industry average costs

suggests that airlines as a whole had limited incentives to resist wage increases.    On the other

hand, the extent of non-price competition and the fragmented collective bargaining structure of

the industry suggest that even under CAB regulation individual firms had strong incentives to




    ‘See Keeler (1981, pp. 60-66). The load factor is the average fraction of filled seats.
                                                  6

resist wage increases. *    The lack of industry-wide bargaining meant that wage incr=ses

negotiated by one firm would not automatically raise industry average costs and regulated fares.

Airlines’ bargaining power wm also bolstered by a strike insurance plan known as the Mutual

Aid Pact, Under this agreement an airline grounded by a labor dispute received some of the

extra revenues earned by its competitors during the strike (see Unterberger and Koziara, 1977

and Cremieux, 1995),9 On balance, airline workers may have kn           less successful at capturing

regulatory rents than their counterparts in other industries, such as over-the-road trucking.




b. Dere~ulatioq

       Regulatory control of the tirline industry was eliminated gradually over the 1975-81

period. Minimum pricing policies were relaxed in 1976 and 1977 and dropped altogether in late

1978. The CAB’s authority over entry and route structures continued until 1981, although entry

was substantially free by 1980 (Moore, 1986). Potential entrants responded almost immediately

to the lifting of regulation: the number of certified airlines rose from 31 in 1977 to 93 in 1982,

and reached a peak of 106 firms in 1985.10

       Even more important than deregulation’s effect on the number of airline firms was its

effect on the s~cture   of airline routes. In the early 1980s the airlines re-organized their routes


     *Airline employees at different firms and in different occupation groups are represented by
different unions, and historically bargained independently. See Kahn (1980) and Capelli and
Harris (1985).

    %e payments were often large: for example, in 1966 American Airlines earned $48 million
in net income and paid $29 million in Mutual Aid benefits (American Airlines, 1967).

    10Airline firms have to be certified as “fit” to operate, Before 1978, certification was
awarded by tie CAB. With the demise of the CAB, certification fell to the Department of
Transportation. A list certified airline firms is published annually in Air Trans~rt.
                                                 7

into “hub-and-spke”    networks. Such networks provide two key advantages. First, they raise

productivity by cr=ting a transfer station betw=n smaller cities and allowing firms to consolidate

long-distance travelers from many markets. 11 Second, hubs create a strategic advantage in the

highly competitive air travel market. By offering a wide range of flights at a hub, an airline

creates a protited    customer base that cannot be asily        captured by a competitors’ fare

reductions.   The incr~ing     returns created by hubbing have led to a notable rise in the

conmntration of air travel business at many airports. The average fraction of passengers flying

with the dominant carrier at each of the nations’ 21 largest airports rose from 33 percent in 1977

to 51 percent in 1993.12

       A second innovation in the post-deregulation era is ‘the expanded role of computer

reservation systems, These systems -- airline-owned networks of computer terminals on travel

agents’ desks -- channel customer demand to the firm that owns the network and simultaneously

gather market data nded     to manage sophisticated pricing strategies. It is argued that American

and United, which own the two dominant computer reservation systems, generate significant y

higher revenue per passenger as a result of their control of travel agents’ networks and through

their yield management strategies (=     Williams, 1994, chapter 2).

       A comparison of the regulated and deregulated airline markets suggests that although the

elimination of CAB control over routes and pricing policies eliminated the primary sources of



    1lHub-and-spoke systems also allow for more efficient use of airline crews, and for
consolidation of airline maintenance facilities.

     12The 1977 figure is based on data in Williams (1994, Table 2.6). Comparable data for 1993
are taken from U.S. Department of Transpofi, 1994. The share of the dominant carrier rose at
16 airports and fell at 5. Interestingly, all 5 airports with a decline in the dominant firm’s share
are on the east or west mast.
                                                   8

rents in the airline industry, the emergence of hub-and-spoke route systems and the dominance

of a few computer reservation systems have created other rent sources.        Unlike the situation

under CAB regulation, rents in the unregulated market arise from firm-specific factors. Thus

employees at some firms may be able to maintain super-competitive wages in the unregulated

industry, while wages at other firms may be driven to competitive levels.          This reasoning

suggests that deregulation might be expected to lead to a dwline in ~verap~ wages of airline

workers and a simultanaus       rise in the inter-firm dispersion in wages.



JI. tie rview of tie Industrv

       To set the stage for an analysis of earnings trends, Table 1 presents some data on output

and employment in the airline industry since deregulation.      The left-hand columns of the table

report two measures of output in the air travel sector: revenue passenger miles, and available seat

miles. The latter is a measure of physical output, while the former is a measure of sales. The

ratio of the two is the “load factor” or average fraction of filled seats, presented in column 3.

       As shown by the growth rates at the bottom of the table, air travel has expanded rapidly

in the past 30 years, with a somewhat slower rate of growth since 1978.13 Over the past 15

yws revenue passenger miles grew faster than available seat-miles, reflecting a rise in average

load factors (from 53.8 permnt in 1960-77 to 60.7 percent in 1978-94). This upward shift is




     131nfact 9 a simple prediction equation for revenue passenger miles that includes real GNP,
a linear trend, and a post-1978 trend reveals a significantly slower rate of growth in revenue
passenger miles after 1978 than in the 1960-77 period. The estimated model is:
       log(RPM) = constant + 2,93* log(GNP) + 0.003 *trend - 0,018 *Post-1978 trend,
The R-squared coefficient is 0.995; the t-statistic for the post-1978 trend coefficient is 3.4.
                                                 9

consistent with the hypothesis that high fares led to excessive scheduling competition and low

load factors in the regulatd   industry. 14

       Column 4 of Table 1 shows the fraction of industry sales (i.e. revenue passenger miles)

accounted for by the 11 original trunk airlines.     Over the regulato~ era this share was fairly

stable at just over 90 percent. In the first few year of deregulation the incumbent trunks’ market

share dipped sharply, r~ching a low of 77 percent in 1984.          Starting in 1985, a series of

acquisitions by the stronger incumbents led to a re-consolidation of the industry. These trends

are illustrated in Figure 1, which shows the market shares of the three largest incumbents

(American, Delta, and United); the other 8 original trunks (4 of which no longer survive); and

the smaller incumbents and new entrants. The market share of-the three leading survivors was

fairly stable until 1985. Thereafter, American’s acquisition of Air California, Delta’s acquisition

of Western, and all three firms’ rapid expansion into international markets led to steady rise in

their combined industry share. 15 By 1993, the three largest firms accounted for 56 percent of

total indus~   sales.

       The next column of Table 1 reports average revenues per seat-mile earned by the industry

for combined domestic and international flights. Inflation-adjusted prices of passenger services

have declined s~dily    in the past 30 years, with a slightly faster rate of decline since 1978.




      14Aspredicted by the “quality competition” hypothesis, deregulation also led to lower quality
via an increase in the number of seats per aircraft. For example, in the early 1980s, American
increased seating by 11-12 percent on most of its fleet (American Airlines, 1980). Delta
instituted similar changes in 1981-82 (Delta Airlines, 1982 and 1983).

    150ther important mergers/acquisitions include Northwest’s purchase of Republic in 1986,
Transworld’s purchase of Ozark in 1986, USAir’s purchases of PSA and Peidmont, and the mid-
1980s merger of Texas International, New York Air, and Paples Express into Continental.
                                                 10

Price trends in the airline industry must be interpreted carefully, since twhnological changes have

not necessarily occurred evenly over the past thr~ decades. Moreover, changes in the relative

prices of industry inputs may have contributed to differences in the rate of growth of output

prices before and after deregulation. For example, real fuel costs rose sharply between 1968 and

1978, but fell between 1978 and 1994. ‘b Since fuel costs account for 10-20 percent of toti cost

in the industry, these trends would have been ex~ted      to generate a more rapid rate of dwline

in rd   seat-mile prices after 1978.

        While most attention is usually devoted to the passenger travel component of the airline

industry, the certified air transport sector also -includes air cargo carriers. As shown in column

6 of Table 1, freight shipments (measured in ton-miles) have grown at a slightly slower pace than

pwsenger miles since 1978. A key factor in the post-deregulatory growth of air cargo was the

addition of Federal Express to the certified industry in 1986.17

        Column 7 of Table 1 reports the rate of return on investment for airline firms as a whole.

Airline profits are highly cyclical: the industry earned low returns in the early 1980s and suffered

unprwedented losses during the 1990-92 rwession. Rates of return on investment in the airline

industry have b~n relatively low since deregulation, averaging just 3.9 percent per year from

1979 to 1994, versus 5.8 percent over the 1960 to 1978 pe.ricd.          Contrary to this realized

experience, the stock market’s reaction to the initial news of airline deregulation was mildly

w-.        Moore’s analysis (1986, table 9) of stock returns suggests that investors anticipated



    lbAverage jet fuel prices (in 1995 cents per gallon) were 46.5 cents in 1969, 91.6 cents in
1978, and 74 cents in 1989.

    17Prior to deregulation the industry included 3 “all cargo” airlines.     The largest of these,
Flying Tigers, was acquired by Federal Express.
                                                   11

slightly higher future profits in the industry as a result of deregulation -- a very different situation

than in trucking, for example, where news of deregulation had a negative effect on the value of

incumbent firms (Rose, 1985).

        Finally, columns 8 and 9 present data on airline industry employment and productivity.

Industry employment was relatively stable in the decade before deregulation (growing at an

average rate of only 0,5 per~nt Wr year) but has risen at a faster pace sinu 1978. Part of this

faster growth is attributable to the addition of Federal Express to the industry in 1986. Even

excluding Federal Express, however, employment in the rest of the industry grew at 2.0 percent

per year between 1978 and 1994. The combination of faster employment growth and slower

output growth after 1978 accounts for the relatively large drop in “productivity” growth

(measured by growth in revenue passenger-miles per employ=) following deregulation. 18

       While it may be tempting to conclude from this drop that deregulation lowered

productivity growth, such an inference ignores the role of technological change in the airline

industry.   For example, prior to 1978, increasing aircraft size and the replacement of first

generation jet aircraft led to significant productivity gains (W Kahn, 1980).19 Since 1978,

aircraft size and other crude measures of aircraft technology have changed at a slower pace. A

simple way to control for technological factors is to compare productivity growth in the U.S.

airline industry relative to other countries.      Between 1979 and 1994, passenger miles per



    *aSince Federal Express produces no passenger services, its employment has b~n excluded
from overall employment count in the calculation of the productivity measure in column 11 of
Table 1.

     19First generation jet aircraft required thrm flight officers and relatively frequent
maintenance. More recent aircraft have 2 instead of 3 or 4 engines, require only two flight
officers, and have much longer service intervals (Kennet, 1988).
                                                 12

employee grew by about 50 percent in the U.S. industry as a whole, with increases at individual

firms ranging from just under 20 percent (at TWA and Northwest) to 103 percent (at United) .*”

By comparison, revenue passenger miles per employee grew by 16 percent at Air Canada, 66

percent at Air France, 90 percent at KLM, 95 percent at Lufthansa, 125 percent at Japan

Airlines, and 136 percent at British Airways.     These data suggest that the U.S. carriers had

comparable productivity growth to other major international firms over the past 15 years, and

that deregulation probably did not slow the relative growth of productivity .21

       The industry-wide data in Table 1 and Figure 1 point to thr~ important factors for

understanding the labor market impacts of deregulation.        First, airline industry output and

employment have continued to grow since deregulation.             Employment growth has been

particularly strong, averaging 2 percent per year since 1978. Second, the airline industry is

extremely cyclical.    The 1982 and 1990 recessions both resulted in slow output growth and

employment cuts.      Third, while deregulation has led to a proliferation of airline firms, the

industry is still dominated by a few large carriers.   In fact, over 50 percent of industry output

is now produced by the three largest firms in the industry, and the 7 surviving incumbent trunk

airlines together account for over 85 percent of industry output. Moraver,      sales in individual

airline markets are now more highly concentrated than under regulation.




     *“Data on employment and output of most major airlines in the world are available in annual
reports of the International Air T-ransport Association (IATA). One explanation for firm-specific
differences in productivity growth is average flight length, which expanded more rapidly for
United than for TWA or Northwest.

     *’Caves Christensen, Trethaway, and Windle (1987) compare international airlines in the
early 1980s’and conclude that deregulation boosted relative productivity growth in the U.S.
industry.
                                                 13

III. Chan~es in Eamin~s for Airline Workers

a.       emiew

         Table 2 presents an overview of earnings trends in the airline industry from 1975 to 1994.

The average weekly earnings data in this table are derived from three sources: firm-level average

earnings data (reported in the FAA Statistical Handbook of Aviation and ATA’s Air TransDort) ;

establishment-level data collected by the BLS Industry Wage Surveys; and individual wage data

collected by the Current Population Survey (CPS). For comparative purposes, the fourth column

of the table shows average weekly earnings for non-supemisory workers in the overall economy.

The earn” s data are reported in 1995 dollars, using the Consumer Price Index as a deflator.
        T
         The firm-based earnings series in column 1 suggests that average real wages in the airline

industry were relatively stable from 1975 to 1983, fell about 11 percent between 1983 and 1991,

and have been roughly constant since then. Industry Wage Survey (NS) data are only available

for 1975, 1980, and 1984, but confirm the relative stability of real wages betw~n         1975 and

1984.22 Other firm-bad      data series, such as the ones analyzed by Cremieux (1996) and Hirsch

and McPherson (1994a, Table 10), are consistent with these patterns, and show a 10-13 percent

d~line in average wages in the urtified airline industry between the mid- 1970s and the early

1990s.




    **Thepublished IWS summties do not include wages for all occupations, and do not provide
an overall industry average wage. I used the reported wage and employment data by occupation
to construct a weighted average industry wage for each year.
                                               14

        The data in column 3 are taken from Hirsch and McPherson (1994a), and are derived

from individual micro data collected in the monthly Current Population Suney (CPS).Z           The

scope of the air transport industry in the CPS (and in the Census data files analyzed below) is

somewhat broader than the cetified       airlines included in the data in columns 1 and 2.

Specifically, the CPS and Census industry classification also includes lW   air taxis and charters,

as well as airport Senice establishments.   I estimate hat the certified industry accounted for

about 65 per~nt of all workers in the Census air transport industry in 1980 and about 70 percent

in 1990. This broader industry definition creates some slippage in drawing inferences about the

certified air transport sector from CPS or Census data.

        Whether bause    of the broader industry definition or for other reasons, average weekly

earnings of airline workers maured    in the CPS are 15-18 percent lower than average w~kly

mings    measured from firm-level data. Nevertheless, the CPS-based wage data show a similar

pattern over time. In particular, the wage series in column 3 shows roughly constant real wages

until the early 1980s, followed by a modest (1O percent) decline.

        Interestingly, the magnitude of the post-deregulation decline in real wages for airline

workers (from either firm or individual data sources) is very similar to the decline in economy-

wide average wages from 1979 to 1994 registered by the wage series in column 4 of Table 2.

This earnings series, which is derived from payroll surveys, shows a 12 percent fall in average

wages of all non-supervisory workers in the U.S. labor market, versus the 12-14 percent decline

for airline workers in columns 1-2 and the 10 percent decline for airline workers in column 3.



    ‘The data are derived from questions asked about an individual’s weekly or hourly earnings
on his or her main job as of the CPS survey week. See Card (1989) for an extensive discussion
of alternative earnings measures in the CPS.
                                                15

       The similarity of earnings trends in the airline industry and the overall anomy          is

potentially surprising. It should be noted, however, that most other aggregate wage series show

a different trend tian the payroll-based series in column 4. Indeed, most series show roughly

constant aggregate real wages betw~n 1979 and the early 1990s, implying a decrea~ in airline

workers’ relative wages after deregulation. 24 It is also worth noting that the dramatic changes

in the structure of wages that occurred throughout the economy over the 1980s might have been

expected to lead to some change in airline relative wages even in the absence of deregulation,

since airline workers are more educated and more likely to be male than other workers. In order

to make a reliable assessment of relative earnings trends it is necessary to use a data set that

provides comparable earnings information for airline and non-airline workers, and also includes

data on education, age, gender, and other factors that affect the structure of wages.



b. Micro Data on Relative Earnin~~

       Previous studies of the effect of deregulation on earnings in the airline industry have

relied on Current Population Survey data (e. g., Card, 1989, Hirsch and McPherson,        1994a).

A major limitation of the CPS is the relatively small number of airline workers in the sample.

Since the airline industry accounts for only 0.7 percent of all U.S. workers, a typical monthly

CPS sample includes only 350-400 airline workers. An alternative source of individual micro

data that provides far larger sample sizes is the decennial Census. In the Census, individuals are

asked their total annual earnings for the previous year, and their w~ks of work and usual weekly

hours. These responses can be combined to construct average weekly or hourly earnings over



    24See BM (1994, pp. 50-53).
                                                16

the previous year. Although retros~tive    earnings and hours data are conceptually less attractive

than the point-in-time wage measures available from the monthly CPS files, a comparison by

Card and hmieux     (1996, Table 9) suggests that the trends in two data series have been quite

similar over the 1980s.

       Table 3 presents some descriptive statistics on the samples of airline workers and non-

airline workers available from the 5-percent public use files of the 1980 and 1990 Censuses. In

drawing these samples I included all employees in the airline industry with positive (non-

allocated) earnings, and 5 percent of workers in all other industries (see the Data Appendix).

To measure any rwent @st- 1989) trends, I also constructed a pled        sample of workers from

the March 1994 and 1995 Current Population Surveys. (The March CPS includes retros~tive

earnings and hours questions very similar to those in the decennial censuses), Note that the two

March CPS samples together contain only 789 airline employees, compared with 20-30 thousand

airline workers in the Census files.

       The demographic characteristics in rows 2-5 of Table 3 revd        that airline workers are

more highly-educated than those in other industries. The gap of about 0.5 years of schooling has

not changed appreciably since 1980. Airline workers are also disproportionately male and much

more likely to be veterans of the armed forces.      Again, the relative fractions of women and

veterans in the airline industry have not changed much since 1980. In contrast to the differences

in education, gender, and veteran status, the airline industry includes about the wme fraction of

nonwhites as the overall labor force.

       Rows 6-11 of Table 3 present a variety of information on w~kly and hourly earnings in

1979, 1989, and 1993-94. As suggested by the data in Table 2, airline workers earn significantly
                                                17

higher average wages than employees in most other industries. For example, in 1979 the        ratio




of mean weekly wages of airline workers to non-airline workers was 1.52, while the gap in mean

log hourly wages was 0.46. The relative distributions of airline and non-airline workers in 1979

and 1989 are illustrated in Figure 2. In 1979 the wage distribution of airline workers appears

to be boti shifted to the right and more compressed than the wage distribution of other workers.

In 1989, the differences between the two distributions appear smaller, although the airline wage

distribution is still shifted to the right. Despite these visual impressions, conventional measures

yield ambiguous conclusions about the relative inequality of wages in the airline industry, Using

the standard deviation of log hourly wages as a benchmark, airline wages were more dismr%

than non-airline wages in 1979; using the interquartile range as an index, airline wages were less

disperse.

       The data in Table 3 yield somewhat different conclusions about the trend in aggregate rd

wages than the BLS payroll series reported in Table 2. In particular, real hourly wages in the

non-airline sector show only a small drop betw~n 1979 and 1989 in the Census data, compared

to the 10 percent decline in column 4 of Table 2. 25 Rd wage trends in both the airline and non-

airline sectors are also somewhat sensitive to whether wages are masured by the hour or by the

w~k.    These differenws are explored in grater detail below.

       Table 4 presents a series of estimated regression models that masure trends in the relative

wages of airline workers over the past two decades. These models regress the log of average

hourly earnings for an individud on an indicator for employment in the airline industry, or on




    ‘Aggregate wage trends in the decennial Census are therefore more in line with other data
sources, such as the March CPS and unemployment insurance tax records -- see BLS (1994).
                                                  18

a set of interactions of an airline industry dummy with dummies for specific mupation       groups.

The table presents models with no other control variables (in the odd-number columns) and

models with a standard   setof   individual-level control variables (in the even-numbered columns).

        Examination of the estimated coefficients in Table 4 leads to three basic conclusions.

First, the addition of conventional “human capital” control variables lowers the estimated airline

wage differential by 10-14 percent, with a slightly larger adjustment in 1979 than in later years.

On average, differences in education, location, gender, and experience account for about one-

third of the gross wage advantage of airline workers.      At the occupation level, the adjustment

is particularly large for pilots (who are mainly males, have high education, and tend to have

considerable experience) and is negligible for flight attendants.    Second, the estimated hourly

wage premium for working in the airline industry is relatively large for pilots and flight

attendants (40-70 percent), and more modest for aircraft mechanics and “non-specialized”

occupations (10-20 percent). As shown below, this is partl y an artifact of the low hours worked

by airline flight persomel.       Third, the time-series patterns of the raw and adjusted wage

differentials show about a 10-15 percent decline in the airline industry premium between 1979

and 1989, with little or no change from 1989 to 1993-94. For pilots and flight attendants the

relative declines are roughly similar using unadjusted or adjusted earnings. For mechanics and

for “non-specialized” occupations the declines in unadjusted wages are larger than the d~lines

in adjusted wages.   The discrepancy is especially notable for mechanics: mean log wages of

airline mechanics dalined 13 percent from 1979 to 1989, but their adj usted wages were virtually

constant.
                                                 19

Q. C han~es in WaPe Differentials Bv Occu~ation

       In light of the findings in Table 4 it is interesting to look more carefully at the effects of

deregulation on different occupation groups. It is also important to chwk the robustness of any

conclusions to the use of an hourly versus a w~kly wage.          Although the hourly wage is an

appropriate mmure of pay for most occupation groups, a weekly wage is arguably better for

pilots and flight attendants. Ffi   regulations restrict pilots to a maximum of 85 flying hours per

month, and many union contracts limit pilot hours even further. Similarly, most flight attendant

contracts specify overtime pay for hours in excess of 65 per month. Given these institutional

features, weekly earnings may be a better measure of the relative return to full-time employment

in the airline indus~.

       Table 5 presents estimated airline industry differentials in hourly and weekly wages for

specific mcupation groups in 1979, along with the changes in the corresponding differentials

from 1979 to 1989.26 The differentials are derived from regression models that include the same

covariates used in the even-numbered columns of Table 4. The results in row 1 compare the

evolution of the airline industry wage differential in hourly and wmkly earnings. In 1979, the

airline wage premium was slightly larger for hourly than w~kly wages, while the reverse was

true in 1989. Thus the decline in the hourly wage premium is larger than the decline in the

weekly wage premium. Examination of the results in rows 2 and 3 reveals that the discrepancy

betw~n hourly and weekly earnings is relatively large for pilots and flight attendants. For other




   2bFor simplicity I have not presented any information on wage developments in the early
1990s. As suggested by the patterns in Table 4, changes in airline industry wage premiums from
1989 to 1993/94 are generally small and unsystematic.
                                                 20

occupations there is little difference in the airline differential for weekly or hourly earnings, and

to save spare I present only the hourly results for these groups.

        Fufier   analysis of the hours data for pilots and flight attendants shows that both groups

reported a substantial rise in hours per week from 1979 to 1989. Pilots reported an average of

41.8 hours per week in 1989, versus 37.0 hours per week in 1979 -- a 13 percent increase.

Flight attendants reported 35,7 hours per week in 1989 versus 32.3 hours in 1979 -- an 11

percent incr~.       As a m~hanical     matter, these rises in hours “explain” the discrepancies

betwmn the relative changes in hourly and weekly wages for flying personnel over the 1980s.

Whether this apparent rise in hours is due to-deregulation or to an inherent weakness in the

Census data is less certain. The sample sizes of pilots and flight attendants in the Census files

are reasonably large, ruling out a sampling error explanation. 27 Nevertheless, given actual work

practices in the industry, the average weekly hours reports for pilots and flight attendants in ~

1979 and 1989 seem too high. For example, a pilot flying 85 hours per month works an average

of just under 20 hours per week. In 1979, however, only 29 percent of pilots reported working

less than 30 hours per week; in 1989 this fraction was only 18 percent. The Census data show

a parallel decline in the fraction of flight attendants who report working less than 30 hours per

week (from 43 to 31 percent).    Given the probable inaccuracy of the hours data, some caution

is required in interpreting the hourly wages for pilots and flight attendants.




     *’The 1979 file contains 2540 pilots and 2649 flight attendants. The 1989 file contains 3610
pilots and 3646 flight attendants. These counts are consistent with ATA data for employment
in the certified industry, assuming that virtually all flight attendants and about 70-75 ~rcent of
pilots work in the certified industry. The sampling error of measured average hours per week
is about 0.25 hours for both pilots and flight attendants in both years.
                                                   21

          With this caveat in mind, the results in Table 5 suggest that most occupation groups in

the airline industry experienced a relative dwline in earnings over the 1980s.             The largest

declines are measured for flight attendants (11-18 percent) and the smallest for mechanics (no

change). Perhaps surprisingly, the d~line in the airline indus~        wage premium for workers in

non-s~ialized     occupations is similar in magnitude to the declines for pilots and flight attendants.

Moreover, there is no apparent connection between the size of the post-deregulation decline in

the airline industry wage eff~t and the magnitude of the effect in 1979.

          An alternative to measuring the airline wage premium by occupation is to classify workers

by education.     As shown by the results in rows 6 and 7 of Table 5, more and less educated

workers earned fairly similar wage premiums for working in the airline industry in 1979. Over

the 1980s, the premium for more educated workers fell slightly faster (10 versus 6 percentage

pints).    Again, however, one is struck by the similarity rather than the difference in the trend

across ducation groups.

          Traditionally, =onomists   have pointed to trade unions as the mechanism by which

workers appropriate rents in regulated industries.         Thus it is interesting to examine post-

deregulatory earnings trends for occupations with negligible union coverage. Two such groups

are managers and secretaries. Since both occupations are broadly represented outside the airline

industry, it is possible to estimate Occupation-specific wage equations that include an airline

industry dummy. The results of this exercise, reported in rows 8 and 9 of Table 5, suggest that

prior to deregulation managers earned about a 14 percent wage advantage for working in the

airline industry, while secretaries earned about an 18 percent premium.         These are the lowest

airline wage differentials re~rted in the table for 1979, and could be interpreted as evidence that
                                                22

non-unionized employees captured few of tie rents from regulation. Nevertheless, both groups

experienced sizeable dwlines in the airline wage premium between 1979 and 1989. IndA,           the

dmline in relative wages of managers in the airline industry is larger than the decline for workers

as a whole. Assuming that the ghan~~ in the airline premium from 1979 to 1989 measures tie

size of regulatory rents, the findings in Table 5 suggest that nonunion occupations like managers

and secretaries earned roughly similar regulatory rent premiums ~ other highly unionized

occupations.



d. C hanees in Wage Dis~rsioq

       If wages are linked to firm-s~ific   rents, and the inter-firm dispersion in potential rents

has risen following deregulation, then one might ex~t    deregulation to increase wage inquality,

Table 6 presents some very simple evidence on this issue, using the 1980 and 1990 Census micro

data on hourly and w~kly wages. Throughout the table, earnings dispersion is measured by the

standard deviation of log hourly or weekly wages,       As noted in Table 3, different inequality

indexes give slightly different impressions of the patterns of earnings dispersions in the airline

industry: his should be kept in mind in interpreting the results in Table 6.

       The first two rows summarize trends in wage inequality outside the airline indust~.

Although much attention has focused on the rise in wage dispersion over the 1980s (e.g. Levy

and Mumane, 1992) the incr~        in earnings inequality measured in the decennial census data

is relatively modest. Part of the reason for this is the pooling of male and female workers: the

10 percentage point closing of the male-female wage gap over the 1980s (Blau and Kahn, 1995)

lessened a major source of overall wage inequality that is ignored in typical studies of male wage
                                                   23

inequality. Based on the census data, the standard deviation of hourly wages outside the airline

~tor   rose about 4 per~nt over the 1980s, while the standard deviation of weekly wages rose

7 percent.

       The dispersion of hourly wages in the airline sector rose by slightly less than in other

sectors (3 perunt)      while the dispersion of weekly wages rose by more (13 permnt).     Within

occupation categories the patterns are broadly similar: weekly wages show a larger increase in

inequality than hourly wages; and for most occupation groups the standard deviation of log

weekly wages rose by as much or only slightly more than elsewhere in the labor market. Based

on tiese results, there is only limited support for the hypothesis that deregulation led to a rise

in mings     inequality in the airline industry.



e, CoIlective Barpaininp Contract Dam

       Under regulation the airline industry was relatively highly unionized (=    Kahn, 1980 for

a brief history).    Prior to deregulation the pilots at all 11 incumbent trunk airlines were

represented by unions, as were the flight attendants and aircraft mwhanics at all but one firm

(Delta). In the deregulated era, despite the entry of non-union airlines and management efforts

to de-unionize at lat     one major carrier, the fraction of airline industry employees covered by

union contracts has remained stable at around 40 percent (Hirsch and McPherson,     1994b, Tables

12a and 12c). Contrary to trends in the rest of the economy, the propensity of airline workers

for unions seems remarkably robust. For example, pilots and flight attendants at Continental

recently re-established union coverage, while representation elmtions continue to be fought and

won at many new entrant firms.
                                                  24

        In light of the importance of collective bargaining in the airline industry, it is interesting

to examine contractual wages for the thrm major craft groups in the industry (pilots, flight

attendants, mechanics) and compare trends in the level and inequality of contractual wages with

the patterns estimated using individual micro data. A major limitation of contract data is the lack

of information on the number of workers in ach job category.                In the absence of this

information I have attempted to construct earnings indexes for pilots, flight attendants, and

mechanics assuming a fixed job description and a fixd level of seniority.

        The choice of job descriptions and seniority levels is arbitrary, but affects the accuracy

of the index to the extent that wage differentials for different jobs or seniority levels change over

time, or that the distribution of workers across jobs or seniority levels changes over time.

Unfortunately, both factors have changed during the past decade. The emergence of two-tier

labor contracts in the mid- 1980s led to a major rift in wages between more and less senior

workers .28 Although many firms have eliminated their two-tier systems, recent contmcts retain

a much steeper seniority profile than before. With respect to the second factor, the age structure

of one important group -- flight attendants -- has changed significantly since deregulation (see

below). These changes call for careful interpretation of earnings indexes based on a fixed level

of seniority.

   Tables 7a-7c provide a summary of average wage rates for pilots, flight attendants, and

mechanics at the major incumbent airlines in 1980, 1987, and early 1995. The tables also show



     **Two-tier contracts contain separate wage schedules for individuals hired before a certain
date, and those hired afterward. S= Capelli (1987) for a history and analysis of these contracts
in the airline industry as of 1986. Two-tier pay schedules are not restricted to unionized firms.
Delta Airlines instituted a two-tier pay arrangement for its nonunion workers in 1984, but
abandoned the plan in August 1988.
                                                25

the number of workers at each firm as of year-end, an employ ment-weightd        average wage (in

current and 1995 dollars), and the coefficient of variation of wages across the incumbent firms.

       Table 7a reports hourly wage rates for the captain of a Boeing 727 aircraft with 10 years

of seniority. 29 The contract data show a 13 percent decline in average real wages of captains at

the incumbent trunk airlines since deregulation, with all of the decline occurring betw=n 1980

and 1987. There was also a sharp increase in inter-firm wage dispersion: the coefficient of

variation of hourly wages rose from 4.3 percent in 1980 to 25 percent in 1987. The increase

in dispersion in the early 1980s was attributable to wage cuts or frwzes at five financial y

troubled airlines: Braniff, Continental, &stem, Pan Am, and Transworld. 30 By the WI y 1990s

three of these firms had failed, while Continental pilots had re-unionized and negotiated a modest

pay increase relative to rates at the industry l=ders (American, Delta, and United).         These

factors, along with the relative rise in employment at the 3 leading firms, led to some narrowing

of intefilrm dispersion from 1987 to 1995. On net, however, the contract data show a widening

of inequality for unionized pilots after deregulation.

       Union contract wage scales for flight attendants are presentd in Table 7b. By the mid-

1980s, most incumbents had negotiated two-tier pay schedules for flight attendants, with a typical

30 percent wage reduction for newly hired workers. I have shown wages for both the high and

low tiers in the table -- in each case, assuming 5 years of seniority. The introduction of two tier



    *gAlthough some pilot contracts set lower wages for newly hired workers, all of the contracts
guarant~ wage quality for captains. Thus, there is no effect of two-tiered wage provisions on
captains’ wages, although there is clearly some effect on wages for first and second officers (see
Walsh (1988), Table 3).

   30Continental abrogated its union contracts in 1985. The 1987 wage rates for Continental
employees reported in Tables 7a-7c are from company employment policy statements.
                                                 26

schedules makes it difficult to construct an average wage across firms: I have used a simple

average of the two scales in constructing the industry average wage and coefficient of variation.

        The mntract data for flight attendants show a large (40 percent) fall in average real wage

rates from 1980 to 1995, with a somewhat bigger decline after 1987 than before. An important

factor in interpreting theses trends, however, is the role of seniority. The d~line in wages for

flight attendants with 5 years of seniority overstates the decline in wages for a representative

flight attendant for two reasons. First, the average age of flight attendants increased by 7 years

betw~n 1979 and 1995, implying a substantial upward shift in seniority .31 Second, as firms

have moved to eliminate permanent two-tier pay schedules, they have increased the slope of the

seniority wage gradient for flight attendants. 32 Even allowing for these factors, however, the

contract data suggest that flight attendant rd   wages have fallen since deregulation.   The trend

in wage dispersion is also positive, although the rise in inter-firm wage differentials is smaller

than for pilots.

        Finally, Table 7Creports union contract wage rates for aircraft mechanics. Traditiondly,

mechanics’ contracts contained relatively limited seniority provisions, with rates reaching a

maximum after only 2 years.      More recently the airlines have negotiated extended seniority




    3lIn 1979 the average age of flight attendants was 30.4 yms -- far below the average age
of 36.2 for the workforce as a whole. The pooled March 1994/95 CPS files show an average
age of 37.7 for flight attendants versus a labor force average age of 38.0.

     32For example, the USAir-flight attendant contracts in the late 1970s and early 1980s
increased wages by about 40 percent in the first 5 years of seniority, and a futiher 14 percent
in the next 5. The 1986 contmct introduced a second-tier pay schedule for new hires, with 25-30
percent lower pay rates. The 1988 contract eliminated the second tier, but effectively retained
the lower tier pay rate for low-seniority workers, so that pay rates rose only 17 percent in the
first 5 years of seniority but then incread 60 percent in the next 5 years.
                                               27

schdules   that lowered wages by 20-30 percent in the first 4 or 5 years of employment.

Compared to pilots and flight attendants, however, the mechanics’ seniority schedules are still

relatively compressed .33 Thus Table 7C presents wage rates for mechanics at the top of the

seniority scale.

       Adjusted for inflation, the average union contract wage for mechanics shows little change

beween 1980 and 1987 and then a roughly 10 percent drop from 1987 to 1995. The trend in

wage dis~rsion is similar to the trend for pilots, although dampened, with a rise from 1980 to

1987 and then a fall from 1987 to 1995. Apti from Continental, inter-firm wage differentials

for mechanics were very small in 1995.34

       How do the trends in collective bargaining pay scales mesh with the findings in Tables

4-6 based on Census and CPS microdata? For pilots, the microdata show a modest decline in

_       wages while tie con~ct dab show a 10 percent d~line in r~        wage m.       Assuming

that real wage rates of non-airline workers were roughly constant, the trends in pilot wages are

therefore roughly consistent across the two sources.    The trends in wage inequality are not,

however, since the Census data show little increase in inquality,   while the contract data show

a sharp rise in inter-firm inequality, Part of the discrepancy may be attributable to problems of

measurement error in the Census and CPS earnings and hours data. Part may also be due to the

fact that pilots hold a very diverse set of jobs in the broadly defined airline industry -- from




    33Furthermore, the extended seniority schedules have not always been binding. For example,
the September 1985 mwhanics’ agreement at American offered accelerated seniority to workers
on the extended seniority schedule,

    34Asof 1995, Continental m~hanics are still nonunion. Delta mechanics are also nonunion,
although their pay scales are comparable to those at American.
                                                  28

flying single-engine air taxis to large commercial jets. Relative to the overall distribution of pay

across all these jobs, the dispersion in pay for captains in the certified airlines is small.

        For flight attendants, the microdata show a 10-17 percent dwline in relative wages and

a significant incr-    in wage inequality, while the contract data show a 40 percent d=line in real

wage levels and a rise in both inter-firm and within-firm wage inequality. As discussed above,

the decline in the real wage rate at a fixed point in the seniority scale for flight attendants clearly

overstates the decline in real wages for a representative worker. Thus, the trends in the levels

of rd   wages in the contract data and micro data may be roughly consistent.          It is difficult to

assess the effects of two-tier pay schedules and steepened seniority schedules on the level of wage

inequality for flight attendants. Supetilcially, the inequality trends in the contract and micro data

are broadly compatible.

        Finally, Census and CPS microdata for mechanics show roughly constant relative wages

since deregulation and a modest rise in wage inequality, while the contract data show an 11

percent dwline in rd    wage Ievel$ and a small increase in inter-firm inquality.      Although these

trends may seem inconsistent, recall that the Census microdata actually show falling average

wage rates for mechanics relative to all non-airline workers.35 After taking account of age,

education, gender, and other observable factors, however, mechanics’ relative wages were

constant between 1979 and 1989. The key adjustment factors are education and gender: airline

mechanics are over 90 percent male and have lower-than-average education. Adjusting for the




    35According to the data in Table 4, the unadjusted airline m~hanic wage differential falls
from 0.473 to 0.347 from 1979 to 1989, The adjusted differential, however, is 0.216 in 179 and
0.224 in 1989.
                                               29

relative pay declines of men and less-educated workers over the 1980s, airline mechanics kept

pace with similar workers in other sectors. Thus, the earnings trends for mechanics in the union

mntracts and microdata are broadly compatible.



IV. An Andys is of Job 1A)sers. 1984-94<

        Census/CPS microdata and union contract data both suggest that mings       in the airline

industry declined relative to earnings outside the industry during the 1980s.          A simple

interpretation of this fact is that airline wages contained a regulatory rent premium that was

gradually eliminated after deregulation. Another way to measure the regulatory wage premium

among airline workers is to compare the earnings changes of individuals who lost jobs in the

airline industry during the 1980s with the earnings changes of other job-losers. 34 One might

ex~t    former airline workers to experience above-average wage losses if their pre-displacement

mings     included a rent premium.    Indd,    the difference in wage changes betw=n former

airline workers and other workers is one potential estimate of the regulatory rent premium. 37

To the extent that job-losers from other sectors also earned non-competitive wage premia,

however, the difference in wage changes between former airline workers and other job-losers

may understate the sim of regulatory rents in the airline sector.



    3bHirschand McPherson (1994a, Table 7) analyze year-to-year wage changes using a sample
of individuals who are intemiewed in consecutive years in the CPS, pooled with a sample of
individuals who report both their wage for the previous year and the wage on their current job
as of the March CPS survey.

    37Displaced workers are typically a non-random sample of workers from a given sector.
Thus any comparison of wage changes for job-losers from different sectors implicitly assumes
that the degree of selectivity bias in the observed distribution of wage changes is similar for
workers from the different ~tors.
                                                  30

        The DisplaA    Worker Suneys (DWS) conducted by the Census Bureau in January 1984,

1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, and February 1994 asked individuals if they had lost a job in the

previous 5 years (3 years in the 1994 sumey), and if so, their earnings on the old job and their

current job. 3a Table 8 presents some descriptive statistics on the set of job losers interviewed

in the combined displaced worker surveys, and on the subset of these individuals displaced from

jobs in the airline industry.     Each of the DWS surveys includes 7,000-9,000 job losers.

Nevertheless, the total number of former airline workers is only 342 (0.7 percent of the sample,

or about the same fraction as airline workers comprise of the overall workforce). The relatively

low number of airline job losers reflects the small size of the airline industry and the fact that

industry employment has actually expanded at about the same rate as the overall labor force since

deregulation.

       The characteristics of workers displaced from the airline industry present an interesting

contrast with other displaced workers and with the stock of workers employed in the industry.

For example, former airline workers are better-educated and more likely to be men than other

displaced workers: both f=tures are consistent with the data for the currently employed airline

workers in the 1980 or 1990 Census (~         Table 3). The ratio of mean weekly earnings of ex-

airline employees to the mean earnings of all displaced workers is 1.29; the ratio of the

corresponding medians is 1.45. This 30-45 percent wage premium is slightly less than the cross-

sectional wage premium for airline workers in 1979 (45-60 percent according to the data in

Tables 3-4) but closer to the cross-wtional   premium in 1989 (roughly 30-40 percent). As shown




    38The DWS surveys have been used by many previous authors -- see Farber (1996) for a
recent analysis.
                                                  31

in the tiird wlumn of the table, the general nature of the airline industry group is similar when

pilots ue excluded, although pilots tend to have higher education and higher wages than other

workers.

        Relative to other displad   workers, the post-displacement experienws of former airline

workers show some interesting differences and similarities.      Airline and non-airline workers

re~fl comparable unemployment experiences after a job loss, but airline workers are more likely

to be re-employed at the survey date and more likely to have moved geographically after

displacement.   They are also more likely to return to jobs in their pre-displacement industry: at

the survey date 39 percent of airline workers were re-employed in the airline industry versus an

average industry re-employment rate of 25 percent. Despite these differences, the mean wage

change conditional on re-employment is very similar for former airline workers and other

displaced workers (see row 50. Moreover, the fractions of ex-airline workers who experienced

bigger than 10 percent wage losses or gains are similar to the fractions for other displaced

workers (rows 5g, 5h).

       Table 9 presents a series of estimated regression models that attempt to measure any

airline-specific effect in the pre- to post-displacement wage change.       With one exception

(explained below) the models are fit to the subsample of individuals who report valid pre-

displacement and post-displacement wages. The model in column 1 includes only a dummy

variable for pre-displawment jobs in the airline industry. The model in column 2 adds a set of

                                           mn 3 excludes pilots, Finally, the models in columns
standard covariates, while the model in COIU

4-6 examine the 25th, 50th, and 75th percentiles of the wage change distribution, respectively,

using a standard quantile regression technique.
                                                  32

        The estimates in columns 1-6 of Table 9 imply that workers displaced from the airline

industry experien~      very similar wage changes to workers displaced from other industries.

Although the standard errors are relatively large, the point estimates are numeridly        small and

renter on zero. The estimates rule out an airline-specific effect any larger than +/- 10 percent,

both at the mean, and at the median, 25th ~rcentile,        and 75th percentile of the wage change

distribution.

        One difficulty with drawing inferences from the models in columns 1-6 is that the

underlying sample excludes individuals who were still unemployed as of the displaced worker

survey date. Since airline workers have higher re-employment rates than other workers, it is

possible that the estimated airline effect on ~ccepted wage offers is a biased estimate of the airline

effect on ptenti~    wage opportunities.   To explore this possibility, I assigned all non-workers

at the time of the survey a log wage change of -1. I then estimated a quantile regression for the

75th percentile of wage changes.        Since the 75th percentile of log wage changes for this

augmented sample is above -1, this is quivalent        to assuming that displaced workers who were

unemployed at the suwey date would have experienced a wage change below the 75th percentile

if they had accepted their best job opportunisty,

        Estimates of this model are reported in column 7 of Table 9.            Comparisons of the

coefficient estimates for the control variables in columns 2-6 with those in column 7 show some

interesting differences. For example, the nonwhite effect is negligible in the conditional models

in columns 2-6 but large and negative in the unconditional model in column 7, implying that

nonwhite displa~      workers have lower re-employment rates than whites, but similar wage

changes conditional on re-employment.        The estimated airline industry effect in column 7 is
                                                  33

relatively imprecise but positive. Even accounting for the likelihood of re-employment, there is

clearly no evidence that airline workers experienced bigger wage losses than other displaced

worker.

          A second issue in interpreting the results in Table 9 is the timing of job losses in the

sample. The 1984-1994 Displaced Worker Surveys include individuals who lost jobs between

1979 and 1994. If the regulatory rents -ed         by airline workers eroded over the 1980s, then

the wages of airline job losers from the later part of the sample period may have already fallen

prior to their displacement.     In this case, the relative wage changes of ex-airline workers

m~ured       in Table 9 may understate the average regulatory wage premiums earned prior to

deregulation. To check this possibility, Ire- estimated the models including only job losers from

1979 to 1985. Contrary to the hpthesis         of bigger relative wage losses for airline workers in

the early 1980s, the estimates show the opposite pattern: the estimated airline job effects are

slightly more positive than those reported in Table 9 (with slightly larger standard errors).

       As notd in Table 8, one of the interesting differences between job losers from the airline

industry and other displaced workers is the relatively lower fraction of airline workers who

changed industries after their displacement.     Previous studies of displaced workers have found

that industry changers suffer bigger wages losses than non-changers.39 Thus the lower rate of

industry switching among airline job losers may account for their relatively favorable

post-displacement earnings experiences.     Table 10 presents a series of regression models that

compare the pre- to postdisplacement     wage changes of industry stayers and industry switchers.

These models include a dummy variable for industry switchers, a dummy variable indicating a



    39S= e.g. Neal (1995) and Parent (1995).
                                                  34

pre-displacement job in the airline sector, and the interaction of the two effects.        To aid in

interpreting the estimates the rows 4 and 5 of the table show the implied wage changes of airline

job losers who were re-employed in the airline industry, and those who were not, relative to an

average displaced worker from other wtors.

     The estimates in Table 10 wnfirm that on average, displaced workers who change industries

have significantly larger wage losses (i.e., more negative wage changes) than industry stayers.

For displa~     workers from the airline ~tor,         however, there are no significant differences

between the wage changes of industry stayers and industry movers.            Wth groups have larger

wage losses than industry stayers displaced from other industries but smaller wage losses than

industry switchers displaced from other industries. a          Although the coefficient estimates are

relatively imprecise, they suggest that the industry -s~ific    component of pre-displacement wages

for ex-airline workers is actually smaller than the industry-specific component for most other

displaced workers.

       A simple interpretation of the patterns of relative wage changes among airline job losers

and other displaced workers is that the pre-displacement “rents” earned by airline workers were

of comparable magnitude to the “rents” (or returns to industry-specific human capital) earned by

displaced workers from other industries.       Thus the patterns of relative wage changes for job

losers from the Displaced Worker Surveys reinforce the conclusion from Census microdata and

union contract data that airline workers wed     relatively modest industry-specific wage premiums

in the regulated era.




    ~ re-estimated the models in Table 10 using only job losers from 1979 to 1985 and found
very similar results.
                                                35

Iv.   Summarv and Co nclusion~

        Airline workers’ relative wages have declined by about Opercentsince 1980. Assuming

that the deregulate   industry can be taken as a competitive benchmark, this shift implies that

airline workers received about a 10 percent wage premium under regulation. There are several

explanations for the moderate size of this rent premium. Non-price competition in the regulated

airline industry was relatively strong, and may have dissipated a substantial fraction of potential

regulatory rents. Mormver, airline unions never succeeded in “taking wages out of competition”

through industry-wide bargaining.    Relative to employms in other regulated industries, airline

workers may have been less successful in capturing a share of the rents created by regulation.

        An alternative explanation for the modest d~line in airline wages since 1980 is that

employ=s at many firms are still earning rents. Even in the deregulated marketplace the larger

airline firms have b=n able to retain a degree of market power through hub-and-spoke route

networks and the strategic control of computer reservation systems. Indeed, the airline industry

is more concentrate     now than in the dwades prior to deregulation.         Evidence from the

experiences of job losers, however, suggests that airline workers do not suffer l~ger wage losses

following a job displacement that job-losers from other industries. Moreover, airline job-losers

who are change industries fare about as well as those who are re-employed in the airline

industry.   Taken together with the cross-sectional evidence, these patterns suggest that any

regulatory or non-competitive rents earned by airline workers are relatively modest, and

comparable to the wage premiums earned in many other =tors.

       Perhaps more surprising than the size of the post-deregulation wage daline            is its

uniformity across different wcupation groups.      Wages declined by about as much for highly
                                                   36

unioti       industry -s~ific   uupations     like pilots and flight attendants M for nonunion

occupations like managers and =retaries.        The apparent similarity of the rent premiums aed

by these disparate groups rules out any s~ial     rent-shifting role for unions, and seems to support

alternative models of rent-sharing.

         The dispersion in wages within the airline sector has also risen after deregulation.

Individual microdata from the 1980 and 1990 Census suggest that the incr-s               in earnings

inequality for most oe.eupation groups were comparable to or slightly larger than the increases

experienced in other sectors of the economy over the 1980s. Union contract data for three main

occupation groups (pilots, flight attendants, mmhanics) show a noticeable rise in inter-firm wage

inequality, especially for pilots. The magnitude of the wage differentials across firms has closed

somewhat since the mid- 1980s, but remains high: up to 40 ~rcent for pilots, and 10-30 percent

for flight attendants.

         Despite the passage of nearly two decades since the lifting of airline regulation, the full

impact of deregulation is still unclw.      Many of the surviving incumbent airline firms are in a

relatively precarious financial condition, and their employees continue to face demands for wage

cuts. It may take another 20 years to reach a complete assessment of the labor market effects

of deregulation.
                                              37

                                          References

Air Transport Association of America. Air Trans~rt (various years). Washington DC: ATA.

American Airlines.   Annual Reoo~ (various years), Dallas: American Airlines.

Bailey, Elizabeth, David Graham and Daniel Kaplan. DerePulatin~ the Airline$. Cambridge,
       MA: MIT Press, 1985.

Blau, Francine and hwrenm       Kahn.   “The Gender Earnings Gap: Some International
      Differences”. In Richard Freeman and Lawrence Katz, editors, Differences and Chan~eq
      in W= Structu req. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.

Brown, Anthony E. The Politics of Airline Regulation.      Knoxville: University of Tennessee
      Press, 1987,

Capelli, Peter. “Competitive Pressures and Labor Relations in the Airline Industry”. Industrial
        Relations 24 (Fall 1985): 316-338.

                       “Airlines”. In David Lipsky and Clifford Dorm, editors, Collective
          Eal“nin~ in American Industrv. Lexington MA: tixington Books, 1987.

                     and Timothy Harris.  “Airline Union Concessions in the Wake of
       Deregulatio~”. Monthlv Labor Review 108 (June 1985): 37-39.

Card, David. “The Impact of Deregulation on the Employment and Wages of                 Airline
      Mwhanics”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 39 (July 1986): 527-538.

                 .   “Deregulation and Labor Earnings in the Airline Industry. ” Princeton
       University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 247, January 1989.

                , and Thomas timieux. “Wage Dispersion, Returns to Skill, and Black-White
       Wage Differentials”. Journal o f Econometrics 74 (1996) forthcoming.

Caves, Richard. Air TransDOrt and Its Re~ulator~. Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press,
       1962.

Caves, Douglas, Launts Christensen, Michael Tretheway and Robert Windle. “An Assessment
       of the Efficiency Eff&ts of U.S. Airline Deregulation           via an International
       Comparison”. In Elizabeth Bailey, editor:    Public Regulation: New Persmctives on
       Institutions and Polici~.  Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1987.
                                               38

Cremieux, Pierre-Yves.   “Why Strike Insurance is Unilateral: Evidenm from the Airline
      Industry’s Mutual Aid Pact”, Unpublished Manuscript, University of Quebec at Montreal
      Department of honomics, 1995.

                            . “The Effect of Deregulation on Employ= Earnings: Pilots, Flight
       Attendants and Mechanics, 1959-1992.” Industrial and Lab or Relations Review 49
       (January 1996):223-242.

Delta Airlines.   Annual ReDon (various years). Atlanta: Delta Airlines.

Devany, Arthur. “The Effect of Price and Entry Regulation on Airline Output Capacity and
      Efficiency”. Bell Journal of Economics 6 (Spring 1975): 327-345.

Douglas, George and James Miller. “Quality Competition, Industry         Equilibrium, and
       Efficiency in the Price Constrained Airline Market”. American Eco nomic Review 64
       (September 1974): 657-669.

Eads, George. Competition in the Domestic Trunk Airline Industry: Too Much or Too Little”.
       In Almarin Phillips, editor: Promotin~ Competition in Reeu lated Industries. Washington
       DC: The Brookings Institution, 1975.

Farber, Henry S. “The Changing Face of Job Loss in the United States, 1981’-1993”. Princeton
       University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper No. 360, March 1996,

Graham, David R. and Daniel P. Kaplan. Competition and the Airlines: An Evaluation of
      Dere eulation. Washington DC: Civil Aeronautics Board, 1982.

Helwege, Jean. “Sectoral Shifts and Interindustry Wage Differentials”.         Journal of Labor
      Economics 10 (January 1992): 55-84.

Hendricks, Wallace. “The Effect of Regulation on Collective Bargaining in El=tric Utilities”.
       Bell Journal of Economics 6 (Autumn 1975): 451-465.

                        “Regulation and Labor Earnings”. Bell Journal of Economics 8 (Autumn
       1977): 483:96.

                   , Peter Feuille, and Carol Szerszen. “Regulation, Deregulation, and Collective
       Bargaining in Airlines”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 34 (October 1980): 67-
       81.

Hirsch, Barry. “Trucking Regulation, Unionization, and Labor Earnings: 1973-85”. Journal
       of Human Resources 23 (Spring 1988): 296-319.
                                                39

                     and David A. McPherson. “hbor Earnings, Rents, and Competition in the
         Airline Industry, 1973- 1993.” Unpublished Manuscript, Florida State University
         Department of bnomics,     1994a.

                      and                      Uni o n Mem be rshi Dand Earninps Data Boo k 194.
                                                                                              9 .
         co m~ilations from the Curre nt Pol)ulation Survey. Washington DC: BNA, 1994b.

International Air Transport Association.      World Air TransDort Statistics (various issues).
        Montreal, Canada: IATA.

Kahn, Mark. “Airlines”. In Gerald Somers, editor: Collective Barg~“nin~ Contemuo~
      American Ex~riencq. Madison WI: Industrial Relations Research Association, 1980.

Keeler, Thdore    E. “The Revolution in Airline Regulation. ” In knard  Weiss and Michael
       Klass, editors, Case Studies in Regulation: Revolution and Reform. Boston: Little,
       Brown, 1981.

Kennet, D. Mark. “Airline Deregulation and Aircraft Engine Maintenance: Reduced Form and
       Structural Estimation”. Unpublished Manuscript, University of California Santa Cruz
       Department of Economics, 1988.

Lewis,   H. Gregg. Unionism and Relative Waees in the United States. Chicago: University of
         Chicago Press, 1963.

Levy, Frank and Richtid Mumane. “U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A review
      of R=ent Trends and Proposed Explanations”. Journal of Economic Literature 30
       (September 1992): 1333-1381.

Moore, Thomas Gale. “The Beneficiaries of Trucking Regulation”. Journal of Law and
      Economics 21 (October 1978): 327-344.

                      “U.S. Airline Deregulation: Its Effects on Passengers, Capital and Labor.
         Journal of ~w and Economics 24 (April 1986): 1-28.

Morrison, Steven and Clifford Winston. The Economic Effects of Airline Dere~ulation.
       Washington DC: The Brookings Institution, 1986.

Neal, Derek. “Industry -S~ific Human Capiti: Evidence from Displaced Workers”. Journal
       of Labor Economic~ 13 (October 1995): 653-677.

Parent, Daniel. “Industry-Specific Human Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the
       NLSY and the PSID”. Princeton University Industrial Relations Swtion Working Paper
       No. 350, November 1995.
                                               40

Rose, Nancy. “The Incidence of Regulatory Rents in the Motor Carrier Indus@”.               Rand
      Journal of Economicq 16 (Autumn 1985): 299-318.

Rose, Nancy. “bbor Rent Sharing and Regulation: Evidence from the Trucking Industry”.
       Jou mal of Political Economy 95 (Dumber 1987): 1146-1178.

Unterberger, S. Herbert and Edward Koziara.         “Airline Strike Insurance: A Study in
       Escalation”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review  30 (April 197~: 364-379.

United States Department of tir Bureau of Labor Statistics.            Rewrt on the American
       Workforx. Washington DC: USGPO, 1994.

United States Department of Transport. “Airport Activity Statistics of Certified Route Carriers”.
       Washington DC: USGPO, 1994,

Walsh, David, “Accounting for the Proliferation of Two-Tier Wage Settlements in the U.S.
       Airline Industry, 1983-86”. Industrial and Labor Relations Review 42 (October 1988):
       50-62,

Williams, Garge.    The Airline Industry and the ImDact of Dereeu Iation.         Brookfleld Vt:
       Ashgate Publishing, 1994.
                                               41

                                         Data ADDendix

1. Census and CPS Microda@

The wples    used in Tables 3-6 are based on extracts from the 1980 and 1990 5-percent Census

public use micro sample files, and the March 1994 and March 1995 Current Population Surveys.

The census files include individuals age 16 and older with positive non-allocated earnings,

psitive weeks of work and positive hours per week in the previous year, who report a valid non-

allocated 3-digit industry for their main job in the last year. The final census extracts include

all individuals who worked in the airline industry (Census industry code 421) and a 5 percent

random sample of all other workers. The CPS extracts include all individuals age 16 and older

with positive non-allocated earnings, positive w~ks of work and positive hours per week in the

previous year.    For the earnings models I fufiher limit the 1980 sample to individuals with

average hourly earnings between $2 and $84 per hour and average weekly earnings under $3360;

the 1990 sample to individuals with average hourly earnings between $3.17 and $132 per hour

and average weekly earnings under $5280; and the 1994-95 sample to individuals with average

hourly earnings between $3.50 and $150 per hour and average weekly earnings under $6000.



2. Displaced Worker SumevS

The samples used in Tables 8-10 include all individuals in the 1984, 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992,

and 1994 displaced worker supplements who reported losing a job in the previous 5 years

(previous 3 y~s   in 1994). Individuals who report a weekly wage of less than $10 per week are

excluded from the earnings analysis.    The models reported in Tables 9 and 10 are fit to a

subsample of observations with non-missing data on age, year of displacement, tenure on the
                                            42

previous job, education,and weekly earnings on the predisplacement and post-displaement job

(in column 7 of Table 9 the -pie     is expandd   to include non-workers at the time of the

survey).
                                     Figure 1
                           Market Shares of Airline Firms
      1.00,




      0.OO1
          1977      1979   1981   1983       1985     1987   1989       1991   1993
                                              Year

~-j     Big Three           ~1    Other   Incumbent     =    Entrants    and Small
                                    Trunks                     Incumbents
     Figure    2:    Hourly     Wage         Distributions          of Airline         and Non-airline
                     Workers       in 1979        (top)       and     1989   (bottom)


10




     a



                                                          m

     6



 4


                                                                                   n

     u
9
‘.




o                          [
              3.a6     5        7,
                                 ,03               1291                            1.50    4L52   57.40 T7.4a




8-




6-




4-



                                                                                   “

2-




0
              r [
              3.a6
                       I        ?.03                                9              1.50    4L52   57.40 77.4a

                               Hourly        Eamin~s          (1994     $/hr),    Log     Scale

                                        ~]      Airli.e                 _        No.-airline

              Note: each horizontal =is                        tick represents            10 log points
Table 1: Overall Industry Statistics for the Scheduled Airline Industry, 1968-94



                          Passqer                  Output                          11 Firm                    Domestic
                                                                                   Share of                  Price   (1%7                       Freight                Return    m                    Tota(               RPM’s per
                  RPM                   Asm                   Loed                 Total   RPM                cents/mi    le)                  Ton-M i 1es             Investment                  E~lo~t                  EwL oyee
                  (1)                   (2)                   (3)                         (4)                       (5)                             (6)                       (7)                        (8)                     (9)
   lW            114.0                216.4                   52.7                        0.92                      5.4                              3.4                       4.9                  311,922                      365
   1978          226.8                368.8                   61.5                        0.91                      4.3                              5.8                      13.3                  329,303                      689
   Im            255.2                432.5                   59.0                        0.86                      4.7                              5.7                       5.3                  371,068                      688
   1982          259.6                640.1                   59.0                        0.80                      4.2                              5.5                       2.1                  330 #795                     785
   1984          305.1                515.3                   59.2                        0.77                      4.1                              6.6                       9.9                  345,079                      884
   19M           M.s                  607.4                   60.3                        0.81                      3.4                              7.3                       4.9                  421, &                       966*
   1988          423.3                676.8                   62.5                        0.91                      3.5                              9.6                      10.8                  480,553                    1, 004*
   1990          457.9                733.4                   62.4                        0.91                      3.4                             10.5                      -6.0                  545,809                      983*
   1 W2          478.6                752.8                   63.6                        0.91                      3.1                             11.1                      -9.3                  540,413                    1, 049*
   1W4           519.2                783.8                   66.2                        0.87                      2.9                             13.7                       5.3                  543,325                    1,152*


Grouth    Rate      (De rcent               -r      year>
1968-78             7.1                     5.5                 --                        ..                       -2.3                              5.7                       --                          0.5                  6.5
1978-94             5.3                     4.8                 --                        ..                       -2.4                              5.5                       ..                   3.2/2.0=                    3.3+


Notes:     Data          are        taken         from        ATA Air              Transmrt,                 various              issues.
           ●
                 Oenotes             that         Federal               Express           ~Lo~t                    is      exclti              from        this       calcuatim.
           Co(um               1:    bi(lions             of         revenue          passenger               miles          (RPM)          flown      in     scheduld                 airline           industy.
           Coium               2:    biltions             of         available             seat-miles                floun           in scheduled                  air(ine           industy
           Colum           3:        ratio         of     revenue              pessanger                mi lea       to     avai lable              seat      mi (es          (“load        factor”).
           Colum           4:        fraction             of         irduetry             RPM’s         accounted             for      by 11 major                  pre-deregulation                      firms.
           Colum           5:        peasenger                revenues               per       mi~e,         in    1967       cents          per     mile.
           CoLum           6:        bil[ions             of         freight          and        expreaa           ton-miles                shipped          by schduied                  carriers.
           Colum               7:    accounting                 masure               of     rate        of    return          on      investment              (for           industry            as a who(e).

           Colum           8:        total         qlo~t                        in    scheduled               airline              industry.               A&iti        M      of      Federal           Express     to
                                     industry              in        1986       adds           42,452        employees               (92,511          in     1W4).              Second           entry      in
                                     bottm              rou        is    calculatd                 excluding               Federal            Express         q~oyment.
           Colum           9:        thousanda                of        revenue           passenger               mi [as      pr       ~[oyee.                     Federal           Express         ~(o~nt               is

                                     ●xcluded              from           ititry                qlo~nt                    total       after         1986       in     calculating                 this      ratio.
Table 2: Real Average Weekly Earnings:             Airline    Workers   and    All Workers


                            Airline     Workers
                                                                   All Private
                  FU/ATA                          May/OGR        Non-Supemisory
                 Handbook         IWS              CPS              Employees
                   (1)            (2)               (3)                (4)

    1975          981             967              809                   463
    1979                          .-               800                   461
    1980                         990               781                   434
    1981            .-            ..               793                   &27
    1982          959             .-               809                   422
    1983          993             .-               838                   430
    1984          956            963               786                   434
    1985           ..             . .              784                   428
    1986                          --               805                   429
    1987                          --               764                   425
    1988                          . .              778                   421
    1989                          --               754                   417
    1990            .-            -.               757                   410
    1991          848             ..               729                   403
    1992          847             . .              723                   403
    1993          843             ..               720                   403
    1994          855             . .               --                   406


Note: All entries        represent weekly earnings in 1995 dollars,
      deflated    by CPI-U.

      Column 1:          1975 entry is from FAA Statistical Handbook of Aviation,
                         1976.   1982-94 entries are from ATA Air TransDOrt, and
                         represent annual wages (excluding fringes) divided by 52.


      Column 2:          From BLS Industry wage Sumeys,          Bulletins 1951, 2129,
                         and 2241.


      Column 3:          From Hirsch and McPherson           (1994), Table 2.      Based on
                         average weekly earnings of full-time private sector
                         workers in the May 1975 and 1976 CPS suveys               (1975 entry)
                         and in the merged outgoing rotation group files of the
                         CPS for 1979-93.


      Column 4:          From 1996 Economic ReDort of the President Table B-43.
Table 3: Mean Characteristics of Airline and Non-Airline Workers,
         1980 Census, 1990 Census, and 1994/95 CPS Samples




                             1980 Census         1990 Census          1994/95 CPS

                          Airline     Other   Airline     Other   Airline     Other


1. Sample Size            22,744    205,742   30,705    236,527       789   116,887

2. Mean Education           13.3       12.6      13.7      13.2      13.9      13.3

3. Percent Female           32.4       43,7      35.1     46.4       37.9      47.1

4. Percent Nonwhite         12.2       12.6      14.5      14.2      17.9      14.6

5. Percent Veterans          37.0      22.5      28.5      16.5        -.        -.

Earnings Data (1995 Dollars):

6. Mean Weekly Wage        871.4      573.i    811,5     602.0      719.7     541.7

7. Mean Hourly Wage        24,54      15.24    20.88     15.08      19.66     13.55

8. Mean Log Hourly         2.988      2.530    2.819      2.505     2.758     2.423
   Wage

9. Std. Dev. of Log        0.608     0,586     0.626     0.611     0.622     0.589
   Hourly Wage

10. Interquartile Range    0.650      0.823    0.771     0,873     0.674     0.870
    of Log Hourly Wage

11. 90-10 Percentile       1.458      1.466    1,504     1.553     1,523     1.556
    Range of Log Hourly
    Wage

Notes: Samples are described in Data Appendix.  Samples include individuals
       who worked in the previous year and reported positive (non-allocated)
       earnings.  1980 and 1990 Census samples exclude individuals with
       allocated industry. Earnings data pertain to previous year: 1979,
       1989, or an average of 1993 and 1994, and are inflated to 1995 levels
       using   the CPI.
Table 4: Estimated Hourly Wage Premiums for Airline Industry




                                  1979                 1989                 1993/4

                            (1)          (2)     (3)          (4)     (5)        (6)


Models with Single Airline Industry Dummy:


 Airline Wage              0.458      0.314     0.314      0.227     0.335      0.225
 Differential             (0.004)    (0.003)   (0.004)    (0.003)   (0.021)    (0.017)

 Added Covariates:         No            Yes     No           Yes     No        Yes


Models with Interaction Effects for Specialized Occupations:


 Airline Wage              0.324      0.203     0.170      0.119     0.198      0.130
 Differential for         (0.005)    (0,004)   (0.004)    (0.004)   (0.025)    (0.021)
 Non-specialized
 Occupations

 Differential for          1,148      0.754     0.977      0.609     0.992      0.605
 Pilots                   (0.012)    (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.058)    (0.047)

 Differential for          0.583      0.657     0.444      0.481     0.436      0.416
 Flight Attendants        (0,012)    (0.010)   (0.010)    (0.009)   (0.064)    (0.052)

 Differential for          0.473     0.216      0.347     0.224      0.314     0,174
 Mechanics                (0.012)   (0.010)    (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.064)   (0,052)

 Added Covariates:         No            Yes    No            Yes    No         Yes


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses.   Covariates included in columns 2, 4,
       6 are: education, cubic in experience, dummies for female, nonwhite,
       hispanic, married, veteran status, residence outside a metropolitan area,
       residence in 8 census divisions, and interactions of experience terms
       and married   dummywith female dummy.
Table 5: Estimated Wage Differentials for Specific Employee
         Groups in the Airline Industry

                                    Group-specific     Change in
                                     Airline Wage     Airline Wage
                                     Differential     Differential
    Employee Group                     in 1979        1979 to 1989

    1.   All        - Hourly Wage      0.314           -0,087
                                      (0.003)          (0.004)
                    - Weekly Wage      0.295           -0.063
                                      (0.004)          (0.006)

 Bv Occupation    (Pooled Model):
    2.   Pilots     - Hourly Wage       0.754           -0.145
                                       (0.010)          (0.013)
                    - Weekly Wage       0.546           -0.027
                                       (0.010)          (0.015)

    3.   F1. Att.- Hourly Wage          0.657           -0.176
                                       (0.010)          (0.013)
                    - Weekly Wage       0.519           -0.113
                                       (0.010)          (0.015)

    4.   Mechanics    (Hourly)          0.216            0.008
                                       (0,010)          (0.013)

    5.   All Non-specialized            0.203           -0.084
         Occupations   (Hourly)        (0.004)          (0.006)

 Bv Education (Pooled Model):
    6.   12 or Fewer Years of           0.309           -0.062
         Education (Hourly)            (0.005)          (0.007)

    7.   13 or More Years of            0.332           -0.102
         Education (Hourly)            (0.005)          (0.006)

 For Narrow Occupation Gr0UD5 (Occupation-specific Models):
    8,   Managers    (Hourly)           0.139           -0.110
                                       (0.011)          (0.019)

    9.   Secretaries    (Hourly)        0,175           -0.084
                                       (0.017)          (0.026)


Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All differentials are obtained
       from regression models that include the covariates listed in the
       note to Table 4. Differentials are for log hourly wage or log
       weekly wage, as noted. Models in rows 1-7 are estimated using a
       pooled sample of all airline and non-airline workers. Models in
       rows 8 and 9 are estimated on occupation-specific samples.
Table 6: Changes in the Dispersion of Hourly and Weekly
         Wages, 1979 to 1989




                                        1979      1989     Change

Non-Airline Workers:
1. Std. Dev. Log Hourly Wage            0.586     0.611      0.025
                                       (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.001)

2.       Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage      0,719     0.772      0.052
                                       (0.001)   (0.001)    (0.002)

All Airli ne Workers:
3. Std. Dev. Log Hourly Wage            0.608     0.626      0.018
                                       (0,004)   (0.003)    (0.005)

4.       Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage      0.580     0.654      0.073
                                       (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.005)

Pilots;
5. Std. Dev. Log Hourly Wage            0.g48     0.793     -0.055
                                       (0.009)   (0,008)    (0.012)

6.       Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage      0.706     0.733      0.027
                                       (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.013)

Fli~ht Attendants:
7. Std. Dev, Log Hourly Wage            0.585     0.608      0.023
                                       (0.008)   (0.007)    (0.011)

8.       Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage      0.407     0.491      0.084
                                       (0.010)   (0.008)    (0.013)

Mechanics
9, Std. Dev. Log Hourly Wage            0.446     0.482     0.036
                                       (0.009)   (0.006)   (0.011)

10. Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage           0.454     0.502     0.048
                                       (0.010)   (0.008)   (0.013)

Non-specialized Occupations:
11. Std. Dev. bg Hourly Wage            0.499     0.533     0.034
                                       (0.004)   (0.003)   (0.005)

12. Std. Dev. Log Weekly Wage           0.537     0.611     0.075
                                       (0.004)   (0.004)   (0.006)

Notes:     Standard errors in parentheses.
Table 7a: Hourly Wage Rates for 727 Captains at Incumbent Firms


                          December 1980      December 1987      January 1995

                           Wage               Wage               Wage
                          ($fir)    Number   ($fir)    Number   ($/hr)    Number


       American             96     4,502      125     6,344      165     9,349
       Braniff              99*    1,439       57     1,006       .-         0
       Continental          92     1,555       53     3,946       90     4,205
       Delta               100”    3,658      140     5,264      166     8,333
       Eastern              90     4,116       93     4,985       -.         0
       Northvest            90     1,517      136     4,557      158     4,965
       Pan Am               95     2,932      113     2,159       -.         0
       Transvorld           88     3,344       88     2,969      n/a     2,347
       USAir               100     1,062      141     1,794      158     4,993
       United               92     5,669      128     6,268      137     7,889
       Western              89     1,560       .-         0       --         0

       Average or Total     93     31,354     113     39,292      150    42,081
       for 11 Firms

       Average Wage in     173                152                 150
       1995 $

       Coefficient of      4.3               24.9                 15,5
       Variation (%)


   Notes: Employment counts include captains, first and second officers, and
          flight engineers. Wage rates are calculated for a captain of a
          Boeing 727 aircraft, flying 50 percent night hours, with 10 years
          of seniority. Wages are obtained from union contracts on file with
          National Mediation Board or other sources. Employment counts
          are from Form 41 reports (1980 and 1987) or IATA World Air Transport
          Statistics (1995). Average wages in 1995 do not include Transworld.

         ●Estimate.
Table 7b: Monthly Wage Rates for Flight Attendants at Incumbent Firms


                   December 1980          December 1987          January 1995

                    Wage                  Wage                  Wage
                   ($/mO)    Numb er     ($/mO)      Number    ($/rnO)     Number


 American          1,470     6,263     1,910/1,369   10,292   1,853/1328   18,008
 Braniff           1,136     2,330     1,300”           411      . .            0
 Continental       1,347     2,175     1,374”         6,068   1,300         5,698
 Eastern           1,402     5,893     1,579          8,112      ..             0
 Northwest         1,208     2,481     1,840/1248     6,347   1,311         8,603
 Pan Am            1,415     6,078     1,922/1281     3,838      . .            0
 Transworld        1,327     5,534     1,704/1333     4,517   1,275         4,446
 USAir             1,347     1,370     1,897/1340     2,486   1,483         8,128
 United            1,298     8,829     1,732/1361    11,755   1,623        18,243
 Western           1,349     2,083        ..              0      --             0

 Average or        1,350    43,036     1,552         53,826   1,500        63,126
 Total for
 10 Firms

 Average Wage      2,497               2,082                  1,500
 in 1995 $

 Coefficient of      6.3                 5.0                    9.1
 Variation (%)


Notes: Wage rates are calculated for a flight attendent with 5 years of
       seniority flying 65 hours per month. In cases where two rates are
       reported, the second pertains to the wage for employees on the
       lower scale of a two-tier pay system. Weighted average wages in
       bottom two rows assume one half of of employees work at the lower-tier
       wage. See Table 7a for sources.

      ●Estimate.
Table 7c:   Hourly Wage Rates for Mechanics at Incumbent Firms


                         December 1980     December 1987     January 1995

                         Wage              Wage              Wage
                        ($fir)   Number   ($/hr)   Number   ($fir)   Number



     American           12.66    6,001    17.89     7,064   22.25    11,232
     Braniff            12.40    1,355     --           0    -.           0
     Continental        12.22    1,151    15.00     3,617    n/a      4,472
     Eastern            12.99    7,207    18.00     6,518    .-           0
     Northwest          12.42    1,407    18.50     3,904   21.00     8,727
     Pan Am             12.50    4,250    16.40     2,976    .-           0
     Transworld         12.07    5,168    15.25     5,010   21.00     4,209
     USAir              12,21    1,335    18.30     1,727   20.00     9,424
     United             12.35    5,793    18.54     7,844   19.77    14,801
     Western            12.99    1,120     --           0    --           0

      Average or        12.53    34,787   17.39    38,660   20.72    52,865
      Total for
      11 Firms

      Averge Wage       23.17             23,33             20.72
      in 1995 $

      Coefficient of     2.5               7.6               4.7
      Variation (%)


 Notes: Wage rates are maximum hourly rates for a fully qualified mechanic
        excluding line service or licence premiums, See Table 7a for
        sources. Average wages in 1995 do not include Continental.

       ●Estimate.
Table             8:                     Characteristics                   of      Displaced          Workers    Frcsn All           Ititries
                                         -     Fra     the           Airline          Ititry:           1979-1994.


                                                                                                 Displaced         From Airline          Industry:

                                                                            All                         Ail             Excluding          Pi(ots

        1. S~le                   Size                                   46,374                          342                      300

        2. D- rati  icCharacteristics:
         n. Percent Fanm Le     39.7                                                                    33.0                  37.0

             b.        Percent       N-i              te                    14.5                        15.7                   17.3

             c.        Percmt    ui th Some                                 23.7                       33.4                   34.8
                        Cot [age

             d.        Percent       with        Co((age                    15.8                        25.7                  21.9
                        Degr_

             ●.        Mean      Years      of    E&ation                   12.6                        13.6                   13.4

             f.        Mean Age at           lima           of              35.2                       35.2                   35.1
                        Job LOSS

        3.         Characteristics                     of    Old     Job:

             a.        Hean Ueek 1y Wage                                457.2                         589.9                  553.1
                        (1W4  s)

             b.        Mdian       Ueakly         Uage                  382.5                         556.2                  512.6
                        (1W4       s)

             c.        Mean      Tenure      (Yeara)                         4.6                         5.9                      6.1

        4.         Post -OisD(acm                      t Ex~riemes:

         a.            Median Uaaks              of                                9                          11                    10
                        Um[omt

         b.            Percent      uith         no                         13.3                       13.8                   14.2
                        u~lomt

         c.            Percmt   Re-~(oyad                                 65.0                         75.8                   75.5
                        at Survey

         d.            Percent   kved             After                     16.9                       24.2                   16.5
                        Oisplacamant

        5.         Characteristics                     of    Those      uith           Neu   ~
         a.            Percent       in Original                          24.5                         38.8                   36.3
                        Industry

         b.            Mean    Week 1y Wage                             L81 .3                        597.5                  552.5
                        Old    Job (1W4   S)

         c.            Mdian  Weakly  Uage                              405.6                         556.2                  512.6
                        O(d Job (1994  S)

         d.            Mean Uaak ( y Wage                               462.6                         571.6                 523.3
                        NeN Job (1W4    S)

         ●✎            Mdian  Ueak(y              Uage                  391.6                         512.5                 469.5
                        Nam Job (1W4               S)

         f.            Mean Percentage.                                     -5.0                       -3.6                   -4.8
                        Uage Change

         g.            Percent  ui th > 10%                               39.3                         39.2                   39.4
                        Uaga Gain

         h.            Percent uith              > 10%                    38.1                         42.2                   42.7
                        Wage Loss
Table         9:                  US d      -tile      Regression      Models       for   Change       in Uage      Follouing
                                  Job Diaplecemant



                                                           OLs mats:                                          Quantile          Regressions:

                                                Ail    re-q[oyad          Excl@             All   re-~       loYsd      uorkers~               Futl      Sq(e
                                                    tirkers                Pilots            25th            50th             75th                    Hth
                                                (1)             (2)          (3)              (4)              (5)             (6)                     (7)


         1.    Displaced            frw      -0.003         -0.002        -0.012             0.016         -0.035           -0.002                  O.w
               Airline          l-try        (0.043)        (0.W3)        (0.045)          (0.059)         (0.034)          (0. w)                (0. w)

 Other         Controls:

         2.    Age    at   Diapiac~t            .-          -0.005        -0.005             0.010         -0.004           -0.016                  0.026
                                                            (0.002)       (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.002)          (0.002)               (0.002)

         3.    Age at      Disp[acemant         ..          -0.015       -0.005            -1.940            0.137            1.370               -4.8m
               Squared       (x1 O,OOO)                     (0.287)      (0.2s8)           (0.3M)          (0.231)          (0.278)               (0.225)

         4.    Education                        ..            0.013        O.olk             0.016           0.011            0.011                 0.035
                                                            (0.002)      (0.002)           (0.002)         (0.001)          (0.002)               (0.002)

         5.    Previous          l~re           ..          -0.012       -0.012            -0.013          -0.010           -0.009                -0.009
                                                            (0.001)      (0.001)           (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.001)              (0.001)

        6.     Female      O-                   ..          -0.004       -o. oo4-          -0.035          -0.001             0.030              -0.041
                                                            (0.008)      (o. ooi3y         (0.012)         (0.007)          (0.008)              (0.008)

         7.    Monuhite         Owuy            ..          -0.007       -0.007             O.OM             0.015            0.002              -0.107
                                                            (0.013)      (0.013)           (0.018)         (0.010)          (0.013)              (0.011)

        8.     Year     Ounniee                 ..             yea          yea               yes             yes               yes                   yes

        9.     S~le        Size              21,625          21,625         21,589            21,625          21,625            21,625           35, 2a4


Notes:        Estin’bet4      statiard       errors      in parentheses.        Sa~~e      in co(ums      1-6 consists       of itiividuals
              in the 1964,          19136, 19&3,       1990,    1992,   or 1994 Oisp(acad        Uorker     Surveys   nho refmrted         a
              valid     pre-displac~t               Wage, were re-qloyd               at the tim     of the Survey,         ad    reportad    a
              valid     ~age for the main job at the time of the survey.                          The dependent       variable       is the change
              in the log of the uage (pre-                   end ~st-displaceinant          uages are inflated        to constant         1W4
              dollars).         S~le       in COIUIM 7 adds in individuals                nho reportad        a valid   re-displacement         uage
              but who uere not re-qloyad                     et the Survey      date.      For these    itiividuals       the change       in log
              uages is (arbitrarily)                set to -2.0.
Table       10:       OLS and Quantile Regression Models for Change in Wage
                      Following Job Displacement




                                             OLS Models:
                                                               Quantile Regressions:
                                                   Exclude
                                           All      Pilots    25th      50th      75th
                                           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)

    1. Change Industry                   -0.116    -0.116    -0.234    -0.077    -0.005
                                         (0.009)   (0.009)   (0.013)   (0.007)   (0.009)

    2.     Displaced from                -0.079    -0.086    -0.082    -0.057    -0.022
            Airline Industry             (0.067)   (0.074)   (0.088)   (0.052)   (0.062)

    3. Interaction: Industry              0.100     0.096     0.134    -0,004     0.038
        Change x Displaced               (0.087)   (0.094)   (0,114)   (0.067)   (0.081)
        from Airline Ind.

  Implied Effects Relative to
  Average Displaced Worker*:

  4. Airline +          New Industry     -0.008    -0.019    -0.006    -0.080     0.015
                                         (0.053)   (0.057)   (0.069)   (0.041)   (0.049)

  5. Airline +          Airline           0,008     0.001     0,094     0.000    -0.018
                                         (0,071)   (0.079)   (0.095)   (0.055)   (0.067)


  Notes:      Sample consists of individuals in the 1984, 1986, 1988, 1990,    1992, or
             1994 Displaced Worker Surveys who reported a valid pre-displacement wage,
             were re-employed at the time of the Sumey, and reported a valid wage for
             the main job at the time of the suney.     The dependent variable is the
             change in the log of the wage (pre-     and post-displacement   Wages are
             inflated   to constant  1994 dollars).     All models include 11 additional
             covariates   (age at job displacement     and its square,   education , pre-
             displacement   tenure, indicators   for female, nonwhite, and suney year).
             sample size in columns 1 and 3-5 is 21,625.         Sample size in column 2
             (which excludes any individuals whose pre-displacement occupation was
             piloC) is 21,589.

           , ‘Row 4shous the est!mateci differential between an airline worker who
             changes industry post-displacement, and an “average” worker displaced from
             non-airline industries. Row 5 shows the estimated differential between an
             airline worker who is re-employed       in the airline industry post-
             displacement,   and an “average” worker      displaced   from non-airline
             industries.
