NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF
PARENTAL LEAVE MANDATES:
LESSONS FROM EUROPE

Christopher J. Ruhm

NBER Working Paper 5688

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

I would like to thank David Blau, Andrew Bred, Bruce Meyer, Ken Snowden and workshop
participants at the Center for European Economic Research, Northwestern University, Princeton
University, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina Greensboro,
University of Wisconsin, and the Society of Labor Economists meetings for helpful comments on
earlier versions of this manuscript. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Health Care,
Labor Studies and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Christopher J. Ruhm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including@ notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5688
July 1996

THE ECONOMIC CONSEQUENCES OF
PARENTAL LEAVE MANDATES:
LESSONS FROM EUROPE

ABSTRACT

This study investigates the economic consequences of parental leave mandates using data for
16 European countries over the 1969 through 1988 period.
family leave in most nations, men constitute

a reasonable

Since women use virtually all of the
comparison

group and the natural

experiment in most of the analysis involves examining how changes in leave entitlements affect the
gap between female and male labor market outcomes.

The employment-to-populations

ratios of

women in their prime childbearing years are also compared to those of older females, as a function
of changes in leave regulations.
employment

Parental leave mandates are associated with increases in total

but appear to have a more modest effect on weekly work hours and there is some

evidence that women pay for entitlements to extended leave by receiving lower relative wages.

The

econometric estimates are sensitive to the inclusion of controls for time-varying country effects and
sex-specific within-country

time-trends.

Christopher J. Ruhm
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina Greensboro
Greensboro, NC 27412-5001
and NBER

The Economic

Consequences

of Parental Leave Mandates:

Lessons From Europe
Despite widespread
effects of government

international

implementation,

little is known about the economic

policies requiring companies to allow their employees

work during the period surrounding

the birth of a child,l

Proponents

to take time off

believe that parental leave

results in healthier children and improves the position of women in the workplace.
counter that the mandates,

by restricting

reduce economic

and may have a particularly

efficiency

This study investigates
data for 16 European

adverse effect on women,
of parental leave policies using

countries over the 1969 through 1988 period.z The dependent
(EP) ratios, weekly work hours (HOURS),

comparison

in leave entitlements

analysis is also undertaken
counterparts

aged 45-54.

group and the “natural” experiment

involves examining

how

Limited

the EP ratios of 25-34 year old women to those of their

The younger cohort are in their prime childbearing

should be strongly affected by leave mandates.
have completed

men are likely to

affect the gap between female and male outcomes.

contrasting

variables

and hourly wages

Since women use virtually all of the family leave in most countries,

provide a reasonable
changes

voluntary exchange between workers and employers,

the labor market consequences

include employment-to-population
(WAGES).

Opponents

Conversely,

years and so

virtually all of the older women

their fertility and so they may provide a useful comparison

group.

In both

cases, time and country effects are also controlled for to provide
“difference-in-dif ference-in-difference”

(DDD) estimates,

1

By 1991, over 100 countries had passed some form of parental leave policies, with most
assuring at least two to three months of paid job absences (Kamerman, 1991).
2 A distinction is sometimes made between “maternity leave”, which is granted to mothers for
a limited period around the time of childbirth, and “parental leave” which permits additional time
off work to care for infants or young children. Both types of entitlements are included in the
definition of parental leave (also referred to as family leave) used below.
Page 1

To preview the results, parental leave entitlements
female employment-to-population
weekly work hours,

and, in particular,
time-varying

European data are particularly
Western

European countries

in the

there is some evidence that women pay for rights to extended

time off work by receiving lower relative wages.

time effects and sex-specific

with increases

ratio, while having a weaker and less certain impact on

Conversely,

choice of specifications

are associated

These results are somewhat

sensitive to the

it is important to include controls for country-specific
country effects.

useful for investigating

the effects of parental leave.

All

currently offer at least 3 months of paid maternity benefits;

however, many of the policies have been instituted or revised during the last 25 years, resulting
in substantial

variation, over time and across countries,

entitlements.

Conversely,

in the type and duration of the

the United States did not require employers

to offer family leave until

the 1993 passage of the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA).3
Obtaining a better understanding
both the European and U.S. contexts.
extensive

social protections

employment

the effects of parental leave mandates
Europe has been grappling

is important

in

with the question of whether

inhibit economic flexibility and are a cause of low rates of recent

growth.4 These concerns have Ied a number of countries

and Sweden) to reduce payments
nations (e.g. Austria, Germany,

(e.g. Finland, Denmark,

provided during the leave period, at the same time that other

and Norway) have increased them (Organization

for Economic

3 The FMLA mandates companies with more than 50 workers to allow 12 weeks of leave
following the birth or adoption of a child or to care for seriously ill relatives. Health insurance
contributions must be continued during the period but the leave is unpaid. Firms may exempt
the highest paid 10% of their workforce and persons employed less than 1250 hours during the
previous year. Klerman & Leibowitz (1995) estimate that these restrictions limit coverage of the
law to 31% of working women, Ten states (and the District of Columbia) legislated
job-protected work absences prior to the FMW and 8 others provided limited rights to parental
leave, without guaranteeing the reinstatement of employment (Waldfogel, 1994). Most of the
state laws were enacted in the late 1980s or early 1990s and included numerous exemptions.
4 Blank (1994) summarizes a series of investigations of the effects of social welfare policies in
Europe and the United States, The general conclusion is that differences in the policies are
unlikely to explain much of the disparity between U.S. and European experiences.
Page 2

Cooperation

and Development,

1995).

Conversely,

on Meeting the Needs of Younger Children,
include small employers

advocates

(e.g. the Carnegie Task Force

1994) have argued for broadening

the US. law to

and provide payment during the time off work,
1. The Economics

In a competitive

of Parental Leave Mandates

spot labor market with perfect information

and no externalities,

mandated

benefits such as parental leave reduce economic efficiency by limiting the ability of

employers

and workers to voluntarily

select the optimal compensation

are required to provide the entitlements
Since these expenses

efficiency

loss.

If firms are constrained

(e.g. by minimum wages), the employment
Supporters
well-being

of leave entitlements

reductions

in effective compensation

in their ability to reduce pay

and efficiency

losses maybe

larger still.’

often argue that they will improve the health and

of children (e.g. see Zigler, Frank, & Emmel, 1988; Carnegie Task Force on Meeting

the Needs of Younger Children,
which are not adequately

1994).

This might occur if the benefits represent

valued by agents negotiating

labor contracts.

might not be fully taken into account if workers have inadequate
advantages

Instead, firms

even when the costs exceed the benefits of doing so.

will be passed on to workers, the decrease

results in a deadweight

package,

externalities

For example,

information

concerning

the gains
the

of staying at home with infants or if they pay only a podion of the costs of their

children’s medical care (as with most types of health insurance).

Undervaluing

might also occur

if parents have higher than socially optimal discount rates, since some of the benefits occur far
in the future, or if the welfare of children receives a relatively low weight in their utility function.~
Employers
dependents

may also be less aware or supportive
than of corresponding

of the advantages

of family leave to

benefits to the workers themselves.

Previous research

5 See Summers (1989), Mitchell (1 990), or Krueger (1994) for detailed discussions of the
effects of mandated benefits.
‘
Conversely, parents could overvalue the benefits to children, leading to excessive parental
leave.
Page 3

provides little indication of whether this type of externality
underprovision

of voluntarily

Proponents

supplied leave.

also frequently

assert that parental leave mandates

equal footing with men in the workplace
1991; Trycinski,

1991).

(e.g. see Kamerman,

Without such entitlements,

rates of unemployment

actually leads to serious

place women on a more

1988; Bookman,

they argue that females experience

and losses of firm-specific

can always voluntarily

negotiate

the specific investments.

maternity

is unconvincing.

Second, with competitive

imperfection,

Individuals

parental leave.

A company voluntarily

number of “high-risk”
probabilities
leave,’

employees

and retaining

information

age will

if the benefit is mandated.’

time off work may lead employers

have better information

and workers

Hence, females of childbearing

jobs where absences are relatively less costly, thereby increasing occupational
Adverse selection under asymmetric

Lacking some

labor markets, the groups most likely to use

continue to obtain lower (and possibly reduced) compensation
which allow substantial

Firstl employers

leave, thus mitigating the joblessness

parental leave will pay for it by receiving lower wages,

Third, entitlements

high

human capital because they must frequently

change jobs if they wish to spend time at home with infants and young children.
source of market failure, this equity argument

1991; Bravo,

to limit women to
discrimination,a

provides a potential source of market

than firms concerning the likelihood

of using

offering leave will therefore attract a disproportionate

and be forced to pay lower wages,

Persons with small

of using the benefit avoid these firms and so will do without even socially optimal

A government

mandate eliminates

the incentive for this type of sorting behavior and

has the potential to raise welfare,10

7 See Gruber (1994) for an excellent discussion of the effects of group-specific mandates.
a Stoiber (1990) claims that the exceptional degree of sex discrimination of the Swedish labor
force is partially the result of the extensive family leave entitlements in that country.
‘
This is analogous to Rothschild & Stiglitz’s (1976) argument for market failure in insurance
markets. Aghion & Hermalin (1 990) raise the possibility that socially optimal parental leave will
not be voluntarily provided to any workers. In their model, low-risk individuals signal this to
Page 4

U.S. data for the pre-FMLA
paid leave relatively infrequently.
employees

period indicates that companies

(greater than 100 workers)

in 1992, just 2% and 1%, respectively,

were entitled to time off work with pay (U.S. Department
1993, 1994).
unregulated

provision of parental leave and particularly

in 1991 and 18% of

of the job-holders

of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics,

These low coverage rates suggest that market imperfections

may limit the

of paid work absences.ll

most workers may believe that the costs of the entitlements
Although

provided explicit

Although maternity leave was available to 37% of full-time

in medium and large establishments

those working for small employers

voluntarily

Alternatively,

exceed the benefits.

parental leave statutes might be expected to increase the time away from work

by mothers of young children, Klerman & Leibowitz (1995) demonstrate

that the effect is

actually ambiguous.

as follows.

The intuition of their argument can be summarized

Let L,

represent the amount of leave which will be taken in the absence of a mandate (where L. is a
function of leave benefits, reemployment

wages etc.).

Next impose a leave guarantee

of L~. If

L~ > L,, the entitlement

will either have no effect on or will increase the duration of the work

absence.

the latter may occur if the statute sufficiently

In particular,

worker of additional

time off the job. Conversely,

reduces the costs to the

consider the case where

L~ < L,.

The

employers by agreeing to contracts with no (or limited) leave provisions. High-risk workers
sometimes do better by mimicking their counterparts (by taking positions without leave) than by
revealing their propensity towards absenteeism.
Another reason why socially optimal leave
might not be provided is that large firms may set compensation policies according to the
preferences of the median worker, who may obtain little benefit from rights to parental leave.
10 The potential inefficiency of privately negotiated labor contracts under asymmetric
information has been demonstrated across a variety of contexts. For example, McGuire &
Ruhm (1993) indicate that employer-drug testing is likely to be excessive, whereas Levine
(1991) and Kuhn (1992) show that just-cause employment security regulations and advance
notice of job terminations will generally be underprovided.
11 Some women are able to take short-periods of time off work even when formal leave
policies do not exist (i.e. through the use of accumulated sick leave and vacation or tempora~
disability policies), Klerman & Leibowitz (1994) estimate that, between 1979 and 1982, 5% of
women with one month old children were on paid leave and 10% were using unpaid leave, By
the time the children were 4 months old, the percentages had fallen to 1YO and 2°/0 respectively.
Page 5

worker must now decide between taking L,or L~ weeks of leave.

The decision will be to choose

L~ if U(L~) > U(L,), where U(. ) shows the utility associated with the specified amount of leave.
This condition will be fulfilled if the gains from returning to the old employer

(e.g. higher wages,

increased job security) exceed the costs of reducing the leave period by the amount L, - L~.
The key point to note is that by permitting

return to the old job after a work absence of L~, the

marginal cost of additional time off work (beyond L~) increases and it may become worthwhile
to reduce the duration of leave.
lower, the employment

If this effect dominates,

the mandate will raise, rather than

of women with infants.’z

Next consider the effects of parental leave statutes on all women, rather than just those
with young children.

Some previous researchers

(e.g. Gruber & Krueger, 1991; Gruber, 1994;

Anderson

& Meyer, 1995) have evaluated the efficiency consequences

mandates

by examining whether firms pass the associated

reducing wages,

costs through to employees

The mandated

benefit shifts the supply curve to

the right and the demand curve to the left, since total compensation

benefits,
whereby

by

To illustrate, consider Figure 1, which shows the market demand and supply

curves for the specified group (e.g. women).

Complete

of similar group-specific

pass-through

occurs if workers value compensation

This corresponds
employment

rises at given wage levels.

equally in the form of wages or

to a change in the labor market equilibrium

and total surplus are unchanged

from point B to E,

(with the latter shown by the identical

triangles ABC and DEF) and wages fall by the cost of the benefit (C). Conversely,
place a lower (higher) value of compensation

in the form of the mandated

if workers

benefit rather than

wages, the supply curve shifts to the right by less (more) than Sz, implying that wages fall by a
smaller (larger) amount than the increase in benefit costs and that total surplus declines (rises).

12 Some individuals may also increase their labor supply prior to having children, in order to
meet the qualification conditions for parental leave. Mortensen (1977) makes an analogous
point with regard to unemployment insurance.
Page 6

Although

cost-shifting

provides a reasonable

effects when firms pay for the mandated
changes in employment

metric for evaluating

benefit (either directly or through payroll taxes),

may be more informative

when dynamic considerations

or if the benefits are financed out of general government
frequently

static efficiency

revenues.

asserted that parental leave raises levels of firm-specific

women to return to their old jobs after having children.

For example,

are introduced
it is

human capital, by allowing

This elevates the marginal revenue

product of workers, causing a rightward shift in the demand curve,

For simplicity,

assume that

the increase in human capital returns the demand curve to D,, with the new equilibrium
occurring

at point G. Whereas efficiency was unchanged

effect of the entitlement

in the static analysis, the long-run

is to boost the sum of producer and worker surplus to AGF.

Notice that

the final wage reduction (W1-Wa) is less than the cost of the parental leave benefit, erroneously
suggesting

an efficiency

loss when using the pass-through

criteria.

Conversely,

employment

is

raised by mandates which increase either static or dynamic efficiency .13
Alternatively,

assume that benefits are paid out of general tax revenues,

leave in many European countries.
(static) demand

as with parental

If firms do not bear any costs of the entitlements,

curve remains unchanged

at D1.14 If the financing is by nondistortionary

the
taxes,

the supply curve will again shift to S, and total surplus will increase from ABC to AGF.
Efficiency

and employment

continue to be positively related while wages fall by less than the

cost of the benefit, with the result that the pass-through
suggests

a decline in total surplus.

criteria once again erroneously

The more realistic case of financing

by distortionary

taxes

‘3 A mandate which reduces productivity (e.g. because the lengthy period away from work
results in the depreciation of human capital) will cause the demand curve to shift to the left of
D,. This decreases both employment and total surplus, and leads to an additional fall in wages.
14 More frequently, firms will continue to incur some costs, even when payments to workers
are provided by the government (e.g. expenses associated with hiring and training temporary
replacements).
In this case, the demand curve will shift to the left of D,, although by a lesser
amount than if benefits were paid directly by employers.
Page 7

would be represented

by additional movements

higher personal (corporate)
left, reducing employment

of the supply or demand curves.

For instance,

income taxes are likely to shift the supply (demand)
compared

to the case of nondistortionary

sufficiently

large, total surplus and employment

situations,

parental leave mandates which increase (decrease)

higher (lower) levels of employment,

taxation.

curve to the
If these shifts are

may fall. Thus, across a wide variety of
economic

while having less predictable

efficiency will result in

effects on wages. ”

2. Previous Research
Early studies by Dalto (1989) and Spalter-Roth

& Hartmann

(1990) indicate that women

are out of work for less time and receive higher wages, following the birth of a child, if their
employers

vo/untari/y provide maternity leave than if they do not. However, it is not clear

whether these advantages
nonrandom

are actually caused by the entitlements

selection into jobs providing the benefit.

Waldfogel
and fixed-effect

(1994, 1995) partially circumvents

this problem by estimating

models (which control for time-invariant

and British data from the Nat;ona/ Longitudinal
Study respectively.
shown to experience
preservation

or if they result from

individual characteristics)

using U.S.

Suweys and the National Child Development

Mothers returning to the same firm within twelve months of childbirth
substantially

faster wage growth than those switching companies,

of job tenure playing an important role in explaining

However, data limitations
the same employer,

first-difference

require Waldfogel

are
with

the superior performance.

to restrict most analysis to the effects of rejoining

rather than focusing directly on parental leave.

Thus, women taking no

time or just a few days off work are grouped with those using extensive

maternity

leave.

15 There may also be distributional consequences.
For instance, a leave benefit which is
financed by personal income taxes may raise the welfare of women while reducing that of men.
In such cases, it is difficult to determine whether efficiency rises or falls.
Page 8

Furthermore,
nonrandom

the differencing

techniques

do not completely

eliminate biases caused by

selection into employ ment.’e

Three studies provide evidence on legislated parental leave entitlements.
Leibowitz (1995) examine the effects of state maternity leave mandates,
census data for the United States. ” Their findings, although somewhat
that rights to time off work have employment
substantially

positive.lB Waldfogel

using 1980 and 1990
ambiguous,

indicate

effects which range from slightly negative to

(1996) investigates

Leave Act utilizing data from the 1992-1995

Klerman &

the impact of the Family and Medical

March Current Population Surveys.

She uncovers

little evidence

of a wage effect but concludes that the FMLA has modestly increased

employment.

This last finding is sensitive to the model estimated,

specifications

indicating a negative or inconsistent

however, with some

impact of the law,19 Finally, Ruhm & Teague

(1995) study the impact of changes in federal leave legislation using data for 17 nations over
the 1968-1988
moderate

period.

durations

After controlling

for country and year effects, they find that short to

of parental leave (through at least one year) are positively related to per

capita incomes and labor market outcomes,
effects or negative impacts.

whereas lengthier entitlements

have less beneficial

However, they do not clearly identify the direction of causation

(i.e.

‘G In particular, Waldfogel (1995) finds that mothers with the option of taking maternity leave
but not doing so experience faster wage growth than corresponding mothers without coverage.
This suggests that women with relatively steep wage profiles disproportionately
work in
positions offering the leave.
‘7 No states had adopted mandates by 1980, whereas six (Minnesota, Rhode Island, Oregon,
Wisconsin, Maine, and Washington) had done so by 1990.
‘G The ambiguity occurs because mothers of somewhat older children, who should be less
affected by maternity leave provisions, experience higher rates of employment growth when
states institute parental leave entitlements than do women with infants.
19 For example, the employment of women with children under one year of age increased
faster, after passage of the FMLA, in states that already had a maternity leave mandate in
place than in those that did not, even though the federal legislation would be expected to have
a stronger impact in the latter states.
Page 9

countries might extend durations when the economy
overestimate

improves),

possibly leading to an

of the benefits of leave.20
3, Parental Leave Policies in Europe

Legislated

maternity benefits have a long history in Europe.

Industrial Code of 1891 set maximum work hours and prohibited
within four weeks of childbirth.

Amendments

The German

the employment

Imperial
of women

to the code in 1903 and 1911 increased

the leave

period to six weeks and supplied women with paid time off work in the two weeks before
delivery.

By turn of the century there was discussion

European

countries.21

child and mother.

of providing maternity

Most early legislation was paternalistic

income support or job-protection

seldom provided,

International

Maternity Profecl~on Conventions

not be perm;fled

in many

in its concern for the health of the

Prenatal and postnatal leave was typically compulsory

Labor Organization

insurance

and supplementary

For example, the 1919 and 1952
recommended

that women

to work during the six week period following confinement.22

The pronatalist

rationale became explicit in social policies across Europe after the end of

World War Il. Many nations which had recruited women into previously male-dominated
occupations

wished to return them to the home (Moeller,

related to family allowances,

protective legislation,

1993).

and family-law

The motivation

for policies

reform was often to restore

women to their “proper” roles as mother and wife (Frank and Lipner, 1988).

During the

20 Furthermorel Ruhm & Teague uncover little evidence that the entitlements have stronger
impacts on females alone than for men and women together. Since females are the main users
of family leave, and so should receive the majority of any benefits, this suggests that concerns
about dual causation may be warranted.
21 See Frank & Lipner (1988) for a detailed discussion of early maternity leave policies.
22 The 1919 convention advocated a 12 week period away from work, payment during the
duration of the leave, and job-reinstatement
upon return to employment.
The 1952 conference
recommended a cash benefit equal to at least two-thirds of previous earnings, compared a
previously suggested unspecified amount “sufficient for the full and healthy maintenance of the
working mother and her child” (International Labor Office, 1984).
Page 10

post-war period some countries
mandated

compulsory

(e.g., Denmark, Finland, Greece, the Netherlands,

pregnancy

and France)

leave but failed to prohibit dismissal from jobs,

By the late 1960s, the concept of maternity leave began to evolve from a prohibition
employing

women during the period surrounding

to care for newborns
reinstatement

and young children.

provisions

similar legislation

period; France and the Netherlands

passed

in 1975 and 1976; as did Denmark, Ireland and Greece between 1980 and

provided for job-protected
legislation

than voluntary,

time off work

Portugal, Spain, and Finland instituted employment

during the 1969-1971

1984. Other nations (e.g. Switzerland

protective

childbirth to one of job-protected

on

and the United Kingdom) inaugurated

maternity leave during this time span.

persist in some countries.

Nonetheless,

regulations
vestiges

Postnatal leaves remain compulsory,

in Austria, Finland, Francel Germany,

which
of

rather

Norway, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland;

Austria, France, and Italy continue to require prenatal leave (Brocus, et. al., 1990).
Income support is provided during at least a portion of the work absence throughout
Western

Europe.

Wage replacement

supplied through social insurance,
the United Kingdom)
benefit replacement

although some nations (e.g. Belgium, Germany,

require an employer contribution.

Cooperation

recently established

Italy, and

A few countries have recently reduced

rates, however, the overall trend has been towards longer paid and total

leave periods, with fathers increasingly
Economic

rates often exceed 80% and payments are usually

gaining rights to time off work (Organization

and Development,

1995). The European Community

of

Social Charter

a minimum standard leave period of 14 weeks, with pay no less than the

individual would receive if absent from work because of sickness (Addison & Siebert, 1993).
Even where parental leave extends to fathers, mothers take the vast majority of actual
time off work.
dramatically

For instance,

males accounted

smaller proportion

for 7V0 of total absences

in Sweden in 1988 but a

of weeks in other European countries (Organization

Page 11

of

Economic Cooperation

and Development,

1995).23 There are a variety of reasons why men use

the leave so sparingly.

In addition to cultural norms and differences

in earnings

entitlements

are generally restricted to mothers during the period immediately

confinement

and fathers can frequently

subsequently

capacity, the
surrounding

take time off work only if the mother

qualifies for but waives her rights to it.
4. Data
This analysis uses aggregate
Denmark,

Finland, France, Germany,

Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
information
originally

data for 16 European countries

Greece, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands,

and the United Kingdom) over the 1969 through 1988 period.

compiled from the International

Labour Office’s Legjs/a/ive

of Working Mothers”,

Wor/d, which is published approximately

The

infants or young children with dismissal

characteristic

Throughout

to time away from work to care for

prohibited during pregnancy

and job-reinstatement

is required because it is a key

of family leave policies which are viewed as a benefit from the perspective

As discussed,

many nations which had previously enacted compulsory

laws added job-security

the

biennially by the U.S. Social Security Administration.

at the end of the leave.24 Employment-protection

guaranteed

Series, their 1984 global

and from .Socia/ Securiiy Programs

Parental leave is defined to include entitlements

protection”

Norway, Portugal,

on family leave is a subset of that utilized by Ruhm & Teague (1995) and was

survey on “Protection

workers.

(Austria, Belgium,

of

“maternity

provisions during the period covered by the data.

23 For example, fewer than 1YO of Germans receiving family leave benefits
(Der Bundesminister fuer Jugend, Familie, Frauen und Gesundheit, 1989).
Spiess for providing me with and translating this information.
24 Ruhm and Teague (1995) coded Spain as providing 156 weeks of total
1970, as compared to 52 weeks in the present analysis. This change was
job-protection is guaranteed for only one year, although women are entitled
reinstatement if they return within a three year period.
Page 12

in 1989 were men
I thank Katharina
leave beginning
made because
to preferential

in

Paid leave refers to supplements
opposed to social insurance
histories,

A distinction

which are directly related to previous earnings,

payments available to individuals

but not mandated.

by law and similar work absences which are granted

Furthermore,

be quite limited when payment is not provided.
primarily on rights to paid time off work.
rates or to separately

where the latter

In practice, however, it may be difficult to distinguish

between unpaid leave which is guaranteed

replacement

of their employment

is made between paid and total leave entitlements,

include rights to unpaid time off work.

by employers

independent

as

the actual use of lengthy leave entitlements

may

For these reasons, the analysis focuses

Finally, no attempt is made to model wage

account for leave available only to the mother, as compared

to that which can be taken by either parent.
The leave durations

apply to persons meeting all eligibility criteria.

This overstates

actual time off work, since some individuals will not fulfill the employment

requirements

others will use less than the entire allowed absence.25 In most countries,

qualifying

while

conditions

either have not changed or have loosened over time and increased labor force participation
should allow more women to meet given employment
greater proportion
the beginning,

implying that the secular increase in family leave entitlements
variables are (natural logs of) employment-to-population

work hours, and hourly wage rates,
Labour Force Statistics.

the ILO Yearbook of Labor Statistics.
information

Thereforel

a

of females are expected to qualify for benefits at the end of the period than at

The dependent

publication

history requirements.

disaggregated

is understated.z’
ratios, weekly

Data on EP ratios are from various issues of the OECD
Those on hours and wages are from several volumes
Work hours refer to manufacturing

by sex available for 9 of the 16 countries.z’

employment,

Gender-specific

of

with
wage

25 In rare cases, workers receive longer leave due to voluntary agreements with employers.
‘G There are also substantial differences in leave “take-up rates”, which are beyond the scope
of this analysis to explain or account for.
27 Data were not obtained for Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, France, Italy, and Portugal.
Page 13

data were obtained for 12 nations and refer to either manufacturing
workers .28 Nominal wages were deflated by purchasing
Accounts

data, and by the U.S. Consumer

or all non-agricultural

power parities, using OECD Nafiona/

Price Index. Age-specific

information

on the EP

ratios of women aged 25-34 and 45-54 was also obtained for 9 nations.2g Finally, population
civilians aged 15-64) and birth rate (per 1000 resident population)

(of

data were obtained from

various issues of Labor Force Sfalisfics.
The data are not always completely
example,

purchasing

either between or within countries.

information

alter their methods of collecting

across time and place.

or aggregating

including vectors of country and year dummy variables,
in labor market outcomes.

data series which affect the information

This automatically

disproportionate

impact was observed,

strategy

In paflicular,

after

accounts for the effects of breaks in

on men and women equally.

preceding and following each interruption

nations

most of the analysis focuses on gender

condition is met, the ratio of (the log of) female to male outcomes
immediately

Similarly,

the data. The estimation

was designed to minimize biases resulting from such noncomparabilities,

differences

For

power parities provide the best method of adjusting nominal wages but

are unlikely to supply exactly equivalent
sometimes

comparable

in series,

To insure that this

was examined

for periods

In the few instances where a

missing values were entered for the period either before

or after the break.30

28 Wages refer to non-agricultural workers for Belgium, Denmark, Germany, and Switzerland
and to manufacturing employees for Finland, France, Greece, Ireland, the Netherlands,
Norway, Sweden and the UK. Information is missing for Austria, Italy, Portugal, and Spain.
2’ These include Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italyl Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Great
Britain, The data for Italy refer to 25-39 and 40-49 year olds.
30 Specifically, in order to maximize the variation in observed parental leave policies,
observations were deleted for the period with no change (or less change) in leave durations.
Page 14

5. Time-trends
Parental leave entitlements
observations

and Correlates

increased

of Parental

Leave

sharply between 1969 and 1988, Weighting

by the country’s working age population,

the average duration of total leave rose

from 15 to 57 weeks and that for paid leave increased from 10 to 32 weeks (see 2a).
Conversely,

as shown in figure 2b, the (weighted)

percentage

declined slightly (from 64% to 62Yo), as a moderate
more than offset by a substantial
rose dramatically

thereafter

employed

increase for women (from 45°A to 50Yo) was

decline for men (from 86°/0 to 73 Yo).3’ As expected,

over time (see figure 2c). More importantly,

fell rapidly at the beginning

of the population

wages

the gender gap in log earnings

of the period (from ,43 in 1969 to .31 in 1977) but relatively

little

(declining to .29 by 1988),

Table 1 details the parental leave provisions effective in 1988, the last year of the data.
At that time, the 16 countries offered a minimum of 10 weeks of paid leave, with 12 nations
mandating

entitlements

of 12 to 18 weeks and 3 (Finland, Germany,

rights to more than a year off work.

and Sweden) requiring

Over half the nations allowed additional

absences

without

pay, although in only 5 countries (Austria, France, Norway, Spain, and the United Kingdom)
was the unpaid leave substantial,32
the 16 countries.33 The conditions

Fathers were eligible to a portion of the time at home in 9 of
required to qualify for leave varied but persons with more

than a year of service were usually covered.

31 The fall in EP ratios partially results from the secular increase in European unemployment.
32 Unpaid leave, when provided, is always in additional to paid entitlements.
Thus, durations
of paid and total leave are virtually identical at short or moderate durations of the latter, with
substantial divergences occurring only when total leave allowances exceed six months.
33 Leave durations have continued to lengthen since the end of the sample period. For
instance, in January 1995, the entitlement was three years in Finland, France, and Germany
and two years in Austria (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1995).
Ondrich, et. al. (1995) analyze the effects of recent changes in German leave regulations on
the return to work after childbirth.
Page 15

Table 2 provides information
country across time.

on the levels and changes in total and paid leave in each

The number of nations providing some type of parental leave entitlement

rose from 8 in 1969 to 13 in 1979, with all 16 doing so in 1988.

Most countries supplying family

benefits in 1969 extended them during the sample period, with the result that the dispersion
leave durations

increased

over time.34 Some nations lengthened

entitlements

of

more than once

during the 20 years while others did so in a single increment.
The correlates

of parental leave were briefly examined

by estimating

the equation:

L,, = X,(a + &j,,

(1)

where L is the number of weeks of leave in country j at year t, X a vector of covariates
wages, birthrates,
disturbance
procedure

total and female EP ratios, total and female unemployment

term, and observations
discussed

wages, the percentage

Ceteris paribusl

of women employed,

with overall EP ratios and joblessness,
durations

but either negatively

Labor market outcome Y (measured

(2)

in

rates while declining

Birth rates were positively correlated

related to or independent

using the

leave durations were increasing

and female unemployment

6. Estimation

assumed to be determined

rates), E a

were weighted to adjust for heteroscedasticity

in the next section.

(hourly

with total leave

of paid time off work.35

Strategy

in natural logs) for group i in country j at year t is

by:
Y,j, = ai) + b,, + Cj,+ Lj(di + eu,,

34 The standard deviation of weighted total (paid) durations was 16.6, 34.8, and 57,9 (8.7,14.2,
and 22.4) weeks in 1969, 1979, and 1989, respectively. The difference between minimum and
maximum entitlements was 65, 120, and 108 (36, 54, and 62) weeks in the same years.
35 A table showing these results is available upon request. The findings are consistent with
family leave being a normal good, which is restricted when overall job competition increases but
becomes more available when women account for a greater proportion of the labor force and
have particular diticulties exiting unemployment.
The negative relationship between birthrates
and paid leave may reflect pronatalist strategies during periods of slow population growth,
whereas the positive coefficient for total leave could indicate political pressure to lengthen the
entitlements when many women are having children.
Page 16

where Ljl is the leave entitlement,
time-effect,

Ci,a time-varying

m and f hereafter

aii a group-specific

country fixed-effect,

b,l a group-specific

country effect, and ei),is a white noise disturbance.

The subscripts

denote males and females.

Since women use almost all weeks of family leave, it is assumed that leave entitlements
only affect female labor market outcomes

(i.e. d~=O). Thus, we obtain:

(3a)

Y~i,= a~j + b~, + Cjt+ e~j,,

(3b)

Yo,= ah + bfl + ciL+ Lj~dr+ e~,l.

Difference-in-difference

(DD) models of the form:
Yil = aij + ~il + Lj~6i+ EiL,

(4)
investigate

within-country

changes in the dependent

durations.

8 provides an unbiased

variable as a function of variations

estimate of the leave effect if Eli,and L,, are uncorrelated.

Since Ci,,= Cjt+ eij,, this requires Litand Cj[to be orthogonal.
country effects are correlated
countries

Bias is introduced

if time-varying

with changes in parental leave (e.g. if the political process leads

to increase entitlements

when employment

If d~=O, this bias can be easily eliminated.
(5)

in leave

is rising),35

Notice that:

YOt- Y~j, = (at + bfi + cj[ + Li~dl + efi,) - (a~j + b~l + cj[ + e~jl)

or equivalently
AYjl = Aai + Ab, + Lj~d, + Aei,

(5’)
Since Cj,has been difference

away, consistent

estimates

obtained from difference-in-difference-in-difference
(6)
The DDD estimates

of the parental leave parameter

regressions

are

of the form:

AYjl = aj + ~t + Lj/5 + Eii.
measure how growth in the gender gap in labor market outcomes

varies as

a function of changes in leave entitlements,
36 A direct estimate of the bias caused by time-varying country effects can be obtained from
the parental leave coefficient in the DD model for male labor market outcomes.
Page 17

If family leave also influences male outcomes

(d~ + O), the DDD estimate of ~ supplies a

consistent

estimate of (d, - d~), rather than of d,. Thus, if dfand d~ have the same sign, the

regression

coefficient

provides a downwards

biased estimate of d,. Since men account for only

a tiny fraction of the time taken off work in most countries,
be small.

For instance, if d, and d~ are proportionate

understatement

will be approximately

however, the resulting bias is likely to

the weeks of leave used by each sex, the

8°\0 in a country (such as Sweden) where men use 7°\0 of

the leave and 2% in a nation where males account for 2% of total weeks.37 Conversely,
d~ have the opposite sign (e.g. if companies
by substituting

employment

or households

respond to lengthened

away from females and towards males).”

d[and

entitlements

In this case, & provides

an upper bound estimate of d~.

The DDD procedure
equally.
effects.

above accounts for all time-varying

However, the estimates

may still be inconsistent

factors whicl

affect both sexes

if there are sex-specific

time-varying

This can be seen by replacing the c,, term in (2) with cij~. Equation (5’) then becomes:
AYj, = Aaj + Abl + Acji + Lj~df + Aejt,

(5”)

where AC), = Cw,[-cmj(; ~, obtained from (6), is then biased if E(Lj,lACj,) # O.
Omitted explanatory
sex-specific

time-varying

variables represent

factors.’g

important potential source of

This source of confounding

models which include a vector of country-specific
(7)

a potentially

time-trends

can be reduced by estimating
(T;) of the form:

AYjt = ai + ~1 + Tj’y + L,(5 + Ejl.

37 Let the p and 1-p represent the proportion of weeks of leave taken by men and women
respectively.
By assumption, d~=ndf, for n=p/(1 -p), which implies that df= 8/(1-n), Thus, if
p=.07, n=.0753 and l/(1-n) = 1.0814. Similarly, if p=.02, n=.0204 and I/(l-n) = 1,0208,
‘a Similarly, firms might replace women of childbearing ages with older females.
3’ For instance, if the education of women rises relative to men, in countries extending leave
durations, parental leave could be positively related to (relative) female employment and
earnings due to the increases in schooling, rather than because of the leave mandates.
Page 18

Equation (7) eliminates
characteristics,

the biases associated

with changes in sex differentials

to the extent the latter follow the specified time trend,

To adjust for heteroscedasticity
models are estimated

resulting from differences

by weighted least squares.

in population

of the squared OLS

residuals on a constant term and the reciprocal of the working age population

The advantages

An Illustrative

of the DDD methodology

are placed in the experimental

Example

can be illustrated with the following example.

(nonexperimental)

group at time t if they have (have

not) increased the duration of paid leave since the previous year. Average
observations

weighted

by country-year

working age populations,

estimates

whether or not countries
any adjustments.

which follow with two exceptions.
have modified leave entitlements

Second, changes in employment

EP ratios, with

are then compared

t-1 (before the potential change) and t+l (after it). This descriptive
econometric

for the specific

observation.40
7. DDD Estimates:

Countries

sizes, the

The weights used are equal to the (square

root of the) inverse of the predicted values obtained from regressions

country-year

in the omitted

for period

analysis corresponds

First, the experiment

to the

examines

but does not account for the size of

rates are calculated

over just two time

periods, rather than for multiple years.
The top panel of Table 3 displays DD results for males and females together,
decline by 0.428% in the nonexperimental
in the experimental

nations.

countries,

between t-1 and t+l, but grow by 0,300%

This suggests that increases

0.728% rise in the percentage-of

the-population

bottom panel of the table, the higher employment

EP ratios

employed.

in paid leave are associated

with a

However, as illustrated in the

need not be caused by the extension

in leave

40 As shown by Blackburn (1995), this procedure is more efficient than weighting by (the
square root of) population size if there is a common group effect (or group-time interaction)
across individuals in a country. The significant constant term obtained in virtually all of the
regressions on squared residuals confirms that such group effects are important.
Page 79

but rather could result from unobserved
relative job-holding

confounding

factors.

Notice that the increase in

is greater for men (0.977Yo) than for women (0.494 ?/0),even though parental

leave policies are expected to have little or no effect on the male labor market.
“true” parental leave effect as the difference

Calculating

the

between changes in female and male outcomes

provides the DDD estimate of -0.483Y0 (0.494Y0 - 0.9770/0). This suggests that increases
paid leave reduce female EP ratios and that countries extend the entitlements

in

during periods of

rising relative employment.
8. Econometric
Table 4 displays econometric
the three labor market outcomes.
so these represent

Results

estimates of the relationship

between parental leave and

Vectors of country and time dummy variables

difference-in-difference

estimates,

The equations

are included,

are estimated

separately

for males and females, with the samples restricted to cases where data on the dependent
variable are available for all specifications.
adjust for heteroscedasticity.

Observations

are weighted

The parental leave regressor

as discussed

above to

in the top (bottom) panel of the

table is weeks of total (paid) leave divided by 100.
The leave coefficients
and durations

are statistically

are of roughly similar magnitude
significantly

related to ma)e labor market outcomes

six cases (i.e. paid leave on EP ratios and work hours).
work hours) is a significant
disparity

in the estimated

outcomes

effect is small.

(total leave on

These results further suggest that countries

is not accounted

pick up the effects of unobserved

41 Klerman & Leibowitz

In only one specification

in two of the

effect obtained for women but not men and, even in this case, the

rights to paid leave during periods of robust employment
this source of confounding

for men and women in all models

for.”

growth and that bias is introduced

To the extent that the regressions

confounding

if

on male

factors, they indicate that family leave

(1 995) obtain similar results for state mandates
Page 20

extend

in the United States.

entitlements

have a smaller (in absolute value) impact on women’s employment

than are implied by the DD estimates

in the first row of each panel.

the analysis focuses on DDD specifications,
labor market outcomes

Therefore,

which include a comparison

are expected to be largely unaffected

and work hours
the remainder

of

group (men) whose

by changes in leave legislation.

8.1 DDD Estimates
Table 5 summarizes

a first set of DDD estimates

each equation, the dependent
labor market outcomes.

variable is the difference

In

between (the log of) female and male

PAID indicates weeks of paid leave (divided by 100), with a quadratic

term included to allow for nonlinearities
hypothesis

examining the effects of paid leave.

in the estimated

effect.

The P-Value refers to the null

that all of the parental leave variables included in the specified model (PAID and its

square in these regressions)
country dummy variables.
entitlements

are jointly equal to zero.

include vectors of year and

The lower panel of the table shows the estimated

to paid leave on the dependent

Specification

All equations

variable, compared

(a) is the basic DDD model.

impact of specified

to the case of no mandate,

The birthrate is included as an additional

covariate in model (b), to allow for the possibility that the number of children influences
market involvement

and is correlated

with leave entitlements.

labor

However, since some countries

use parental leave policies as part of a strategy to raise the birthrate, the latter may be
endogenous

and its inclusion as an explanatory

could also influence

variable problematic,

Parental leave mandates

labor market outcomes with a lag.42 To allow for this, specification

(c)

includes controls for paid leave (and its square) at year t-1, as well as at time t, with the table
displaying

the sum of the coefficients

at t-1 and t, along with the corresponding

standard

error.

42 Most obviously, this may occur because policy changes often take effect in the middle of
calendar years. Since this study uses annual data, only a portion of the total impact will
therefore be observed during the year of enactment.
Page 21

These regressions
hourly wages.

provide little evidence that paid leave is related to either EP ratios or

Although the point estimates suggest that intermediate

increase female employment
neither effect approaches
associated

while rights to extended work absences

statistical significance,

with weekly work hours.

durations

modestly

reduce relative wages,

By contrast, paid leave is strongly positively

For instance, legislation guaranteeing

nine months off work

with pay is predicted to increase hours by 2Y0.43
These results are relatively unaffected
lagged leave durations.
(increases)

by the inclusion of controls for birthrates

As shown in specification

(b), the addition of birthrates

or

reduces

the predicted effect of paid leave on EP ratios (hourly wages), but the change is

small in both a statistical and an economic sense, while having essentially

no impact on work

hours.44 Likewise, the predicted parental leave effects are robust to the inclusion of lags.
instance, the differential

associated

with 20 weeks of paid leave, compared

For

to no entitlement,

is

0.8Y0, 1.3Y0, and -0.7% for EP ratios, work hours, and hourly wages, when lags are included in
the model (column (c)), versus 0.9%, 1.3%, and -0.4Y0 when they are not (specification
Given these findings, birthrates
estimates

and lagged durations are excluded from the econometric

presented

in the remainder

8.2 DDD Estimates

With Time-trends

The DDD estimates
country-effects

(a)).45

of the paper.

above may be biased if there are sex-specific

which are correlated

with changes in leave entitlements.

in Table 6 reduce this potential source of confounding

time-varying
The models presented

by adding a vector of country-specific

43 However, as shown below, this finding is not robust to the addition to the model of
country-specific time-trends.
44 Birthrates are significantly negatively related to employment, hours, and wages.
45 To avoid reducing the sample size, leave data for 1968 are also used in specification (c), I
also estimated models with leave at year t, t-1, and t-2 controlled for. The second lag was
never statistically significant and the results were similar to those with just a one year lag.
Page 22

time-trends

to the set of covariates.

Other than this change, specification

(a) is identical to

column (a) of Table 5.
The inclusion country-specific
parental leave mandates,
insignificant

to substantially

from significantly

time-trends

dramatically

positive and statistically

significant when considering

positive to having no impact for work hours.

by 5.3°/0 and hours by -0.2°/0 in

(a) of Table 6, as compared to 0.9% and 1.9% in model (a) of table 5.46

relative employment

in periods when the

rates (work hours) of women are trending down (up). When combined

the DD estimates

summarized

leave guarantees

is endogenous

typically lengthened

in Table 4, they show that the adoption or extension
and follows a fairly complicated

when overall employment

of parental

pattern -- leave durations

is rising (relative to other countries)

with

are

but women’s

is falling (relative to men).

Continuous

regressors

even when quadratic
entitlements

EP ratios and

For example, rights to 36 weeks

These findings suggest that countries raise paid leave entitlements

job-holding

impact of

The predicted effect of paid leave switches from small and

of paid leave increase predicted female employment
specification

alters the estimated

may poorly capture the effects of the parental leave mandates,

or higher order terms are included.”’

to short work absences could have substantial

For example, the effect of legislating
effects, while further extensions

of

the leave period could have little or no additional impact.48 The models above would then be

4’ I experimented with including a vector of quadratic country time-trends in the model. The
results obtained were quite similar to those using a linear trend. As an additional specification
check, the models were estimated with parental leave (and its square) at year t+l controlled for.
The lead leave variables never approached statistical significance in the specifications which
included country time-trends but were jointly significant for the hours equation in their absence.
This last result provides a further indication of the importance of including controls for
country-specific
time-trends.
47 The equations were also estimated using cubic leave specifications.
These yielded results
which were generally very similar to those discussed above.
“a For instance, this might occur if women strongly desire to be at home for a short period
following childbirth, with rapidly diminishing marginal utility of additional time off the job.
Page 23

misspecified

since they restrict the consequence

be small, relative to that of longer durations.

of an initial (arbitrarily

short) period of leave to

To permit this type of “step” effect, the dummy

variable ANYPAID was added to the models displayed in specification

(b) of Table 6. ANYPAID

takes the value one if the country has enacted a leave mandate and zero otherwise,
therefore

indicates the impact of paid job absences of arbitrarily short duration.”

specifications,

PAID and its square then show the effects of extending

It

In these

an existing leave

mandate.
The coefficient
substantial

on ANYPAID

is highly significant for EP ratios and work hours and is of

size and has a T-statistic

indicate that legislation
relative employment,

exceeding

requiring employers

to offer minimal amounts of paid leave raise the

the leave period is summarized

6 and is detailed in Figure 3. Interestingly,

work change predicted employment,

still does not quite reach statistical

whereas EP ratios are predicted to increase through

For instance, entitlements

to 10 weeks away from

hours, and wages by 3.4Y0, 1.1 Yo, and O.l O/O,while the

in contrast to the results in column (a), while that on wages
significance.

Table 7 provides results for additional specifications
In column (a), the only leave regressor

distinguishing

in the lower panel of Table

impact of 36 weeks of paid leave is 4,6Y0, -2.0°/0, and -1 ,8V0, Also notice that the

effect on hours is highly significant,

variables.

The

the first year of paid leave, fairly sizable declines in expected work hours and

wages are observed at longer durations.

corresponding

The point estimates

hours, and wages of women by 2.5Y0, 2.8Y0, and 1,7°/0 respectively.

predicted impact of further extending

approximately

one for hourly wages.

between no leave entitlement

(b) contains dichotomous

variables

which include categorical

leave

is ANYPAID, the dummy variable

and rights to some time off work with pay. Model

indicating paid leave in the ranges of 1-13, 14-26, and >26

4’ Since the initial period of leave is paid for all countries in this sample, this variable is
identical to one which distinguishes between some versus no total leave.
Page 24

weeks, with O weeks the excluded reference category .50 Finally, specification
dummy variables

indicating the same three duration categories

(c) incorporates

as column (b) but controlling

for

total (paid and unpaid) rather than just paid leave.
The findings of the table can be summarized
positive effect on women’s employment,

as follows.

with somewhat

larger gains for rights to intermediate

long than for short periods away from the job. These estimates
previously.

For instance,

4.6% increases

First, parental leave has a
or

are similar to those obtained

1-13, 14-26, and >26 weeks of paid leave lead to 2.7Y0, 4,3%, and

in the predicted female EP ratio (see model (b)), as compared

to 3.4Y0, 4.1 Yo,

and 4,6% changes for durations of 10, 20, and 36 weeks in column (b) of Table 6.
Second, there is some indication that brief leave entitlements
little evidence

of effects at longer durations.

increase work hours but

This contrasts with a negative impact of rights to

lengthy leave in column (b) of Table 6. However, there is some reason to suspect that the
specification

in the earlier table may be preferred.51

More generally, the sensitivity

of the

findings to the choice of models implies that the results for work hours should be interpreted
cautiously,
Third, the categorical

specifications

suggest that rights to short work absences

may

raise (and certainly do not reduce) predicted wages, whereas women pay for lengthy paid
entitlements
associated

by receiving lower earnings.
with wage differentials

with the null hypothesis

Thus, 1-13, 14-26, and >26 weeks of paid leave are

of 1, 1°/0, -1 .50A, and -2.9V0, compared to the reference

of no wage effect strongly rejected.

group,

There is also some indication that

short periods of total leave raise wages relative to either no entitlement

or rights to a longer

period off work (see column (c)).

50 The results are not sensitive to changing the ranges of the categorical variables.
51 These include the relatively high standard errors on the leave coefficients in Table 7 and the
higher adjusted R-Squared in column (b) of Table 6 than for any of the three models shown in
the subsequent table.
Page 25

8,3 DDD Estimates

For Women of Different Aqes

Up to this point, men have been used as the comparison
time-varying

country-specific

factors which may be correlated

The inclusion of country time-trends
might result from sex-specific

group, to account for

with parental leave durations,

provided one method of reducing potential biases which

time-varying

country effects (e.g. those introduced

if nations

increase leave durations during periods of slow growth in relative female employment).
complementary

approach,

those of their counterpafls
childbearing

Conversely,

be less influenced
in the percentage

aged 45-54.52 Since 25-34 year old females are in their prime

45-54 year olds have completed

by the statutes.

virtually all of their fertility and so may

Thus, the natural experiment

involves contrasting

of the younger and older cohorts of women employed,

changes

as a function of

in leave entitlements.

Table 8 summarizes
is the difference
aged 45-54.
estimates,

this section compares the EP ratios of 25-34 year old women to

years, they are expected to be directly and strongly affected by parental leave

mandates.

variations

As a

the econometric

estimates.

The dependent

variable in all models

in (the log of) the EP ratio of 25-34 year old females versus those of women

Vectors of time and year dummy variables are also included, to provide DDD

as are country-specific

heteroscedasticity,

time-trends.

using the procedure

the models estimated

Observations

discussed above.

are weighted to correct for

The five specifications

correspond

in Tables 6 and 7. Thus, column (a) shows results for the quadratic

weeks of paid leave (divided by 100); model (b) adds the leave/no leave dummy variable;
ANYPAID

is the only parental leave regressor

include controls for categorical

in specification

(c); and columns

(d) and (e)

variables indicating ranges of paid and total leave durations.

52 Age-specific data on female work hours or wages are not readily available,
analysis of these outcomes.
Page 26

precluding

in

to

The table confirms that parental leave entitlements
women.

The large and significant

which include only continuous
legislation

coeticient

on ANYPAID

of paid leave legislation

women employed

and indicates that leave

increases relative EP ratios.

is predicted to raise the percentage

by 9.OYO,relative to 45-54 year olds. Conversely,

prediction

concerning

estimated

to be positive in specifications

of young

in model (b) implies that regressions

leave variables are misspecified

of even short duration substantially

the existence

raise the employment

Thus, in column (c),
of 25-34 year old

there is no consistent

the additional effect of more extended leave entitlements

-- the impact is

(a) and (b), negative in model (e), and with no clear

pattern in column (d) -- with all of the effects estimated

imprecisely,

8.4 Discussion
The preceding

analysis indicates that parental leave legislation

employment-to-population

increases the

ratios of women, especially those of childbearing

data also raise the possibility that firms respond to lengthy leave entitlements

age. However,

by reducing the

work hours of females and more strongly suggest that women pay for rights to extended
leave by receiving

lower earnings.

This pattern of results makes sense.

parental leave are likely to impose few costs on employers
to workers, with the consequence

that employment

For instance, firms may be able to temporarily
absent employees
position following
investments.

the

paid

Short periods of

but could confer substantial

benefits

increases without negative wage effects.

reassign individuals to fulfill the responsibilities

of

and rights to brief time away from the job, by allowing return to the old
childbirth,

Conversely,

may increase the ability of women to retain firm-specific
lengthy entitlements

fail to provide sufficient compensatory

are likely to be costlier to companies

but may

benefits to workers and could lead to the depreciation

human capital, with the result that wages decline.

Page 27

of

One issue deserving
parental leave as “employed
ratios will therefore
absences

mention is that many European

countries count individuals

but absent from work”, rather than “not employed”.

rise when countries expand leave entitlements,

of “employed”

persons increase.

Some indication

for by maternity

Ieave.m Moreover,

in 12 EC countries was

leave in 1983 (OECD, 1995).53 By comparison,

to the number of women counted as employed
the estimated

contrast to the more substantial
“employment”

impact rises only marginally

leave mandates

effects of the legislation

but actually on maternity

if the observed

effect were actually caused by changes in leave-taking.
ranging from 1.5% to 3°A for laws mandating

lengthy

(i.e. six months or more of) paid leave, are quite large given that only a limited proportion
women are absent from work for this reason at any one time and since a substantial
the leave benefits are paid by the government,
impacts of this magnitude

countries (Denmark,
exceeding

are

with the duration of leave, in

increase which would be expected

The predicted wage reductions,

Nevertheless,

EP

to the extent that the work

predicted above to raise EP ratios by 4% to 5%. Thus, the estimated
are large compared

Reported

of the relative size of this effect

can be obtained by noting that 0.9% of women’s “employment”
accounted

on

Finland, Germany,

rather than the employers,

of

fraction of

in most countries.

may be plausible for several reasons.

First, only five

Italy, Sweden) had legislated rights to paid leave

six months, during the sample period, and each had relatively high rates of work

absence due to maternity

leave or personal/family

reasons.

Second, the expansions

in leave

53 Similarly, 0,6% of female “employment” consisted of absences for other family or personal
reasons, including extended parental leave. The 12 EC countries include Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Portugall Spain, and the
United Kingdom.
54 Work hours could also be overstated to the extent that individuals take part-time parental
leave. However, only a few countries provide a legal right to partial absences and, even when
provided, parents seldom take it. For example, among 11 countries (Belgium, Denmark,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Luxembourg, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and the United
Kingdom) for which 1988 data were available, part-week absences due to maternity leave were
only observed in Britain (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1991).
Page 26

typically occurred relatively late in the time period and coincided with increased
leave.55 Third, employers
extremely
workers,

lengthy,

may incur substantial

nonwage costs when the leave entitlements

For example, it may become much harder to schedule

given considerable

uncertainty

use of maternity

replacement

regarding the actual leave period and the possibility

that the individual will ultimately choose not to return to the same job.5’ These difficulties
be magnified
contracts.
relatively

are

by national regulations which limit the duration of temporary

may

work on fixed-term

Finally, when leave durations exceed one year, women having multiple children
close together may be away from their jobs for several years consecutively,

just brief spells of intervening

employment,

causing substantial

depreciation

or with

of human capital,

9. Conclusion
Virtually all industrialized
maternity

countries currently provide women with rights to job-protected

leave during the period surrounding

childbirth.

Some nations (e.g. Germany)

have

allowed lengthy paid absences for many years whereas others (e.g. the United States) have
only recently mandated
widespread

international

the economic

to limited periods off work without pay. Despite the

implementation,

consequences

how leave mandates
differences

entitlements

there has been relatively little research investigating

of parental leave.

This study helps to fill this gap by examining

affect labor market outcomes.

One important

between female and male values of the dependent

innovation

variables,

is the focus on

Since women use

55 Denmark extended paid leave durations by 18 weeks in 1981 and 10 weeks in 1987;
Finland by 6, 8, and 26 weeks in 1979, 1983, and 1985; Germany by 18, 25, and 9 weeks in
1979, 1986, and 1988; Italy by 26 weeks in 1979; and Sweden by 12 weeks in 1979 and 18
weeks in 1985. In 1992, 4.10A, 3,70A, and 3.1 YOof women’s “employment” in Denmark,
Germany, and Italy was accounted for by maternity leave or absences for other personalifamily
reasons, as were 5.5°/0 of weeks for maternity or parental leave in Sweden, in the same year,
(Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1995). These are lower-bound
estimates, since some persons on leave do not report themselves as having jobs and so are
not included in the employment figures,
56 For instance, less than half of German job leavers return to work at the end of the leave
period (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1995).
Page 29

virtually all parental

leave in most countries, changes in entitlements

no effect on men, making them a natural comparison
of how the employment

of women of childbearing

group.

are likely to have little or

Limited analysis is also provided

ages varies, relative to that of older females,

as a function of parental leave.
Rights to paid time off work raise the percentage
effect observed

for even short durations

Based on the preferred
legislation

increases

and less consistent
considerable
controlling

specifications,

age by approximately

leave-taking

by “employed”

effects on work hours.

sensitivity

estimate is that leave

9Y0, with up to a quarter of this change resulting
women.

By contrast, the mandates

More generally, the econometric

have weaker

estimates

of the importance

within-country

of choosing the “right” specification

and points to

is whether employers

pass the costs of the (largely

leave benefit through to women in the form of lower relative wages.

lengthier paid entitlements

are associated

with substantial

wage reductions,

in the range of 1.5% to 3“A for durations of six months or more.

leave is sometimes

of

time-trends.

periods of leave are found to either have no effect on or to raise female earnings.

decreases

exhibit

of much of the previous related research.

A second issue addressed
group-specific)

work absence.

ratio of all females by around 4% and of

country effects and sex-specific

This fragility highlights the importance
potential shortcomings

a reasonable

to the choice of models, with evidence presented

for both time-varying

with a substantial

(i.e. less than 3 months) of guaranteed

the employment-to-population

women of childbearing
from increased

econometric

of women employed,

justified on the grounds that, even if it decreases

because it improves the position of women in the workplace.

Conversely,

with predicted
Extended

efficiency,

parental

it is desirable

However, the evidence that

females pay for the rights through reduced wages raises questions

Page 30

Short

about this equity argument.

To summarize,

the employment

short (less than 6 months) durations
more extended

entitlements.

many European

countries

of women appears to be increased

by even relatively

of paid leave, whereas their relative wages may fall with

This suggests that the work absences

currently guaranteed

may be so lengthy as to reduce the earnings of females.

there is little indication that substantial

in

Conversely,

costs would be incurred, in the U. S., if the period of

parental leave were modestly extended or if payment were provided.”
These conclusions

should be viewed as tentative for a variety of reasons.

sample sizes are relatively small, resulting in imprecise estimates
some models.

Second, the data on leave are incomplete.

would include information
benefit, the “take-up
entitlements.

of parental leave effects in

A more comprehensive

investigation

of workers in each country qualifying for the

rate” among qualified individuals,

Third, other efficiency

Most significantly,
children.

on the percentage

First, the

and details on the structure

benefits or costs may be associated

of paid

with the mandates.

it is often argued that parental leave improves the health and well-being

This represents

an important

of

area for future research.

57 However, as noted above, no European country offers unpaid leave, except as an addition
to an initial period of paid time off work, making it dificult to apply these results to the United
States which, under the FMW, mandates only unpaid leave.
Page 31

References
Addison, John T. and W. Stanley Siebert (1993) Current Controversies, No. 6: Social
Enqineerinq in the European Community: The Social Charter, Maastricht and Bevond,
London: The Institute of Economic Affairs.
Aghion, Phillipe and Benjamin Hermalin (1990) “Legal Restrictions on Private Contracts
Enhance Eticiency” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 6(2), 381-409

Can

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce Meyer (1995) “The Incidence of A Firm-Varying Payroll Tax:
The Case of Unemployment Insurance”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper No. 5201.
Blackburn, McKinley L. (1995) “Misspecified
mimeo, University of South Carolina.
Blank, Rebecca M, (1994)
Chicago Press.

Skedastic

Functions for Grouped-Data

Social Protection Vs. Economic Flexibility.

Chicago:

Models”,

University

of

Bookman, Ann (1991) “Parenting Without Poverty: The Case for Funded Parental Leave,” in
Hyde and Essex, Parental Leave and Child Care (pp. 66-89). Philadelphia, PA: Temple
University Press.
Brocas, Anne-Marie, Anne-Marie Cailloux and Virginie Oget (1990) Women and Social Securitv:
Proqress Towards EqualitV of Treatment, Geneva: International Labour Office.
Bravo, Ellen (1991) “Family Leave: The Need for a New Minimum Standard” in Hyde and
Essex, Parental Leave and Child Care (pp. 165-175), Philadelphia, PA: Temple University
Press.
Bundesminister fuer Jugend, Familie, Frauen und Gesundheit.
(1989) Erziehunqs~eld<
Etziehunqsurlaub
und Anrechunq von Erziehunqszeiten in der Rentenversicherunq,
Band
243. Berlin: Verlag W. Kohlhammer, 53. (The Federal Ministry of Youth, Family and
Health. (1 989) Child Rearinq Benefit, Parental Leave and Credits for Rearinq Children in
the Social Securitv System, Vol. 243. Berlin: W. Kohlhammer, 53).
Carnegie Task Force on Meeting the Needs of Young Children (1994) Startinq Points: Meetinq
the Needs of Younq Children. New York, N. Y,: Carnegie Corporation of New York.
Dalto, Guy C. (1989) “A Structural Approach to Women’s Hometime and Experience-earnings
Profiles: Maternity Leave and Public Policy,” Population Research and Policv Review,
8(3), 247-266.
Frank, Meryl and Robyn Lipner (1988) “History of Maternity Leave in Europe and the United
States, ” in Zigler and Frank The Parental Leave Crisis (pp. 3-22) New Haven: Yale
University Press.
Gruber, Jonathan (1994) “The Incidence of Mandated
Review, 84(3), 622-41.
Page 32

Maternity

Benefits,” American

Economic

Gruber, Jonathan and Alan B. Krueger (1991) “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided
Health Insurance: Lessons from Workers’ Compensation Insurance” in David Bradford
(cd.) Tax Policy and the American Economy. Vol. 5 (pp. 111-143), Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
International Labor Office. (Various Years) Yearbook of Labour Statistics.
International Labour Office Publications,
International Labor Office.
Office Publications.

(Various Years)

International Labor Office (1964) “Protection
(1964 -84),” Women at Work, 2, 1984.

Legislative

Series.

Geneva:

Geneva: International

Labour

of Working Mothers: An ILO Global Survey

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J, LaLonde, and Daniel Sullivan. (1993) “Earnings Losses of
Displaced Workers” American Economic Review, 83 (September), 685-709.
Kamerman, Sheila B. (1991) “Child Care Policies and Programs:
Journal of Social Issues, 47(2), 179-196.

An International

Overview,”

Kamerman, Sheila B. (1 988) “Maternity and Parenting Benefits: An International Overview,”
Zigler and Frank The Parental Leave Crisis (pp. 235-244) New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Klerman, Jacob A. and Arleen Leibowitz.
Leave Legislation”, mimeo, RAND.

(1995)

Klerman, Jacob A. and Arleen Leibowitz. (1994)
New Mothers” Journal of Human Resources,

in

“Labor Supply Effects of State Maternity

“The Work-Employment
24(2), Spring, 277-303.

Distinction Among

Krueger, Alan B. (1994) “Observations on Employment-Based
Government Mandates, With
Particular Reference to Health Insurance,” Working Paper #323, Industrial Relations
Section, Princeton University, January.
Kuhn, Peter (1992) “Mandatory

Notice,” Journal of Labor Economics,

10(2), 117-137

Levine, David 1. (1991) “Just-cause Employment Policies in the Presence of Worker Adverse
Selection,” Journal of Labor Economics, 9(3), 294-305.
McGuire, Thomas G. and Christopher J. Ruhm (1993) “Workplace
of Health Economics 12(l), 19-38.

Drug Abuse Policy,” Journal

Mitchell, Olivia (1990) “The Effect of Mandatory Benefit Packages” in Bassi, L., D. Crawford,
and R, Ehrenberg (eds, ) Research in Labor Economics, Vol. 11. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press,
297-320.
Moeller, Robert G. (1993) Protecting Motherhood:
Women and the Family in the Politics of
Postwar West GermanV, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Page 33

Mortensen, Dale T. (1 977) “Unemployment
Insurance and Job Search Decisions,”
and Labor Relations Review, 30(4), 505-517.

Industrial

Ondrich, Janl C. Katharina Spiess, Quing Yang. (1995) “Barefoot and in a German Kitchen:
Federal Parental Leave and Benefit Policy and the Return to Work After Childbirth in
German”, prepared for the Ninth Annual Meeting of the European Society of Population
Economics, Lisbon, Portugal.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
(1 995) “Long-Term Leave for
Parents in OECD Countries”, in Employment Outlook: Julv 1995. Paris: OECD
Department of Economics and Statistics, 171-202.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
(1991 ) “Absence
Reported in Labour Force Surveys”, in Employment Outlook: July 1991.
Department of Economics and Statistics, 177-197.

From Work
Paris: OECD

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
(1 989) National Accounts, Vol. 1:
Main Aqqreqates 1960-1987, Paris: OECD Depadment of Economics and Statistics.
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.
(various years) Labour Force
Statistics: 1966-1986, 1968-1988, 1971-1991. Paris: OECD, Department of Economics
and Statistics.
Rothschild, Michael and Joseph Stiglitz. (1976) “Equilibrium in Competitive Insurance Markets:
An Essay on the Economics of Imperfect Information” Quarterlv Journal of Economics, 90,
629-49.
Ruhm, Christopher J. and Jacqueline
L. Teague. (1995) “Parental Leave Policies in Europe
and North America” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #5065, March.
Spalter-Roth, Roberta M. and Heidi 1, Hartmann (1990) Unnecessary Losses: Costs to
Americans of the Lack of FamilV and Medical Leave, Washington D. C.: Institute for
Women’s Policy Research, 1990.
Stoiber, Susanne A. (1990) “Family Leave Entitlements in Europe: Lessons for the United
States,” Compensation & Benefits Management, 6(2), Winter, 111-116,
Summers, Lawrence (1 989) “Some Simple Economics
Economic Review, 79(2), 177-83.

of Mandated

Benefits” American

Trzcinski, Eileen (1991) “Employers’ Parental Leave Policies: Does the Labor Market Provide
Parental Leave?” in Hyde and Essex Parental Leave and Child Care, (pp. 41-65)
Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1994) EmploVee Benefits in Small
Private Establishments,
Bulletin No. 2441. Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office,
May.

Page 34

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (1993) Employee Benefits in Medium
and Larqe Private Establishments, Bulletin No. 2422. Washington: U.S. Government
Printing Office, May.
U.S. Social Security Administration. (various years) Social Security Proqrams Throughout
World. Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

the

Waldfogel, Jane. (1994) “The Family Gap for Young Women in the US and UK: Can Maternity
Leave Make a Difference?” mimeo, Columbia University.
Waldfogel, Jane. (1995) “Working Mothers Then and Now: A Cross-Cohort Analysis of the
Effects of Maternity Leave on Women’s Pay” mimeo, Columbia University.
Waldfogel, Jane (1996) “The Impact of the Family and Medical Leave Act on Coverage,
Leave-Taking, Employment and Earnings” mimeo, Columbia University.
Zigler, Edward F., Meryl Frank, and Barbara Emmel. (1988) “Introduction”, in Edward F. Zigler
and Meryl Frank, eds., The Parental Leave Crisis: Toward a National Policv, New Haven:
Yale University Press, xv-xxv,

Page 35

Tablel:

Country

Total
Leave

Austria

67 wks

16 wks

Belgium

14 wks

Denmark

Parental Leave Provisions

Paid Leave
(0/0 of pay)

Available
To Fathers

in 1988

Qualification

Conditions

None

10 months of social insurance
coverage in last 2 years or 6 months
coverage in last year.

14 wks (71Yo)

None

6 months coverage

28 wks

28 wks (90%)

12 wks

6 months coverage and employment
during previous year, including at
least 40 hours of work during 4 weeks
preceding leave.

Finland

69 wks

69 wks (80%)

26 wks

3 months employment, unless
involuntarily unemployed.

France

120 wks

16 wks (900A)

104 wks

10 months of insurance prior to leave
and at least 200 hours of work in 3
months pre{;eding the pregnancy.

Germany

66 wks

14 wks (1 oo~o),
52 wks (flat rate)

52 wks

12 weeks of insurance
employment.

Greece

13 wks

12 wks (5070)

12 wks

200 days of employment
years.

Ireland

18 wks

14 wks (70Yo)

None

30 weeks of insurance

contributions.

Italy

46 wks

46 wks (52Yo)

26 wks

Insured and employed
pregnancy.

at start of

Netherlands

12 wks

12 wks (1 00%)

None

Insured and employed.

Norway

52 wks

18 wks (9070)

40 wks

Pofiugal

12 wks

12 wks (100%)

8 wks

Employed with 6 months of insurance.

Spain

52 wks

14 wks (75Yo)

None

Insured 9 months, with 6 months of
contributions.

Sweden

78 wks

72 wks (90Yo)

60 wks

Switzerland

14 wks

10 wks (flat rate)

None

Up to 9 months insurance
upon Canton).

United
Kingdom

40 wks

18 wks (flat rate)

None

6 months of insurance contributions
during previous year and 2 years of
work with same employer.

(100yo)

preceding

leave.

or 6 months of
during last 2

Employed and insured at least 6 of
the last 10 months.

Insured 8 months.
(depending

Table 2: Levels and Changes in Parental Leave in Selected Years

Total Leave

Country

Paid Leave

A in Weeks:

Ave.
Weeks

Weeks
in
1969

Austria

66

Belgium
Denmark

A in Weeks:

Ave.
Weeks

Weeks
in
1969

19691979

19791988

65

2

0

15

14

14

0

0

8

0

0

Finland

34

0

France

73

Germany

19691979

19791988

12

4

0

14

14

0

0

28

8

0

0

28

35

34

34

0

35

34

0

120

0

11

0

16

0

27

14

18

34

27

14

18

34

Greece

3

0

0

13

3

0

0

12

Ireland

7

0

0

18

6

0

0

14

45

40

6

0

32

14

32

0

8

0

12

0

8

0

12

0

Norway

36

12

40

0

15

12

6

0

Portugal

10

0

12

0

10

0

12

0

Spain

49

0

52

0

13

0

14

0

Sweden

61

36

42

0

50

36

18

18

Switzerland

13

8

6

0

10

8

2

0

United Kingdom

33

18

22

0

18

18

0

0

Italy
Netherlands

Table 3: Difference-in-Difference-in-Difference
Estimates of the Effects of
Increases in Paid Leave on the Percent of the Population Employed
Employed
Before Increase in
Paid Leave
YO

Group

Employed
After Increase in
Paid Leave
0/0

(y,.,)

(y,+,)

Time
Difference
for Country
(y,+,

-

Y,-1)

Males and Females Combined
Experimental

Countries

Nonexperimental

Countries

Country Difference
Point in Time:

61 .6680/0

61.968°A

0.30070

62.502%

62.074%

-0.428°h

-0.834Y0

-0,106%

at a

Difference-in-Difference:

Treatment

Group:

Experimental

0.728%

Females

Countries

Nonexperimental

Countries

Country Difference
Point in Time:

45.412%

46.488%

1.076%

45.878%

46.460%

0.582%

-0.466Y0

0.028%

at a

Difference-in-Difference:
Control

Group:

Experimental

0.494%

Males
Countries

Nonexperimental

Countries

Country Difference
Point in Time:

78.267%

77.715%

-0.552°k

79.502%

77.973%

-1 .529%

-1 .235%

-0.258%

at a

Difference-in-Difference:

0,97770

Difference-in-Difference-in-Difference:

-0.483Y0

Note: Cells contain the weighted average employment percentages for the group identified.
Experimental Countries are those raising the paid leave entitlement during the calendar year t
(n=23); nonexperimental
countries are those not changing the duration of paid leave in year t
(n=214),

Table 4: Difference-in-Difference

Estimates of Parental Leave Effects

Employment/
Population

Group

Specification

Weekly
Work Hours

Hourly
Wages

(a): Total Leave

Females

.0121
(.0166)

.0508
(.0248)

,0269
(,0293)

Males

.0088
(.0128)

.0409
(.0252)

.0254
(.0273)

Females

.0994
(.0371)

,0870
(.0307)

-.0595
(.0617)

Males

.1269
(.0264)

,0659
(.0316)

-.0427
(.0564)

270

131

231

Specification

Sample Size

(b): Paid Leave

Notes: Table displays coefficients on parental leave regressors. Data are for 16 European
countries over the 1969-1988 time period. All specifications include year and country effects.
Total and paid leave refer to weeks of entitlement divided by 100. Dependent variables are
natural logs of labor market outcomes. Samples are limited to observations where information
on all dependent variables are available. Observations are weighted to correct for
heteroscedasticity.
Standard errors are in parentheses.

.

Y

w

m=
ma
bm
00
G

.

-m
m

w

n

z
n

Table 6: DDD Estimates

For Specifications
Employment/
Population

With Country-Specific
Weekly Work
Hours

Time-trends
Hourly Wages

Leave Duration
(a)
Regression

(b)

(a)

(b)

(a)

(b)

Estimates

ANYPAID

.0282
(.0100)

.0247
(.0121)

.0169
(.0151)

.2382

.1040

(.0493)

(,0820)

.0072
(,0386)

-.1856
(,0781)

-.0737
(.0573)

-.1772
(.1089)

PAIDSQ

-.2598
(,0587)

-.1332
(.0851)

-.0320
(.0490)

.1415
(.0778)

,1346
(.0680)

-.2241
(.1 050)

P-Value

.0000

.0000

.6619

.0375

.1320

.1517

1.1%

-0.6Y0

0.l%

PAID

Estimated

Differential

Vs. No Paid Leave

10 weeks

2.1°A

3,4°h

O,o”h

20 weeks

3.8%

4.l%

0.0%

-0.3Y0

-0.9%

-1 .0%

36 weeks

5.3%

4.6%

-0.2%

-2.OYO

-0.9%

-1 .8%

52 weeks

5.50/0

4.4°h

-0.5Y0

-3.OYO

-0.2Y0

-1 .5%

Notes: See notes on tables 4 and 5. All specifications include vectors of year and country
dummy variables as well as country-specific time-trends. ANYPAID is a dummy variable taking
the value of one (zero) for positive (zero) weeks of paid leave entitlement.

OS

mm
00
00
lW

w

Table 8: DDD Estimates of Parental Leave Effects
on the EP Ratios of Women of Childbearing Age
(a)

Regressor

Regression

(b)

(c)

.0682
(.0297)

.0860
(.0215)

PAID

.4303
(.1385)

,1370
(.1 863)

PAID SQUARED

-.3145
(.1575)

-.0470
(,1 934)

weeks

Leave: 14-26

Leave:

weeks

>26 weeks

P-Value
Estimated

(e)

.1447
(,0252)

,1112
(.0297)

.0589
(.0216)

.0739
(.0234)

.1055
(.0272)

.0893
(.0259)

.0000

.0008

Estimates

ANYPAID

Leave: 1-13

(d)

.0032
Differential

.0008

.0001

Vs. No Paid Leave

10 weeks

4.1%

8.5°h

20 weeks

7.6°h

9.8%

36 weeks

12.l%

11.870

52 weeks

14.9%

13,50/0

Note: See notes on tables 4 through 6. The dependent variable is the difference in the natural
log of EP ratios between 25-34 and 45-54 year old women. All regressions include vectors of
country and time dummy variables as well as country-specific time-trends.
The categorical
leave durations in specification (d) refer to paid entitlements while those in column (e) are for
total (paid and unpaid) parental leave. The sample contains 160 observations.

Fig 1: Consequences

of A Mandated Benefit

Wages

s,

w,

..........

s~
W3

w~=wl-c

Employment

Fig 2a: Average Weeks of Parental Leave

1ea9

1972

1975

1981

1978

1984

1987

Year

~ TotalLeave

,—

+

Paid Leave

~

Fig 2b: Average Employment/Population Ratios
0,9

0.4
1972

1569

1975

197a

19al

19a4

1557

Year

; ~

Males and Females +
.-

Males Only

*

Females Only

Fig 2c: Natural Log of Hourly Wages
2,5

0.5

2

0.5

1%s

1972

1975

197a

19s1

I 9a4

Year
—
*

Males

+

Females

+

Difference

19a7

Fig. 3: Labor Market Outcomes as a Function of Paid Leave
0.06

0.04

E
al
.—
Q 0.02
k
a
8
c
.-o
m
UJ
al
5

0

$

●
✼☛
✼☛
A

‘\\

“~\<’.x
— -—”

‘-—--””

\

-0.02

-0.04
246810121416182022

24262830323436384042

4446485052

Weeks of Leave
■ Employment/Population

+ Work Hours

~ Hourly Wages

