NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEDERAL RESERVE PRIVATE
INFORMATION AND THE BEHAVIOR
OF ~TEREST RATES

Christina D. Romer
David H, Romer

NBER Working Paper 5692

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 1996

We thank Norman Bernard, Dean Croushore, Carol Low, Stephen McNees, and Randell Moore for
providing date, Jeffrey Fuhrer, Owen Lament, Gregory Mankiw, and Glenn Rudebusch for helpfil
comments, Matthew Jones and Clara Wang for research assistance, and the National Science
Foundation for financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Economic
Fluctuations and Growth, and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5692
July 1996
FEDERAL RESERVE PRIVATE
INFORMATION AND THE BEHAVIOR
OF ~TEREST RATES

ABSTMCT

Many authors argue that asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and the public
is important to the conduct and the effects of monetary policy. This paper tests for the existence of
such asymmetric information by examining Federal Reserve and commercial inflation forecasts. We
demonstrate that the Federal Reserve has considerable information about inflation beyond what is
known to commercial forecasters.

We also provide evidence that monetary policy actions provide

signals of the Federal Reserve’s private information and that commercial forecasters modifi their
forecasts in response to those signals.

These findings may explain why long-term interest rates

typically rise in response to shifts to tighter monetary policy.

Christina D. Romer
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

David H. Romer
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
and NBER

FEDERAL RESERVE PWATE
INFORMATION AND
THE BEHAVIOR OF INTEREST RATES

I. INTRODUCTION
Asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and the public
is a phenomenon that is often posited, but rarely tested. Numerous models of
central bank behavior, for example, show that the existence of asymmetric
information has important implications for the effectiveness of policy and the
consequences of dynamic inconsistency (see, for example, Sargent and
Wallace, 1975; Barre, 1976; Barro and Gordon, 1983; Canzoneri, 1985; and
Cukierman and Meltzer, 1986). Yet there are few studies that test whether the
Federal Reserve does indeed possess information about the state of the
economy that is not available to the public.
Asymmetric information between the Federal Reserve and the public
is also often mentioned as a possible explanation for a puzzling empirical
phenomenon:

the response of long-tern interest rates to monetary policy

actions. Standard theories of the effects of monetary policy imply that a shift
to tighter policy raises short-term interest rates temporally

by raising real

rates, but lowers them in the long run by reducing inflation.
theones are coupled with the expectations thary

When these

of the term structure, they

predict that a shift to tighter policy lowers interest rates on bonds of
sufficiently long maturities.

In fact, however, when the Federal Reserve

undertakes contractionary open-market operations, interest rates for securities
of all maturities typically rise (Cook and Hahn, 1989a).

A common

explanation of this behavior is that when the Federal Reserve tightens, market
participants infer that it has unfavorable private information about the likely
behavior of inflation, and they therefore revise their expectations of inflation
upward.

It is this upward revision in inflation expectations caused by the

revelation of Federal Reserve private information that causes long-tern interest

2
rates to rise.
In this paper we use Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts to test
whether the central bank actually does possess private information about the
current and future state of the economy. The key idea is that information the
Federal Reserve has about the economy that is not known to market
participants is likely to be reflected in the Federal Reserve’s internal forecmts.
Because the Federal Reserve m&es its forecwts public ordy after five years,
the forecasts can contain information that is not known contemporaneously to
market participants. In this analysis of private information we look primarily
at the Federal Reserve’s knowledge about inflation, because we then use the
results to test the asymmetric information explanation of the response of
interest rates to monetary actions. However, to check the robustness of our
resdts, we also look for private information about the path of real GDP.
This analysis of asymmetric information and its implications for the
behavior of interest rates proceeds in several steps. Section 11describes the

forecast data that we use, S&tion 111then investigates whether the Federal
Reserve has private information about inflation. Specifically, we ask whether,
given commercial forecasts of inflation, the Federal Reserve forecasts are
useti in predicting inflation. To do this, we regress commercial forecasters’
ex post foraast errors on the difference between the Federal Reserve forecasts
and the commercial forecasts.
We find that the difference between the two inflation forecasts is an
overwhelmingly significant predictor of tbe commercial forecast errors. The
t-statistic on the difference between the Federal Reserve and commercial
forecwts is insistently

over two, and in many specifications it is over four.

In addition, in most specifications the estimated coefficient on the difference
between the two forecasts is approximately equal to one, implying that the
optimal forecasting strategy of someone with access to both forwasts would
be to put essentially no weight on the commercial forecaat. These findings are

3
robust across forecasting horizons,
periods.

commercial forecasters, and sample

We also find that the Federal Reserve possesses equally important

private information about the path of future output. Thus our results provide
powerful evidence that the Federal Reserve has important information about
the path of the economy beyond that available to market participants.
Sections IV and V turn to the link between Federal Reserve private
information and the behavior of interest rates. For the asymmetric information
hypothesis to explain why long-term rates rise following a monetary
contraction, it is not enough to merely show that the Federal Reserve possesses
useful information about future inflation.

It is also necessary to show that

monetary actions provide signals of this information,

and that market

participants respond to these signals.
To address the signaling issue, we aak whether it is rational for
market participants to infer that the Federal Reserve’s inflation forwast is
above their own when they observe a contractionary policy action. To do this,
in Section IV we regress the difference between the Federal Reserve and
commercial forecaats on indicators of Federal Reserve actions. The results of
these tests, although not as strong as the results concerning the existence of
Federal Reserve private information, support the hypothesis that tbe Federal
Reserve’s actions signal its private information, The estimated coefficients on
the measures of shifts to tighter monetary policy are almost always positive;
typically, however, they are only marginally significant. The point estimates
suggest that when the Federal Reserve raises its funds rate target by one
percentage point, its inflation for~ast for the coming year is on average about
a quarter of a percentage point above commercial forecasts.
In Section V, we examine whether market participants actually
revise their forecasts in response to Federal Reserve actions. Specifically, we
regress the revision in commercial forecasters’ predictions of inflation from
one forecmt date to the next on measures of the change in the funds rate

4
target, controlling for the mival of other information about inflation between
the two forecast dates. The results of these regressions are broadly similar to
the those concerning the information content of the Federal Reserve’s actions.
The estimates suggest that commercial forecasters raise their expectations of
inflation in response to contractionary Federal Reserve actions, but that they
do so by slightly less than one would expect given the earlier results. A rise
of one percentage point in the funds rate target is associated with an increase
in commercial inflation forecasts of between one-tenth and two-tenths of a
percentage point.
Section VI concludes by discussing the implications of our results for
the response of interest rates to monetary policy actions. We show that our
results imply that the information-revelation effect of changes in monetary
policy may be more than enough to account for their puzzling impact on longterm rates, and that it also accounts for a substantial fraction of their impact
on short-term rates.

We also discuss the more general implications of our

findings of asymmetric information for a variety of theoretical and empirical
studies of monetary policy.

II. DATA
To test whether the Federal Reserve hw private information about the
state of the economy and to analym the possible implications of such
information for the term structure, we use data on inflation forecasts from both
the Federal Reserve and mrnrnercial forwasters.

The particular indicator of

inflation for which we analyze forecwts is the GDP deflator. 1

1 The obvious alternative measure of inflation that muld be analyzed is
the Consumer Price Index (CPI). We choose to use the GDP deflator for two
reaaons. First, forecasts for the GDP deflator are available for a much longer
sample period: both the Federal Reserve and the Survey of Professional

5
We focus on commercial forecasts for several reasons.

Most

obviously, as Keane and Runkle (1990) observe, mmmercial forecasters have
a strong financial incentive to be accurate; thus their forecasts are likely to be
more reliable and less subject to random noise than conventional surveys of
expectations. Furthermore, many market participants, especially pension fund
managers and other large investors, have access to commercial forecasts of
inflation. As a result, commercial forecasts are probably particularly relevant
for the determination of long-term interest rates.2
While our focus on asymmetric information m an explanation for the
behavior of interest rates leads us to look primtiily at forecasts for inflation,
we also consider forecasts for real GDP in a robustness check on the inflation
results.

This section therefore describes the sources of the Federal Reserve

forecasts and the commercial forecasts for both the GDP deflator and real

Forwasts begin their forecasts of the CPI more than ten years after they begin
their forecasts of the GDP deflator. Second, interest rates were included in
the CPI until 1983. This greatly complicates the analysis of the link between
inflation forecasts and monetary policy.
2 As Scharfstein and Stein (1990), Lament (1995), Ehrbeck and
Waldmann (1996), and others point out, there may be agency problems
between commercial forecasters and their clients that cause forecasters not to
report their true expectations of inflation. This is unlikely to be a problem for
our investigation, however. To begin with, simple models of agency problems
imply that forecasters are concerned about the accuracy of their forecasts and
about their forecasts relative to others’. As a result, the models imply that
forecasters’ predictions are centered around their true expectations, and thus
that median forecmts, which are mainly what we consider, reflect forecasters’
true expectations (Lament, 1995). More importantly, the hypothesis that the
Federal Reserve’s apparent additional information is in fact known to market
participants requires that the market participants pay for forecasts that they
know to be biased, despite the fact that they possess enough information to
produce forecasts incorporating all of the information contained in the for~asts
of a large organimtion (the Federal Reserve) that devotes vast resources to
for=asting. Finally, Ehrbeck and Waldrnann (1996) find that agency models’
predictions are rejected in the data.

6
GDP.3 It also discusses issues of consistency and timing related to these data.
Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve forecasts of inflation and real
GDP growth are contained in the “Green Book” that is prepared by the staff
of the Board of Governors before each meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee (FOMC).

These forecasts are available for the period 1965:11-

1991:12,4 me Green Book typically forecasts inflation and real GDP growth
for five or six quarters into the future, though the horizon of the forecast
varies over time and with the date of the FOMC meeting.
Because the Federal Reserve forecasts are tied to FOMC meetings,
there are no forecwts in months when the FOMC does not mmt. In the late
1960s and 1970s, there are forecasts almost every month; in the 1980s, there
are typically eight forecasts per year. me time of the month when the Federal
Reserve forecast is made also varies because the date of the FOMC mmting
varies. FOMC meetings more often occur during the first half of the month,
but the pattern is not regular.5

3 Because the Department of Commerce only switched from GNP to GDP
accounting in 1991, for most of our sample period the forecast data me for the
GNP deflator and real GNP. However, since our analysis focuses solely on
the percentage change in these variables, this change in definition is of
essentially no importance. Therefore, for convenience we refer to the spliced
GNP/GDP forecast series simply as GDP.
4 The end date is determined by the Federal Reserve’s policy of releasing
information with a five-year lag. Dean Croushore of the Federal Reserve
Bank of Philadelphia provided a machine-readable version of the Green Book
forecasts for the GDP deflator. We updated and revised his series using a
hard copy provided by the Board of Governors. me real GDP forecasts were
obtained from the same documents provided by the Board of Governors.
5 Occasionrdly there are two or more Federal Reserve forecasts in a single
month, This is especially common in the late 1960s and 1970s. In our
analysis we use either the first or last forecwt in a given month, depending on
whether the particular application calls for a forecast that is early or late in the

7
Blue ChiD. One set of commercial forecasts that we use is from the
Blue Chip Economic Indicators (BC).6 Around the fifth of each month, Blue
Chip surveys economic forecasters at approximately 50 bti,
and consulting firms.

corporations,

It then produces a consensus forecast (which is the

median of the individual forecmts) for the percentage change in the GDP
deflator and real GDP over each of the next six or seven quarters. The Blue
Chip forecasts for both inflation and real GDP growth are available starting
in 1980:1.
Data ResourcH, Inc. A second set of commercial forecasts that we
consider is that prepared by Data Resources, Inc. (DRI).7 DRI produces
three forecasts each qutier;
quarter.

one early, one late, and one in the middle of the

For comparability with monthly forecasts from other sources, we

assign the early forecast to the first month in the quarter, the middle forecmt
to the second month, and the late forecast to the third month. The early and
late forecasts are available starting in the third quarter of 1970; the middle
forecast is not available until the first quarter of 1980. Each forecast is made
relatively late in the month, The forecast horizon is typically seven quarters. *
Survev

of Frofesaional

Forecasters.

The final source for

month.
G The historical Blue Chip Economic Indicators were purchased from
Capitol Publications, Inc.
7 The DRI forecasts for both the GDP deflator and real GDP were
collated and provided by Stephen K. McNees of the Federal Reserve B* of
Boston. ~ey are used with permission from DRI.
6 me DRI forecasts are for the level of the GDP deflator and real GDP.
Forecasts for the inflation rate and the real growth rate are calculated using the
change in the logarithm of the forecasts between a given horizon and a horizon
one quarter before (times 400).

8
commercial forecasts of inflation and real growth that we consider is the
Survey of Professional Forecasters (SPF), currently conducted by the Federal
Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. This survey continues the American Statistical
Association/National Bureau of Economic Research Economic Outlook Survey.
The combined survey, which is conducted quarterly, is available beginning in
1968:4 for the GDP deflator and 1981:3 for real GDP.9
Like the Blue Chip Economic Indicators, the Survey of Professional
Forecasters is based on many commercial forecwts. We again use the median
of the individual forecasts. 10 me horizon of the forecasts is four quarters.
The SPF is conducted near the end of the second month of each quarter. For
comparison with our other forecasts, which are monthly, we treat the Survey
of Professional Forecasters as a monthly series available ordy in February,
May, August, and November.

III. DOES THE FEDERAL RESERVE HAVE PRIVATE
INFORMATION?
To ascertain

whether

the Federal

Reserve possesses private

information, this section compares mmmercial forecasts of inflation with those
of the Federal Reserve. The method of comparison that we use reflects the
question we are asking. We are not interested in who is a better forecaster
overall, but rather in whether commercial forecasters could improve their
forecasting perforrnan~ by Icnowing the Federal Reserve forecast. Therefore,

9 We use a version of the forecasts compiled by Dean Croushore of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
10 Like DRI , the SPF forecasts the level of the GDP deflator and real
GDP. Forecasts for the inflation rate and the real growth rate are again
calculated using the change in the logarithm of the forecasts between a given
horizon and a horizon one quarter before times 400.

9
we do not want to compare the overall accuracy of the mmmercial and
Federal Reserve forecasts. Instead, we want to see if the difference between
the Federal Reserve forecmt and a given commercial forecast explains some
of the commercial forecaster’s forecast errors.
conclude that the Federal Reserve

If it does, then we can

possesses information that commercial

forecasters would want to have.

A. Sr)eeifications
The basic equation that we estimate is:

where Ei( is the commercial forecast error at horimn i, and C,, is the
contemporaneous difference between the Federal Reserve forecast and the
commercird forecast at the same horizon.

For example, ~ is the difference

in month t between actual inflation two quarters ahead of month t and the
commercial forecast of inflation two quarters ahead; C2~is the difference
between the Federal Reserve forecast of inflation two quarters ahead in month
t and the commercial forecast two qua2ters ahead, dso in month t. A positive
value of p would indicate that the difference between the Federal Reserve
forecast and the commercial forecast helps to explain the commercial forecast
errors, and thus that the Federal Reserve has information that would be helpful
to commercial formatters. 11
As expressed in equation (l), we consider the forecast error for each
forecast horimn separately. An alternative that we also consider is to average

11 This specification is similar in spirit to that used by Nelson (1972) to
test whether the forecwts of the FRB-MIT-PENN model of the U.S. economy
contain information not available in a simple ARIMA forecast.

10
the forecast errors for various horizons and regress them on the average
difference between the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial forecast
for the same span of horizons. That is, we estimate

where AEi, is the average forecast error for some commercial forecast up to
horizon i, and ACiLis the average difference between the Federal Reserve
forecast and the commercial forecast up to horizon i. 12 me regressions using
averages provide a useful summary of the overall relationship between
commercial forecasts and the Federal Reserve forecast. They also provide a
chwk that the relationship is systematic rather thatI the result of quarter-toquarter noise.
A final specification issue involves computing standard errors. As the
horimns for the various commercird forecasts become longer, the serial
correlation of the forecast errors increases. This is true because the forces that
drive inflation are themselves serially correlated.

Hence a change in one of

these forces in the future will cause repeated errors in the forecasts at longer
horimns.

Because nothing in the dependent variable can deal with this serial

correlation, the error terms in these regressions tend to be serially correlated,
and the serial correlation tends to be greater the longer the forecasting horizon
considered. To deal with this potential problem, we calculate robust standard
errors for all of our regressions. Specifically, when we consider forecasts for
inflation i quarters ahead, the standard errors are computed correcting for
heteroscedasticity and for serial correlation over i+ 1 quarters.

12 For exmple,

AE3(is the averageof Em) Elt , ~, , and Eq, ; AC~,is the

average of Cw , Clt , C2t , and

C3t
.

11
B. Results
me estimates of ~, the coefficient on the difference between the
Federal Reserve and commercial inflation forecasts, for our main specification
(equation (l)) are given in Table 1.13 The results indicate overwhelmingly
that the Federal Reserve possesses valuable information about future inflation:
the difference between the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial
forecast is an excellent predictor of commercial forecast errors. This is true
for all the commercial forecasts that we consider and for virtually all forecast
horizons. For all three commercial forecasts, the estimates of 6 are large and
positive. For horizons further ahead than the current quarter, the coefficient
estimates are typically between 1 and 1.5, These estimates are almost always
significant at the 99% confidence level.

For the forecasts for the current

quarter, the estimates are smaller, but are still significant for two of the three
commercial forecasts.
Taken together, the results indicate that knowing the Federal Reserve
forecast wotid improve the accuracy of the three commercial forecasts we
consider, even at fair]y short horizons.

Indeed, the fact that the coefficient

estimates are usually close to one indicates that when the Federal Reserve and
commercial forecasts differ, actual inflation on average differs from the
commercial forecast by rougtiy the full amount of the gap between the
forecasts. Thus the optimal forecasting strategy of someone who knew both
forecasts would be to discard the commercial forecast and use ordy the Federal
Reserve forecast. In sum, the Federal Reserve appears to have a substantial
informational advantage.
Table 2 shows the estimated coefficients for equation (2), in which the

13 For convenience, the estimates of the constant term, u, are not reported
in Table 1. These estimates are split fairly evenly between positive and
negative values and are rarely significantly different from zero.

12
forecast errors and forecaat differences are averaged across horizons rather
than considered individually.

There is remarkably little difference between

these results and those in Table 1. It does not appear that quarter-to-quarter
noise is driving the basic results. Rather, the difference between the Federal
Reserve forecast and the mmmercial forecast explains commercial forecast
errors at almost every horizon for which forecasts are available.
This informational advantage is almost surely due to something other
than the Federal Reserve gaining access to data ewlier than commercial
forecasters.

First, the Federal Reserve receives data on economic variables

such as unemployment and inflation at most a few days before they are
relemed to the public. Since the Federal Reserve’s for=ast is typically made
well before those of the Survey of Professional Forecasters and DRI, a few
days lead time on monomic statistics could not give it a net advantage.
Furthermore,

the Federal Reserve’s informational advantage persists for

forecast horizons many quarters ahead. One would expect a data advantage
to be of most use at very short horizons.
The Federal Reserve’s informational advantage is also probably not
due to inside information about monetary policy. Monetary policy appews to
have little impact on output and inflation for at least three to four quarters
(see, for example, Gordon, 1993, and Romer and Romer, 1994). Yet, the
Federal Reserve forecast is a very useti
one or two quarters ahead.

predictor of private forecast errors

The fact that the Federal Reserve continues to

have an advantage at fairly distant horizons could indicate that staff members
have inside information about the FOMC’S commitment to a given policy.
However, some evidence presented in the next section contradicts this
interpretation.
The most likely explanation for the Federal Reserve’s informational
advantage is that the Federal Reserve staff is simply better at processing and
interpreting information,

This is certairdy consistent with the fact that the

13
Federal Reserve commits far more resourws to forecasting than even the
largest commercial forecasters.

C. Robustness
Outliers.

To better understand the regression results in Table 1, it

is useful to consider a plot of the individual commercial forecast errors and the
difference between the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial forecast
for a typical regression. Figure 1 shows a scatter plot of the two series using
the four-quarter-ahead forecaat from DRI. Figure 2 shows a time-series plot
of the same series.
The scatter plot in Figure 1 makes it clear that the explanatory power
of the forecast differences for the commercial forecast errors is not the result
of outliers; there is a consistent positive relationship between the two series.
The only observations that seem disproportionately important for establishing
the estimated relationship are those in the lower left-hand quadrant. It appears
that the Federal Reserve forecast is particularly below the commercial forecast
when actual inflation is below the commercial forecast.
The time-series graph in Figure 2 shows that these pairs of negative
values mainly occur in the early 1980s, the time of the Volcker disinflation.
The Federal Reserve correctly predicted that inflation would fall sharply, while
commercial forecasters did not. To make sure that these observations are not
driving the results, we rerun the regressions in Table 1 with the period
1979:10-1984:12 excluded. While the t-statistics fall somewhat, the coefficient
estimates remain wound one and are still significant at the 99% level.
Tirnin~ Disadvantage.

In addition to checking for the presence and

contribution of outliers, we also test the robustness of the results to a different
specification of the relative timing of the Federal Reserve forecast and the
commercial forecasts. In the basic specification, we use the contemporaneous

14
difference between the two forecasts. Since both the DRI and the Survey of
Professional Forecasters foreeasts are done near the end of the month, while
the Federal

Reserve

forecasts

are done throughout

the month,

the

contemporaneous difference in these cases puts the Federal Reserve at a
disadvantage.

This is not true for the Blue Chip survey. Because the Blue

Chip forecast is done at the beginning of the month, the mntemporaneous
difference gives the Federal Reserve a potential informational advantage
simply because it has more data available.
To correct for this, we do the experiment of putting the Federal
Reserve at a deliberate disadvantage in terms of timing. We regress:

where Ei, is again the contemporaneous mmrnercial forecast error at horizon
i, and Bit is the difference between the Federal Reserve forecast in month t-1
and the commercial forecmt for horizon i in month t.
Table 3 shows the estimated coefficients when the formast differences
are calculated so as to put the Federal Reserve at this timing disadvantage,
Even when the Federal Reserve is put at such a deliberate disadvantage, the
difference between the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial forecwt
is a useful predictor of commercial forecast errors.

Neither the sizes of the

coefficients nor the t-statistics are substantially reduced by this change. Thus,
it seems clear that the Federal Reserve does have information about inflation
that commercial forecasters would want to have.
Multiple Forecasts.

In a third test of the robustness of the results,

we examine whether the Federal Reserve’s inflation forecast contains useful
information beyond that contained in two or more mmmercial forecasts. It is
possible that access to multiple commercial forecasts could eliminate the

15
apparent informational value of the Federal Reserve’s forecast. At the same
time, since many market participants presumably do not have access to
multiple commercial forecasts, this test is likely to understate the importance
of the Federal Reserve’s private information.
To consider the value of multiple forecasts, we do the following.
Both the Blue Chip and DRI forecasts are avtilable monthly starting in 1980,
and there are never multiple forecasts in the same month before 1980. We
therefore consider two combinations of commercial forecasts: Blue Chip and
DRI, and Blue Chip, DRI, and SPF. We regress DRI’s forecast error on the
gap between the Federal Reserve’s forecast and the DRI forecast, controlling
for the difference between the Blue Chip and DRI forecasts and (when we
include the SPF forecast) the difference between the SPF and DRI
forecasts .14
The results of this exercise are ordy slightly weaker than those based
ordy on a single commercial forecast.

For the current quarter, the Federal

Reserve’s for=mt is of essentially no value in explaining commercial forecast
errors.

For the one-quarter horizon, the estimated weight on the Federal

Reserve’s forecmt is about 0.7, and for all longer horizons it is close to one.
The t-statistic on the Federal Reserve forecmt variable is over two for all
forecast horizons other than the current quarter, and it is usually over three.
Real GDP. The final, and perhaps most important, robustness check
that we do is to see if the Federal Reserve’s informational advantage for
inflation extends to real GDP.

Since inflation and real output are

simultaneously determined, it would be puzzling if the Federal Reserve had
useful information about one variable and not the other. Such a finding might

‘4 The choice of which mrnrnercial forecast error to put on the left-hand
side has no impact on the coefficient estimate or standard error on the Federal
Reseme forecast variable.

16
suggest that the results for inflation were somehow spurious.
To see if the Federal Reserve possesses additional information about
the path of real output, we run equations (1) and (2) using the forecast errors
and forecast differences for the various commercial and Federal Reserve
forecasts of real GDP,

The restits for both the individual and average

forecast errors are given in Table 4. The table shows that the Federal Reserve
certainly possesses information about the course of real output that private
forecasters would like to have. The difference between the Federal Reserve
forecast and the various commercial forecmts is almost always a significant
predictor of the commercial forecast errors.’5
There are, however, two differences between the results for inflation
and the results for real GDP. First, the coefficient estimates are more varied
for real GDP. For inflation, the typical coefficient on the difference between
the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial forecast is around one, which
implies that the commercial forecasters would typically do better if they could
discard their own forecasts and simply use the Federal Reserve’s.

For real

GDP, some coefficients are well below one, suggesting that the commercial
forecasters should put some weight on their own forecasts, and some
coefficients are well above one, suggesting that the commercial forecasters

‘5 In a related exercise, we also look at the Federal Reserve and
commercial forecasts of the rate of change of the CPI. Despite the fact that
the sample sizes in these regressions are substantially smaller that those for the
GDP deflator because of data limitations, the results are very similar: the
Federal Reserve appears to have significant private information about this
alternative measure of inflation. This informational advantage is partictiarly
striking at longer horimns. For example, the coefficient on the difference
between the Federal Reserve forecast and the commercial forecast in equation
(1) is larger than one with a robust t-statistic over two for every forecast four
or more quarters out for each of the commercial forecasters. For more
contemporaneous forecasts, the coefficients are almost always positive, but
only about a third of them are statistically significant.

17
should not just adopt the Federal Reserve’s forecast but should move even
farther away from their own forecast.
The other substantial difference is that the Federal Reserve’s private
information at short horizons is more pronounced for real GDP than for
inflation. Even for the contemporanmus quarter the Federal Reserve appears
to have a large forecasting advantage over the commercial forecasters.

One

possible explanation for this advantage is that the Federal Reserve collects and
processes the index of industrial production. ~erefore,

at very short horizons

it may actually have more data about real output, rather than just be better at
processing widely available information.

IV. DO FEDERAL RESERVE ACTIONS REVEAL PRIVATE
INFORMATION?
This section investigates the question of whether the Federal Reserve’s
actions reveal any of its private information about inflation.

The Federal

Reserve’s private information cannot matter for the effects of monetary policy
unless policy actions reveal some of that information. In the specific context
of policy’s impact on long-term interest rates, even if market participants know
that the Federal Reserve possesses private information, it is rational for them
to raise their expectations of inflation in response to tighter policy ordy if a
tightening signals that the Federal Reserve’s inflation forecasts are above their
own.
To investigate this issue, we consider the problem of market
participants attempting to infer the information that the Federal Reserve
possesses that they do not. We therefore regress measures of the difference
between Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts on measures of Federal
Reserve actions. As with our examination of the existence of Federal Reserve
private information, we focus mairdy on information about inflation. At the

18
end of the next section, however, we briefly examine information about real
output as a check on our main results and as a way of learning more about the
nature of the Federal Reserve’s private information.
Investigating the relationship between the Federal Reserve’s actions
and its private information is important for another reason. As described in
the previous section, one possible reason that the Federrd Reserve could have
private information is that it has superior information about future monetary
policy.

As discussed there, the fact that the Federal Reserve hm useful

information about inflation just one or two quarters ahead already casts strong
doubt on this hypothesis. But an additional piece of evidence can be obtained
by examining the direction of the relationship between the Federal Reserve’s
information and its policy actions.

If the Federal Reserve has private

information about future inflation simply because it knows more about its
likely policy actions, then times when the Federal Reserve forecmts of
inflation are above commercial forecasts should on average be followed by
moves to looser policy.

In contrast, if the Federal Reserve has private

information about the economy not stemming from its knowledge about future
policy, such times should on average be followed by moves to tighter policy.
This is true because the difference between the forecasts indicates that the
Federal Reserve has r-ived

news that inflation will be higher than expmted,

and it will therefore tighten in order to counteract this development,

A. Indicators of Federal Reserve Actions
In this analysis we use two indicators of Federal Reserve actions.
This first is a simple dummy variable derived from the Wall Street Journal.
Cook and Hahn (1989a and 1989b) catalog the dates from September 1974 to
September 1979 when the Journal reports that the Federal Reserve deliberately
moved the federal funds rate.

From this catalog, we construct a dummy

variable that is -1 in the months when the Federrd Reserve loosened, + 1 in

19
months when the Federal Reserve tightened, and O in all other months.
We extend the sample period by replicating Cook and Hahn’s
procedures for the months between March 1984 and December 1991.

In

particular, we checked the front page of each issue of the Wall Street Journal
for some mention of Federal Reserve action or interest rate change.

Very

rarely there was more than one funds rate change in a month. However, ordy
in October 1987 was there both a tightening and a loosening in the same
month. Therefore, in all but this one month, assigning the dummy variable
was straightfow~d.

We dealt with October 1987 by excluding it from the

sample.
This simple dummy variable for whether the Federal Reserve acted
in a given month may be a particularly useful indicator of monetary actions.
It is possible that action of any sort is what reveals information. ~us,

having

an indicator that does not distinguish between large md small changes cotid
be desirable. Furthermore, because the dates of actions are derived from the
press, we are certain that this is information that commercial forecasters and
other agents in the wonomy actually possessed.
An alternative indicator of monetary policy actions that we consider
is the change in the Federal Reserve’s actual federal funds rate target. These
data are available for 1974:8-1979:9 and 1984:2-1992:8. ‘b We use the funds
rate target in effect at the end of the month as the monthly observation. The
change in the target, therefore, reflats

the change from the end of the

previous month to the end of the current month,
me target series could be useful because it calibrates the size of
monetq

actions. If commercial forecasters respond differently to changes in

lb The funds rate target series is available in Rudebusch (1995). We
construct observations for the end of 1974:08 and 1984:02 by combining the
earliest observation of the funds rate target in 1974:09 and 1984:03 and the
reported change in the target.

20
the federal funds rate of different magnitudes, then it is useful to know the size
of the monetary actions. The target series is also a useful complement to the
dummy variable derived from the Wall Street Journal because it reflects what
the Federal Reserve was actually doing.

Cook and Hahn (1989b) show that

while the Journal identifies most changes in the target, it misses some and
misjudges the magnitude of others. Particularly in analyzing the information
revealed by Federal Reserve actions, it is therefore desirable to work with the
Federal Reseme’s own target information.

At the same time, since most of

the target information is revealed in the press, the Federal Reserve series
provides a very good and unbiased proxy for what market participants actually
knew about the timing and magnitude of target changes. 17

B. Sueeifications
As described above, we consider market participants’ efforts to infer
the Federal Reserve’s information about inflation from its actions. Our basic
specification is therefore

where CiLis again the contemporaneous difference in month t between the
Federal Reserve forecast and a given commercial forecmt of inflation i
quarters later, and M, is the Federal Reserve’s monetary policy action in
month t (measured either by our dummy variable or by the change in the funds

17 For the 1980s it is quite difficult to derive a synthetic target series from
the Wall Street Journal. In many instances the Journal is mnfident that the
Federal Reserve has moved, but it is unsure where the funds rate will come
to rest. Furthermore, the Journal often reports the funds rate in comparison
to a year ago, so it is unclear how large a short-run change the paper
observes.

21
rate target).

In this specification, the coefficient T, shows whether, and by

how much, a monetary policy action signals that the Federal Reserve forecast
differs from the commercial forecast. For example, a coefficient that is large
and positive would indicate that contractionary monetary policy actions provide
information that the Federal Reserve’s inflation forecast is substantially higher
than the commercial forecast.
The sample periods used for estimation are determined by the
availability of the data.

As just described, the dummy variable for policy

actions is available for 1974:9-1979:9 and 1984:3-1991:12. me federal funds
rate target has the same break in the Volcker era, but continues through
1992:8. me Federal Reserve inflation forecasts are available through the end
of 1991.

Thus the longest possible sample is 1974:9-1979:9 and 1984:3-

1991:12. When we use the DRI and SPF forecasts, we are able to use this
entire period. Because the Blue Chip forecasts are available only since 1980,
the sample for this case is 1984:3-1991:12.
As before, a convenient way of summarizing the evidence from the
different quarters is to examine the average difference betw~n the Federal
Reserve and commercial forecasts of inflation over the next i quarters rather
than the difference in their forecasts only for the quarter i quarters after month
t. Thus, we also estimate

(5)

ACi, = 4, + yiM, +

Vi, ,

where ACii is the average difference betwmn the Federal Reserve forecast and
the commercial forecast up to horizon i.
Because any information that is publicly available at time t should be
incorporated in both the Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts, it is not
necessary to include any control variables in the regression.

Thus the main

issue that arises in the specification is the timing of the inflation forecasts and

22
Federal Reserve actions. Ideally, we would examine the relationship between
Federal Reserve actions and the difference between the two forecasts
immediately before the actions. As described in Section II, however, this is
not feaaible:

Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts ue not made

simdtaneously, and they are not made just before Federal Reserve actions.
Any information revealed by policy actions that occur before the
commercial forecmts are made should be incorporated in the forecasts. We
therefore focus on actions that occur after the commercial forecasts are made.
For the DRI and SPF forecasts, which are made late in the month, this means
that we examine Federal Reserve actions in the month after the forecasts. For
the Blue Chip forecasts, which are made at the beginning of the month, we
consider actions in the same month as the forecast.
If the Federal Reserve receives unfavorable information about
inflation, it is likely to tighten,

This implies that using Federal Reserve

forecasts that do not immediately precede its actions is likely to bias the results
against finding information revelation:

the Federal Reserve’s estimates of

inflation at the moments that it tightens are likely to be greater than its
estimates as of the dates of its most recent formal forecasts.

Some of the

unfavorable news about inflation is presumably observed by commercial
forecasters as well. Thus using commercial forecwts of inflation that do not
immediately precede the Federal Reserve’s actions introdums a bim in the
opposite direction:

commercial forecasters’ estimates of inflation at the

moments that the Federal Reserve tightens are also probably greater than their
estimates in their most recent official forecasts.
In addition, the Federal Reserve presumably bases its actions mainly
on its own forecasts rather than those of commercial forecasters. Thus times
when its estimates of inflation increase after its last official forecast but
commercial forecasters’ do not are more likely to be followed by tightening
than times exhibiting the reverse pattern. To the extent that this occurs, the

23
actions are signaling a gap between Federal Reserve and commercial estimates
of inflation; but our tests, which are based on the official forecasts, will not
capture this.

As a result, if the Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts

were made at the same time, but both preceded the Federal Reserve’s actions,
the tests would be biased against finding information revelation.
To balance these considerations,

we focus on Federal Reserve

forecmts that are made slightly after the commercial forecasts. As described
in Section II, the Federal Reserve forecasts are made at different times of the
month, although the majority of them are made in the first half of the month.
For the DRI and SPF forecasts, which come late in the month, we therefore
consider the Federal Reserve forecast in the subsequent month. For the Blue
Chip forecast, which comes early in the month, we consider the Federal
Reserve forecwt in the same month. The preceding analysis implies that the
bias caused by this choice of timing is ambiguous: the fact that both forecasts
generally precede the action creates a bias against finding signdling, but the
fact that the Federal Reserve forecast is usually later creates a hiss in the
opposite direction. la

16 For completeness, we have also examined the case where the Federal
Reserve forecast usually precedes the commercial forecast. For DRI and SPF,
this means that we consider the Federal Reserve forecast in the same month
as the commercial forecast; for Blue Chip, it means that we consider the
Federal Reserve forecast in the preceding month. Our analysis implies that
this specification is unambiguously biased against finding a signrdling effect of
policy actions. Consistent with this analysis, for DRI and SPF -- where the
Federal Reserve forecasts typically precede the commercial forecasts by
several weeks and the policy actions by over a month -- we obtain resdts that
are qualitatively similar to those from our main specification, but considerably
weaker. For Blue Chip -- where the Federal Reserve forecasts usually precede
the commercial forecwts by almost a month and the policy actions by more
than a month -- we find no relationship between policy actions and the gap
between Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts.

24
C. Restits
Table 5 reports the results based on individual forecast differences.
In the first three columns, policy actions are measured using the dummy
variable; in the second three, they are measured using the charlge in the funds
rate target.

As before, the standard errors are computed allowing for

heteroscedasticity and for serial correlation over i+ 1 quarters.
The restits support the view that shifts to tighter policy signal that the
Federal Reserve’s forecasts of inflation exceed those of market participants.
me vast majority of the estimated coefficients are positive, and a substantial
number of them are significantly greater than zero. In contrast, none of the
estimates are significantly less than zero.
Table 6 reports the results using the average differences betwmn
Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts of inflation at various horizons in
place of the differences for individual quarters. The results are ve~ similar
to those in Table 5: 30 of the 34 point estimates we positive, and eight of the
t-statistics exceed two.
The results also suggest that the magnitude of the association is
substantial. For the one-yea horizon, for example, the average point estimate
in the first half of Table 6 is 0,16.

Thus, the estimates suggest that a move

to tighter policy (as measured by the dummy variable) indicates that the
Federal Reserve forecast of inflation over the coming year is between onetenth and two-tenths of a percentage point above mmmercial forecasts. For
the coefficient estimates in the second half of the table, the corresponding
figure is 0.25:

an increase in the funds rate target of one percentage point

signals a gap of about a quarter of a percentage point between Federal Reserve

25
and commercial inflation forecasts. 19 Thus, Federal Reserve actions appear
to be important signals of its private information.

V. DO CO-RCIAL
FORECASTERS
RESERVE ACTIONS?

RESPOND TO FEDERAL

The previous two sections show that the Federal Reserve possesses
valuable information about future inflation and that changes in the federal
funds rate target reveal some of this information,

There remains, however,

the question of how commercial forecasters respond to monetary actions. In
standard theories, an exogenous monetary tightening should produce lower
inflation, and should therefore cause commercial forecasters to reduce their
expectations of inflation.

Our results in the previous two sections imply,

however, that if the commercial forecasters realize the information revealed
by Federal Reserve actions, they should raise their forecmts of inflation when
the Federal Reserve tightens. This section tests which of these two views of
commercial forecasters’ responses to monetary policy actions is correct.

A, Specifications
To analyze how forecasters respond to Federal Reserve actions, we
look at the revisions in commercial inflation formasts from one forecast to the
next. Paralleling our earlier analysis, we look at boti the individual revisions
for a specific quarter and the average revisions for a set of quarters.

me

individual revision, Ri,) shows the change in a commercial forecast of inflation
i quarters after month t between month t and the forecaster’s next regular

19 Since the average change in the funds rate target is considerably less
than one percentage point, the estimates using the funds rate target imply a
smaller signaling role of monetary policy actions than do the estimates using
the dummy variable.

26
forecast. The average revision, ARi,, shows the average of the changes in the
commercial inflation forecast between t and the next forecast in dl of the
forecasts up to i quarters after month t.
One obvious complication is that monetary actions are not the ordy
thing that could cause commercial forecasters to change their inflation
forecasts.

In particular, the Federal Reserve actions and the revisions in

commercird forecasts could both be responses to information released between
the times of the initial for~asts and the Federal Reserve actions. Suppose, for
example, that there is unfavorable news about inflation.

Then commercial

forecasters may raise their forecasts of inflation in response to this news, and
the Federal Reserve may tighten.

The revision in the commercial forecasts,

however, would not be a response to the tightening.

Thus in the absence of

controls, the coefficient estimate could be biwed upward.
To address this possibility, we control for the change in the Federal
Reserve’s forecast of inflation in the interval between the two forecasts. The
change in the Federal Reserve forecast should reflect general information that
becomes available during the period between the two forecasts.m

If

commercird forecasters revise their forecasts in response to policy actions

m The change in the Federal Reserve’s forecast reflects the arrival not just
of new public information, but also of new private information. On the one
hand, this means that the change in the Federal Reserve forecast is a noisy
measure of new public information. To the extent that the Federal Reserve
acts on the basis of the new public information, the fact that we are controlling
for this information imperfectly means that the coefficient on the Federal
Reserve’s action is biased up. On the other hand, to the extent that the
Federal Reserve acts on the basis of its new private information and
commercial forecasters respond to those actions, by controlling for the change
in the Federal Reserve for=ast we tend to understate the importance of its
actions to commercial forecast revisions. One can show that in the natural
baseline case where the Federal Reserve puts the same weight on new public
and private information in choosing its action, the two sources of bias just
balance.

27
controlling for the change in the Federal Reserve’s forecast, this would imply
that they are not just responding to the release of general information.
Therefore, we estimate:

and
(7)

ARit = qi + 8iMt + 6iARFiL+ ~it ,

where RFi( is the change in the Federal Reserve forecast of inflation i quarters
after month t and ARFi~is the average of the changes in the Federal Reserve
forecast in all of the forecasts up to i quarters after month t. A positive value
of di would indicate that commercial forecasters raise their forecasts of
inflation when the Federal Reserve tightens. 21

2] We have also investigated an alternative way of addressing the problem
that both the Federal Reserve’s actions and the revisions in commercial
forecasts of inflation could be responses to information released between the
times of the initial forecasts and the Federal Reserve’s actions. The alternative
is to control for the main pieces of information released emly in the interval
between the two commercial forecasts. Relative to our main approach of
controlling for the change in the Federal Reserve’s forecast, this approach has
an advantage and a disadvantage. The advantage is that, because it does not
require data on Federal Reserve forecaats, it permits a larger sample. The
disadvantage is that, because one cannot control for rdl publicly available
information, it can ordy partially address the problem.
The specific information that we control for is the information about
the percentage changes in payroll employment, average hourly earnings of
production workers, and average weekly hours of production workers, which
is released early in the month. The employment report released early in
month t concerns month t-1. In looking at the revision of the Blue Chip
forecast from the beginning of month t to the beginning of month t+ 1, we
therefore control for the percentage changes in employment, hours, and
earnings from month t-2 to month t-1. In looking at the revisions in the DRI
forecast from late in month t to late in month t+ 1, and in the SPF forecast

28
Once again, timing is very important.

Because the Blue Chip

forecasts are done at the begiming of each month, Ri, shows the revision over
month t, Our measures of policy actions are therefore measures of actions in
month t, and we control for the change in the Federal Reserve forecast from
month t to month t+ 1.
The DRI forecasts are done at the end of each month. Thus RiLshows
the revision over month t+ 1. For this forecast, the appropriate explanatory
variable is a measure of Federal Reserve actions during month t+ 1, and the
appropriate control vwiable is the change in the Federal Reserve forecwt from
month t+l to month t+2.
The Survey

of Professional

Forecasters

presents

even more

complicated timing issues. me SPF is ordy done at the end of the middle
month of each quarter.

Thus, the forecast revision in terms of monthly data

is the change between the end of month t and the end of month t+ 3, and the
control variable is the change in the Federal Reserve forecast from month t + 1
to month t +4.

In addition, to minimize the possibility that the Federal

Reserve actions are responses to information that becomes available between
the two forecast dates rather than to its forecast as of the initial forecast date,
we consider ordy actions in month t+ 1.
The sample periods are again determined by the availability of the
data. Since the data are the same as those used Section IV, the sample periods
are also the same: 1974:9-1979:9 and 1984:3-1991:12 for DRI and SPF, and
1984:3-1991:12 for Blue Chip. Finally, because the Federal Reserve rarely

from late in month t to late in month t+ 3, we control for the percentage
changes in employment, hours, and earnings from month t-1 to month t.
Although this change in specification alters the results of many of the
individual regressions noticeably, it has virtually no impact on the fraction of
the estimates that are positive or their average size. Because of the luger
sample sizes, however, the standard errors are generally smaller; as a result,
many more of the estimates are significantly larger than zero.

29
makes long-ten

forecasts in two consmutive months, the smple sizes for the

regressions that mnsider forecast revisions at the six- and seven-quarter
horizons are always less than 20, and sometimes less than 10. We therefore
do not mnsider these horizons.n

B. Results
Table 7 presents the coefficient estimates for the effects of monetary
actions on individual forecast revisions. n

It shows the results for both the

dummy variable for Federal Reserve actions and the change in the federal
funds rate target.

For simplicity, the coefficient estimates for the change in

the Federal Reserve forecast are not shown. These estimates are positive in
the vast majority of cases, but are usurdly not significantly different from zero.
The results in Table 7 support the hypothesis that commercial
forecasters revise their forwasts

of inflation upward

in response to

contractionary monetary actions. A large mjority of the point estimates are
positive, and a number of them are significant. There is certairdy variation in
the strength of the finding, however.

For the Blue Chip and SPF forecasts,

the estimated coefficients are positive in all but one case, and for Blue Chip
they are often significant. For the DRI for~asts, in contrwt, the estimates are
often negative, and ordy two are significantly larger than zero. Table 8 shows
the effect of monetary actions on commercial forecast revisions, averaged over

n Because the SPF forecasts are made at the end of the second month of
each quarter, by the time the next forecwt is made, the data for the previous
Thus there is never a
quarter are actual rather than forecasted.
contemporaneous forecast revision for the SPF, We therefore consider
contemporaneous forecast revisions ordy for Blue Chip and DRI.
n Because theory predicts that forecast revisions should be serially
uncorrelated, and because the estimated residuals do not show any consistent
pattern of serial correlation, the standard errors in Tables 7 and 8 are
corrected for heteroscedasticity but not for serial correlation.

30
various horimns.

This change in the specification has no great effect on the

signs, magnitudes, or statistical significance of the estimates.
For the monetary policy dummy variable, the magnitude of the
estimated effect is close to what one would expect given the findings in Section
IV about the information content of the Federal Reserve’s actions. Using the
average forecast revision for four quarters ahead, for example, the average
point estimate in the first half of Table 8 is 0.12. This implies that following
a report in the Wall Street Journal of a rise in the federal funds rate,
commercial forecasters raise their forecwts of inflation over the next year by
between one- and two-tenths of a percentage point.

For comparison, the

corresponding figure in Table 6 of Section IV is 0.16. This figure implies that
a contractionary monetary action signals that the Federal Reserve forecast is
also between one- and two-tenths of a percentage point above the commercial
forecast.
For the federal funds rate target, in contrmt, commercial forecasters
appear to revise their forecasts in response to Federal Reserve actions by
somewhat less than one would expect given the information content of the
actions.

Using the average forecast revision for four quarters Aead, the

average point estimate in the second half of Table 8 is 0.15.

In Section IV,

we found that a rise of 100 basis points in the federal finds rate target signals
a gap of about 25 bmis points between Federal Reserve and commercial
inflation forecasts.

Our results here therefore indicate that commercial

forecasters change their forecasts ordy by about half this amount.
There are at lemt two reasons why commercial forecasters might not
revise their forecasts by the full amount of the information revealed by Federal
Reserve actions. First, for the longer horizons, the actions’ direct effects tend
to offset their information-revelation effects. For example, a contractionary
policy action (unless it is fully anticipated by the Federal Reserve at the time
of its forecast) tends to reduce inflation below the path forecasted by the

31
Federal Reserve. Thus commercial forecasters should not revise their inflation
exp~tations by the full amount of the gap between their forecasts and the
Federal Reserve’s that is signalled by the policy action.
Second, determining what information is revealed by Federal Reserve
actions is complicated.

It requires obtaining and systematically examining

large sets of forecasts that are more than five years old. Given the limited
resources that commercial foraasters

devote to forecasting, it would not be

surprising if they did not do this, and instead made imperfeet estimates of the
information content of monetary policy actions.

Our results about the

information mntent of Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts already
suggest that commercial forecasts do not process publicly available information
perfectly.

Our findings about how commercial forecasters respond to

monetary policy actions may just be a specific illustration of this general
phenomenon.

C. Restits for Real GDP
The information that the Federal Reserve’s policy actions reveal about
inflation is likely to be much more important to the actions’ impact on interest
rates than is the information they reveal about real GDP.

Nonetheless, to

provide a more complete description of the relationship between the Federal
Reserve’s private information

and its actions, we briefly examine the

association between monetary policy actions and foreemts of real GDP growth.
For simplicity, we discuss ordy forecasts for individual quarters and do not
report the results for average forecasts at various horizons.
Tables 9 and 10 report the results for real GDP. Table 9, which is
analogous to Table 5 for inflation, examines the signaling effect of Federal
Reserve actions.

Specifically, it presents regressions of the gap between

Federal Reserve and commercial forecasts of red GDP growth on our
measures of policy actions.

Table 10, which is analogous to Table 7 for

32
inflation, examines the response of commercial forecasters to Federal Reserve
actions; it reports regressions of the revision in commercial forecasts of real
GDP growth from one forecast to the next on the policy measures. Paralleling
the regressions in Table 7, the regressions in Table 10 control for the change
in the Federal Reserve’s forecast of real growth,
The regressions show that contractionary monetary policy actions
signal that the Federal Reserve’s forecasts of real growth for the current and
next quarter are far above commercial forecasts, and that commercial
forecasters appe~ to respond to those signals. A 100-basis point rise in the
funds rate target, for example, indicates that the Federal Reserve’s growth
forecast is in the vicinity of 150 basis points above commercial forecasts for
the current quarter, and about 100 basis points above for the next qutier;
most of these estimates are highly significant. Commercial forecasters appear
to revise their forecasts of near-term growth in response to the actions. The
point estimates are considerably less than one would expect given the
information content of the actions, however, and they are ordy sometimes
significant.
Once the horizon reaches two quarters, there is no strong pattern to
the restits.

For Blue Chip and SPF, the estimated relationships in Tables 9

and 10 are generally slightly negative; for DRI, they are not consistently of
either sign. Few of the estimates are significantly different from zero.
An interpretation that is consistent with these findings about the
signaling role of policy actions for inflation and output at different horizons
is that the Federal Reserve responds to expected changes in inflation only
enough to offset them very gradually. If the Federal Reserve responds slowly,

33
then a rise in inflation will be very long-lasting.x

Thus, the gradual response

hypothesis can explain why moves to tighter policy signal that the Federal
Reserve’s forecasts of inflation are above commercial forecasts even at
moderately long horizons, and, hence, why commercial forecasters raise their
inflation forecasts at all horimns in response to policy tightening .x
This hypothesis also provides a possible explanation of the lack of a
clear link between policy actions and the gap between Federal Reserve and
commercial forecasts of real growth beyond very short horizons. On the one
hand, since policy affects real output with a lag, the Federd Reserve’s
knowledge that it is likely to tighten policy in response to information about
near-tern

inflation incremes implies that contractionary policy will be

associated with Federal Reserve medium-term growth forecasts that are lower
than commercial forecasts.

On the other hand, any information that the

Federal Reserve has about likely movements in aggregate demand beyond the
short term will be responded to ordy gradually.

Thus, in this case,

contractionary policy will be associated with Federal Reserve growth forecasts
for the medium term and beyond that are above commercial forecasts. Hence,
the hypothesis that the Federal Reserve adjusts rates to gradually offset
expected changes in inflation can account for the fact that monet~

actions

24 Indeed, one type of evidence in favor of this hypothesis are studies
showing that inflation is in fact highly persistent (see, for example, Barsky,
1987). The hypothesis is also consistent with the common observation that the
Federal Reserve prefers gradual changes in policy to sudden ones.
M The point estimates in Table 6 appear to suggest that Federal Reserve
actions have little signaling value concerning its inflation forecasts at horizons
of six and seven quarters. In fact, however, these results arise only because
the observations for which these long-horizon forecasts are available are
unusual. Specifically, when the regressions for horimns of one through five
quarters in Table 6 are estimated using ordy the observations for which the
long-horizon forecasts are available, those point estimates also do not differ
systematically from zero.

34
provide clear signals about inflation at all horizons, but ambiguous signals
about output beyond short horizons.

VI. CONCLUSION
The most important finding of this paper is that the Federal Reserve
does appear to possess information about the current and future state of the
economy that is not known to market participants. Our estimates suggest that
if they had access to the Federal Reserve’s forecast of future inflation,
commercial forecasters wodd find it optimal to simply discard their forecasts
and adopt that of the Federal Reserve.

Furthermore,

this informational

advantage appears to exist for real output as well as for inflation,

The

existence of significant wymmetric information between the Federal Reserve
and the public has several important implications.

A. Implications for the Impact of Monetarv Policv on Interest Rates
One implication concerns the puzzling response of interest rates to
monetary policy actions. Consider first the behavior of short-term interest
rates. Our estimates in Section IV about the information revealed by policy
actions imply that an increase in the funds rate target of one percentage point
signals that the Federal Reserve’s inflation forecast for the coming year is
about 25 basis points above commercial forecasts. And our results in Section
III about the value of Federrd Reserve forecasts in predicting inflation given
commercial forecasts imply that commercial forecasters should raise their
forecasts by roughly the full amount of this difference. Our results in Section
V suggest, however, that commercial forecasters in fact revise their forecasts
by only about half the amount of this difference.
For comparison, Cook and Hahn (1989a) report that an increase of
one percentage point in the federal funds rate target is associated with an

35
increase of roughly 50 b~is points in 3-month, 6-month, and 1-year interest
rates. Thus our results imply that between a quarter and a hrdf of the impact
of monetary policy actions on short-term rates is due to their impact on
expected inflation rather than on real rates.
Now consider longer-term interest rates. We do not have any direct
evidenm about the relative value of Federal Reserve and commercial inflation
forecasts at horizons beyond two years, or about what Federal Reserve actions
signal about the gap between the two for~asts over such horizons.

As a

result, we cannot make a precise estimate of how much of the response of
long-term interest rates to policy actions is due to the actions’ signdling
effects.

We can say, however, that it is possible that the inforrnation-

revelation effects are crucial to the response. Cook and Hahn report that an
increase of one percentage point in the funds-rate target is associated with
increases of about 30 basis points in the 3-yew bond rate, 20 points in the 5and 7-year bond rates, and 10 points in the 20-year bond rate, Thus if the
information-revelation effects of monetary policy for the first year carry over
to longer horizons, which is consistent with the view that the Federal Reserve
acts to undo changes in inflation ordy very gradually, they account for most
of the impact of monetary policy on medium-term rates, and for more than all
of the response of long-term rates. And even if the effects for longer horizons
are somewhat smaller than the effects over the first year, they can still account
for much of the response of medium-term rates and most of the response of
long-term rates.
In sum, our results suggest that the keys to understmding the puzzling
response of long-term rates to monetary policy are that there is important
asymmetric information between the Federd Reserve and the public and that
policy actions are often not exogenous.

The Federal Reserve has important

information about inflation that market participants do not, and its policy
actions provide

signals about that information.

As a result, market

36
participants’ expectations of inflation rise when the Federal Reserve tightens,
and fall when the Federal Reserve loosens. Thus, the apparently anomalous
behavior of long rates in response to changes in monetary policy is in fact the
rational response of markets to valuable information revealed by the Federal
Reserve through its actions.

B. Implications for Other Studiti
Our finding of substantial asymmetric information between the
Federal Reserve and the public may also have implications for a variety of
other studies in monetary economics.

First, as mentioned before, many

models of central bank behavior emphasize the potential importance of an
informational advantage for the monetary authority. For example, in models
with rational expectations and flexible prices, activist monetary policy can
stabiltie real output only if the monetary authority has private information
about the state of the economy (Sargent and Wallace, 1975; Barro, 1976). To
give another example, Barro and Gordon (1983), Canzoneri (1985), and
Cukierrnan and Meltzer (1986) argue that in settings where optimal monetary
policy is not dynamically consistent, asymmetric information betw=n the
monet~

authority and the public about the benefits of expansionary policy has

important implications for the conduct of policy, the monetary authority’s
desire for smrecy, and the relation between economic conditions and policy
actions.

Our results bea

on the importance of rdl of these models of

asymmetric information.
Second, an even broader literature is concerned with the possibility
of asymmetric information in financial markets, and of actions providing
signals of that information. In the case of inflation and interest rates, it is easy
to identify a participant that may have private information (the Federal
Reserve) and one important set of its actions (changes in its funds rate target).
Even more important, the Federal Reserve and commercial inflation forecmts

37
provide a potential record of the informed party’s private information.

As a

result, this setting may be a particularly fruitful one for investigating this
general class of models.
overwhelming

As we have described, in this case there is

evidence of the existence of private information,

and

considerable evidence that actions provide signals of that information and that
those signals are important to the actions’ effects.
asymmetric information

and signaling

This suggests that

deserve serious consideration in

financial markets more generally.
Finally, a number of empirical studies have attempted to identify the
effects of monetary policy by examining the response of the economy to the
component of some policy instrument, such as the federal funds rate, that is
orthogonal to some set of publicly available information (see Christian,
Eichenbaum, and Evans, 1996, for a recent example). Our results suggests
that there is a fundamental problem with this approach.

The component of

monetary policy that is orthogonal to publicly available information reflects not
just random vtiations

in policy, but also the Federal Reserve’s responses to

shocks that it observes but the public does not. As a result, the estimates of
policy’s effects from this approach are contaminated with the effects of the
shocks that are causing the changes in policy. Indeed, since the Green Book
forecasts are not perfwt measures of the Federal Reserve’s expectations at the
times of its policy actions, even controlling for the information in the Green
Book forecasts will not solve the problem. Thus, the existenm of significant
Federal Reserve private information may have important implications not just
for the behavior of interest rates and theoretical analyses of central bank
behavior, but for a wide range of empirical investigations of monetary policy.

38

Barre, Robert J. 1976. “Rational Expectations and the Role of Monetary
Policy. ” Journal of Monetarv Economics 2 (January): 1-32.
Barre, Robert J., and David B, Gordon. 1983. “Rules, Discretion and
Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy. ” Journal of MonetW
Economics 12 (July): 101-121.
Barsky, Robert B. 1987. “The Fisher Hypothesis and the Forecastability and
Persistence of Inflation. ” Journal of Monetary Economics 19
(January): 3-24.
Canzoneri, Matthew B. 1985. “Monetary Policy Games and the Role of
Private Information.” American Economic Review 75 (December):
1056-1070.
Christian, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum, and Charles Evans. 1996.
“me Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from the Flow
of Funds. “ Review of Economics and Statistics 78 (February): 1634.
Cook, Timothy, and Thornas Hahn. 1989a. “The Effect of Changes in the
Federal Funds Rate Target on Market Interest Rates in the 1970s. ”
Journal of Monet w Economics 24 (November): 331-351.
Cook, Timothy, and Thomas Hahn. 1989b. “The Credibility of the ~
Street Journal in Reporting the Timing and Details of Monetary
Policy Events, ” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper
No. 89-5 (December).
Cukierrnan, Alex, and Allan H. Meltzer. 1986. “A Theory of Ambiguity,
Credibility, and Inflation under Discretion and Asymmetric
Information. ” Econometrics 54 (September): 1099-1128.
Ehrbeck, Tilrnan, and Robert Waldmann. 1996. “Why Are Professional
Forecasters Biased?
Agency versus Behavioral Explanations. ”
Quarterly Journal of &onomics 111 (February): 21-40.
Gordon, Robert J. 1993.
HarperCollins.

Macroeconomics.

Sixth edition.

New York:

39
Keane, Michael P., and David E. Runkle. 1990. “Testing the Rationality of
Price Forecasts:
New Evidence from Panel Data. ” American
Economic Review 80 (September): 714-735.
Lament, Owen. 1995. “Macroeconomic Forecasts and Macroeconomic
Forecasters. ” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 5284 (October).
Nelson, Charles R, 1972. “The Prediction Performance of the FRB-MITPENN Model of the U.S. Economy. ” American Economic Review
62 (December): 902-917.
Romer, Christina D., and David H. Romer. “What Ends Recessions?”
NBER Macroanomics
Annual 9: 13-57.
Rudebusch, Glenn D, 1995. “Federal Reserve Interest Targeting, Rational
Expectations, and the Term Structure. ” Journal of Monetw
Economics 35 (April): 245-274.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace. 1975. “‘RationaJ Expectations,’ the
Optimal Monetary Instrument, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule. ”
Journal of Political Economy 83 (April): 241-254.
Schwfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein. 1990. “Herd Behavior and
Investment. ” American Economic Review 80 (June): 465-479,

TABLE 1
Estimates of Federal Reserve Private Information
(Individual Forecast Errors)
Forecast
Horizon

(Q ahead)

Blue Chip

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of ~ ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

o

0.16
(1.44)

0.62
(3.59)

0.59
(4.04)

1

0.60
(3.66)

1.04
(5.66)

1.10
(5.63)

2

0.97
(5.07)

1.01
(4.93)

1.14
(4.86)

3

0.95
(4.20)

1.24
(4.23)

1.45
(5.81)

4

1,00
(3.23)

1,53
(3 .66)

1.73
(5.19)

5

0.95
(5.09)

1,64
(3.78)

6

0.84
(3.52)

1.43
(3.85)

7

1.53
(4.77)

TABLE 2
Estimates of Federal Reserve Private Information
(Average Forecast Errors)
Forecast
Horizon

(Q ahead)

Blue Chip

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of ~ ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

1

0.43
(2.92)

0.95
(5.38)

1.08
(5.17)

2

0.62
(4.50)

1.00
(5.38)

1.19
(4.42)

3

0.74
(4.02)

1.09
(4.55)

1.29
(4.64)

4

0.79
(3.31)

1.34
(4.23)

1.41
(4.40)

5

1.08
(4.59)

1.47
(4.13)

6

1.08
(3 .40)

1.29
(4,06)

7

1.16
(4.33)

TABLE 3
Estimates of Federal Reserve Private Information
(Federal Reserve at a Timing Disadvantage)

Individual Forecast Errors
Forecast
Horizon

(Q ahead)

BC

DRI

SPF

AveraRe Formast Errors
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of ~ ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

o

0,22
(1,84)

0.60
(5.27)

0.42
(2.78)

1

0.74
(4.12)

0.91
(4.82)

0.61
(1.88)

0.45
(3.83)

0.79
(5.54)

0.39
(1.77)

2

0.88
(3.75)

0.73
(2.91)

0.79
(3.74)

0.60
(3.57)

0.70
(3.36)

0.66
(2.75)

3

0.98
(3.74)

1.15
(4.56)

1.36
(5.32)

0.74
(3.68)

0.85
(3.51)

0.79
(2.80)

4

1.05
(4.07)

1.27
(3.83)

1,76
(5.94)

0.88
(3.56)

1.15
(3.60)

1.19
(3.01)

5

0.89
(3.71)

1,32
(4.31)

0.96
(2.63)

1.03
(3.59)

6

0.96
(3.29)

1.11
(4.89)

0.97
(2.76)

1.05
(3.33)

7

1.19
(2.75)

1,04
(1.72)

TABLE 4
Estimates of Federal Reserve Private Information
(Real GDP)

Individual Forecast Errors
Forecast
Horizon

(Q ahead)

DRI

BC

SPF

Average Forecast Errors
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of 6 ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

o

1.40
(5.73)

0.41
(1.74)

1.26
(3.01)

1

0.34
(0.55)

0.27
(1.01)

0.74
(1.06)

0.81
(2.64)

0.27
(0.72)

1.10
(2.36)

2

0.72
(1.11)

0.57
(1.87)

1.19
(1.62)

0.72
(1,32)

0.53
(1.19)

1.09
(1.54)

3

0.37
(0,46)

0.69
(1.94)

1.05
(2.78)

0.58
(0,93)

0.67
(1.61)

1.24
(1.78)

4

1.99
(5.54)

1.18
(4.10)

2.40
(3.23)

1.09
(2.31)

0.75
(2.16)

1.64
(2.64)

5

1.60
(9.41)

1.21
(5.86)

1.32
(3.41)

0.73
(1.71)

6

1.64
(5,70)

1.28
(7.69)

1.41
(5.02)

0.66
(1.60)

7

1.20
(1.55)

0.95
(3.85)

TABLE 5
Estimates of Information Revelation
(Individual Forecast Differences)

Durnrnv Variable
Forecast
Horizon

(Q ahead)

BC

DRI

SPF

Change in Target
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of y ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

o

0.20
(1.68)

0.14
(1.16)

0.16
(0.90)

0.28
(1.74)

0.03
(0.09)

-0.13
(-0.35)

1

-0.16
(-1.18)

0.23
(1.56)

0.11
(0.62)

-0.38
(-1 .76)

0.51
(2.22)

-0.13
(-0.46)

2

0.02
(0.18)

0.25
(2.15)

0.33
(1.96)

0.15
(0.91)

0,61
(3.10)

0.45
(1.18)

3

0.10
(1.63)

0.17
(1.56)

0.24
(2.24)

0.26
(5.41)

0.39
(1.85)

0.28
(1,19)

4

0.14
(4.34)

0.07
(0.62)

0,28
(2.98)

0.40
(4,67)

0.13
(0.70)

0.29
(2.09)

5

0.07
(1,68)

0.11
(1.24)

0.20
(2.44)

0.26
(1.62)

6

-0.09
(-1 .45)

0.03
(0.32)

-0.04
(-0.22 )

0.43
(1.69)

7

0.21
(1.11)

0.43
(1.17)

TABLE 6
Estimates of Information Revelation
(Average Forecast Differences)

Dummv Variable
Forecast
Horizon

BC

(Q ahead)

DRI

SPF

Change in Tu~et
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of T ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

1

0.02
(0.23)

0.19
(1.76)

0.14
(0.92)

-0.05
(-0.39)

0.27
(1,58)

-0.13
(-0.50)

2

0.02
(0.25)

0.21
(2.07)

0.20
(1.36)

0.01
(0.13)

0.38
(2,25)

0.06
(0.19)

(:::)

0.20
(1.81)

0.21
(1.66)

0.08
(1.04)

0.39
(2.00)

0.12
(0.41)

4

0.06
(3.45)

0.17
(1.48)

0,27
(3.22)

0.14
(2.96)

0.32
(1.93)

0.27
(1.84)

5

0.10
(2.51)

0.13
(1.36)

0.20
(2.16)

0.29
(1.80)

6

-0.00
(-0.01)

-0.03
(-0.30)

0.06
(0.46)

0.04
(0.21)

3

7

0.01
(0.08)

0.10
(0.56)

TABLE 7
Estimates of Forecast Response to Monetary Policy Actions
(Individual Forecast Revisions)

Dununv Variable
Forecast
Horizon

BC

(Q ahead)

DRI

SPF

Change in Target
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of L9; robust t-statistics in pmentheses)

0.33
(2.30)

0.51
(2.35)

0.29
(1.64)

0.13
(1,51)

0.20
(1.45)

0,14
(0.38)

-0.00
(-0.01)

0.08
(0.47)

0.07
(0.92)

-0.24
(-0.58)

-0.01
(-0.03)

-0.02
(-0.18)

0.18
(1.67)

0.12
(1.97)

-0.18
(-0.62)

0.17
(0.59)

0.28
(2.35)

0.15
(2.65)

-0.16
(-0.55)

0.27
(0.82)

0.07
(0.81)

0.39
(2.91)

o

0.14
(2.51)

0.22
(1.95)

1

0.05
(1.59)

0.10
(1.30)

2

0.03
(0.88)

(;:2)

3

4

0.06
(3.00)

0.07
(0.53)

5

0.03
(0.81)

0.12
(1.42)

TABLE 8
Estimates of Forecast Response to Monetary Policy Actions
(Average Forecast Revisions)

Dummy Variable
Forecmt
Horizon

(Q ahead)

BC

DRI

Change in Target
SPF

BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of d ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

1

0.09
(2.21)

0.13
(2.39)

2

0.06
(1.73)

0.08
(1.04)

3

0.05
(1.58)

4

5

0.21
(1.88)

0.29
(2.48)

0.16
(0.85)

0.14
(1.40)

0.24
(1.42)

-0.02
(-0.04)

0.03
(0.31)

0.17
(1.04)

0.11
(1.29)

0.09
(0.45)

0.02
(0.06)

0.05
(1.76)

0.01
(0,21)

0.29
(2,59)

0.11
(1.42)

-0.06
(-0.63)

0.38
(1.17)

0.02
(0.68)

-0.00
(-0.01)

0.02
(0,21)

-0.09
(-0.86)

TABLE 9
Estimates of Information Revelation
(Real GDP; Individual Forecast Differences)

Durnrny Variable
Forecast
Horizon

BC

(Q ahead)

DRI

SPF

Change in Target
BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of y ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

o

0.77
(5.26)

0.33
(1.86)

1.01
(3.45)

1.65
(5.43)

0.83
(2.34)

2,31
(5.48)

1

0.13
(0.70)

0.02
(0.10)

0.51
(1.54)

0.73
(2.22)

0.53
(1.22)

1.55
(2.98)

2

-0.16
(-0.75)

0.18
(0.75)

-0.43
(-1 .41)

-0.13
(-0.38)

0.89
(1.35)

-0.48
(-0.92)

3

-0.10
(-0.72)

0.20
(0.88)

-0.07
(-0.44)

-0.10
(-0.43)

0.39
(0.94)

-0.12
(-0.40)

4

-0.12
(-2.21)

0.22
(1.14)

-0.26
(-1.43)

-0.16
(-2.62)

0.49
(1 ,07)

-0.61
(-2.06)

5

-0.09
(-1 .05)

-0.13
(-0.34)

-0.12
(-2.62)

0.32
(0.59)

6

0.04
(0.26)

-0.28
(-0.68)

0,04
(o. 14)

-0.44
(-0.74)

7

-0.59
(-1.51)

-0.86
(-1 .26)

TABLE 10
Estimates of Forecast Response to Monetary Policy Actions
(Real GDP; Individual Forecast Revisions)

Dummv Variable
Forecast
Horizon

BC

DRI

Change in Target
SPF

BC

DRI

SPF

(Estimates of d ; robust t-statistics in parentheses)

(Q ahead)

o

0.41
(3.52)

0.46
(2.97)

1

0,05
(0.50)

0.14
(1.04)

2

0.08
(1.41)

3

0.99
(2.90)

0,80
(1,86)

0.17
(0.87)

0.24
(0.83)

0.42
(1.37)

0.29
(0.50)

0.29
(2.11)

-0.41
(-3.99)

0.14
(1.17)

0.66
(2.85)

-0.67
(-2.06)

0.02
(0.33)

-0,11
(-1.04)

-0.37
(-3 .40)

0.02
(0.17)

-0.35
(-2.36)

-0.74
(-2.75)

4

-0.07
(-1 .80)

-0.34
(-2.90)

-0.06
(-0.29)

-0.17
(-1,58)

-0.51
(-1 . 17)

-0.29
(-0.79)

5

-0.04
(-0.62)

-0.23
(-2.92)

-0.09
(-0,51)

-0.24
(-1.34)

FIGURE 1
Scatter Plot of Forecast Errors and Forecast Differences

Forecast Differences
2.0
❑

1.5

o
❑

I,0

a

o
❑

0.5

❑

o
o

0.0

0

o
o

❑

-0.5

o

❑

0

E

❑

‘a

❑

a~

o

a

~aqo

I

-Is
-2.0

d

doa

00

~aafl

-1.0

&

3

10

-2.5

a
❑

0

0
0

c

I

-5.0

-2.5

1

0.0

2.s

I

5.0

I

7s

Forecast Errors

~:
The forecast errors and contemporaneous for-t
based on the DRI forecasts for four quarters ahead.

differences are

10.0

FIGURE 2
Time-series Plot of Forecast Enors and Forecmt Differences

100

1

I

o

—

Forecast Error

❑

7s

go
5,0

2.5

0.0

-2.s

I Fo_

I
-5.0

w

Difference

❑

I

li:
❑

I

i

I

1970:1

1975:1

1980:1

B

I

I

1985:1

1990:1

~:
The forecast emors and contempomeous forecast differences are
based on the DRI forecasts for four quarters ahead.

