                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DETERMINANTS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                          A CROSS-COUNTRY EMPIRICAL STUDY




                                          Robert J. Barro




                                    NBER Working Paper 5698




                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 1996




Prepared for the Lionel Robbins Lectures, delivered at the London School of Economics, February
20-22, 1996. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Economic Fluctuations and Growth.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

O 1996 by Robert J. Barre. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to
the source.
                                                                         NBER Working Paper 5698
                                                                                     August 1996


                         DETERMINANTS OF ECONOMIC GROWTH:
                          A CROSS-COUNTRY EMPIRICAL STUDY


                                            ABSTRACT


        Empirical findings for a panel of around 100 countries from 1960 to 1990 strongly support

the general notion of conditional convergence. For a given starting level of real per capita GDP, the

growth rate is enhanced by higher initial schooling and life expectancy, lower fertility, lower

government consumption, better maintenance of the rule of law, lower inflation, and improvements

in the terms of trade. For given values of these and other variables, growth is negatively related to

the initial level of real per capita GDP. Political freedom has only a weak effect on growth but there

is some indication of a nonlinear relation. At low levels of political rights, an expansion of these

rights stimulates economic growth. However, once a moderate amount of democracy has been

attained, a further expansion reduces growth. In contrast to the small effect of democracy on growth,

there is a strong positive influence of the standard of living on a country’s propensity to experience

democracy.



Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 120
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
barro @husc3 .harvard.edu
      The revival of interest in growth theory and empirics is now about ten years old.

The initial excitement centered on “endogenous growth” theories, in which the

long–term growth rate WM determined by government policies and other forces

mntained in the analysis. The first models were standard except that capital was

broadened to include human components and to allow for spillover effects (Romer

[1986], LUCM[1988], Rebelo [1991]). In these settings, the absence of diminishing

returns meant that the accumulation of capital cotid sustain growth indefinitely,

although the rates of growth and investment might not be Pareto optimal.

      Subsequent analyses argued that technological progress generated by the discovery

of new ideas was the only way to avoid diminishing returns in the long run. In these

models, the purposive behavior that underlay innovations hinged on the prospect of

monopoly profits, which provided individud incentives to carry out costly research

(Romer [1990], Aghion and Hewitt [1992], Grossman and Helpman [1991, Chs. 3,4]).

Again, the equilibria need not be Pareto optimal, and there were some intriguing

implications for policy, notably for subsidies to basic research.

      Despite these breakthroughs, the recent empirical work on growth across countries

and regions has not received its main inspiration horn the new theories.     Rather, the

standard applied framework derives more from the older, neoclassical model, as

extended to incorporate government policies (including institutional     choices that

maintain property rights and free markets), accumulation of human capital, fertility

decisions, and the diffusion of technology. In partictiar,   the neoclassical model’s central

idea of conditional convergence receives strong support from the data: poorer countries

grow faster per capita once one holds constant measures of government policy, initial

levels of human capital, and so on.

      Theories of basic technological change are most important for understanding why

the world as a whole-and, more specifically, the economies at the technological frontier–

can grow in the long run. But these theories have less to do with the determination        of
relative rates of growth across economies; that is, with the relations studied in

cross-country    or cross–region statistical analyses. It is surely an irony that one of the

lasting contributions of endogenous growth theory is that it stimulated empirical work

that demonstrated    the explanatory power of the neoclassical growth model.

      The first essay begins with a sketch of old and new growth theories.      An empirical

framework that embodies the idea of condition        convergence is then derived from an

extended version of the neoclassical growth model. In this setting, the growth rate

depends on the relation between the initial level of output, y, and its target position, y*.

The target, y*, depends on government policies and on household behavior with respect

to saving, work effort, and fertility.   For given determinants of y*, the growth rate

vanes inversely with y (the condition      convergence effect). For given y, the growth

rate increases with y*—for example, with improved property rights and lower tax rates.

In addition, the speed of convergence of y to y* is increased by a higher starting level of

human capital.

      The empirical findings for a panel of around 100 countries strongly support the

general notion of conditional convergence. For a given starting level of real per capita

GDP, the growth rate is enhanced by higher initial schooling and life expectancy, lower

fertility, lower government consumption, better maintenance of the rde of law, lower

inflation, and improvements in the terms of trade. For given values of these and other

variables, growth is negatively related to the initial level of real per capita GDP.

      The second essay details the interplay between economic development and a

measure of political freedom or democracy.      The extent of democracy does not emerge as

a critical determinant of growth, but there is some evidence of a nonlinear relationship.

At low levels of political rights, an expansion of these rights stimulates economic

growth. However, once a moderate amount of democracy has been attained, a further

expansion reduces growth. A possible interpretation      is that, in extreme dictatorships,
an increase in political rights tends to raise growth because the limitation on

governmental authority is critical.       However, in places that have already achieved some

political rights, further democratization     may retard growth because of the heightened

concern with social programs and income redistribution.

       In contrast to the weak effect of democracy on growth, there is a strong positive

linkage from prosperity to the propensity to experience democracy (a relation called the

Lipset [1959] hypothesis).       Various measures of the standard of living—real per capita

GDP, life expectancy, and a smaller gap between male and female educational

attainment —are found to predict democracy.          Additional effects considered include

urbanization, natural resources, country size, inequality, colonial history, and religious

affiliation.

       The final essay details the link between inflation/monetary      policy and economic

growth. The basic finding is that higher inflation goes along with a lower rate of

economic growth. Moreover, the adverse effect of higher inflation on economic outcomes

is quantitatively   important.     This pattern shows up clearly for inflation rates in excess

of 15–20% annually, but cannot be isolated statistically for the more moderate

experiences.   However, there is no evidence in any range of a positive relation between

itiation   and growth. The analysis also suggests that the estimates isolate the direction

of causation from inflation to growth, rather than the reverse.




I. Economic Growth and Convergence



A. Ndastical        and Endogenous Growth Theorim

       In the 1960s, growth theory consisted mairdy of the neoclassical model, as
developed by Ramsey (1928), Solow (1956), Swan (1956), Cass (1965), and Koopmans

(1965). One feature of this model, which has been exploited seriously as an empirical

hypothesis only in recent years, is the convergence property.      The lower the starting

level of real per capita gross domestic product (GDP) the higher is the predicted growth

rate.

        If all economies were intrinsically the same, except for their starting capital

intensities, then convergence would apply in an absolute sense; that is, poor places

would tend to grow faster per capita than rich ones. However, if economies differ in

various respects —including propensities to save and have children, willingness to work,

access to technology, and government policies— then the convergence force applies only

in a conditional sense. The growth rate tends to be high if the starting per capita GDP

is low in relation to its long–run or steady+tate    position; that is, if an economy begins

far below its own target position. For example, a poor country that also has a low

long–term position—possibly       because its public policies are harmful or its saving rate is

low—would not tend to grow rapidly.

        The convergence property derives in the neoclassical model from the diminishing

returns to capital.   Economies that have less capital per worker (relative to their long-

run capital per worker) tend to have higher rates of return and higher growth rates.

The convergence is condition      because the steady+tate    levels of capital and output per

worker depend in the neoclassical model on the propensity to save, the growth rate of

population, and the position of the production function+haractenstics         that may vary

across economies. Recent extensions of the model suggest the inclusion of additional

sources of cross-country variation, especially government policies with respect to levels

of consumption spending, protection of property rights, and distortions of domestic and

international   markets.
      The concept of capital in the neoclassical model can be usefully broadened from

physical goods to include human capital in the forms of education, experience, and

health.   (See Lucas [1988], Rebelo [1991], Caballe and Santos [1993], Mulligan and

Sala-i-Martin    [1993], and Barro and Sala-i-Martin     [1995a, Ch. 5].) The economy

tends toward a steady+tate     ratio of human to physical capital, but the ratio may

depart from its long–run value in an initial state.    The extent of this departure generally

affects the rate at which per capita output approaches its steady+tate      value. For

example, a country that starts with a high ratio of human to physical capital (perhaps

because of a war that destroyed mainly physical capital) tends to grow rapidly because

physical capital is more amenable than human capital to rapid expansion.        A supporting

force is that the adaptation of foreign technologies is facilitated by a large endowment of

human capital (see Nelson and Phelps [1966] and Benhabib and Spiegel [1994]). This

element implies m interaction effect whereby a country’s growth rate is more sensitive

to its starting level of per capita output the greater is its initial stock of human capital.

      Another prediction of the neoclassical model+ven        when extended to include

human capital—” 1s that, in the absence of continuing improvements in tethnology, per

capita growth must eventually cease. This prediction, which resembles those of Malthus

(1798) and Ricardo (1817), comes from the assumption of diminishing returns to a broad

concept of capital.   The long–run data for many countries indicate, however, that

positive rates of per capita growth can persist over a century or more and that these

growth rates have no clear tendency to decline.

      Growth theorists of the 1950s and 1960s recognized this modeling deficiency and

usually patched it up by usuming that technological progress occurred in an

unexplained (exogenous) manner.      This device can reconcile the theory with a positive,

possibly constant per capita growth rate in the long run, while retaining the prediction

of conditional convergence. The obvious shortcoming, however, is that the long-run per
capita growth rate is determined entirely by an element-the         rate of technological

progress—that       comes from outside of the model. (The long-run growth rate of the levd

of output depends dso on the growth rate of population, another element that is

exogenous in the standard theory.)       Thus, we end up with a model of growth that

explains everything but long-run growth, an obviously unsatisfactory situation.

      Recent work on endogenous growth theory has sought to supply the missing

explanation of long–run growth. In the mtin, this approach provides a theory of

technical progress, one of the central missing elements of the neoclassical model. The

inclusion of a theory of technological change in the neoclassical framework is difficult,

however, because the standard competitive assumptions cannot be mtinttined.              (These

=sumptions    work fine in the framework of Ramsey, Cass, and Koopmans. )

      Technological advance involves the creation of new ideas, which are partially

nonrival and therefore have aspects of public goods. For a given technology-that            is,

for a given state of knowledge-it      is reasonable to assume constant returns to scale in

the standard, rival factors of production, such as raw labor, broad capital, and lad.

But then, the returns to scale tend to be increasing if the nonrival ideas are included as

factors of production.     These increasing returns conflict with perfect competition.

Moreover, the compensation of nonnvd old ideas in accordance with their current

marginal cost of production-zero-will         not provide the appropriate reward for the

research effort that underlies the creation of new ideas.

      Arrow (1962) and Sheshinski (1967) constructed models in which ideas were

unintended by-products of production or investment, a mechanism described as

learning-bydoing.        In these models, each person’s discoveries immediately spilled over

to the entire economy, an instantaneous      diffusion process that might be technictiy

feasible because knowledge is nonrival.      Romer (1986) showed later that the competitive
                                                                                              7




framework can be retained in this case to determine an equilibrium rate of technological

advance, but the restiting growth rate would typically not be Pareto optimal.         More

generally, the competitive framework breaks down if discoveries depend in part on

purposive R&D effort and if an individual’s innovations spread only gradually to other

producers.     In this realistic setting, a decentralized theory of technological progress

requires basic changes in the framework to incorporate elements of imperfect

competition.     These additions to the theory did not come until Romer’s (1987, 1990)

research in the late 1980s.

         The initial wave of the new research-Romer      (1986), Lucas (1988), Rebelo

(1991)—built on the work of Arrow (1962), Sheshinski (1967), and Uzawa (1965) and

did not really introduce a theory of technological change. In these models, growth may

go on indefinitely because the returns to investment in a broad class of capital goods,

which includes human capital, do not necessarily diminish as economies develop. (This

idea goes back to Knight [1944].) Spillovers of knowledge across producers and external

benefits horn human capital are parts of this process, but only because they help to

avoid the tendency for diminishing returns to capital.

         The incorporation of R&D theories and imperfect competition into the growth

framework began with Romer (1987, 1990) and includes significant contributions by

Aghion and Hewitt (1992) and Grossman and Helpman (1991, Chapters 3 and 4). Barro

and Sala–i-Martin      (1995a, Chs. 6, 7) provide expositions and extensions of these

models. In these settings, t ethnological advance results from purposive R&D activity,

and this activity is rewarded, along the lines of Schumpeter (1934), by some form of

e*post     monopoly power. If there is no tendency to run out of ideas, then growth rates

can remain positive in the long run. The rate of growth and the underlying amount of

inventive activity tend, however, not to be Pareto optimal because of distortions related

to the creation of the new goods and methods of production.        In these frameworks, the
                                                                                                 8




long-term growth rate depends on governmental actions, such as taxation, maintenance

of law and order, provision of infrastructure    services, protection of intellectual property

rights, and regulations of international    trade, financial markets, and other aspects of the

economy. The government therefore has great potential for good or ill through its

influence on the long-term rate of growth.

      One shortcoming of the early versions of endogenous growth theories is that they

no longer predicted conditional convergence. Since this behavior is a strong empirical

regularity in the data for countries and regions, it was important to extend the new

theories to restore the convergence property.     One such extension involves the diffusion

of technology (see Barro and Sala-i-Martin       [1995b]). Whereas the analysis of discovery

relates to the rate of technological progress in leading+dge economies, the study of

diffusion pertains to the manner in which follower economies share by imitation in these

advmces.   Since imitation tends to be cheaper than innovation, the diffusion models

predict a form of condition    convergence that resembles the predictions of the

neoclassical growth model. Therefore, this framework combines the long–run growth of

the endogenous growth theories (from the discovery of ideas in the leading+dge

economies) with the convergence behavior of the neoclassical growth model (from the

gradual imitation by followers).

     Endogenous growth theories that include the discovery of new ideu and methods

of production are important for providing possible explanations for long–term growth.

Yet the recent cross-country   empirical work on growth has received more inspiration

from the older, neoclassical model, as extended to include government policies, human

capital, and the diffusion of technology.    Theories of basic technological change seem

most important for understanding why the world as a whole can continue to grow

indefinitely in per capita terms. But these theories have less to do with the

determination of relative rates of growth across countries, the key element studied in
                                                                                               9




cross-country     st atisticd analyses. The remainder of this essay deals with the findings

from this kind of cross-country    empirical work.



B. Framework for the Analytis of Growth Across Countries

      The framework for the determination of growth follows the extended version of the

neoclassical model as already described. In equation form, the model can be represented

as

      (1)                               DY = f(Y) Y*),


where Dy is the growth rate of per capita output, y is the current level of per capita

out put, and y* is the long-run or steady+t ate level of per capita output. 1 The growth

rate, Dy, is diminishing in y for given y* and rising in y* for given y. The target value

y* depends on an array of choice and environmental variables.       The private sector’s

choices include saving rates, labor supply, and fertility rates, each of which depends on

preferences and costs. The government’s choices involve spending in various categories,

tax rates, the extent of distortions of markets and business decisions, maintenance of the

rule of law and property rights, and the degree of political freedom. Also relevmt for an

open economy is the terms of trade, typically given to a small country by external

conditions.

      For a given initial level of per capita output, y, an increase in the st eady%t ate

level, y*, rtises the per capita growth rate over a transition interval.   For example, if

the government improves the climate for business activity+ay         by reducing the burdens

from regdation,    corruption, and taxation, or by enhancing property rights-the      growth




lWit h exogenous, labor-augmenting t echnologicd progress, the level of output per worker
grows in the long run, but the level of output per e~~ectiveworker approaches a constant,
y*. Hence, y* should be interpreted in this generalized sense.
                                                                                                 10




rate increases for awhile. Similar effects arise if people decide to have fewer children or

(at least in a closed economy) to save a larger fraction of their incomes.

      In these cases, the increase in the target, y*, translates into a transitional increase

in the economy’s growth rate. As output, y, rises, the workings of diminishing returns

eventually restore the growth rate, Dy, to a value determined by the rate of

technological progress. Since the transitions tend to be lengthy, the growth effects from

shifts in government policy or private behavior persist for a long time.

      For given values of the choice and environmental variables-and)         hence, y*—a

higher starting level of per capita output, y, implies a lower per capita growth rate.

This effect corresponds to conditional convergence. Note, however, that poor countries

would not grow rapidly on average if they tend also to have low steady+tate

positions, y*. In fact, a low level of y* expltins why a country would typically have a

low observed value of y in some arbitrarily chosen initial period.

      The last result shows that the framework can be reconciled with the now familiar

lack of wrrelation between the growth rate and initial level of real per capita GDP

across a large number of countries over the period 1960 to 1990. Figure 1 shows that

this relationship is virtually nil. ~ (The slope actually hw the wrong sign+lightly

positiv~but    is not statistically significant. ) The interpretation   from the standpoint of

the neoclassical model is that the initially poor countries, which show up closer to the

origin along the horizontal tis,   are not systematically far below their steady+tate

positions and therefore do not tend to grow relatively fast. The isolation of the




Whe data on real per capita GDP are the internationally comparable values generated by
Summers and Heston (1993). The vertical axis in Figure 1 cent ains observations on per
capita growth rates for 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90, the three periods used in the
dettiled empirical analysis described below. The horizontal tis shows the corresponding
values of the logarithm of per capita GDP in 1965, 1975, and 1985.
                                                                                                 11




convergence force requires a conditioning on the determinants of the steady state, as in

the crosscountry     empincd   analysis discussed in the next section.

      Even if convergence held in an absolute sense-that      is, if y* were identical across

economies and the poorer places tended accordingly to grow faster-the         dispersion of

per capita product wodd not necessarily narrow over time. The evolution of dispersion,

or inequality, depends on a weighing of the convergence force against effects horn the

shocks that impinge on each economy. These shocks, if independent across economies,

tend to create dispersion and therefore work agtinst the equalizing pressure from

convergence.

      The idea that the tendency for the poor to grow faster than the rich implies a

negative trend in inequality is a fallacy; in fact, it is Gdton’s fallacy, as discussed in the

growth contut      by Quah (1994) and Hart (1995). Gdton’s (1886; 1889, Ch. VII)

research indicated that the deviation of children’s heights (and other physical and

mental characteristics)   from the mean of the population were positively correlated with

the parent’s deviation, but the amount of deviation tended to regress+r        converge

toward zero. Nevertheless, the poptiation’s distribution of heights did not tend

systematically to narrow over time.

      The explanation of these facts is that a measure of the population’s dispersion—

say the standard deviation of the log of height (or GDP) —would tend to adjust toward

a long–run value that depends on the rapidity of the reversion to the mean (the rate of

convergence) and the variance of random shocks to height (or GDP). If the

determinants of the long–run distribution do not change, then dispersion would tend to

rise or fti depending on whether it happened to start below or above its long–run value.

Moreover, if the underlying determinants    stay constant for a long time, then the

observed distribution for a large population would remain fixed (despite the presence of

the convergence tendency).
                                                                                              12




      Empirically, for 114 countries with data, the standard deviation of the log of real

per capita GDP rose from 0.89 in 1960 to 1.14 in 1990. This observation of increased

inequality does not re~ct the convergence implications of the neoclassical growth

model—partly      because the predicted convergence is only conditional and partly because

the poor tending to grow faster than the rich is not the same thing as a declining trend

in inequality.



C. Empirical Findings on Growth across Countries

      Table 1 shows restits from regressions that use the general framework of

equation (1) from the previous section. The regressions apply to a panel of roughly 100

countries observed from 1960 to 1990.s The dependent variables a-re the growth rates of

real per capita GDP over three periods: 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90. 1 (The first

period begins in 1965, rather than 1960, so that the 1960 value of real per capita GDP

can be used as an instrument; see below. ) Henceforth, the term GDP will be used as a

shorthand to refer to real per capita GDP.

      Some previous analysis, such as Barro (1991), used a cross-sectional    framework;

that is, the growth rate and the explanatory variables were observed ody once per

country.   The main reason to extend to a panel setup is to expand the sample

information.     Although the main evidence turns out to come horn the cross+ectional

(between+ountry)      variation, the time-series (within-country)   dimension provides some

additional information.    This information is greatest for variables, such as the terms of

trade and inflation, that have varied a good deal over time within countries.


3The data ~d    detailed definitions of the variables Me contained in the B~ro-Lee data set,
which is available via anonymous FTP from the National Bureau of Economic Research.
lMost oft he GDP figures are from version 5.6 of the Surnmers-Heston data set (see
Summers and Heston [1991, 1993] for general descriptions). World Bank figures on red
GDP growth rates (based on domestic accounts only) are used for 1985–90 when the
Summers-Heston figures are unavailable.
                                                                                                13




      The underlying theory relates to long–term growth, and the precise timing

between growth and its determinants is not well specified at the high frequencies

characteristic of “business cycles. “ For example, relationships at the annual frequency

wotid likely be dominated by mistiming and, hence, Wectively by measurement error.

In addition, many of the variables considered+uch       as fertility rates, life expectancy,

and education     attainment-are     not actually measured for many countries at periods

finer than 5 or 10 years. These considerations suggest a focus on the determination        of

growth rates over fairly long intervals.   As a compromise with the quest for additiond

information, I settled on periods of five or ten years; specifically, growth rates were

considered for 1965–75 and 1975-85 and for a final five-year period, 1985–90. When

the data through 1995 become available, the third period will be lengthened to 1985–95.

      The estimation uses an instrumental-variable    technique, where some of the

instruments are earlier values of the regressors. (The method is t hree-st age least

squares, except that each equation contains a different set of instruments; see the notes

to Table 1 for details. ) This approach may be satisfactory because the residuals from

the growth-rate equations are essentially uncorrelated across the periods. In any event,

the regressions describe the relation between growth rates and prior values of the

explanatory variables.

      The regression shown in column 1 includes explanatory variables that can be

interpreted as initial values of state variables or as choice and environmental variables.

The state variables include the initial level of GDP and measures of human capital in

the forms of schooling and health.    The GDP level reflects endowments of physical

capital and natural resources (and dso depends on effort and the unobserved level of

technology).    The choice and environmental variables me the fertility rate, government

consumption spending, an index of the maintenance of the rule of law, the change in the
                                                                                              14




terms of trade, an index of democracy (political rights), and the inflation rate. The

roles of democracy and itiation     will be discussed in the subsequent essays.



      1. Initial kel   of GDP

      For given values of the other explanatory variables, the neoclassical model predicts

a negative coefficient on initial GDP, which enters in the system in logarithmic form. s

The coefficient on the log of initial GDP has the interpretation   of a conditional rate of

convergence. If the other explanatory variables are held constant, then the economy

tends to approach its long-run position at the rate indicated by the magnitude of the

coefficient. d The estimated cticient     of -0.025 (se. = 0.003) is highly significant and

implies a condition    rate of convergence of 2.570 per year. T The rate of convergence is

slow in the sense that it would take the economy 27 years to get half way toward the

steady+tate   level of output and 89 years to get 9070 of the way. Similarly slow rates of

convergence have been found for regional data, such as the U.S. states, Canadian

protinces, Japanese prefectures, and regions of the mtin western European countries

(see Barro and Sala-i-Martin      [1995a, Ch. 11]).

     Figure 2 shows the partial relation between growth and the starting level of GDP,

as implied by the regression from column 1 of Table 1. The horizontal axis plots

log(GDP) for 1965, 1975, and 1985 for the observations included in the regression



sThe variable log(GDP) in Table 1 refers to 1965 in the first period, 1975 in the second
period, and 1985 in the third period. Five-year earlier values of log(GDP) are used as
instruments. The use of these instruments lessens the estimation problems associated with
temporary measurement error in GDP.
13Afull treatment of convergence would also require an analysis of how the various
explanatory variables+uch     as schooling, health, and fertility—respond to the
development of the economy.
TThis result is ordy approximate because the growth rate is observed as an average over ten
or five years, rather than at a point in time. The implied instantaneous rate of
mnvergence is slightly higher than the value indicated by the coefficient. See Barro and
Sala-i-Martin (1995a, Ch. 2) for a discussion.
                                                                                                15




sample. The vertical tis    shows the corresponding growth rate of GDP after filtering

out the puts explained by all explanatory variables other than log(GDP). s Thus, the

negative slope shows the conditional convergence relation; that is, the effect of log(GDP)

on the growth rate for given values of the other independent variables.      In contrast to

the lack of a simple correlation in Figure 1, the conditioned convergence relation in

Figure 2 is clearly defined in the graph, Also, the graph indicates that the relation is

not driven by a few outliers and does not appear to be nonlinear.



      2. Initial kel   of Human Capital

      Initial human capital appears in three variables in the system: average years of

attainment for males aged 25 and over in secondary and higher schools at the start of

each period, the log of life expectancy at birth at the start of each period (an indicator

of health status), g and an interaction between the log of initial GDP and the years of

male secondary and higher schooling. The data on yeas of schooling are updated and

improved versions of the figures reported in Barro and Lee (1993).

      The results show a significantly positive effect on growth from the years of

schooling at the secondary and higher level for males aged 25 and over (0.0118 [0.0025]). 10

On impact, an extra year of male upper–level schooling is therefore estimated to raise

the growth rate by a substantial 1.2 percentage points per year. (In 1990, the mean of

the schooling variable was 1.9 years with a st andard deviation of 1.3



BThe residual is calculated from the regression system that contains dl of the variables,
including the log of initial GDP. But the contribution from initial GDP is left out to
compute the variable on the vertical axis in the scatter diagram. The residud has also
been normalized to have a zero mean. The fitted straight line shown in the figure comes
from an ordinary–least-squares     (OLS) regression of the residual on the log of initial GDP.
gThe results are similar if the infant mort alit y rat e is used instead of life expect anCy as a
measure of health status.
10Schooling of those aged 25 and over has somewhat more explanatory power than schooling
of those aged 15 and over.
                                                                                                 16




years. ) The partial relation between the growth rate and the schooling variable

constructed analogously to the method described for log(GDP) in n. 8+s          shown in

Figure 3.

         Male primary schooling (or persons aged 25 and over) has an insignificant effect if

it is added to the system; the estimated coefficient is +.0005     (0.0011), whereas that on

upper–level schooling remains similar to that found before (0.0119 [0.0025]). Thus,

growth is predicted by male schooling at the upper levels but not by male schooling at

the primary level. Howe\’er, primary schooling is indirectly growth enhancing because it

is a prerequisitee for training at the secondary and higher levels.

         More surprisingly, female education at various levels is not significantly related to

subsequent growth. For example, if years of schooling at the secondary and higher levels

for females aged 25 and over is added to the system shown in column 1 of Table 1, then

the estimated coefficient of this variable is +.0023 (0.0046), whereas that for males

remains significantly positive, 0.0132 (0.0036). For primary schooling of women aged 25

and over, the estimated coefficient is -0.0001 (0.0012), whereas that for men (25 and

over for secondary and higher schools) is 0.0118 (0.0025). Thus, these findings do not

support the hypothesis that education of women is a key to economic growth. Ii

        Some additional results indicate that female schooling is important for other

indicators of economic development, such as fertility, infant mort tit y, and political

freedom (see the next essay). Specifically, female primary education has a strong

negative relation with the fertility rate (see Schultz [1989], Behrman [1990], and Barro

and Lee [1994]). A reasonable inference from this relation is that female education

wotid spur emnomic growth by lowering fertility, and this effect is not captured in the




llIn   e~lier   res~ts,   Barro   and   Lee found that the estimated coefficient on female
                                              ( 1994)

secondary and higher schoolin was significantly negative. With the revised data on
education, the estimated fema f e coefficients are essentially zero.
                                                                                                 17




regressions shown in Table 1 because the fertility rate is already held constant.     If the

fertility rate is omitted from the system, then the ~timated     coefficient on female

primary schooling (the level of female schooling that tiects    fertility inversely) is 0.0012

(0.0012), which is positive but not significantly different horn zero. Thus, there is ordy

slight evidence that female education enhances economic growth through this indirect

channel.

      Returning to column 1 of Table 1, the significantly negative estimated coefficient

of the interaction term between mde schooling and log(GDP), -0.0062 (0.0017), implies

that more years of school raise the sensitivityy of growth to the starting level of GDP.

Starting from a position at the sample mean, an extra year of male upper-level

schooling is estimated to raise the magnitude of the convergence coefficient from 0.026

to 0.032. This result supports theories that stress the positive effect of education on an

economy’s ability to absorb new technologies. The partial relation between the growth

rate and the interaction variable appears in Figure 4. (The points at the far right of the

diagram are for the most developed countries+uch        as the United States, Caada,      and

Sweden—which have high values of GDP and schooling.)

     The regression in column 1 also reveals a significantly positive effect on growth

from initial human capital in the form of health.    The coefficient on the log of life

expectancy is 0.042 (0.014). As an interpretation,   it may be that life expectancy proxies

not only for health status but more broadly for the quality of human capital.      The

partial relation between growth and life expectancy is shown in Figure 5.



     3. Fertfity   Rate

     If the population is growing, then a portion of the economy’s investment is used to

provide capital for new workers, rather than to rtise capital per worker. For this reason,

a higher rate of population growth has a negative effect on y*, the steady~t ate level of
                                                                                                 18




output per effective worker in the neoclassical growth model. Another, reinforcing,

tiect is that a higher fertility rate means that increased resources must be devoted to

childrearing, rather than to production of goods (see Becker and Barro [1988]). The

regression in mlumn 1 shows a significantly negative coefficient, -0.016 (0.005), on the

log of the total fertility rate. The partial relation between growth and fertility is in

Figure 6.

         Fertility decisions are surely endogenous; previous research has shown that fertility

typically declines with measures of prosperity, especially female primary education (see

Schultz [1989], Behrman [1990], and Barro and Lee [1994]). The estimated coefficient of

the fertility rate in the growth regression shows the response to higher fertility for given

values of male schooling, life expectancy, GDP, and so on. Since the average of the

fertility rate over the preceding five years is used as an instrument, the coefficient likely

rdects     the impact of fertility on growth, rather than vice versa. (In any event, the

reverse effect would involve the level of GDP, rather than its growth rate, ) Thus,

although population growth cannot be characterized as the most important element in

economic progress, the restits do suggest that an exogenous drop in birth rates would

raise the growth rate of per capita output.



         4. Government Co~umption

         The regression in column 1 of Table 1 dso shows a significantly negative effect on

growth from the ratio of government consumption (measured exclusive of spending on

education and defense) to GDP. The estimated coefficient is -0.136 (0.026). (The

period-average of the ratio enters into the regression, and the average of the ratio over

the previous five years is used as an instrument.)    The particular measure of government

spending is intended to approximate the outlays that do not enhance productivity.

Hence, the conclusion is that a greater volume of nonproductive government
                                                                                            19




spending— and the associated taxation-reduce        the growth rate for a given starting

value of GDP. In this sense, big government is bad for growth. The partial relation

between growth and the government consumption variable appears in Figure 7.



      5. The Rd~f-Law          Index

      Knack and Keefer (1995) discuss a variety of subjective country indexes prepared

for f~paying    international investors by International   Country Risk Guide. The

mncepts covered include quality of the bureaucracy, political corruption, likelihood of

government repudiation of contracts, risk of government expropriation, and overall

maintenance of the rule of law. (The various time series cover 1982 to 1995 and are

available from Political Risk Services of Syracuse, New York. ) The general idea is to

gauge the attractiveness   of a country’s investment climate by considering the

effectiveness of law enforcement, the sanctity of contracts, and the state of other

influences on the security of property rights. Although these data are subjective, they

have the virtue of being prepared contemporaneously by local experts.      Moreover, the

willingness of customers to pay subst anti al fees for this information is perhaps some

testament to their validity.

      Among the various series available, the indicator for overall maintenance of the

rule of law seemed a ptioti to be most relevant for investment and growth. This

indicator was initially measured in 7 categories on a Oto 6 scale, with 6 the most

favorable.   The scale has been revised here to O to 1, with Oindicating the worst

maintenance of the rule of law and 1 the best.

      The rul~f-law    variable (observed, because of lack of earlier data, only once for

each count ry in the early 1980s) was included in the regression system reported in

column 1 of Table 1 and has a significantly positive coefficient, 0.0293 (0.0054). (The

other measures of investment risk, including political corruption, and various indicators
                                                                                                   20




of political instability are insignificant in these kinds of growth regressions if the

rule-of-law      index is dso included.)   The interpretation   is that greater maintenance of

the rule of law is favorable to growth. Specifically, an improvement by one rank in the

underlying index (corresponding to a rise by 0.167 in the rule–of-law variable) is

estimated to rtise the growth rate on impact by 0.5 percentage points. The partial

relation bet ween growth and the rul~f-law          index is in Figure 8. (Note that ordy seven

values for the index are observed. )



      6. Terms of Trade

      Changes in the terms of trade have often been stressed as important influences on

developing countries, which t ypic~y       specialize their exports in a few primary products.

The effect of a change in the terms of trade—measured           as the ratio of export to import

prices+n      GDP is, however, not mechanical.       If the physical quantities of goods

produced dom~ticdly        do not change, then an improvement in the terms of trade raises

real domestic income and probably consumption, but would not affect real GDP.

Movements in real GDP occur ordy if the shift in the terms of trade stimulates a change

in domestic employment and output.         For example, an oil-importing country might react

to an increue in the relative price of oil by cutting back on its employment and

production.

      The result in column 1 of Table 1 shows a significantly positive coefficient on the

terms of trade: 0.14 (0,03). (The change in the terms of trade is regarded as exogenous

to an individual country’s growth rate and is therefore included as an instrument.)

Thus, an improvement in the terms of trade apparently does stimulate an expansion of

domestic output.      The partial relation with growth appears in Figure 9. Although the

terms-of-trade      variable is statistically significant, it turns out not to be the key
                                                                                                21




element in the weak growth performance of many poor countries, such as those in Sub

Saharan Africa.



      7. ~onal      Vtiables

      It has often been observed that recent rates of economic growth have been

surprisingly low in Sub Saharan Africa and Latin America and surprisingly high in East

Asia. For 1975-85, the mean per capita growth rate for all 124 countries with data was

1.0%, compared with -0.3% in 43 Sub Saharan African countries, 4.1%           in 24 Latin

American countries, and 3.7% in 12 East Asian countries.       For 1985–90, the average

growth rate was again 1.0% (for 129 places), compared with O.1% in 40 Sub Saharan

African countries, 0.4% in 29 Latin American countries, and 4.0% in 15 East Asian

countries.   An important question is whether these regions continue to look like outliers

once the explanatory variables considered in Table 1 have been taken into account.

      In some previous cross-country     regression studies, such as Barro (1991), dummy

variables for Sub Saharan Africa and Latin America were found to enter negativdy and

significantly into growth regressions. However, column 2 of Table 1 shows in the

present specification that dummies for these two areas and also for East Asia are

individually insignificant.    (The p-value for joint significance of the three dummy

variables is O.11.) Thus, the unusual growth experiences of these three regions is mostly

accounted for by the explanatory variables.

      The inclusion of the inflation rate is critical for eliminating the significance of the

Latin America dummy —this interaction is discussed in the next essay. The Latin

America dummy also becomes significant if the fertility rate or the government

consumption ratio is omitted.      In the case of Sub Saharan Africa, the government

consumption ratio is the only individual variable whose omission causes the dummy to
                                                                                              22




become significant.   For East Asia, the dummy is significant if male schooling, the

rti~f-law     indicator, or the democracy variables are deleted.



      8. Investmat    Ratio

      In the neoclassical growth model for a closed economy, the saving rate is

exogenous and equal to the ratio of investment to output.     A higher saving rate raises

the steady+tate   level of output per effective worker and thereby raises the growth rate

for a given starting value of GDP. Some empirical studies of cross-country growth have

also reported an important positive role for the investment ratio; see, for example,

DeLong and Summers (1991) and Mankiw, Romer, and Weil (1992).

      Reverse causation is, however, likely to be important here. A positive coefficient

on the contemporaneous investment ratio in a growth regression may reflect the positive

relation between growth opportunities and investment, rather than the positive effect of

an exogenously higher investment ratio on the growth rate. This reverse effect is

especially likely to apply for open economies. Even if cross-country differences in saving

ratios are exogenous with respect to growth, the decision to invest domesticdly,     rather

than abroad, wotid reflect the domestic prospects for returns on investment, which

wotid relate to the domestic opportunities for growth.

      The system from column 1 of Table 1 has been expanded to include the penod-

average investment ratio as an explanatory variable. If the instrument list includes the

investment ratio over the previous five years, but not the contemporaneous value, then

the estimated coefficient on the investment variable is positive, but not statistically

significant, 0.027 (0.021). In contrast, the estimated coefficient is almost twice as high

and statistically significant if the contemporaneous investment ratio is included as an

instrument,   0.043 (0.018). These findings suggest that much of the positive estimated

effect of the investment ratio on growth in typical cross-country regressions reflects the
                                                                                                23




reverse relation bet ween growth prospects and investment.     Blomstrom, Lipsey, and

Zejan (1993) reach similar conclusions in their study of investment and growth.

      To interpret these resdts further, Table 2 shows regression systems in which the

dependent variables are the average ratios of investment to GDP for 1965–74, 1975+4,

and 1985-89. The independent vtiables       (aside from the investment ratio) are the same

as those used in Table 1. The key finding in column 1 of Table 2 is that a number of the

variables that are found to enhance the growth rate in Table 1 also appear as stimulants

to investment.   In particular, the investment ratio is positively related to life expectancy

(a proxy for the quality of human capital) and the rul~f–law       index and negatively

related to the government consumption ratio and the inflation rate. The investment

ratio also follows the same sort of quadratic relation with democracy that showed up for

the growth rate. The effects of democracy are explored in the next essay.

      A reasonable interpretation   of the results is that some policy variables+uch       as

better maintenance of the rule of law, lower government consumption, and price

stability+ncourage     economic growth partly by stimtiating    investment.    However, if

investment is higher for given values of the policy instruments—perhaps       because of

variations in thriftiness across economies that lack perfect capital mobility—then      the

positive effect on growth is weak, as indicated by the estimated coefficient of 0.027

(0.021) on the investment ratio.



D. Cr-ountry         B.egressions and Country Fixed Effects

      A comparison of Figures 1 and 2 shows that it is critical to hold fixed the

determinants of the long–run target value, y*, in equation (1) to isolate the conditional

convergence force; that is, the effect of initial GDP, y, on the growth rate, Dy, for a

given y*. Since y and y* tend to be positively correlated, the estimated coefficient on y

would be biased upwards if y* were not held constant.      Since the true coefficient on y is
                                                                                              24




negative, the omission of y* tends to generate an underestimate     of the rate of

convergence, possibly even to the extent of estimating divergence (a positive coficient

on y) rather than convergence. Hence, the omission of y* can account for the incorrect

(positive) sign in the simple relation between Dy and y shown in Figure 1.

      One remaining problem in Figure 2 is that the estimated rate of convergence

would still tend to be underestimated    if the measures used to hold fixed y* were

imperfect (w they must be). Specifically, underestimation     of the convergence rate

wodd tend to apply if the omitted determinants of y* were still positively correlated

with y after holding fixed the variables included to measure y*. It is hard to get a direct

assessment of the magnitude of this problem, although the isolation of y*–like variables

that have a lot of explanatory power for growth—as highlighted in the previous

discussion+hould     lessen the error.

      Some researchers prefer to handle this type of estimation problem by allowing for

an unobserved fixed effect for each country (see Knight, Loayza, and Villanueva [1993];

Islam [1995]; and Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort [1995]). Usually, this treatment is

applied by first differencing all variables in order to eliminate the fixed effect. This

procedure works if the underlying determinants of y*+uch        as government policies and

preferences about saving and fertility+o     not vary over time within a country.     In

practice, problems wotid still exist because unobserved shifts in y* could still be

correlated with the movements in y.

     The main drawback of the fixed-effects technique is that it relies on tim~enes

information within countries; that is, it eliminates the cross+ ectional information,

which is the principal strength of the broad crosscountry     data. Aside from losing

information and, hence, precision, first differencing of the data tends to emphasize

measurement error over signal. In particular, the estimation becomes more sensitive to

incorrect timing in the relation between growth and its determinants.
                                                                                                 25




      If first differences of the determinants of y* are retained in the estimation, then

measurement error tends to bias toward zero the estimated coefficients of these

variables.   For the estimated coefficient of Dy on y, one should consider a regression of y

(log[GDP]) on its own lag. Measurement error tends to bias this value toward zero and

leads accordingly to an overestimate   of the rate of convergence.

      Column 1 of Table 3 shows the restits from estimation of a first-differenced

version of the system from column 1 of Table 1. This setup includes two equations—in

the first, the dependent variable is the growth rate of GDP from 1975 to 1985 less that

from 1965 to 1975. In the second, the dependent variable is the growth rate from 1985

to 1990 less that from 1975 to 1985. Similarly, the independent variables are first

differences of the variables that appear in column 1 of Table l—for example, the first

equation contains log(GDP) for 1975 less log(GDP) for 1965. The system is estimated

in a seemingly-unrelated    (SUR) framework, which allows for correlation of the errors

across the two equations.   (Since the residuals from the growt h–rate equations in

Table 1 were essentially uncorrelated across the time periods, the residuals for the two

equations in column 1 of Table 3 have a strong negative correlation. )

      Column 2 of Table 3 shows the results from ordinary-least+quares        (OLS)

estimation of a pure cross section, which contains one observation for each country.        In

this case, the dependent and independent variables are means over the three time

periods of the variables used in column 1 of Table 1.

      Fintiy,   column 3 of Table 3 is the same as column 1 of Table 1, except that the

estimation is by the SUR technique instead of instrumental     variables.   This setup is

basically a weighted combination of the tim~eries       information from column 1 of

Table 3 with the cross-sectional information from column 2 of the table. In the main,

these estimates are close to those shown in column 1 of Table 1. The principal
                                                                                                 26




differences from the use of instruments show up in the estimated coefficients of the

democracy and inflation variables.

       If one compares the estimated coefficients from the first-difference      specification

with those from the cross section, then the biggest discrepancy is in the estimated

convergence rate: -0.044 (0.007) in column 1 versus -0.022 (0.004) in mlumn 2. The

hypothesis of equality for these coefficients is rejected by a Wald test with a p-value of

0.000 (see column 4 of the table).     For the other independent variables, the ordy cases in

which the estimated coefficients from the two specifications differ significantly at the 5%

level (when variables are considered one at a time) are those for life expectancy and

government mnsumption.          However, a joint test of equality for all 10 pairs of

coefficients rejects decisively.

      The standard errors of the coefficients in columns 1 and 2 indicate the information

available from the tim~eries       and cross-sectional   dimensions of the panel data, For

many of the variables—log( GDP), male schooling, log(life expectancy), the interaction

bet ween log(GDP) and male schooling, log(fertilit y rate), and the government

consumption ratiethe        standard errors are much smaller in column 2 than in column 1,

This pattern indicates that the cross-country      (between) variation in these independent

variables is much more informative than the time-series        (Within+ountry)    variation.

The extreme situation is for the rtie–of-law      variable, which has no tim~enes

dimension (U presently measured) and therefore effectively has an infinite standard

error in the first-difference   form. The only case in which the standard error is

noticeably smaller in column 1 is for the terms of trade; the variations here relate more

to changes over time than to differences across countries.      For democracy and inflation,

the standard errors are similar in the two contexts.

      Many researchers seem to prefer the results from variants of first-difference

specifications, as in column 1 of Table 3, because of their concern with the possible bias
                                                                                                   27




from correlated fixed effects. The high estimated convergent          coefficient from this

mlumn4.4%          per year-is    similar to that reported from more sophisticated, but

related, techniques by Knight, Loayza, and Villanueva (1993, p. 529); Islam (1995,

Tables III and IV); and Caselli, Esquivel, and Lefort (1995, Tables 3 and 4). However,

the higher magnitude of these convergence coefficients, relative to those found from the

panel estimation in column 3 of Table 3 or column 1 of Table 1, may reflect an increase

in the relative amount of measurement error from the exclusion of the cross-sectional

information.      That is, instead of eliminating the fixed-effects bias (which tends to

underestimate      the convergence rate), the first-difference   procedure may mainly

aaggerate      the measurement-error     bias (which tends to overestimate the convergence

rate).

         The results in column 1 also show that it is hard to isolate effects from the

explanatory variables other than lagged GDP in a pure tim~eries             context.   The only

estimated coefficients that are significant at the 5% critical level are those for the

fertility rate, the terms of trade, and the inflation rate. Life expectancy is marginally

significant with the wrong sign! One reason for these findings is that the time series

offers little variation in many of the variables.     In addition, the model likely misspecifies

the timing between growth and its determinants,          and this error is much more important

for tim~enes       estimation than in a cross section.

         Undoubtedly, the confidence in the restits would be greater if the estimated

coefficients from first-difference     and cross+ectional   forms did not differ significantly.

Improvements in specification-for         example, with regard to the lag structure between

growth and its determinants—may           produce more uniform results.     But, at this stage,

there seems to be no basis for preferring the first+ifference       estimates to the

cross-sectional     ones. I have focused on panel result s+olumn       3 of Table 3 or column 1

of Table l—as a weighing of these two imperfect sources of information, where the
weights are determined (by means of the SUR or thre~tage          least+ quares procedures)

from the relative informativeness of the t wo sources.



E. Growth Projections

        The results from column 1 of Table 1 can be used to construct long–term forecasts

of economic growth for individual countries.     These predictions have been constructed

by using recent observations of the aplanatory     variables+DP      in 1994 (or sometimes

earlier), schooling in 1990, life expectancy and fertility in 1993, CPI inflation through

1993 or 1994, the rul~f-law      indicator for 1995, the democracy index for 1994, and

government consumption in the late 1980s. 12 Table 4 shows the 20 predicted best and

worst performers from 1996 to 2000 out of the 86 countries that have the necessary data

to make these projections. 13 There is, however, a substantial margin of error (of as

much as two percentage points) in the prediction for an individual country.

        For aU 86 countries, the average forecast of per capita growth is 2.4% per year.

The breakdown by region is 3.7% for 18 Asian countries, 2.9% for 22 Latin American

countries, 2.4% for 21 OECD countries (not including Japan, Turkey, and Mexico), and

0.5% for 18 Sub Saharan African countries.

        It is no surprise that many old and new tigers of East Asia are forecasted to grow

rapidly-South     Korea, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Hong Kong, and Taiwan are on

the high~rowth     list. (Japan falls short with 3.2% growth. ) The unexpected finding is

the presence in the high-growth group of Asian laggards of the past: the Philippines,




i2The   constantterm is the one applicable to the 1985–90 equation. More accurate growth
forecasts might be obtainable frdfi a full vector–autogressive    (VAR) system that r~ates all
variables to lagged observations.
lqJordan codd be included as the 87th country and actually has the highest growth forecast,
6.9% per year. However, Jordan was omitted from Table 4 because the data for the west
bank are intermingled with those for Jordan proper.
                                                                                                  29




India, Sri Lanka, and Pakistan.    (China and Vietnam would likely also appear but are

excluded because of missing data.)

      South Korea places at the top with 6.2% growth because it has high educational

attainment,   strong economic rights, low government spending, low fertility, high

investment, and low inflation.    Although their underlying growth determinants       are less

favorable, the Philippines, India, and Sri Lanka place nearly as high in projected growth

rates because their levels of per capita GDP are only one-eighth to one-quarter        as large

as South Korea’s. These are cases in which the convergence force generates rapid

growth.

      The high-growth list also has substantial representation in South America: Peru,

Argentina, Chile, Paraguay, Guyana, and Ecuador.        A key assumption here is that the

recently achieved macroeconomic stability—as       reflected in relatively low inflation

rates—will be maintained.    As a contr=t,     Brazil appears on the low-growth list with

roughly zero per capita growth. Aside from low school attainment,        a major element is

projected inflation of around 50%.

      In central Europe, post–transformation     Poland appears as a prospective fast

grower, and Hungary (with 3.5% projected growth) just misses the list. Other count ries,

such as the Czech Republic, would likely have appeared but are excluded because of lack

of data.

      On the low-growth list, 13 of the 20 countries are in Sub Saharan Africa. (Other

countries+uch     as Nigeria, Rwanda, and Somalia —wotid likely have been included if

not for their missing data. ) Sierra Leone, as a prototype, has weak enforcement of

property rights, low school attainment,   high fertility, low life expectancy, no political

freedom, high government consumption, moderately high inflation, and virtually no
                                                                                               30




investment.    Being poor, which Sierra Leone and the other African countries surely are,

is not enough to generate high growth.

      Among OECD countries, the ody place on the high-growth list is Greece. (Sptin

comes close with 3.8% growth.)      Many of the advanced economies nearly made the

low-growth list: Denmark at 1.3%, Norway at 1.4%, the United States at 1.4%, Sweden

at 1.770, Finland at 1.9Y0,the United Kingdom at 2.070, Canada at 2.070, Germany at

2.1%, Italy at 2.2%, and Frace     at 2.4%. (Note that the growth rate of the level of

GDP adds the growth rate of population; roughly 1% per year for the United States and

smaller amounts in western Europe.)

      One can also use the results to ask, somewhat more speculatively, whether some

changes in institutions or policies could move the United States or the United Kingdom

or another advanced country to the high-growth list; that is, raise the long–t erm per

capita growth rate from 1–1 /2 to 270 to around 470. Unfortunate ely, the answer seems to

be no. The institutions    and policies in the advanced countries are already reasonably

good (despite possible excesses of transfer programs and regulations), and long–term per

capita growth much above 2~0 seems to be incompatible with the prosperity that has

already been attained.

      It would probably be feasible to raise the long–term growth rate by a few tenths of

a percentage point by cutting tax rates and nonproductive government spending or by

eliminating harmful regulations.    (Some of these variables may be important but could

not be measured for the cross+ountr y empirical work discussed above. ) Moreover,

increases in growth rates by a few tenths of a percentage point matter a lot in the long

run and are surely worth the trouble.     On the negative side, it would be possible to

lower the growth rate by a few tenths of a percentage point by moving away from price

stability or by interfering further with free markets.   There is no evidence that increases

in infrastructure   investment, research subsidies, or education   spending would help a
                                                                                            31




lot. Basically, 2% per capita growth seems to be about as good as it gets in the long run

for a country that is already rich,
                                                                                                32




II. The IntemlaY between Economic and Political Develo~ment



A. Theoretical Notions

      Economic freedoms, in the form of free markets and small governments that focus

on the maintenance of propert y rights, are often t bought to encourage economic growth.

This view receives support from the empirical findings discussed in the previous essay.

      The connection between political and economic freedom is more controversial, as

stressed in the theoretical parts of the recent surveys by Sirowy and Inkeles (1990) and

Przeworski and Limongi (1993). Some observers, such as Friedman (1962), believe that

the two freedoms are mutually reinforcing. In this view, an expansion of political

rights-more    “democracy” —fosters economic rights and tends thereby to stimulate

growth. But the growth retarding aspects of democracy have also been stressed. These

features involve the tendency to enact rich–to-poor    redistributions   of income (including

land reforms) in systems of majority voting and the enhanced role of interest groups in

systems with represent ative legislatures.

      Authoritarian   regimes may partially avoid these drawbacks of democracy.

Moreover, nothing in principle prevents nondemocratic governments from maintaining

economic freedoms and private property.      A diet at or does not have to engage in central

planning. Examples of autocracies that have expanded economic freedoms include the

Pinochet government in Chile, the Fujimori administration      in Peru, the Shah’s regime

in Iran, and several previous and current governments in East Asia. Furthermore,        as

Schwarz (1992) observes, most OECD countries began thtir modern economic

development in systems with limited political rights and became full-fledged

represent ative democracies only much later.
                                                                                               33




      The effects of autocracy on growth are adverse, however, if a dictator uses his

power to steal the nation’s wealth and to carry out nonproductive investments.          Many

governments in Africa, some in Latin America, some in the formerly planned economies

of eastern Europe, and the Marcos administration       in the Philippines seem to fit this

pattern.   Thus, history suggests that dictators come in two types, one whose personal

ob@ctives often conflict with growth promotion and another whose interests dictate a

preoccupation with economic development.          This perspective accords with Sah’s (1991,

pp. 70-71) view that dictatorship is a form of risky investment.      In any event, the

theory that determines which kind of dictatorship will prevail seems to be missing.

      Democratic institutions provide a check on governmental power and thereby limit

the potential of public officials to amass personal wealth and to carry out unpopular

policies. Since at least some policies that stimulate growth will also be politically

popular, more political rights tend to be growth enhancing on this count. Thus, the net

effect of democracy on growth is theoretically inconclusive.

      The interplay between political institutions and economic outcomes also involves

the effect of the standard of living on a country’s propensity to experience democracy.

A common view since Lipset’s (1959) research is that prosperity stimtiates       democracy;

this idea is often described as the Lipset hypothesis.    Lipset (1959, p. 75) apparently

prefers to view it as the Aristotle hypothesis:    “From Aristotle down to the present, men

have argued that only in a wealthy society in which relatively few citizens lived in real

poverty could a situation exist in which the mass of the population could intelligently

participate in politics and could develop the self–restraint necessary to avoid

succumbing to the appeals of irresponsible demagogues. ” (For a statement of Aristotle’s

views, see Aristotle [1932, book VI].)

      Theoretical models of the effect of prosperit y on democracy are not well developed.

Lipset (1959, pp. 83-84) emphasizes increased education and an erdarged middle class as
                                                                                                 34




elements that -pand       “receptivity to democratic political tolerance norms” (a phrase

that I wish I understood).      He also stresses Tocqueville’s (1835) idea that private

organizations and institutions are important as checks on dictatorship.       This point has

been extended by Putnam (1993), who argues that the propensit y for civic activit y is

the key underpinning of good government in the regions of Italy. 1AFor Huber,

Rueschemeyer, and Stephens (1993, pp. 74-75), the crucial concept is that capitalist

development lowers the power of the landlord class and raises the power and ability to

organize of the working and middle classes.

      Despite the lack of a compelling underlying theory, the cross-country       evidence

examined in the present study confirms that the Lipset hypothesis is a strong empirical

regularity.     In particular, increases in various measures of the standard of living tend to

generate a gradual rise in democracy.      In contrast, democracies that arise wit bout prior

economic development-sometimes           because they are imposed by ex-colonial powers or

international    organizations—tend    not to last. Given the strength of this empirical

regularity, one would think that clear+ut      theoretical analyses ought also to be

attainable.     (This seems to be a case where the analysis works in practice but not in

theory.)



B. Effects of Dmocracy        on Economic Growth

      The principal measure of democracy used in the present study is the indicator of

political rights compiled by Gastil and his followers (1982+3 and subsequent issues)

from 1972 to 1994. A related variable from Bollen (1990) is used for 1960 and 1965.15


lAPutnam’s (1993) empirical work is, however, marred by his tendency to identify good
goverment with big government.
15see G~til      1991) for a &scussion of the methods that under~e ~s data sefiesm Inkeles
 1991
()       provi i es an overview of measurement issues on democracy. He finds (p. x) a
I ... high degree of agreement produced by the classification of nations as democratic or not,
even when democracy is measured in somewhat different ways by different analyst s.”
Bollen (1990) suggests that his measures are reasonably comparable to Gastil’s. It is
                                                                                                35




The Gastil concept of political rights is indicated by his basic definition:   “Political

rights are rights to participate meaningftiy   in the political process. In a democracy this

means the right of W adults to vote and compete for public office, and for elected

represent atives to have a decisive vote on public policies. ” (Gastil, 1986+7 edition,

p. 7.) In addition to the basic definition, the classification scheme rates countries

(somewhat impressionistically)   as less democratic if minority parties have little irdluence

on policy.

      Gastil applied the concept of political rights on a subjective basis to classify

countries annually into 7 categories, where group 1 is the highest level of political rights

and group 7 is the lowest. The classification is made by Gastil and his associates based

on an array of published and unpublished information about each country.         Ufike the

rul~f-law    index, which was discussed in the previous essay, the subjective ranking is

not made directly by local observers.

      The original ranking from 1 to 7 has been converted here to a scale from O to 1,

where Ocorresponds to the fewest political rights (Gastil’s rank 7) and 1 to the most

political rights (Gastil’s rank 1). The scale from Oto 1 corresponds to the system used

by Bollen.

      Figure 10 shows the time path of the unweighed      average across countries of the

democracy index for 1960, 1965, and 1972–94. The number of countries covered rises

horn 99 in 1960 to 109 in 1965 and 138 from 1972 to 1994. The figure shows that the

mean of the democracy index peaked at 0.66 in 1960, fell to a low point of 0.44 in 1975,

and rose subsequently to 0.58 in 1994.




difficult to check comparability directly because the two series   do not overlap in time.
Moreover, many countries+specially       those in Africa+learly     experienced ma@r declines
in the extent of democracy horn the 1960s to the 1970s. Thus,      no direct inference about
comparability can be made from the higher average of Bollen’s      figures for the 1960s than
for Gastil’s numbers for the 1970s.
                                                                                                 36




      Figures 11 and 12 demonstrate that the main source of the decline in democracy

after 1960 is the experience in Sub Saharan Africa. Figure 11 shows that the average of

the democracy indicator in Sub Saharan Africa peaked at 0.58 in 1960 (26 countries),

then (for 43 countries) feU to low points of 0.19 in 1977 and 0.18 in 1989 before rising to

0.38 in 1994. This pattern emerges because many of the African countries began with

democratic institutions when they became independent in the early 1960s, but most

evolved into one-part y dictatorships by the early 1970s. (See Bollen [1990] for further

discussion.)   The democratization    in Atica since 1989 has been substantial; whether it

will be sustained is not yet known.

      For countries outside of Sub Saharan Africa, Figure 12 shows that the average of

the democracy index fell from 0.68 in 1960 (73 countries) to 0.55 in 1975 (95 countries).

It then returned to 0.69 in 1990, but fell to 0.67 in 1994.

      Some of the analysis also uses the Gastil indicator of civil liberties.   The definition

here is “civil liberties are rights to free expression, to organize or demonstrate, as well as

rights to a degree of autonomy such as is provided by fxeedom of religion, education,

travel, and other personal rights” (Gastil [1986+7 edition, p.7]). Otherwise, the

sub@ctive approach is the same as the one used for the political rights indicator.      The

original scale for the civil liberties index from 1 to 7 has again been converted to Oto 1,

where Orepresents the fewest civil liberties and 1 the most. In practice, as observed by

Inkeles (1991), the indicator for civil liberties turns out to be extremely highly

correlated with that for Political rights.

      The previous discussion indicated that the net effect of more political freedom on

growth is theoretically ambiguous.     If the indicator for democracy is entered linearly
                                                                                               37




into the regression system of Table 1, then the resulting coefficient estimate turns out to

be negative but statistically insignificant:   -0.003 (0.006). 10

       The system shown in column 1 of Table 1 allows for a quadratic in the indicator.

In this case, the estimated coefficients on democracy and its square are each statistically

significant.   (The p–value for joint significance of the two terms is 0.001. ) The pattern

of restits-a    positive coefficient on the line~ term and a negative coefficient on the

square-means      that growth is increwing in democracy at low levels of democracy, but

the relation turns negative once a moderate amount of political freedom h~ been

attained. 17 The estimated turning point occurs at an indicator value of approximately

0.5, which corresponds to the levels of democracy in 1994 for Malaysia and Mexico.

      Table 2 shows that an analogous nonlinear relation shows up in the effect of

democracy on the investment ratio. The level of democracy that maximizes this ratio is

again sound 0.5.

      One way to interpret the results is that, in the worst dictatorships,   an increase in

political rights tends to enhance growth and investment because the benefit from

limitations on governmental power is the key matter.      But in places that have already

achieved a moderate amount of democracy, a further increase in political rights impairs

growth and investment because the dominant effect comes from the intensified concern

with income redistribution.    Thus, growth would likely be reduced by further

democratization    beyond the levels attained in 1994 in countries such as Malaysia and

Mexico. Moreover, growth will probably be retarded by the political liberalizations that

occurred by 1994 in places such as Chile, South Korea, and Taiwan.       (These countries


l~See Sirowy and Inkeles (1990) and Przeworski and Limongi (1993) for broad surveys of this
kind of empirical evidence.
lTThe conclusions are similar if dummy variables for different intervals of the democracy
indicator are employed. (Note that the underlying indicator may have only an ordinal
meaning. ) For example, if the indicator is divided into three regions—up to 0.33, between
0.33 and 0.67, and greater than 0.67—then the estimated effect on growth is highest in the
middle range and roughly similar in the two extreme ranges.
                                                                                              38




went from levels for the democracy indicator of 0.17, 0.33, and 0.33, respectively, in the

early 1980s to 0.83, 0.83, and 0.67, respectively, in 1994.)

      Figure 13 shows the partial relation between the growth rate and democracy

indicator, as implied by thes ystem shown in column 1 of Table 1. (The concentration

of points at a democracy value of 1.0 corresponds to the many OECD countries that are

rated as fully democratic. ) An inverse u+hape can be discerned in the plot, with many

of the low and high democracy places exhibiting negative residuals. la Only a few of the

observations with middle levels of democracy, such as Guyana in 1975-85 and Pakistan

in 1965-75, have substantially negative residuals.

      The overall relation bet ween growth and democracy is far from perfect; for

example, a number of countries with little democracy have large positive residuals.

Also, the places with middle levels of democracy seem to avoid low growth rates but not

to have especially high growth rates. Thus, there is ordy the suggestion of a nonlinear

relation in which more democracy raises growth when political freedoms are weak but

depresses growth when a moderate amount of freedom is already established.       One

cannot conclude from this evidence that more or less democracy is a critical element for

economic growth.



C. framework for the Determination of Democracy

     Inspection of the cross-country   data suggests that countries at low levels of

economic development typically do not sustain democracy.       For example, the political

freedoms installed in most of the newly independent African states in the early 1960s did

not tend to last. Conversely, nondemocratic places that experience substantial economic


18The residual is calctiated from the regression system that contains all of the variables,
including democracy and its square. But the contributions from the two democracy
variables are left out to compute the variable on the vertical axis. This residud has also
been normtized to have a zero mean. The curve shown in the figure comes from an OLS
regression of the residual on democracy and its square.
                                                                                              39




development tend to become more democratic.         Examples include Chile, South Korea,

Ttiwan, Spain, and Portugal.     Moreover, the countries of central and eastern Europe

which have been reasonably advanced economically for some time, espedally in terms of

education-ventudly        became more democratic.     Thus, a casual view of the data tends

to cotirm   the Lipset hypothesis.

      To assess this hypothesis formally, I consider a system of the form



      (2)          DEMOCit = aO + alZi t T + a2DEMOCi t T + Uit,
                                       Y—             )—


where i is the country, t is the time period, and T is a time lag, usually taken to be five

years. DEMOC is the indicator for democracy; Z is a vector of variables, such as per

capita GDP and education, that influence the extent of democracy; and u is an error

term. The idea in equation (2) is that, if 0<a2<l,    then the extent of democracy in a

country converges gradually over time toward a (moving) target that is determined by

the Z variables.   In practice, the Z variables are themselves highly persistent over time.

      Operationally, I use a panel setup in which the dependent variable, DEMOCit , is

observed at most six times for each country:    1972, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, and 1994.

(The year 1972 is the initial date of the Gastil sample.) The variables Zi t_T and
                                                                          Y
DEMOCi t_T refer to variables observed roughly five years prior to these dates. 19 (The

values for’DEMOCt_T are for 1965, 1972, 1975, and so on. )



D. Regression Results for Democracy

      The basic regression results are in column 1 of Table 5. This system cent ains the




lgThe empirical results turn out to be virtually the same if contemporaneous values of the Z
variables are entered into equation (2 (that is, if the lag T is set to zero), but lagged
values of democracy and the Z variab )es are used as instruments.
                                                                                                 40




five-year lag value of democracy as a regressor. ZOThe explanatory variables also include

several indicators of the level of the standard of living: the log of real per-capita     GDP,

the log of life expectancy at birth, 21and measures of educational attainment.      These

indicators are observed roughly five years prior to the dependent variable.      The

schooling figures that turn out to have the most explanatory power are the years of

attainment       at the primary level for males and females aged 15 and over.

       A dummy for oil~xporting        countries, as designated by the IMF,ZZ is also included

as a rough adjustment of GDP for the contribution of natural resources. That is, the

income generated from natural resources such as oil may create less pressure for

democratization      than income associated with the accumtiation    of human and physical

capital.

      The specification includes some other possible influences on democracy that have

been proposed in the politicd~cience      literature that began with Lipset (1959); see

Lipset, et al (1993) and Lipset (1994) for discussions. The urbanization rate is often

mentioned as a determinant of democracy, although the sign of this influence is not clear

on t heretical     grounds. (The easier communication and transportation     in urban are~

may make it easier for the populace to resist oppression, but these forces also make it

easier for a dictator to monitor and control his subjects. ) The simple correlation

between democracy and urbanization is strongly positive, but urbanization is adso




zOThedemocracy indicator takes on only seven discrete values between zero and one, but the
linear specification on the right–hand side does not take this pattern into account. In
practice, none of the fitted values turned out to be negative and only a few exceeded 1.0
The highest fitted value, 1.04, applies to the United States in 1994.
zlThe res~ts are basically the same if the infant mortality rate is used instead of life
expectancy.
~2The IMF definition includes countries whose net oil exports represent a minimum of
two-thirds of total exports and are at least equivalent to approximately one percent of
world exports of oil. A definition based on OPEC membership would add Ecuador and
subtract Bahrain and Oman.
                                                                                                   41




positively related to real per capita GDP and the other measures of the standard of

living that are included as regressors. In any event, the system includes the rate of

urbanization observed five years prior to the dependent variable. 23

      The system also includes a measure of country size, the log of the fiv~year      earlier

level of population.   It is, however, not apparent a ptioti whether a larger place is more

or less likely to be democratic.   (One selection problem here is that the existing

countries had not become too large to split apartaee      Alesina and Spolaore [1995] for a

discussion of the determinants of country size.)

      The first observation from column 1 of Table 5 is that the estimated coefficient on

lagged democracy is 0.67 (se. =0.03). Thus, democracy is highly persistent over time,

but roughly onethird     of the adjustment to a target position (determined by the other

variables) occurs over five years.

      The results for the standard of living are broadly highly supportive of the Lipset

idea that more prosperous places are more likely to be democratic.     The estimated

coefficients on log(GDP ) and log(life expectancy) are each significantly positive: 0.046

(0.017) and 0.19 (0.08), respectively.   Thus, the target level of democracy is increasing

in these indicators of the standard of living.

      The estimated coefficient on years of primary school attainment for females aged

15 and over is significmtly positive, 0.060 (0.014), whereas that for male schooling is

significantly negative, -0.056 (0.014). 24 A surprising aspect of this result is that-once

GDP and life expectancy are held constant—the       level of schooling does not help to

explain democracy.     However, a smaller excess of male over female attainment-that         is,




23The standard figures on urbanization, which are reported by the World Bank and used
here, suffer from inconsistent definitions of urbanization across countries.
~aPrimary schooling of males and females aged 15 and over has slightly more explanatory
power than primary schooling of those aged 25 and over.
                                                                                                42




more equal educational opportunity across the sexes—raises the target level of

democracy.    The gap between male and female attainment        may be viewed as a proxy for

the equality of schooling more generally. However, an explicit measure of education

inequality does not have a lot of explanatory power for democracy (see below). Perhaps

more promising is the idea, reminiscent of Tocqueville (1835), that expanded

educational opportunity for women goes along with a social structure that is generaJ.ly

more participatory      and, hence, more receptive to democracy.

       The oil-country     dummy is significantly negative, -0.11 (0.03), thereby indicating

that the high level of per-capita    GDP in oil countries does not have the usual positive

dect   on democratization.     It seems plausible that this result would extend to

natural-resource      activities more generally. To test this idea, I introduced the measures

of natural-resource     intensit y used by Sachs and Warner (1995): t he ratios (in 1971) of

primary-product       exports to total exports or to GDP. However, these variables are

insignificant if added to thes ystem shown in column 1 of Table 5. For example, the

estimated coefficient on the primary product share of exports is 0.005 (0.029). The

estimated coefficient on the oil dummy is then -0.113 (0.032), about the same aa that

shown in Table 5. It seems likely, however, that a better measure of natural resources

wotid outperform the oil dummy.

       The p–value for the joint significance of the variables that measure the standard of

living+og(GDP),        log(life expectancy), male and female primary schooling, and the oil

dummy—is 0.000. Thus, the general link bet ween democracy and the standard of living

is firmly established. 25




zsSimilarly, Helliwd (1994, Table 1) finds that the Gastil measures of political rights and
civil liberties are positively related to levels of GDP and secondary-school enrollment
ratios.
                                                                                                43




      The urbanization rate enters negatively in the system shown in column 1 of

Table 5;theestimated        coefficient is-O.10 (0.05). Thus, once theindicators    of the

standard of living are held constant, it is not true that more rural places are less likely

to be democratic.

      The cticient        on the log of population is positive but not significant, 0.006

(0.004). (The simple correlation between democracy and country size is also close to

zero. ) Thus, there is no clear evidence on whether larger countries are more or lMS

likely to be democratic.

      Column 2 of Table 5 adds a second lag of democracy; that is, a value applying

roughly ten years prior to the dependent variable.       (This system includes ordy the five

equations that begin with the observation of democracy for 1975.) The estimated

coefficients on the five-year and ten–year lags me 0.65 (0.04) and 0.04 (0.04),

respectively.     Hence, there is no indication that the longer term history of democracy

matters, once the sit uation five years previously is held constant.

      Table 6 considers some other possible determinants       of democracy, mmy of which

have been proposed in the political~cience literature.      These additional variables are

entered one set at a time into the six-period regression system described in column 1 of

Table 5. For example, on the first line of Table 6, the infant mortality rate has an

estimated coefficient of -0.42 (O.53) and is therefore insignificant.    Infant mortality and

life expectancy are highly correlated and are essentially indistinguishable     in the

regressions.

      The second regression in Table 6 adds years of school attainment for males and

females aged 15 and over at the secondary and higher levels. These values are

individually and jointly insignificant, whereas the estimated coefficients on primary

attainment      remain significant (-0.064 [0.017] for males and 0.069 [0.017] for females).
                                                                                               44




Hence, it appears to be early education that matters for democratization.        Similar

reatits apply to the determination   of fertility rates and health status.   However, as

discussed in the previous essay, rates of economic growth (and investment) relate far

more to seconduy and higher schooling than to primary education.

      Regression 3 of Table 6 includes a measure of inequality, as gauged by Gini

coefficients for data on income distribution.    (A higher Gini coefficient signifies more

inequtit y.) Figures for the early 1960s are used in the first three equations (for 1972,

1975, 1980), and values for the early 1980s are used in the last three equations (for 1985,

1990, 1994). These data on income distribution have been used in numerous studies but

are thought to be highly inaccurate. 26 In any event, the estimated coefficient on

inequality is essentially zero. Although the sample of observations is much reduced

(because of the limited data on inequity),      the estimated coefficients of the other

explanatory variables remain similar to those shown in column 1 of Table 5.

      The finding that inequality is unimportant       for democracy may reflect the poor

quality of the data on income distribution, rather than the irrelevance of inequality for

democracy. In particular, the other independent variables-specially          female primary

schooling-may      be superior to the reported Gini coefficients as measures of income

inequtity.    The data on educational attainment     at seven levels allow us to construct

measures of schooling inequality.    Regression 4 of Table 6 uses as an independent

variable the standard deviation of log (l+years of schooling)zT for the population of both

sexes aged 15 and over. This variable is observed for 1965, 1970, ... The estimated

ufficient    is negative (-0.058 [0.043])—indicating     that more inequalit y of schooling

goes along with less democracy—but      statistically insignificant at conventional critical



z6Data were provided by the World Bank and on inate from Jain (1975) and Lecaillon
(1984). For a discussion of the data, see Perotti t 1996).
zTThe value 1 can be thought of as the effective years of educational human capital possessed
by a person with no formal schooling.
                                                                                                 45




levels. The estimated coefficients of mrde and female primary schooling remain

significant here (-0.047 [0.015] and 0.051 [0.016], respectively).    If the Gini coefficient

for years of schooling is used as an alternative measwe of educational inequality, then

the estimated coficient    is again negative but even less statistically significant.   Hence,

these results indicate that male and female years of schooling do not enter the

regressions merdy as proxies for educational inequality.

      The population’s degree of heterogeneity with respect to ethnitity, language, and

culture may also matter for democracy.      The usual idea is that more heterogeneity

makes it more difficult to sustain democracy.      A standmd measure of a population’s

heterogeneity is its ethnolinguistic fractionalization,   a measure of disparity of languages

and ethnicity within a country.    (See Mauro [1995] for a discussion. ) The variable runs

between Oand 1 and is intended to measure the probability that two randomly chosen

persons in a country will come from different groups. Hence, Ois the most

homogeneous, and 1 is the most heterogeneous.        Regression 5 of Table 6 shows that the

estimated coefficient of the fractionalization   vanable (observed once per country) is

close to zero.

      A measure of economic rights —the rul~f–law          index described beforehas

substantial explanatory power for economic growth, as discussed in the previous essay.

However, the connection between political and economic rights is unclear, as stressed in

the theoretical parts of the recent surveys by Sirowy and Inkeles (1990) and Przeworski

and Limongi (1993). Some observers, such as Friedman (1962), argue that the two

freedoms are mutually reinforcing, but others regard them as essentially independent.

      Regression 6 of Table 6 checks out this relationship by entering lagged values of

the rule–of-law index into the equations for democracy.       Since the data on the rule of

law begin in 1982, this system includes only the equations for democracy for 1985, 1990,

and 1994. The values for the rule of law in this system apply to 1982, 1985, and 1990.
                                                                                             46




The result is that the estimated coefficient on the role–of-law variable is positive but

insignificant, 0.048 (0.056). Thus, holding fixed the measures of standard of living,

there is not much evidence that economic rights promote political freedom. Less

directly, however, an expansion of the rule of law would raise econotic    growth and lead

over time to a higher standard of living and, hence, to more democracy.

      The rul~f-law      measure can dso be viewed as the dependent variable in a system

where the independent variables are own lags and lags of the other variables, including

the democracy index. (Three equations —for 1985, 1990, and 1995—are used here.) In

this setting, democracy turns out to enter with a positive coefficient, 0.026 (0.027),

which is not significant at conventional critical levels. Thus, there is also not strong

evidence that political freedom stimtiates   the maintenance of the rule of law.

      Colonial heritage would be important for democracy if countries inherit tendencies

for more or less political freedom from their previous rders.   For example, Lipset, et al

(1993, p. 168) argue that British rtie provided a crucial learning experience for

subsequent democracy.     In Table 7, a non-colony is defined to be a country that was

independent prior to and since 1775 (so that the United States is treated as a former

colony of Britain).   Each former colony is attributed to its most recent occupier; for

example, the Philippines is associated with the United States rather than Spain,

Rwanda and Burundi are attached to Belgium rather than Germany, and several

Caribbean countries are related to Britain rather than Spain. The classification treats

as non-olonies   places such as South Korea, Taiwan, Hungary, and Poland, which were

occupied by a foreign power for some periods.

      The first section of Table 7 shows that the 32 non-colonies are more likdy to be

democratic (average value for the democracy indicator from 1975 to 1994 of 0.69) than

are the colonies (average value of 0.46). Within the colonies, the former possessions of
                                                                                            47




Britain and Sptin are substantially more democratic than are those of France, Portugal,

or other countries.

      In the statistical analysis, with the measures of standard of living held constant,

regression 7 of Table 6 shows that a dummy variable for mlonial status (1 for former

colony, Ofor non<olony) is insignificant for democracy. Moreover, regression 8 indicates

that a breakdown among British, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and other colonies fails

to generate any significmt coefficients. (The p–value for joint significance of the 5

coefficients is 0.82.) These results, in conjunction with Table 7, suggest that the

itiuence   of former colonial status on democratic tendency must work indirectly through

effects on the standard of living, as measured here by GDP, life expectancy, and male

ad female primary schooling. These indirect links with colonial history are worth

further study.

      Religious affiliation has also been stressed as an important determinant of

democracy; see Huntington (1991, pp. 71-85) and Lipset (1994, p, 5). (The theory of

the interplay between religion and political structure is even less developed than are

other aspects of the theory of democracy. ) To check for a connection between religion

and political freedom, I use data compiled by Jong–Wha Lee on the fractions of a

country’s population in 1970 and 1980 affiliated with nine ma@r groups: 28 Catholic,

Muslim, Protestant    (including Anglican, eastern orthodox, and some other Christian

groups), Hindu (including Jains and Sikhs), Buddhist, miscellaneous eastern religions


~BTheunderlyin data, horn the World ~~tian          Enc~clopedia (Barrett [1982]), are
estimates of pro !essed affiliation in 1970 and 1980. (Figures are also available for 1900.)
This information takes no account of regularity of church attendance or amounts spent on
religious activities. The data provided in the encyclopedia are compiled from the most
authoritative local sources, published or unpublished, including government censuses of
religion. A large part of the data were collected directly by the editors, who visited
virtually all of the countries over the years 1965–75. The basic concept of a religious
adherent is that the person professes to believe in the religion when government censuses or
public opinion polls ask the question, “What is your religion?” Each person is considered
to have at most one religious affiliation. Further work on cross-country religion data is
ongoing.
                                                                                                   48




(Chinese folk religions, Shinto, Confucianism, and new–religionists), Jewish, no

professed religion (including atheists), and other religious groups (such as Parsis,

Bahais, Spiritists, tribal religions, and indigenous third-world   Christians).

       The second section of Table 7 verifies that differences in a country’s primary

rdigious affiliation relate strongly to democracy. When countries are sorted in

accordance wit h the most popular religion in 1980, the average of the democracy

indicator horn 1975 to 1994 is 0.85 for Jewish (1 country), 0.78 for Protestut      (24

countries), 0.66 for Hindu (5 countries), 0.60 for Catholic (49 countries), 0,56 for

Buddhist (4 countries), 0.45 for miscellaneous eastern religions (3 countries), 0.28 for

other religions (17 countries), and 0.26 for Muslim (32 countries).    China is the ordy

place in which non–religion is the most common affiliation, and the average of the

democracy index in this case is 0.10. The mean value of democracy for all 136 countries

with data on religion is 0.51.

       A prominent aspect of this breakdown is that Protestant     countries are nearly

always highly democratic, whereas Muslim countries are usually not democratic,            Only 4

of the 32 Muslim countries have democracy indicators that averaged at least 0.5 for

1975–94: Gambia, Senegal, Malaysia, and Turkey.

       Regression 9 of Table 6 shows the results when eight religious affiliation variables

are entered into the equations for democracy. 29 (The omitted characteristic is chosen

arbitrarily to be Catholic, the most prevalent religion when countries are weighted

equally. ) The regressions indicate that the only significant religion coefficients at the

5% critical level are for non–religion, -0.27 (O.10); Hindu, 0.12 (0.05); and Muslim,

4.08   (O.03). The estimated coefficient for Protestant   is positive but not significant,


29The system allOWSfor some variation over time in religious affiliation in that the 1970
religion figures appear in the first three equations for democracy, and the 1980 figures enter
into the last three equations. However, in most cases, the variations in religious tiliation
between 1970 and 1980 are minor, If the 1970 values are included in all six equations, then
the results are virtually indistinguishable from those shown in regression 9 of Table 6.
                                                                                               49




0.05 (0.03). Thus, the strong explanatory power for religion that appears in

Table 7+specially      the contrast in democratic tendency been Protestant      and Muslim

countnes+s       mostly reflected in the measures of standard of living, which are being

held constant.

      The p-value of 0.0002 indicates that the eight religion coefficients are significant

overall. However, much of this significance hingti on the presence of a few outlier

countries.   For example, the significantly positive coefficient on Hindu mairdy indicates

that India and Mauritius are surprisingly democratic, given their indicators of the

standard of living. If these two places are omitted from the sample, then the estimated

coefficient on Hindu falls to 0.041 (0.064). The significantly negative coefficient on

non–religion depends on the inclusion of China, the one country for which this affiliation

exceeds 0.5.30 If China is omitted, then the estimated coefficient of non–religion

becomes -0.25 (O.14); that is, the point estimate is about the same but the rise in the

standard error eliminates the statistical significance.

      The weak results on the estimated religion coefficients do not necessarily mean

that religion is unimportant    for understanding political freedom (or in other respects).

Rather, the indication is that the main effects on democracy work indirectly through

ifluences    on the economic variables; for example, through effects on female schooling.

Given the striking patterns that emerge in Table 7, these channels are worth further

investigation.

      The democracy indicator is a narrow measure that focuses on political rights,

specifically on the role of elections. In contrast, the Gastil index of civil liberties is a

broader concept that covers freedoms of speech, press, and religion, and also considers a

variety of legal protections.   In practice, however, the civil–liberties variable is highly


30The 1980 v~ue of non–re~gion for Ctina is 0.71. The other values that exceed 0.1 are 0.35
for Uruguay; 0.29 for Sweden; 0.17 for Yugoslavia; 0.16 for Italy, Hungary, and France;
0.15 for Australia; 0.14 for Hong Kong; and 0.12 for the Netherlands and Japan.
                                                                                             50




correlated with the democracy index: 0.86 in 1972, 0.93 in 1980, 0.94 in 1990, and 0.91

in 1994. Given this high degree of correlation, it is not surprising that results with the

civil-liberties   index as the dependent variabl~hown      in column 3 of Table 5—look

similar to those found for the democracy index. t 1 This restit suggests that the economic

and social forces that promote political rights are similar to those that stimulate civil

liberties.



E. Long-Run Forats          of Democracy

       The estimated relation from column 1 of Table 4 implies a gradual adjustment of

democracy toward the values determined by the explanatory variables aside from lagged

democracy. 32 In a full system, the dynamics of these explanatory variables would dso

be determined.     In practice, the level of GDP and the other variables are highly

persistent over time, although they evolve gradually in line with the process of economic

development, some of which has already been studied in the previous essay in terms of

rates of economic growth. 33

      One simple way to relate the current level of democracy to its long–run target is

to compute at each date the estimated level of democracy that would arise

asymptotically if all the right-hand-side   variables (aside from lagged democracy) were

held fixed at their current values. For example, in 1975, the long–run level of

democracy is calculated from the 1970 values (1965-69 for life expectancy) of the


31Aformal test rejects equality of the coefficients in the systems for democracy and civil
liberties. Viewed individudly, the ordy coefficients that are found to differ significantly are
those for life mpectancy, male schooling, population, and the constant term.
3~Moreprecisely, the model shows how initial democracy and the values of the other
explanatory variables influence the probabilities of transition over time among the seven
discrete rankings of democracy.
33Apositive trend in GDP and the other indicators of prosperity implies an upward trend in
democracy. This result seems reasonable because-when     evaluated in terms of the Gastil
concept of political participation—there have not been many full democracies in the world
until the twentieth cent ury.
                                                                                             51




regressors included in column 1 of Table 5.31 The resulting projected values for 1975 and

1994 are shown along with the actual values of democracy in Table 8. The gap is the

difference between the current level of democracy and its long–run target.   Values of the

gap that exceed 0.33 in magnitude are shown in boldface.

      In 1975, out of 100 countries with data, 13 were below the long–run target for

democracy by at least 0.33 and 5 were above by at least 0.33. In 1994, out of 102 places

with data, 8 were below target by at least 0.33 and 12 were above t wget by at least

0.33. The larger relative number with positive gaps in 1994 than in 1975 reflects the

global upward trend in democracy (Figure 12), which has surpassed the trend in the

model’s target level of democracy.

      One striking observation is that only two countries+hina    and Yugoslavia—

appear with the same sign (negative) on both lists. With an estimated rate of

convergence for democracy of about on-third    per five-year period (from the coefficient

on lagged democracy in column 1 of Table 5), a lot of reversion to the mean occurs over

19 years.

      Among the African countries, Botswana, Gambia, and Mauritius looked “too

democratic” in 1975, but the situation for Gambia changed with a coup in 1994.

Botswana and Mauritius were still above target for democracy in 1994 but by smaller

amounts than in 1975.

      Several African countries, such as Benin and Rwanda, were surprisingly

nondemocratic in 1975. However, a recent surge of democratization    caused many of the

African countries to become more democratic than predicted by 1994. This group

includes Benin, Central African Republic, Guinea–Bissau, Malawi, Mdi, Mozambique,




slThe projected value equals [1/( l-coefficient of lagged democracy )]*(estimated value based
on explanatory variables other than lagged democracy).
                                                                                              52




Niger, and Zambia. In some of these cases, the democratization     may be explicable from

the pressures and rewards exerted by international   organizations, such as the IMF and

the World Bank. (The recent U.S.efforts in Htiti are analogous.)

      In any case, the regression analysis predicts that, as with the African experience of

the 1960s, democracy that gets well ahead of economic development will not last. (As a

possible indicator of this process, Niger had a militay   coup in January 1996 and then

became nondemocratic.)     South Africa, which was below target for democracy in 1975,

also became above target by 1994 and would be projected to become lms democratic.

     A few Atican countries still had below–target levels of democracy in 1994.

Prominent here are Rwanda, Sudan, and Swaziland. (Nigeria and Somalia wodd likely

be included in this category but have missing data and are therefore excluded from

Table 8.)

     For Latin America in 1975, several countries were surprisingly nondemocratic,

including Panama, Chile, Ecuador, and Uruguay. All of these places subsequently

experienced sharp increases in political freedom. In 1994, Bolivia had far more

democracy than would be predicted from its economic situation.      Mexico was below

target in 1994 and is predicted to become more democratic (as likely occurred in 1995).

     Among Asian countries, surprisingly low democracy prevtiled in 1975 in

Bangladesh, China, and Taiwan, but ordy China remained in this state in 1994. Hong

Kong, Singapore, and Syria exhibited below-target     democracy in 1994. The model

predicts increases in democracy in these cases, but the model has not been informed of

Hong Kong’s post–1997 relationship with China. It will be of interest to see whether

prosperous Singapore joins South Korea and Taiwan in their marked democratizations.

     On the other side, democracy was higher than predicted for India and Indonesia in

1975. The Indian situation (along with that in Mauritius) accounted for the significance
                                                                                              53




of the Hindu variable in the regression analysis discussed before. However, with the

decline in Gastil’s measure of democracy (in 1991 and 1993), India no longer looked like

a large outlier in 1994. For Indonesia, the decline in democracy to zero in 1994 meant

that it had fallen below target.   Nepal had surprisingly high democracy in 1994.

      Because of lack of data, ordy three countries from central or eastern Europe are

represented in the sample: Hungary, Poland, and Yugoslavia. In each of these places,

democracy was strikingly below its target level in 1975. Two countries in western

Europ&Portugrd      and Spain-were     dso surprisingly nondemocratic.    By 1994, all of

these countries except Yugoslavia had—as predicted-became          far more democratic.

Thus, these countries were no longer negative outliers in 1994; in fact, Hungary was

more democratic than predicted.     The model forecasts a large increase of democracy in

Yugoslavia, which should perhaps now be identified with Serbia. The model also

predicts substantial democratization   for Turkey, which was surprisingly nondemocratic

in 1994.



F. Some Conclusions

     The positive relation between democracy and prior measures of prosperity-the

Lipset hypothesis—is well established as an empirical regularity.    Given the strength of

this relation, it is surprising that convincing theoretical models of this mechanism do not

exist. Thus, development of such a theory is a pnorit y for future research.

     At the empirical level, it wotid be interesting to investigate further the relation of

democracy to inequality, colonial status, and religion. Of course, it may be that the

development of satisfactory theories for the determination of democracy would dso

suggest additional empirical linkages that ought to be explored.
                                                                                               54




III. Inflation and Growth

       In recent years, many central banks have placed increased emphasis on price

stability.   Monetary policy-whether     expressed in terms of interest rates or growth of

monetary aggregates—has       been increasingly geared toward the achievement of low and

stable inflation.   Central brokers and most other observers view price stability as a

worthy obfictive because they think that inflation is costly. Some of these costs involve

the average rate of inflation and others relate to the variability and uncertainty of

inflation.   But the general idea is that businesses and households are thought to perform

~rly    when inflation is high and unpredictable.

       The academic literature contains a lot of theoretical work on the costs of inflation,

as reviewed recently by Briault (1995). This analysis provides a presumption that

inflation is a bad idea, but the case is not decisive without supporting empirical findings.

Although some empincd results (also surveyed by Briault) suggest that inflation is

harmfd, the evidence is not overwhelming.      It is therefore important to carry out

additional empirical research on the relation between inflation and economic

performance.    This essay explores this relation with the cross-country   data used in the

previous essays.



A. Data on Inflation

       Table 9 provides information about the behavior of inflation in the data set.

Annual inflation rates were computed in most cases from consumer price indexes. (The

deflator for the gross domestic product was used in a few instances, when the data on

consumer prices were unavailable. ) The table shows the mean and median across the

countries of the inflation rates in three decades: 1960–70, 1970-80, and 1980–90. The

median inflation rate was 3.3% per year in the 1960s (117 countries), 10.1~0 in the 1970s

(122 countries), and 8.9% in the 1980s (119 countries).    The upper panel of Figure 14
                                                                                              55




provides a histogram for the inflation rates observed over the three decades. The

bottom panel applies to the 44 observations for which the inflation rate exceeded 20%

per year.ss

      The annual data were used for each country over each decade to compute a

measure of inflation variability, the standard deviation of the inflation rate around its

decadal mean. Table 9 shows the mean and median of these standard deviations for the

three decades. The median was 2.4% per year in the 1960s, 5.4% in the 1970s, and 4.9%

in the 1980s. Thus, a rise in inflation variability accompanied the increase in the

average inflation rate since the 1960s.

      Figure 15 confirms the well-known view that a higher variability of inflation tends

to accompany a higher average rate of inflation (see, for example, Okun [1971] and

Logue and Willett [1976]). These charts provide scatter plots of the standard deviation

of inflation (measured for each country around its own decadal mean) against the

average inflation rate (the mean of each country’s inflation rate over the decade). The

upper panel considers only inflation rates below 1570 per year, the middle panel includes

values above 1570 per year, and the lower panel covers the entire range. The positive,

but imperfect, relation between variability and mean is apparent throughout.



B. Preliminary Results for the Effect of Inflation on Economic Growth

     To get a first-pass estimate of the effect of inflation on economic growth, the

inflation rate was included over each period as an explanatory variable along with the

other growth determinants considered in the first essay. The system shown in column 1



ssTable g shows that the cross-country mean of inflation exceeded the median for each
decade. This property reflects the skewing of inflation rates to the right, as shown in
Figure 14. That is, there are a number of outliers with positive inflation rates of large
magnitude, but none with negative inflation rates of high ma nitude. Because this
skewness increased in the 1980s, the mean inflation rate rose ! rom the 1970s to the 1980s,
although the median rate declined.
                                                                                               56




of Table 10 is the same as that from column 1 of Table 1, except for the instruments

associated with inflation.     The estimation reported in column 1 of Table 10 includes

mntemporaneous        inflation among the instruments, whereas that in Table 1 uses

alternative instruments,      as described later. The estimated coefficient of inflation in

Table 10, column 1 is significantly negative: -0.029 (0.004).36 Hence, an increase by 10

percentage points in the annual inflation rate is associated on impact with a decline by

0.3 percentage points in the annual growth rate of GDP.

      Figure 16 depicts graphically the relation between growth and inflation.          The

horizontal axis plots the inflation rate; each observation corresponds to the average rate

for a particular country over one of the time periods considered (1965–75, 1975-85, and

1985–90). The top panel in the chart considers inflation rates below 20% per year, the

middle panel includes values above 2070 per year, and the bottom panel covers the full

range of inflation.   As usual, the vertical axis plots the growth rate of GDP, net of the

part of the growth rate that is explained by dl of the explanatory variables aside from

the inflation rate. 37 Thus, the panels illustrate the relation between growth and inflation

after all of the other growth determinants have been held constant.

      The panels of Figure 16 show regression lines (least+ quares lines) through the

scatter plots. The slope of the line in the lower panel corresponds approximately to the

significantly negative coefficient shown in column 1 of Table 10. The panels show,

however, that the fit is dominated by the inverse relation between growth and inflation

at high rates of inflation.    For inflation rates below 20% per year, as shown in the upper

panel, the relation bet ween growth and inflation is not st atisticdly   significant.


qBTtis estimate is similar to that reported by Fischer (1993, Table 9). For earlier estimates
of inflation variables in cross-country regressions, see Kormendi and Meguire (1985) and
Gner and Ttilock (1989).
371’om~nt~n Comparabilityy with previous figures, the residuals are const rutted from the
coefficient estimates shown in column 1 of Table 1. However, the results are similar if the
coefficients from column 1 of Table 10 are used.
                                                                                             57




      The results indicate that there is not enough information in the low-inflation

experiences to isolate precisely the effect of inflation on growth, but do not necessarily

mean that this effect is small at low rates of itiation.   To check for linearity of the

relation between growth and inflation, the system was reestimated for the whole sample

with separate coefficients for inflation in three ranges: up to 15Y0,between 15 and 4070,

and over 4070. The estimated coefficients on inflation in this form are -0.023 (0.036) in

the low range, 4.055    (0.017) in the middle range, and -0.029 (0.005) in the upper

range. Thus, the clear evidence for the negative relation between growth and itiation

comes from the middle and upper intervals.      However,’since the three estimated

coefficients do not differ significantly from each other (P-value = O.12), the data are

consistent with a linear relationship.   In particular, the data wotid not reject the

hypothesis that the relation between growth and inflation is negative at low rates of

inflation and of the same magnitude as that for higher rates of inflation.   Moreover,

there is no sign in any range of a positive relation, which would signify that higher

inflation had to be tolerated to obtain more growth.

      Although statistically significant effects arise only when the high–inflation

experiences are included, the restits are not sensitive to a few outlier observations.

Table 11 shows the 27 cases of inflation in excess of 40% per year for one of the time

periods, 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90. Note that Uruguay appears 3 times (although

it is by no means the overall champion for high inflation), and Argentina, Brazil, Peru,

Uganda, and Zaire show up twice each. The other countries, with one observation each,

are Chile, Indonesia, Bolivia, Haiti, Israel, Guinea-Bissau,   Mexico, Mozambique,

Nicaragua, Poland, Sierra Leone, Turkey, Yugoslavia, and Zambia. (Guinea–Bissau,

Mozambique, and Poland are not in the regression sample because of missing data on

other variables. ) The exclusion of any small number of these high–inflation
                                                                                              58




observations —Nicaragua and Zaire were suggested by Bruno and Easterly (1995)—has

a negligible effect on the results.

       The estimates are also reasonably stable over time. If different coefficients for

i~ation     are allowed for each period, but the system is otherwise the same as in

column 1 of Table 10, then the resulting estimates are -t).040 (0.015) for 1965-75,

-0.040 (0.010) for 1975-85, and +.026 (0.005) for 1985-90. These values do not differ

significantly from each other (P-value = 0.29).

       The standard deviation of inflation can be added to the system to see whether

itiation    vanability has a relation with growth when the average inflation rate is held

constant.    The strong positive correlation bet ween the mean and vanabilit y of inflation

(Figure 15) suggests that it would be difficult to distinguish the influences of these two

aspects of inflation.   Howeverj when the two variables are entered jointly into the

regression system in column 2 of Table 10, the estimated coefficient on inflation remains

similar to that found before (-0.032 [0.008]), and the estimated coefficient on the

standard deviation of inflation is essentially zero (0,003 [0.009]). 38 Thus, for a given

average rate of inflation, the variability of inflation has no significant relation with

growth. One possible interpretation    of this result is that the realized variability of

inflation does not adequately measure the uncertainty of inflation, the van able that one

would have expected to be negatively related to growth. This issue is worth further

investigation.



C. The Endogeneity of Inflation

      The key problem in interpreting the effect of inflation on growth from column 1 of



38This system includes on the right–hand side standard deviations of inflation measured for
the periods 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90. These variables are also included with the
instruments. The findings are similar if longer term measures of the standard deviation are
used instead of the cent emporaneous values.
                                                                                               59




Table 10 is that the regression need not reflect causation from inflation to growth.

Inflation is an endogenous vanable, which may respond to growth or to other variables

that are related to growth. For example, an inverse relation between growth and

inflation would arise if an exogenous slowing of the growth rate tended to generate

higher inflation.    This increase in inflation could result if monetary authorities reacted

to economic slowdowns with expansionary policies. Moreover, if the path of monetary

aggregates did not change, then the equality between money supply and demand at each

point in time implies that a reduction in the growth rate of output would tend

automatically to raise the inflation rate.

      Kocherlakota (1996) focused on this last source of endogeneity bias. To fix ideas,

suppose as he does that the money growth rate, At, is determined exogenously. The

relation bet ween the inflation rate, ~t, and pt is given from the money+upply~quals-

moneydemand         condition by



      (3)                                  Tt=pt–gt+vt)




where gt is the growth rate of output and Vt is an independent shock to velocity.

Suppose that the effect of inflation on the growth rate is described by



     (4)



where Et is an independent shock and a is the coefficient to be estimated.
                                                         .
     In this framework, the OLS regression coefficient, a, of gt on mt can be shown to

be given by


                         .
                                       ~. [VAR         +VAR(V     +VAR(C
     (5)                 ~=–
                                   {    VAR,(P)VAR(
                                               ‘JAR(
                                                 p)+        v)+       t) ‘) “
                                                                                                60



           .
Thus, atillbclose          toaifthe   vtiances   of theshocks tomoney growth ad velocity

are much greater than those to output growth.

       Using averages over the three periods in the panel and measuring money by either

Mlor M2, Ifindthat VAR(~)x.032) VAR(v)&.004, VAR(~)x.OOO2. Then avalue_O
               .                             .
corresponds to m–.006, and a value -–.020 to w–.O26. Hence, the likely bias would

be small and could not account for the empirical findings on inflation in mlumn 1 of

Table 10. Moreover, if inflation, rather than money growth, were determined

exogenously, then the bias would be nil.

       The Kocherlakota argument also implies that the results would be very different if

money growth, rather than inflation, were included in the growth regressions. If the

panel estimation from column 1 of Table 10 is redone with Ml growth replacing the

itiation       rate, then the estimated coefficient is -0.0306 (0.0055). If M2 growth is used

instead, that the result is -0.0280 (0.0055). Thus, this direct procedure verifies that the

magnitude of the estimated coefficient is similar when money growth, rather than

inflation, is used as the regressor. Basically, the results reveal an inverse relation

bet ween the growth rate of GDP and the growth rate of prices or money. The

distinction between inflation and money growth is not central to the findings.

       Another possibility is that some omitted third variable is correlated with growth

and inflation.      For example, better enforcement of property rights is likely to spur

investment and growth and is also likely to accompany a rules-based setup in which the

monetary authority generates a lower average rate of inflation.       The idea is that a

committed monetary policy represents the application of the rule of law to the behavior

of the monetary authority.        Some of the explanatory variables in the system attempt to

capture the degree of maintenance of the rde of law. However, to the extent that these

measures are imperfect, the inflation rate may proxy inversely for the rule of law and

thereby show up as a negative influence on growth. The estimated coefficient on the
                                                                                                    61




inflation rate could therefore reflect an effect on growth that has nothing to do with

inflation, per se.

      Some researchers like to handle this type of problem, as discussed in the first

essay, by using some variant of fixed-effects estimation; that is, by allowing for an

individual constant for each country.    This procedure basic~y     eliminates

cross-sectional information about inflation from the sample and therefore relies on

effects within countries from changes over time of inflation and other variables.       It is not

appaent   that problems of correlation of inflation with omitted variables wotid be less

serious in this time-series context than in cross sections. (If a country is undergoing an

inflation crisis or implementing a monetary reform, then it is likely to be experiencing

other crises or reforms at the same time. ) Moreover, the problems with measurement

error and timing of relationships would be more substantial in the time series. The one

thing that is clear is that fixed-effects procedures lose a lot of information.

      Another way to proceed is to find satisfactory instrumental      variables-reasonably

exogenous variables that are themselves significantly related to inflation.       My search

along these lines proceeded along the sequence now described.



      1. Central Bank Independace

      One promising source of instruments for inflation involves legal provisions that

guarantee more or less central bank independence.      A recent literature (Bade and Parhn

[1982]; Grilli, Masciandaro, and Tabellini [1991]; Cukerman       [1992]; and Alesina and

Summers [1993]) argues that a greater degree of independence leads to lower average

rates of money growth and inflation and to greater monetuy        stability.   The idea is that

independence enhances the ability of the central bank to commit to price stability and,

hence, to deliver low and stable inflation.   (This view assumes that central bankers have

relatively strong preferences for low inflation. ) Alesina and Summers (1993,
                                                                                                 62




Figures la, lb) find striking negative relationships among 16 developed countries from

1955 to 1988 between an index of the degree of central bwk independence and the mean

and variance of inflation.    Thus, in their context, the memure of central bank

independence satisfies one condition needed for a good inflation instrument; it has

substantial explanatory power for idation.

       Because of the difficulty of enacting changes in laws, it is plausible that a good

deal of the cross-country     differences in legal provisions that influence central bank

independence can be treated as exogenous. Problems arise, however, if the legrd

framework changes in response to inflation (although the sign of this interaction is

unclear). In addition, exogeneit y would be violated if alterations in a country’s legal

environment for monetary policy are correlated with changes in unmeasured

institutional featuresauch      as structures that maintain property rights—that     influence

growth rates. This problem is, however, mitigated by the inclusion of other explanatory

variables, notably the index of the rule of law, in the regression framework.

       Cukierman (1992, Chapter 19) argues that the legal provisions that govern central

bank action differ substantially from the way that the banks actually operate. In

partictiar,   he distinguishes the legal term of office of the central bank governor from the

observed turnover.     The latter variable would be more closely related to bank

performance (and, hence, to inflation), but cannot be treated as exogenous to growth or

omitted t bird variables.    Thus, for the purpose of constructing instruments for inflation,

the preferred strategy is to focus on the extent to which inflation can be explained by

differences in legal provisions for the central bank.

       Table 12 shows an index of central bank independence for 67 countries, based on

the information compiled by Cukierman (1992, Chapter 19, Appendix A) over time

periods that correspond roughly to the four decades from the 1950s to the 1980s. The

index is an average over the time periods and for numerous categories of legal provisions
                                                                                               63




contained in the charters of the central banks; see the notes to the table. The details of

construction differ somewhat from those used by Cukierman, but the values shown in

the table are similar to those reported in his Table 19.3 for the 1980s.

      Table 12 also conttins the average itiation   rate from 1960 to 1990 for the 67

countries in my sample that have data on the index of central bank independence.          A

mmparison between the index and the inflation rate reveals a crucial problem; the

correlation bet ween the two variables is essentially zero, as is clear from Figure 17. This

verdict is also maintained if one looks separately over the three decades from the 1960s

to the 1980s and if one holds constant other possible determinants of inflation.    In this

broad sample of countries, differences in legal provisions that ought to affect central

bank independence have no explanatory power for inflation. 39

      The Alesina–Summers (1993) finding of a close negative link between inflation and

central bank independence turns out to be a fragile one. In their sample of 16 developed

countries, the correlation between average inflation (between 1960 and 1990) and their

measure of independence is -0.82.   If one ret tins their sample but switches to the

presumably more accurate indicator of independence based on Cukierman’s (1992)

information, then the correlation falls in magnitude to -0.59.   If one sticks to developed

countries but enlarges the sample to the 23 OECD countries for which Cukierman had

data on independence, then the size of the correlation declines further to -0.18.   (Iceland

is particularly troublesome in t Ms sample. ) Finally, if one considers the full sample of

67 countries with data (as in Figure 17), then the correlation becomes a negligible -0.02.

     This negative finding about the role of central bank independence is of

considerable int crest, because it suggests that low inflation cannot be atttined merely by

instituting legal changes that appear to promote a more independent central bank.


s’JCukierman’s (1992, Chapter 20) results concur with this finding, especially for samples that
go beyond a small number of developed countries, the kind of sample used in most of the
literature on central bank independence.
                                                                                              64




However, the result also means that we have to search further for instruments to clarify

the relation bet ween growth and inflation. AO



      2. Lagged Intlation

      Earlier values of a country’s inflation rate have substantial explanatory power for

inflation. A1 Lagged inflation would also be exogenous with respect to innovations in

subsequent growth rates. Hence, if lagged inflation is used as an instrument, then the

estimated relation between growth and inflation would not tend to rdect      the short–run

reverse effect of growth on inflation.

      One problem, however, is that lagged inflation would reflect persistent

characteristics of a country’s monetary institutions   (such as the extent to which

policymakers have credibilityy), and these characteristics could be correlated with

omitted variables that are relevant to growth (such w the extent to which political

institutions support the maintenance of property rights).    The use of lagged inflation as

an instrument would therefore not rule out the problems of interpretation    that derive

from omitted third variables.    However, the inclusion of the other explanatory variables

in the regression framework lessens this problem. Another favorable element is that the

residuals from the growth equations are not significantly correlated over the time

periods.



40cukierman, et ~ (1993) use as instruments the turnover rate of bank governors and the
average number of changes in bank leadership that occur within six months of a change in
government. These measures of actual bank independence have substantial explanatory
power for inflation but would not tend to be exogenous with respect to growth.
411have carried out SUR estimation of a panel system with the inflation rate = the
dependent variable (for 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90), where the independent variables
are lagged inflation and its square and the instrumental variables other than
contemporaneous inflation used in column 1 of Table 10. The estimated coefficient of
lagged inflation is 1.47 (0.10) and that on its square is –1.01 (.09). No other estimated
                                                              n
coefficients are significant at the 107o critical level. The R’ values for the three periods are
0.60, 0.39, and 0.20.
                                                                                              65




      Column 3 of Table 10 shows the estimated effect of inflation on the growth rate

when lagged inflation (over the five years prior to each sample period) and its square are

used as instruments.    The estimated coefficient is -0.026 (0.005), slightly smaller in

magnitude than that found in column 1 when contemporaneous inflation is included as

an inst rurnent.   Thus, it seems that most of the estimated negative relation between

growth and inflation does not represent reverse short–term (negative) effects of growth

on inflation.

      The significant negative influence of inflation on growth still shows up only when

the high–inflation observations are included. The results are, however, again consistent

with a linear relation and with stability over the time periods. The standard deviation

of inflation also remains insignificant if it is added to the regressions (column 4 of

Table 10).



      3. Prior Colonial Status

      Another possible instrument for inflation comes from the observation that prior

colonial status has substantial explanatory power for inflation.   Table 13 breaks down

averages of inflation rates from 1960 to 1990 by groups of countries classified, as in the

second essay, as non-colonies and former colonies of Britain, France, Spain or Portugal,

and other countries (in this sample, Australia, Belgium, the Netherlands, New Zealand,

and the United States).

      Table 13 indicates that the average inflation rate for all 117 countries from 1960 to

1990 was 12.6% per year. The average for the 30 non<olonies        of 8.9% was similar to

that of 10.4% for the 42 British colonies and 6.6% for the 20 French colonies. However,

the rates were strikingly higher for the 18 Spanish or Portuguese colonies-29.4%-and

somewhat higher for the 7 other colonies—16. lYo.
                                                                                              66




      A key reason for the low average itiation   rate in the former French colonies is the

participation   of most of the Sub Saharan African states in the fixed-exchange   rate

regime oft he CFA Franc. Aa This type of reasonabl y exogenous commitment to

relatively low inflation is exactly the kind of experiment that provides for a good

instrument for inflation.

      For many of the former British colonies, a significant element may be their prior

experience with British organized currency boards, another system that tends to

generate low inflation (see Schwartz [1993]). These boards involved, at one time or

another before independence, most of the British colonies in Africa, the Caribbean,

southeast Asia, and the mideast.

      The high average inflation rate for the 16 former Spanish colonies in the sample

does not reflect, per se, their presence in Latin America. For seven Latin American

countries that are not former Spanish or Portuguese colonies, Aqthe average inflation rate

for 1960–90 was only 9.0%, virtually the same as that for the non-colonies (see

Table 13). Also, four former Portuguese colonies in Africa experienced the relatively

high average inflation rate of around 20%. AAFor Portugal and Spain themselves, the


AzFordiscussions of the CFA Franc zone, see Boughton (1991) and Clement (1994). The
zone mtinttined a fixed exchange rate with the French Franc for 45 years until the
devaluation from 50 to 100 CFA Francs per French Franc in January 1994. At the time of
the devaluation, the zone covered 14 African countries grouped around three central banks:
the West African Monetary Union of Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast, Mali, Niger,
Senegal, and Togo; a group of central African countries consisting of Cameroon, Central
African Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon; and the Comoros. Some
original members of the zone left to establish independent currencies—Djbouti    in 1949,
Guinea in 1958, Mali in 1962 (until it rejoined in 1984), Madagascar in 1963, Mauritania in
1973, and the Comoros in 1981 (to set up its own form of CFA franc). Equatorial Guinea,
which joined in 1985, is the ordy member that is not a former colony of France (and not
French~peaking).
AoTheseven in the sample are Barbados, Dominican Republic (attributed to France rather
than Spain; see the notes to Table 13), Guyana, Htiti, Jamaica, Suriname, and Trinidad &
Tobago. Five other former British colonies in Latin America that are not in this
sampleBahamas,       Belize, Grenada, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent-xpenenced     the
relatively low average inflation rate of 6.970 horn 1970 to 1990.
AAThesefour are Angola, Cape Verde, Guinea-Bissau,       and Mozambique.    Data are
                                                                                            67




average inflation rate of 10.9~0 for 1960–90 was well below the rate of 29.4% experienced

by their former colonies. However, 10.9% inflation was substantially   higher than that

experienced by France (6.4%) and the United Kingdom (7.7%).

      The regression system focused on in the first essay=hown     in column 1 of

Table l~hows       the estimated effect of inflation on the growth rate of GDP when the

instruments exclude contemporaneous or lagged inflation but include indicators of prior

colonird status.   The two variables used are a dummy for whether the country is a

former Spanish or Portuguese colony and a dummy for whether the country is a former

colony of a country other than Brittin, France, Sptin, or Portugal. AS The estimated

coefficient on the inflation rate is now -0.043 (0.008), higher in magnitude than that

found in Table 10 when contemporaneous or lagged inflation is used as an instrument.

The significantly negative relation between growth and inflation again arises ordy when

the high–inflation experiences are included in the sample. The results dso continue to

be stable over the time periods.

      One question about the procedure is whether prior colonial status works in the

growth regressions only because it serves as an imperfect proxy for Latin America, a

region that is known to have experienced surprisingly weak economic growth (see, for

example, the results in Barro [1991]). However, column 2 of Table 1 showed that if a


unavailable for Cape Verde and Guinea-Bissau in the 1960s (prior to independence). The
figures for Angola in the 1980s me rough estimates.
A51have carried out SUR estimation of a panel system with the inflation rate as the
dependent variable (for 1965–75, 1975-85, and 1985–90), where the independent variables
are the instrumental variables used in column 1 of Table 1. The estimated coefficient on
the Spain–Portugal colonial dummy is 0.125 (0.027) and that on the dummy for other
colonies is 0.159 (0.051 . The R2 values are 0.35 for 1965–75, 0.09 for 1975-85, and 0.05
for 1985–90. Thus, in d ation is difficult to explain, especially if most contemporaneous
variables and lagged inflation are excluded as regressors (see n. 40). Two variables that are
sometimes suggested as determinants of inflation-trade        openness (measured by ratios of
exports and imports to GDP) and country size (measured by log of population —are
insignificant if added to the system. Years since independence also has no exp 1anatory
power for inflation. This result may arise because the former colonies of Spain and
Portugal in Latin America became independent at rougMy the same time.
                                                                                                  68




dummy variable for Latin America is included in the system (along with dummies for

Sub Saharan Africa and East Asia), then the estimated coefficient of inflation changes

little: +.039 (0.008). Moreover, the estimated coefficient on the Latin America

dummy is not statistically significant at conventional levels, +.0054 (0.0032). The

resdts are basicaJ.ly the same if the Latin America dummy is added to the system from

column 1 of Table 10, in which contemporaneous inflation is used as an instrument.           It

therefore appears that much of the estimated effect of a Latin America dummy on

growth rates in previous research reflected a proxying of this dummy for high inflation.

In partictiar,   the negative effect of inflation on growth does not just reflect the tendency

of many high-inflation    countries to be in Latin America.



D. S~            Findings on Inflation

       A major result is that the estimated effect of inflation on growth is significantly

negative when some plausible instruments are used in the statistical procedures.       Thus,

there is some reason to believe that the relations reflect causation from higher long–term

itiation   to reduced growth.

       It should be stressed that the clear evidence for adverse effects of inflation comes

from the experiences of high inflation.    The magnitudes of effects are dso not that large;

for example, an increase in the average inflation rate by 10 percentage points per year is

estimated to lower the growth rate of real per capita GDP on impact by 0.3-0.4

percentage points per year.

       Some people have reacted to these kinds of findings by expressing skepticism about

the value of cross-country    empirical work. In fact, the wide differences in inflation

experiences offered by this kind of panel provide the best opportunity for ascertaining

the long–term effects of inflation and other variables on economic performance.       If the

effects cannot be detected accurately with these data, then they probably cannot be
pinpointed anywhere else. In particular, the usual focus on annual or quarterly time

series of 3H0     years for one or a few countries is much less promising.

       In any event, the apparently small estimated effects of inflation on growth are

misleading.     Over long periods, these changes in growth rates have dramatic effects on

standards of living. For example, a reduction in the growth rate by 0.3+.4 percentage

points per year (produced on impact by 10 percentage points more of average inflation)

means that the level of real gross domestic product would be lowered after 30 years by

6–9%. Ad In 1995, the U.S. gross domestic product was around $7–1/2 trillion; 6–9% of

this amount is $450+80 billion, more than enough to justify a keen interest in price

stability.




AdInthe model, the fall in the growth rate by 0.3-0.4 percent per year apphes on impact in
response to a permanent increase in the inflation rate. The growth rate would also
decrease for a long time thereafter, but the ma nitude of this decrease diminishes toward
mro as the economy converges back to its (uric%anged) long–run growth rate, Hence, in
the very long run, the effect of higher inflation is a path with a permanently lower level of
output, not a reduced growth rate. The numerical estimates for the reduced level of output
after 30 years take account of these dynamic effects. The calculation depends on the
economy’s rate of convergence to its long–term growth rate (assumed, based on the
empincd estimates, to be 2–3 percent per year). Also, the computations unrealistically
neglect any responses of the other explanatory variables, such as the human-capital
measures and the fertility rate.
                                                                                                 70




w.   co ncludin~ Observatio~

      The data now available for a broad panel of countries over 30 years provides the

information necessary to isolate determinants of economic growth. With respect to

government policies, the evidence indicates that the growth rate of real per capita GDP

is enhanced by better maintenance of the rule of law, smaller government consumption,

and lower inflation.   Increases in political rights initi~y   increase growth but tend to

retard growth once a moderate level of democracy has been attained.         Growth is also

stimulated by greater starting levels of life expectancy and of male secondary and higher

schooling, by lower fertility rates, and by improvements in the terms of trade.     For

given values of these variables, growth is higher if a country begins with a lower starting

level of real per capita GDP; that is, the data reveal a pattern of condition

convergence.

      To some extent, the forces that have been isolated in this and other empirical

studies reflect the variables that researchers have been able to measure in a consistent

and accurate manner for a large number of countries.       Additional public policies that are

likely to be important for growth include tax distortions; public-pension     and other

transfer programs; and regulations that affect labor, financial, and other markets.       Also

likely to be important are infrastructure   investments, R&D outlays, the qualit y of

education, and the distribution of income and wealth. Some of these elements have been

discussed in other empirical studies, but further measurement and investigation is

important for obtaining reliable results.

     The great strength of the cross-country      approach is that it provides the breadth of

experience needed to assess government policies and other determinants       of long–term

economic growth. At the same time, the use of these data creates problems related to

measurement and estimation.      Many critics of cross-country    empincd   work focus on

these difficulties, but my view is that the informational benefits override these
                                                                                             71




objections.   Naturally, this viewpoint will become more persuasive if futher progress can

made in overmming the problems of measurement and estimation.
                                                                                        72




                                      References



Aghion, Philippe and Peter Hewitt (1992). “A Model of Growth through Creative

     Destruction,” Economettica, 60, 2 (Much), 323–351.

Alesina, Alberto ad Enrico Spolaore (1995). “On the Number and Size of Nations,”

     unpublished, Harvard University, October.

Alesina, Alberto and Lawrence H. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and

     Macroeconomic Performance:     Some Comparative Evidence, ” Journal oj Mouy,

     Credit, and Banking, 25 (May), 151–162.

Aristotle (1932). Politics, translated by H. Rackham, Cambridge MA, Harvard

     University Press.

Arrow, Kenneth J. (1962). “The Economic Implications of Learning by Doing,” Retiew

     of Economic Studies, 29 (June), 155–173.

Bade, Robin and J. Michael Parkin (1982). “Central Bank Laws and Monetary Policy,”

     unpublished paper, University of Western Ontario.

Barrett, David B., editor (1982). World Chfitian   Encyclopedia, Oxford, Oxford

     University Press.

Barre, Robert J. (1991). “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly

     Journa/ of Economics, 106, 2 (May), 407433.

Barre, Robert J. and Jong–Wha Lee (1993). “International    Comparisons of

     Educational Attainment ,“ Journal of Monetary Economics, 32 (December),

     363–394.

Barre, Robert J. and Jong–Wha Lee (1994). “Sources of Economic Growth,” Carnegie-

     Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy (June), 146.

Barre, Robert J. and Xavier Sala–i-Martin   (1995a). Economic Growth, New York,

     McGraw Hill.
                                                                                              73




Barre, Robert J. and Xavier Sda-i-Martin       (1995b). “Technological Diffusion,

      Convergent,   and Growth,” National Bureau of Emnomic Research, working paper

      no. 5151, June.

Becker, Gary S. and ~bert       J. Barro (1988). “A Reformtiation    of the Economic Theory

     of Fertilit y,” Quatierly Journal of Economics, 103, 1 (February), 1–25.

Behrman, Jere R. (1990). “Women’s Schooling and Nonmarket Productivity y: A Survey

     and a Reappraisal, ” unpublished paper, University of Pennsylvtia.

Benhabib, Jess and Mark M. Spiegel (1994). “The Role of Human Capital in Ewnomic

     Development:       Evidence from Aggregate Crosscountry        Data,” Journal of

     Moneta~ Economics, 34, 2 (October), 143–173.

Blomstrom, Magnus, Robert E. Lipsey, and Mano Zejan (1993). “Is Fixed Investment

     the Key to Economic Growth?,” National Bureau of Economic Research working

     paper no. 4436, August.

Bollen, Kenneth A. (1990). “Political Democracy: Conceptual and Measurement

     Traps,” Studies in Comparative International Development, Spring, 7–24.

Boughton, James M. (1991). “The CFA Franc Zone: Currency Union and Monetary

     Standard,” International     Monetary Fund, working paper no. 91/133 (forthcoming

     in Anthony Courakis and George Tavlas, eds., Monetary Integration, Cambridge,

     Cambridge University Press).

Briault, Clive (1995). “The Costs of Inflation,” Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, 35,

     February, 33-15.

Bruno, Michael and William Easterly (1995). “Inflation Crises and Long–Run

     Growth,” National Bureau of Economic Research, working paper no. 5209, August.

Caballe, Jordi and Manuel S. Smtos (1993). “On Endogenous Growth with Physical

     and Human Capita l,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 6 (December),

     1042–1067.
                                                                                         74




Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort (1995). “Reopening the

      Convergent     Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country       Growth Empirics,”

     unpublished paper, Harvard University, November.

Cass, David (1965). “Optimum Growth in an Aggregative Model of Capital

     Accumulation,”     Retiew of Economic Studies, 32 (July), 233–240.

Clement, Jean A.P. (1994). “Striving for Stability:    CFA Franc Realignment,”

     Finance & Development, June, 10-13.

Cu.kierma,    Ala (1992). Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence, MIT

     Press, Cambridge MA.

Cukierman, Alex, Pantelis Kalaitzidakis, Lawrence H. Summers, and Steven B. Webb

     (1993). “Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates,”

     Came~e-Rochester        Conference Seties on Public Policy, 39, 95–140.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers (1991). “Equipment Investment and

     Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal ojEconornics, 106, 2 (May), 445-502.

Fischer, Stardey (1993). “The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth,” Journal of

     Moneiaq      Economics, 32, 3 (December), 485–512.

Friedman, Milton (1962). Capitaltim and Freedom, Chicago, University of Chicago

     Press.

Galton, Francis (1886). “Regression towards Mediocrity in Hereditary Stature,”

     JoumaL of the Anthropolo@cal Institute of Great Btitain and Ireland, 15, 246–263.

Gdton, Frmcis (1889). Natural Inheritance, London, Macmillan.

Gastil, Raymond D. and followers (1982+3 and other years). Freedom in the World,

     Westport CT, Greenwood Press.

Gastil, Raymond D. (1991), “The Comparative Survey of Freedom: Experiences and

     Suggestions, ” in Alex Inkeles, ed., On Measuring Democracy, New Brunswick NJ,

     Trmsaction     Publishers.
                                                                                         75




Gner, Kevin B. and Gordon Tdlock (1989). “An Empirical Analysis of Cross–National

     Economic Growth,” Journal of Monetaw Economics, 24, 2 (September), 259–276.

Grilli, Vittorio, Donato Mwciandaro, and Guido Tabellini (1991). “Political ad

     Monetary Institutions and Public Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries,”

     Economic Po/icv, 13 (October), 341–392.

Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman (1991). Innovation and Grozuth in the GZobal

     Economy, Cambridge MA, MIT Press.

Hart, Peter E. (1995). “Galtonian Regression Across Countries and the Convergence of

     Productivity y,” Oz~ord Bul/etin of Economics and Stattitics, 57,3 (August),

     287–293.

Helliwell, John F. (1994). “Empirical Linkages Between Democracy and Economic

     Growth,” British Journal of Political Science, 24, 225–248.

Huber, Evelyne, Dietnch Rueschemeyer, and John D. Stephens (1993). “The Impact of

     Economic Development on Democracy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7,

     Summer, 71-85.

Huntington, Samuel P. (1991). The Third Wave: Democrattiation        in the Late

     Twentieth Century, Norman, Oklahoma, University of Oklahoma Press.

Inkeles, Alex (1991). On Measuting Democra~,       New Brunswick NJ, Transaction

     Publishers.

Islam, N=rul (1995). “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach,” Quarterly Journal

     of Economics, 110, 4 (November), 1127–1 170.

Jain, S. (1975). Size Dtittibution of Income: A Compdation of Data, Washington DC,

     The World Bank.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995). “Institutions    and Economic Performance:

     Cross-Country    Tests Using Alternative Institutional   Measures,” Economics and

     Politics, 7, 207–227.
                                                                                         76




Knight, Frank H. (1944). “Diminishing Returns from Investment ,“ Journal of Political

      EcOnOm~,52 (March), 26-47.

Knight, Malcolm, Norman Loayza, and Delano ViUanueva (1993). “Testing the

     Neoclassical Theory of Economic Growth,” IMF Staff Papers, 40, 3 (September),

     512–541.

Kocherlakota, N.R. (1996). “Discussion of Inflation and Growth,” in Federal Reserve

     Bank of St. Louis, Price Stability and Economic Growth.

Koopmans, Tjalling C. (1965). “On the Concept of Optimal Economic Growth,” in The

     Econometric Approach to Development Planning, Amsterdam, North Holland.

Kormendi, Roger C. and Philip G. Megu.ire (1985). “Macroeconomic Determinants of

     Growth,” Journal of Moneta~ Economics, 16, 2 (September), 141–163.

Lecaillon, Jacques, et al (1984), Income Dtittibution and Economic Development,

     Geneva, International   Labor Office.

Lipset, Seymour Martin (1959). “Some Social Requisites of Democracy: Economic

     Development and Political Legitimacy,” American Political Science Review, 53,

     69-105.

Lipset, Seymour Martin (1994). “The Social Requisites of Democracy Revisitedj”

     Ametican Sociological Retiew, 59 (February), 1–22.

Lipset, Seymour Martin, Kyoung–Ryung Seong, and John Charles Torres (1993). “A

     Comparative Analysis of the Social Requisites of Democracy,” International Social

     Science Journal (May), 155-175.

Logue, Dennis E. and Thomas D. Willett (1976). “A Note on the Relationship between

     the Rate and Variability of Inflation,” Economics, 43, 151–158.

LUCM,Robert E., Jr. (1988). “On the Mechanics of Economic Development ,“ Journa/ of

     Moneta~ Economics, 22, 1 (July), 3A2.
                                                                                          77




Malthus, Thomas R. (1798). An Essay on tie Principle of Population, London, W.

      Pickering, 1986.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil (1992). “A Contribution to the

      Empirics of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 2 (May),

      407437.

Mauro, PW1O (1995). “Corruption, Country Risk, and Growth,” @arterly Jouti           of

      Economics, 110 (October).

Mtiigan,   Casey B. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin   (1993). “Transitional   Dynamics in

     Tw~Sector    Models of Endogenous Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108,

     3 (August), 737–773.

Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps (1966). “Investment in Humans,

     Technological Diffusion, and Economic Growth,” American Economic Retiew, 56,

     2 (May), 69–75.

Okun, Arthur M. (1971). “The Mirage of Steady Inflation,” Broo~ngs Papers on

     Economic Activity, 2, 485-498.

Perotti, Roberto (1996). “Growth, Income Distribution, and Democracy,” Journal oj

     Economic Growth, 1, 2 (June).

Przeworski, Adam and Fernando Limongi (1993). “Political Regimes and Economic

     Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 7, Summer, 51-69.

Putnam, Robert D., with Robert Leonardi and Raffaella Y. Nanetti (1993). Mafing

     Democracy Work, Civic Traditiom in Modern Italy, Princeton NJ, Princeton

     University Press.

Quah, Danny (1993). “Galton’s Fallacy and Tests of the Convergence Hypoth~is,”

     Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 95,4 (December), 427443.

Ramsey, Frank (1928). “A Mathematical Theory of Saving,” Economic Journal, 38

     (December), 543-559.
                                                                                             78




Wbelo, Sergio (1991). “Long-Run Policy Analysis and Long–Run Growth,” Journal of

     Po/itical Ecowmy,     99, 3 (June), 500-521.

Ricardo, David (1817). On the Ptincipks of Political Economy and Tuation,       P. Sraffa,

     cd., Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1951.

Romer, Paul M. (1986). “Increasing Returns and Long–Run Growth,” Joumd           of

     Political Economy, 94, 5 (October), 1002–1037.

Wmer, Paul M. (1987). “Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization,”

     American Economic Retiew, 77,2 (May), 56-62.

Miner, Paul M. (1990). “Endogenous Technological Change,” Joumai of Political

     Economy, 98, 5 (October), part II, S71–S102.

Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew M. Warner (1995). “Natural Resource Abundance and

     Economic Growth,” unpublished, Harvard Institute for International

     Devdopment,       December.

Sah, Raaj K. (1991). “Fallibility in Human Organizations and Political Systems,”

     Journal of Economic Perspectives, 5, Spring, 67-88.

Schultz, T. Paul (1989). “Returns to Women’s Education,”      PHRWD background

     paper 89/001, The World Bank, Poptiation,      Health, and Nutrition Department,

     Washington D.C.

Schurnpeter, Joseph A. (1934). The Z’heo~ of Economic Development, Cambridge MA,

     Harvard University Press.

Schwartz, Anna J. (1993). “Currency Boards: Their Past, Present, and Possible Future

     Mle,” Camegi+Rochegter        Conference Serieg on Public Policy, 39, 147–187.

Schwarz, Gerhard (1992). “Democracy and Market-Oriented        Reform—A Love-Hate

     Relationship?,”    Economic Education BuUetin, 32, 5 (May).
                                                                                      79




Sheshinski, Eytan (1967). “Optimal Accumulation with Learning by Doing)” in Karl

      Shell, ed., Essays on the Z’heo~ of Optimal Economic Grotih, Cambridge MA,

      MIT Press, 31-52.

Sirowy, L=ry and Alex Inkel~ (1990). “The Effects of Democracy on Economic

      Growth and Inequality:   a Review,” Studies in Comparative International

      Development, 25, Spring, 126–157.

Solow, Robert M. (1956). “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,”

      Quarterly Journal of Economics, 70, 1 (February), 65–94.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston (1991). “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An

      Expanded Set of International   Comparisons, 1950–1988,” Quarterly Journal of

      Economics, 106, 2 (May), 327–368.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston (1993). “Penn World Tables, Version 5.5,” available

     on diskette from the National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge MA.

Swan, Trevor W. (1956). “Economic Growth and Capital Accumulation,” Economic

     Record, 32 (November), 334–361.

Tocqueville, Altis   de (1835). Democracy in Ametica, translated by Henry Reeve,

     London, Saunders & Otley.

Uzawa, Hirofumi (1965). “Optimal Technical Change in an Aggregative Model of

     Economic Growth,” lntemational Economic Retiew, 6 (January), 18–31.
6-20-96                  Table 1         Regressions   for Per Capita     Growth late


independent         variable                                        (1)                 (2)

log(GDP)                                                      -.0254              -.0225
                                                              (.0031)             ( .0032)

male secondary           ad     higher     schooling             .0118               .0098
                                                               (.0025)             (.0025)

log(life        expectancy)                                      .0423               .0418
                                                               (.0137)             (.0139)

log(GDP)*male schooling                                       -.0062              -.0052
                                                              (.0017)             (.0017)

log(fertility           rate)                                 -.0161              -.0135
                                                              ( .0053)            ( .0053)

government        consumption       ratio                     -.136               -.115
                                                              (.026)              (.027)

rule-of-lau        index                                         .0293               .0262
                                                               (.0054)             (.0055)

terms-of-trade           change                                  .137                .127
                                                               (.030)              (.030)

democracy index                                                  .090*               .094
                                                               (.027)              (.027)

democracy index squared                                       -.088               -.091
                                                              (.024)              (.024)

inflation        rate                                         -.043               -.039
                                                              (.008)              (.008)

Sub Saharan Africa              dummy                          --                   .0042**
                                                                                  ~ .0043)

Latin      America dummy                                       --                 -.0054
                                                                                  ( .0032)

East Asia dummy                                                --                    .0050
                                                                                   (. 0041)

R2                                                        .58, .52,              .60, .52,
                                                            .42                    .47

number of observations                                        80, 87,            80, 87
                                                                84  “              84


*p-value for joint significance of two democracy variables                         is 0.0006 in
column 1 ad 0.0004 in column 2.

**p-value        for joint       significance      of three     dummyvariables    is 0.11.
Notes to Table 1: The system has three equations,                uhere the dependent
variables     are the growth rate of real per capita GDPfor 1965-75, 1975-85,
and 1985-90.       The variables       GDP (real per capita gross domestic product) and
male schooling (years of attainment             for the population    aged 25 and over at
the secondary and higher levels)            refer to 1965, 1975, and 1985. Life
expectancy at birth is for 1960-64, 1970-74, and 1980-84.                  The variable
log(GDP)*male schooling is the product of log(GDP (expressed as a deviation
from the sample mean) and the male upper-level             sc t oolin   variable   (also
expressed as a deviation          from the sample ❑ean).      The ru f e-of-law index
applies to the early 1980s (one observation             for each country).       The terms-of-
trade variable       is the routh rate over each period of the ratio of export to
import prices.        The in f lation rate is the grouth rate over each period of a
consumer price index or of the GDPdeflator               in a few cases).       The other
variables     are measure i as averages over each period.            These variables    are the
log of the total fertility           rate, the ratio of government consumption
(exclusive     of defense md education           to GDP, and the democracy index.         Column
2 includes dummyvariables            for Sub i aharan Africa, Latin America, and East
Asia.     Individual    constats       (not shown) are also estimated for each period.

Estimation is by three-stage        least squares (uith different        instrumental
variables   used for each equation).         The instruments   include the five-year
earlier   value of 10 (GDP) (for example, for 1960 in the 1965-75 equation);
the actual values o! the schooling,          life-expectancy,   rule-of-law,     and terms-
of-trade variables;      and, in column 2, the three area dummyvariables.
Additional    instruments    are earlier   values of the other variables        except the
inflation   rate.    For example, the 1965-75 equation uses the averages of the
fertility   rate and the government- spendin          ratio for 1960-64.      Dummies for
former colonies of Spain or Portugal and ! or former colonies of other
countries   aside from Britain ad Frace are also included as instruments.
(These variables     have substantial     explanatory power for inflation.       ) The
instrument list also includes the cross product of the lagged value of
log(GDP) (expressed as a deviation         from the sample mean) with the ❑ale
schooling variable      (expressed as a deviation from the sample mean).

The estimation   weights countries   equally but allows for different   error
variances   in each period and for correlation     of these errors over time.    The
estimated correlation    of the errors for column 1 is -0.13 between the 1965-75
and 1975-85 equations,    0.05 between the 1965-75 and 1985-90 equations,      and
0.04 between the 1975-85 and 1985-90 equations.        The pattern is similar for
column 2. The estimates are virtually       the same if the errors are assumed to
be independent over the time periods.       Standard errors of the coefficient
estimates are shown in parentheses.   The R2 values            and numbers of
observations apply to each period individually.
                                                    Table 2

                                     Regressions    for Investment      Ratio


independent         variable                                      (1)                (2)

log(GDP)                                                    -.010                 -.005
                                                            (.011)                (.011)

male secondary           and higher     schooling           -.0032                -.0064
                                                            ( .0088)               ( .0085)

log(life        expectancy)                                   .259                  .274
                                                            (.050)                (.051)

log(GDP)*male schooling                                    -.0004                   .0009
                                                           (.0057)                (.0055)

log(fertility           rate)                              -.0028                   .0056
                                                           (.0192)                (.0186)

government        consumption       ratio                  -.264                 -.216
                                                           (.089)                (.087)

rule-of-law        index                                      .092                  .074
                                                            (.023)                (.024)

terms-of-trade           chmge                                .074                  .070
                                                            (.068)                (.064)

democracy index                                               .148                  .168
                                                            (.069)                (.070)

democracy index squared                                    -.142                 -.153
                                                            (.061)               (.062)

inflation        rate                                      -.053                 -.036
                                                            (.022)               (.021)

Sub Sahara         Africa       dummy                        --                   .013*
                                                                                 ~.o19)

Latin      America dummy                                     --                  -.038
                                                                                 (.014)

East Asia dummy                                              --                     .010
                                                                                  (.017)

R2                                                        .59, .62,             .60, .65,
                                                             .61                  .67

number of observations                                    80, 87,               80, 87
                                                            84   -                84


*p-value        for joint       significmce    of three     dummyvariables      is 0.03.
Notes to Table 2: The systems correspond to those described in Table 1,
except that the dependent variables        are now the average ratios of real
investment     private plus public) to real GDPover the periods 1965-74,
1975-84, an i 1985-89.     The correlation    of the errors across the equations is
substantial    in the systems for investment.       For example, for column 1, the
correlation    between the first   ad second periods is 0.53, that between the
first   and third periods is 0.35, and that between the second amd third
periods is 0.62.
                 Table 3       Results     from First          Differences       and a Cross Section

                                                     (1)                 (2)                (3)          (4)

independent        variable                      First                 Cross               Panel       p- value
                                               Difference             Section

log(GDP)                                        -.0444                -.0220           -.0242           .000
                                                 ( .0066)              (.0041)         (.0028)

male schooling                                  -.0032                  .0141            .0123          .68
                                                (.0045)               ( .0030)         (.0023)

log(life        expectancy)                     -.0820                  .0172            .0388          .002
                                                 (.0381)              (.0184)          (.0124)

log(GDP)*male schooling                            .0052              -.0077           -.0070           .18
                                                 (. 0035)              (.0019)          (.0015)

log(fertility          rate)                    -.0396                -.0206           -.0156           .11
                                                 (.0116)              ( .0066)         (.0049)

government        consumption      ratio          .000                -.114            -.110            .024
                                                (.048)                (.026)           (.021)

rule-of-law        index                             --                 .0294            .0300           --
                                                                      ( .0066)         (.0051)

terms-of-trade          change                    .102                  .078             .129           .92
                                                (.027)                (.078)           (.029)

democracy index                                   .019                  .071             .048           .51
                                                (.029)                (.026)           (.019)

democracy index squared                         -.014                 -.074            -.051            .28
                                                (.026)                (.023)            (.016)

inflation       rate                            -.032                 -.030            -.028            .12
                                                (.005)                (.006)            (.004)

R2                                            .29, .44                 .76           .56, .53
                                                                                        .49

number of observations                         88,        91            80            83        88
                                                                                           84


Notes:     The systems are variants   of the one shown in COIW 1 of Table 1.
Column 1 uses first     differences of all variables   and is estimated by the SUR
technique,    uhich allous for a different   error variance for the tuo periods and
correlation    of the errors across the periods.     Column 2 uses means of all
variables    and is estimated by OLS. Column 3 is the same as column 1 of Table 1,
except that estimation      is by SUR rather than three-sta  e least squares.   The
p-values in column 4 refer to Vald tests of equality of the coefficients        from
columns 1 ad 2.
                                       Table 4

                Winners and Losers for Prospective      Economic Growth



       Top 20 Prospects                              Bottom 20 Prospects

Country             Predicted growth       Country               Predicted growth
                     rate of real                                 rate of real
                    per capita GDP                               per capita GDP
                       1996-2000                                   1996-2000
                     (Z per year)                                 (% per year)


South Korea              6.2              Sierra Leone                -3.6
Philippines              5.6              Sudan                       -2.7
Dominican Rep.           5.4              tialawi                     -0.2
India                    5.3              Bangladesh                  -0.2
Poland                   5.2              Niger                       -0.1

Peru                     5.2              Zaire                       -0.1
Sri L*a                  5.0              Gambia                       0.1
Malaysia                                  Botswana                     0.1
Argentina                ::!              Senegal                      0.2
Singapore                4.6              Papua New Guinea             0.2

Thailad                  4.6              Brazil                       0.2
Greece                   4.6              Congo                        0.3
Chile                    4.3              Algeria                      0.3
Paraguay                 4.2              Zambia                       0.5
Hong Kong                4.2              Hal i                        0.8

Guyana                   4.2              Nicaragua                    0.8
Pakistan                 3.9              Cameroon                     1.1
Taiwm                    3.8              Trinidad                     1.2
Ecuador                  3.8              Costa Rica                   1.3
Egypt                    3.8              Ugada                        1.3




Regional    patterns:

all countries (86)             2.4
Sub Saharan Africa (18)        0.5
Latin America (22)             2.9
Asia 18                        3.7
OECD[]21                       2.4
                                                  Table 5

                   Regressions   for Democracy and Civil-Liberties                 Indexes


                                           (1)                       (2)                     (3)

dependent      variable:             democracy                 democracy                 civil
                                                                                      liberties

independent       variable

constant                                  -0.91                     -0.54                   -0.48
                                          (0.26)                    (0.28)                  (0.21)

                                          0.672                     0.650                   0.680
‘emOct-5
                                         (0.028)                   (0.042)                 (0.026)

log(GDP)                                  0.045                     0.041                   0.037
                                         (0.017)                   (0.019)                 (0.014)

male primary       schooling             -0.056                    -0.047              -0.037
                                         (0.014)                   (0.015)             (0.011)

female primary       schooling            0.060                     0.053               0.047
                                         (0.014)                   (0.015)             (0.011)

log(life      e~ectacy)                   0.187                     0.100                   0.096
                                         (0.076)                   (0.085)                 (0.062)

urbanization       rate                  -0.102                    -0.061              -0.032
                                         (0.048)                   (0.051)             (0.039)

log(population)                           0.0061                    0.0049             -0.0016
                                         (0.0043)                  (0.0046)            (0.0035)

oil-country       dummy                  -0.107                    -0.129              -0.101
                                         (0.030)                   (0.032)             (0.025)

democt-10                                  --                       0.035                    --
                                                                   (0.040)


E2                                .59,    .74,    .66               .73,     .67    .59,     .81,    .77
                                  .74,    .76,    .55       .75,    .76,     .57    .83,     .70,    .72

number of observations             85, 97, 101                89, 101                85, 97, 101
                                  102, 105, 102         102, 105, 102               102, 105, 102
                                   Notes to Table 5



     System (1) has six equations,  where the dependent variables are the
values of the Castil democracy index for 1972, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990, and
1994. The variable   democt-5 is for 1965, 1972, and so on. (The data for
1965 are from Bollen [1990].)      The variables    GDP (real per-capita     GDP), male
and female primary schooling (years of attainment        for persons aged 15 and
over at the primary level),    urbanization    rate, and population     refer to 1965,
1970, etc.     Life expectacy  at birth applies to 1960-64, 1965-69, and so on.
The oil dummy equals 1 for countries      designated as oil exporting by the IW
and O otheruise.     System (2) contains only the five equations that start with
the 1975 value of the democracy index.        This system adds a second lag of the
index (applying to 1965, 1972, etc.) as m explmatory          variable.      System (3)
is the same as system (1) except that the dependent variable          and its lag are
for the Gastil civil-liberties     index.     The value for 1965, from Bollen
 [1990] , coincides with the democracy in Aex. )

     Each system contains only one constant,   as shown. The estimation,    by the
SUR technique,   weights countries equally but allows for different   error
variances   in each period and for correlation  of these errors over the
periods.   Standard errors of the estimated coefficients    are shown in
parentheses.   The R2 values   apply to each period    individually.
                                         Table 6

                  Additional       Determinmts     of Democracy


     independent       variables                                  regression
                                                                  coefficients


1.   infant    ❑ortality         rate                             -0.42    (0.53)


2.   male upper schooling                                          0.021    (0.024)

     female upper schooling                                       -0.016    (0.027)

                                                                   p-value=O.60

3.   income inequality            (Gini coefficient)               0.02 (0.12)


4.   educational  inequality   (standard                          -0.058    (0.043)
        deviation of log[l+years     of schooling]
        for population    aged 15 and over)

5.   ethnolinguistic          fractionalization                   -0.004    (0.032)


6.   rule-of-law       index                                       0.048    (0.056)


7.   dummyfor former colony                                       -0.010    (0.017)


8.   dummyfor British             colony                          -0.018    (0.018)

     dummyfor French colony                                       -0.007    (0.026)

     dummyfor Spanish             colony                          -0.002    (0.022)

     dummyfor Portuguese                colony                     0.031    (0.044)

     dummyfor other           colony                              -0.010    (0.032)

                                                                   p-value=O.82

9.   Muslim religion          fraction                            -0.053    (0.027)

     Protestant       religion      fraction                       0.028    (0.033)

     Eastern      religion       fraction                         -0.050    (0.031)

     Hindu religion          fraction                              0.136    (0.050)
                                  Table 6, continued


            independent     variables                                   regression
                                                                        coefficients


            Jewish religion      fraction                                0.066   (0.079)

            Creek Orthodox religion         fraction                     0.089   (0.053)

            other   or no religion      fraction                        -0.030   (0.043)

                                                                      p-value=O.005
                                                   (without   Hindu = 0.101)




Notes:     The indicated     groups of explanatory       variables      are added, one at a
time, to the system for the democracy index shown in column 1 of Table 5.
  Case 6 applies only to the three periods that start uith the value of the
Aemocracy index for 1985.)           The infant mortality        rate applies to 1965, 1970,
etc.     Upper schooling is the years of secondary and higher schooling for
males or females aged 15 and over in 1965, 1970, etc.                    Income inequality       is
the Gini coefficient        for income data applying around 1960 in the first                 three
equations and in the early 1980s in the last three equations.                      A higher
number indicates      more inequality.       Educational      inequality     is the standard
deviation    of log(l+years      of schooling) for the overall population             aged 15 and
over in 1965, 1970, etc.          The ethnolinguistic       fractionalization       variable,
which runs between O and 1, is a measure of heterogeneity                    of language and
ethnicity.     The number, observed once for each country, represents                   the
probability    that two randomly selected persons uill come from different
  roups; hence, a higher value signifies           more heterogeneity.          See Mauro (1995)
f or a discussion     of these data.       The rule-of-law       index, discussedby        Knack
and Keefer (1995) and available          for 1982-95 from Political           Risk Services,       is
a subjective     indicator     of the extent of ❑aintenmce           of the rule of law. The
variable    runs from O to 1, uith a higher value indicating                 a more favorable
environment.      Colony is a dummyfor countries            that are former or present
colonies,    where my country that was independent before 1776 is designated                         as
a non-colony.       In case 8, dummies for former British,              French, Spanish,
Portuguese,     and other colonies are added together to the system from column 1
of Table 5. Colonial status is based on the most recent ruler; for exaple,
the Philippines      is attributed     to the United States,         rather than Spain.         In
case 9, the fractions        of the population     affiliated       with seven major religious
  roups are entered together into the system from column 1 of Table 5. The
f eft-out religion      category is Catholic.        The religion       data, which are rough
estimates observed once per country in the late 1980s, are from Central
Intelligence     Agency (1992).       Eastern religions       include Buddhist, Taoist,
Confucian, and Shinto.
                                        Table 7

             Democracy in Relation     to Colonial   Status   and Religion


I.    Colonial     Status

      Colonial                           Number of               Democracy
       status                            countries               indicator
                                                                 (average
                                                                  1975-94)

      non-colony                            32                      0.69
      colony                               106                      0.46

      British  colony                       53                      0.54
      French colony                         23                      0.25
      Spauish colony                        16                      0.60
      Portuguese colony                      5                      0.28
      Other colony                           9                      0.35

      all    countries                     138                      0.51



II.    Religious         affiliation

      Majority                           Number of               Democracy
      religion                           countries               indicator
                                                                 (average
                                                                  1975-94)

      Catholic                                                      0.62
      Muslim                                                        0.27
      Protestant                                                    0.87
      Eastern religions                                             0.47
      Hindu                                                         0.73
      Jewish                                                        0.85
      Creek Orthodox                                                0.90
      other or no majority
          religion                          36                      0.40

      all    countries  with
            data on religion               135                      0.51




Note: See the discussion        in the text and Table 6 for definitions    of
colonial    status and religious     affiliation. Section II shows averages
of the democracy measure for groups of countries        in which religious
affiliation     of the indicated type is at least 0.5.
                                             Table 8

                         Actual and Long-Run Values of Democracy


Count ry             Democ. 75   Democ. 75     Democ. 75   Democ. 94   Democ. 94   Democ. 94
                      actual     projected       gap        actual     projected     gap

Algeria                0.17        0.01          0.16        0.00         0.20      -0.20
Benin                  0.00        0.36         -0.36        0.83         0.24       0.59
Bot sw~a               0.83        0.51          0.32        0.83         0.76       0.08
Cameroon               0.17        0.27         -0.10        0.17         0.38      -0.21
Cent. Afr. Rep.        0.00        0.15         -0.15        0.67         0.13       0.54

Congo                  0.33                                  0.50         0.48       0.02
Egypt                  0.17        0:38*        -0;21        0.17         0.44      -0.27
C-bia                  0.83        0.18*         0.65        0.00         0.17      -0.17
Ghana                  0.00        0.25         -0.25        0.33         0.21       0.12
Guinea- Bissau         0.17         -.            --         0.67         0.18       0.48

Kenya                  0.33        0.23          0.10        0.17         0.38      -0.21
Lesotho                0.33        0.59         -0.25        0.50         0.76      -0.26
Liberia                0.17        0.25         -0.08        0.00
Malawi                 0.00        0.06         -0.06        0.83        0:21        0:63
Mali                   0.00        0.17         -0.17        0.83        0.27        0.56

Haurit ius             0.83        0.48          0.35        1.00        0.75        0.25
Mozambique             0.17        0.33         -0.16        0.67        0.32        0.34
Niger                  0.00        0.27         -0.27        0.67        0.32        0.34
Rwanda                 0.00        0.31         -0.31        0.00        0.30       -0.30
Senegal                0.17        0.22         -0.05        0.50        0.28        0.22

Sierra Leone           0.17        0.18         -0.01        0.00        0.16       -0.16
South Africa           0.50        0.64         -0.14        0.83        0.61        0.23
Sudan                  0.17        0.33         -0.16        0.00        0.39       -0.39
Swaziland              0.17        0.45         -0.29        0.17        0.54       -0.37
Tazaia                 0.17        0.21         -0.05        0.17        0.26       -0.10

Togo                   0.00        0.21         -0.21        0.17        0.15        0.01
Tunisia                0.17        0.35         -0.19        0.17        0.36       -0.19
Uganda                 0.00        0.27         -0.27        0.33        0.32        0.02
Zaire                  0.00        0.15         -0.15        0.00        0.07       -0.07
Zambia                 0.33        0.15          0.18        0.67        0.07        0.60

Zimbabue               0.17        0.41         -0.24        0.33         0.48      -0.14
Barbados               1.00        0.84          0.16        1.00         0.92       0.08
Canada                 1.00        0.96          0.04        1.00        (1.06)     -0.06
Costa Rica             1.00        0.76          0.24        1.00         0.86       0.14
Dominican Republic     0.50        0.57         -0.07        0.50         0.66      -0.16

El Salvador            0.83        0.46          0.37        0.67        0.63        0.03
Guatemala              0.50        0.50          0.00        0.50        0.63       -0.13
Haiti                  0.17        0.36         -0.19        0.33        0.21        0.13
Honduras               0.17        0.49         -0.32        0.67        0.45        0.22
Jamaica                1.00        0.78          0.22        0.83        0.81        0.03
                                  Table 8, continued

Country           Democ. 75   Democ. 75   Democ. 75 Democ. 94   Democ. 94   Democ. 94
                   actual     projected     gap      actual     projected     gap

Mexico               0.50        0.56      -0.06       0.50        0.80      -0.30
Nicaragua            0.33        0.53      -0.19       0.50        0.56      -0.06
Panama               0.00        0.74      -0.74       0.83        0.79       0.04
Trinidad & Tob.      0.83        0.85      -0.02       1.00        0.88       0.12
United States        1.00       (1.02)     -0.02       1.00       (1.11)     -0.11

Ar entina           0.50         0.74      -0.24       0.83        0.76       0.07
Bof ivia            0.17         0.25      -0.09       0.83        0.45       0.39
Brazil              0.50         0.64      -0.14       0.83        0.76       0.08
Chile               0.00         0.65      -0.65       0.83        0.74       0.09
Colombia            0.83         0.59       0.25       0.67        0.83      -0.16

Ecuador             0.00         0.59      -0.59       0.83       0.72        0.11
Guyana              0.50         0.67      -0.17       0.83       0.65        0.19
Paraguay            0.33         0.61      -0.27       0.50       0.68       -0.18
Peru                0.17         0.41      -0.25       0.33       0.55       -0.21
Uruguay             0.33         0.75      -0.41       0.83       0.77        0.07

Venezuela           0.83         0.53       0.30       0.67       0.46        0.21
Bahrain             0.17          --                   0.17       0.43       -0.27
Bangladesh          0.00         0.38      -0:38       0.83       0.46        0.37
China               0.00         0.53*     -0.53       0.00       0.53       -0.53
Hong ~Ong           0.67         0.45       0.22       0.33       0.85       -0.51

India               0.83          0.20      0.63       0.50       0.38        0.12
Indonesia           0.33       (-0.05)      0.38       0.00       0.25       -0.25
Iran                0.17          0.22     -0.05       0.17       0.26       -0.10
Iraq                0.00          0.15     -0.15       0.00       0.09       -0.09
Israel              0.83          0.71      0.12       1.00       0.86        0.14

Japan               0.83         0.91      -0.08       0.83       (1.06)     -0.23
Jordan              0.17         0.22      -0.06       0.50        0.57      -0.07
South Korea         0.33         0.50      -0.17       0.83        0.81       0.03
Malaysia            0.67         0.40       0.27       0.50        0.73      -0.23
Nepal               0.17         0.34      -0.17       0.67        0.33       0.34

Pakistan            0.33         0.30       0.03       0.67        0.44       0.23
Philippines         0.33         0.62      -0.29       0.67        0.74      -0.07
Singapore           0.33         0.36      -0.03       0.33        0.73      -0.39
Sri Lanka           0.83         0.70       0.13       0.50        0.82      -0.32
Syria               0.17         0.29      -0.13       0.00        0.54      -0.54

Taiwan               0.17        0.55      -0.38       0.67        0.86      -0.19
Thailand             0.83        0.55       0.28       0.67        0.87      -0.20
Austria              1.00        0.89       0.11       1.00        1.00       0.00
Belgium              1.00        0.93       0.07       1.00       (1.01)     -0.01
Cyprus               0.50        0.67      -0.17       1.00        0.93       0.07
                                       Table 8, continued

Country               Democ. 75   Democ. 75    Democ. 75      Democ. 94   Democ. 94    Democ. 94
                       actual     projected       gap          actual     projected      gap

Denmark                  1.00         0.90        0.10          1.00         0.96        0.04
Finland                  0.83        (1.04)      -0.20          1.00         1.08       -0.08
France                   1.00         0.92        0.08          1.00         1.01       -0.01
West Germany             1.00         0.97        0.03          1.00         1.05
                                                                            11          -0.05
Greece                   0.83         0.65        0.18          1.00         0.71        0.29

Hary                     0.17        0.94        -0.77          1.00        0.83         0.17
Ice
  Y and                  1.00        0.80         0.20          1.00        0.89         0.11
Ireland                  1.00        0.90         0.10          1.00        1.00         0.00
Italy                    1.00        0.88         0.12          1.00        0.96         0.04
Netherlands              1.00        0.92         0.08          1.00        0.97         0.03

Norway                   1.00        0.99         0.01          1.00        1.00         0.00
Poland                   0.17        0.80        -0.63          0.83        0.86        -0.03
Portugal                 0.33        0.73        -0.40          1.00        0.95         0.05
Spain                    0.33        0.82        -0.49          1.00        0.99         0.01
Sweden                   0.83        0.90        -0.07          1.00        0.98         0.02

Switzerland              1.00       (1.02)       -0.02          1.00       (1.06)       -0.06
Turkey                   0.67        0.46         0.21          0.33        0.72        -0.38
United Kingdom           1.00        0.94         0.06          1.00       (1.02)       -0.02
Yugoslavia               0.17        0.65        -0.48          0.17        0.70        -0.53
Australia                1.00        0.92         0.08          1.00        1.00         0.00

Fiji                     0.83        0.52         0.31          0.50        0.75        -0.25
New Zealand              1.00        0.89         0.11          1.00        0.95         0.05
Papua New Guinea         0.67        0.46         0.21          0.83        0.50         0.33




Note: Projected values are based on the estimated            system shown in Table 5,
column 1. The 1975 projection     is [1/(1-coeff.    of    lagged democracy)]*
(estimated value based on other variables      included      in the 1975 equation).
The 1994 projection    is formed analogously.     Values     in parentheses  are
linearly  fitted  values that lie outside the range        (0,1).    Values shown in
bold have a magnitude of at least 0.33.


*Long-run projected   value based on variables     included    in the 1980 equation.
                                               Table 9

                              Descriptive    Statistics      on Inflation


Variable                         Hem                      Median            Number of Countries


1960-70:
inflation   rate                  .054                     .033                     117

standard deviation                .039                     .024                     117
of inflation  rate


1970-80:
inflation   rate                  .133                     .101                     122

standard deviation                .075                     .054                     122
of inflation  rate


1980-90:
inflation   rate                  .191                     .089                     119

standard deviation                .134                     .049                     119
of inflation  rate




Notes:      The inflation     rate is computed on an annual basis for each country
from data on consumer price indexes (from the World Bd,                   STARSdatabank and
issues of Yorld Tables; International            Monetary Fund, Internuiionul       Financial
$tatistics,     yearbook issues; and individual         country sources).       In a few
cases, figures on the GDPdeflator            were used.     The average inflation      rate for
each country in each decade is the mean of the annual rates.                  The standard
deviation for each country in each decade is the square root of the average
squared difference        of the annual inflation     rate from the decadal mean. The
values shown for inflation         in this table are the mean or median across the
countries     of the decade-average      inflation   rates.    Similarly,    the figures for
standard deviations        are the mem or median across the countries            of the
standard deviations        for each decade.
        Table 10        Alternative     Specifications    for Inflation    in Grouth Regressions


independent         variable                      (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)

log(GDP)                                       -.0260        -.0261         -.0261       -.0262
                                               (.0031)       (.0031)         (.0031)     (.0031)

male schooling                                   .0116         .0114          .0111        .0110
                                               ( .0024)      ( .0024)       (.0025)      (.0025)

log(life        expectmcy)                       .0421         .0419          .0418        .0427
                                               (.0137)       (.0137)        (.0139)      (.0139)

log(GDP)*male schooling                        -.0057        -.0057        -.0052       -.0052
                                               (.0016)       (.0016)       (.0017)       (.0017)

log(fertility           rate)                  -.0166        -.0167        -.0170       -.0167
                                               (.0053)        (. 0053)     (.0054)       (.0054)

govt.      consumption          ratio          -.138         -.140         -.137        -.140
                                               (.026)         (.026)       (.026)       (.026)

rule-of-law         index                        .0310         .0310          .0315        .0317
                                               (.0053)       (.0053)        (.0054)      (. 0054)

terms-of-trade           change                  .137          .137           .139         .139
                                               (.030)        (.030)         (.030)       (.030)

democracy index                                  .091          .091           .104         .103
                                               (.026)        (.026)         (.026)       (.026)

democracy index squared                        -.088         -.088         -.099        -.097
                                               (.023)         (.023)       (.023)       (.023)

inflation        rate                          -.0293        -.0317        -.0261       -.0314
                                                (.0043)       ( .0080)     (.0054)      (.0113)

standard        deviation        of              --            .0030          --           .0071
inflation        rate                                        (.0089)                     (.0150)

R2                                           .56, .51,     .56, .51,      .55, .49,    .55, .50
                                                .50           .50           .51           .50

number of observations                        80, 87,       80, 87        80, 87       80, 87
                                                84            84            84           84


Notes:    The systems correspond to those shown in Table 1 except for the
inflation     variables.    In columns 1 and 2, the actual inflation       rate over each
period is included on the instrument list.           Columns 3 and 4 include lagged
inflation     (for 1960-65, 1970-75, and 1980-85, respectively)         and its square, but
not contemporaneous inflation,         with the instruments.      Columns 2 and 4 add the
standard deviation       of the inflation   rate for 1965-75, 1975-85, and 1985-90,
respectively.        Column 2 includes this stadard      deviation   on the instrument list.
Column4 includes only the lagged stadard            deviation    (for 1960-65, 1970-75, and
1980-85) with the instruments.
                                            Table 11

                                High-Inflation    Observations

  (values   for which the period-average         inflation    rate    exceeds      40Z per year)


            Count ry                                         Inflation      rate

1965-75:

            Chile                                                    0.68
            Indonesia                                                0.53
            Uruguay                                                  0.50

1975-85:

            Ar entina                                                1.26
            Bof ivia                                                 1.06
            Brazil                                                   0.66
            Haiti                                                    0.48
            Israel                                                   0.78

            Peru                                                     0.56
            Uganda                                                   0.53
            Uruguay                                                  0.41
            Zaire                                                    0.44

1985-90:

            Argentina                                                1.92
            Brazil                                                   2.04
            Guinea-Bissau*                                           0.53
            Hexico                                                   0.53
            Mozambique*                                              0.48

            Nicaragua                                                1.87
            Peru                                                     2.22
            Poland*                                                  0.81
            Sierra Leone                                             0.63
            Turkey                                                   0.43

            Uganda                                                   0.78
            Uruguay                                                  0.58
            Yugoslavia                                               1.41
            Zaire                                                    0.59
            Zambia                                                   0.56



*Not included   in regression      sample because      of missing     data on other      variables.
                                         Table 12

                Inflation   Rates and Central       Bti   Independence


Country         Index of     Inflation       Country             Index of   Inflation
                  bank        rat e,                               bank      rat e,
                 indep.      1960-90                              indep.    1960-90


West Germany      0.71        0.037         South Africa            0.33     0.099
Switzerland       0.65        0.038         Ni eria                 0.33     0.125
Austria           0.65        0.043         Ma! aysia               0.32     0.034
Egypt             0.57        0.094         Ugada                   0.32     0.353
Denmark           0.53        0.069         Italy                   0.31     0.088

Costa Rica        0.52        0.117         Finland                0.30      0.073
Greece            0.52        0.109         Sweden                 0.30      0.067
United States     0.51        0.049         Singapore              0.30      0.034
Ethiopia          0.50        0.058         India                  0.30      0.074
Ireland           0.50        0.083         United Kingdom         0.30      0.077

Philippines       0.49        0.107         South Korea            0.29      0.113
Bahamas           0.48        0. 063*       China                  0.29      0.039
Tanzania          0.48        0.133         Bolivia                0.29      0.466
Nicaragua         0.47        0.436         Uruguay                0.29      0.441
Israel            0.47        0.350         Brazil                 0.28      0.723

Netherlands       0.47       0.045          Australia              0.27      0.067
Canada            0.47       0.054          Thailand               0.27      0.052
Venezuela         0.45       0.100          Western Samoa          0.26      0.112**
Barbados          0.44       0.075          New Zealand            0.25      0.085
Argentina         0.44       0.891          Nepal                  0.23      0.084

Eonduras          0.44       0.058          Panma                  0.23      0.033
Peru              0.44       0.606          Zimbabwe               0.22      0.074
Chile             0.43       0.416          Hungary                0.21      0.047
Turkey            0.42       0.235          Japan                  0.20      0.054
Malta             0.42       0.035          Pakistan               0.19      0.072

Icelmd            0.42       0.229          Colombia               0.19      0.170
Kenya             0.40       0.082          Spain                  0.16      0.096
Luxembourg        0.40       0.044          Morocco                0.15      0.055
Zaire             0.39       0.357          Belgium                0.13      0.048
Hexico            0.37       0.227          Yugoslavia             0.12      0.395

Indonesia         0.36        0.366         Poland                 0.12      0.293*
Botswana          0.36        0.076         Norway                 0.12      0.066
Ghana             0.35        0.256
France            0.34        0.064
Zambia            0.34        0.174


*1970-90
**1975-90
Notes to Table 12: The index of central bank independence is computed from data
 in Cukierman (1992, Chapter 19, Appendix A). The index is a weighted average of
the available      data from 1950 to 1989 of legal provisions          regarding
1. appointment and dismissal        of the governor (wei ht 1/6), 2. procedures for the
formulation     of monetary policy (weight 1/6), 3. 0f jectives           of central bti
policy      wei ht 1/6), and 4. limitations      on lending by the central bank (weight
12).      $!he irst category is an unwei hted average of three underlying variables
t i at involve the governor’s term of of fice and the procedures for appointment
and dismissal.        The second category is an unweighed average of two variables,
one indicating      the location of the authority      for setting monetary policy and the
other specifying       methods for resolving   conflicts     about policy.      The third
category relates       to the prominence attached to price stability           in the bank’s
charter.      The fourth cate ory is an unweighed avera e of four variables:
limitations     on advances, f imitations    on securitized     ! ending, an indicator      for
the location of the authority        that prescribes     lending terms, and the circle of
potential     borrowers from the central bank. For each underlying variable,
Cukierman defines a scale from O to 1, where O indicates               least favorable    to
central bank independence and 1 indicates          most favorable.        The overall   index
shown in Table 12 runs correspondingly         from O to 1. See Table 8 for a
discussion     of the inflation   data.
                                               Table 13

                         Inflation   Rates and Prior      Colonial     Status



Period         All          Non-       British     French        Spanish        Other    addendum:
             Countries     Colony      Colony      Colony        or Port.       Colony   Latin Amer.
                                                                 Colony                  not Spanish
                                                                                         or Port.
                                                                                         Colony

1960-70        .054          .045       .033         .030            .089        .194      .031
               (121)         (31)       (43)         (21)            (19)          (7)       (7)

1970-80        .131          .110       .120         .093            .218        .147      .109
               (131)         (32)       (50)         (20)            (21)         (8)      (11)

1980-90        .182          .124       .139         .074            .523        .136      .097
               (132)         (31)       (51)         (22)            (20)          (8)     (11)


1960-90        .126          .089       .104         .066            .294        .161      .090
               (117)         (30)       (42)         (20)            (18)         (7)       (7)




Notes:    The numbers shown in parentheses        are the numbers of countries    with
available    data that fall into each category.         See Table 9 for a discussion    of
the inflation    data.    Countries that were independent before 1776 are treated
as non-colonies.       Otherwise, the colonial status refers to the most recent
outside power; for exwple,        the Philippines    is attributed  to the United
States,   rather than Spain; Rwanda and Burundi are attributed         to Belgium,
rather than Germany; md the Dominican Republic is attributed             to France,
rather than Spain.       Some countries    that were dominated by other countries      for
some periods are treated as non-colonies;          examples are Hungary, Poland, South
Korea, and Taiwm.        The only present colony in the sample is Hong Kong. The
last column refers to countries        that are located in Latin America but are not
former Spanish or Portuguese colonies.
Figure     1             Simple                    Correlation                     between     Growth
                               and            Level            of        GDP

0.10
                                +                                             +
                                                 +         ++
                                                                                       ☞
                               ●                      ☞          ☞
                                                                          ☞

                     ●
                                             +
                 ☞                                       + +++
                                             +
0.05                            +
                                 +
                                               ●
                                             ☞☞


                     ☞☞




                     ●
                         ▼☞



0.00           $
                +:
                     ++

                          +    +             +
                              ++
                                         ●            +              ●+            ●

                                             +                   *+                    +
                                     +
                                                    ++
                                                   +                          +
                                                          ++




       5                 6                       7                    8                    9    10
                              log(real               per       capita             GDP)
                                                              .       .
   rlgure    G   tirowtn            Hate      versus          Level       01-    GDP



  0.15



 0.10



 0.05



 0.00



–0.05



-0.10
         5       6              7              8                  9         10
                     log(real       per    capita      GDP)
 Figure          3     Growth    Rate     versus        Male        Schooling



 0.10




 0.05


                                        +++   ●
                                                  ●




 0.00

          ●
          ❆
             4




-0.05




–0.10
        0123456                                                         7
years   of       secondary   & higher    school,      males    25    and    older
    Figure            4 “    Growth        Rate         versus      Interaction
             between           Schooling          and     Level     of   GDP

  0.10




 0!05




 000




-0.05




-O.10
    –0.05               -0.00              0.05              0.10            0.15
        interaction         between   male    schooling           and    log(GDP)
    Figure        5   Growth       R ate     versus        Ljfe   Expectancy



    O.10


n
                                         +
                                                       +
    0.05                                         +




    0.00




           3,25       3.50        3.75         4100        4.25       450
                       log(life   expectancy     at   birth)
  -.               —                 .
  Figure      6    Growth            R ate                   versus            Fertility     Rate



 0.10




 0.05




 0.00             +
                  ++
                  +     +
                            +       t+           +*
                                                             ++++
                                ●☞               ●            4
                                         ●               +

                                             +
                                                                  +
                                                                              ++
                                                     +

–0.05




-0.10
        0.0       0.5           1.0                          1.5               2.0         2.5

                        log(total            fertility                rate)
                     Figure      7           Growth      Rate    versus
                    Government                 Consumption        Ratio

    0.10


n




    0105
                                     +




    0.00




                     +                   +
                                                   ●




           0.0           0.1             0.2           0.3       0.4            0.5
                 ratio   of government             consumption     to     CDP
            F]gure    8      Growth       Rate    versus
                     Rule    of   Law    index

 0.10




 0.05




 0.00




–0.05




–010
    –0.25   –OiOO     0.25        0.50     0.75    1.00    1.25
                      rule   of    law   index
         Figure     9      Growth          Rate      versus      Change
                           in    Terms      of     Trade

  0.10


 0.05



 0.00



-0.05



-0.10



-0.15
     –0.3         -0.2           –0.1       –Oho           O.l       0.2
                  growth        rate    of terms     of trade
                                                           \
                                                               I
                                                               I
                                                                   \
                                                                       \


    . . . . . . . . . . ,.   . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . .                                                                              .........



                                                                                        \
                                                                                            t
                                                                                                \
                                                                                                    \
                                                                                                        \.
                                                                                                        1:
     ..... ..         ..                                                                                 \
                                      .....               ., .,..                       . .         . . . \,              .:.,.           .                      ...
                                                                                                                 \:
                                                                                                                      \
                                                                                                                           \
                                                                                                                           .\




                      ..                        ,..                               .,




                                                                                                                                                             :1
                                                                                                                                                              \
                                                                                                                 ,. ..,..                              . . ..“\.
                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                           #?
                                                                                                                                                       \’
                                                                                                                                                            \:
                                                                                                                                                            /:
                                                                                                                                                       /
                                                                                                                                                     /.
                                                                                                                                              # /.
                                                                                                                                          #
                                                                                                                                      #
0                  ,...                                                                                               ,* /
                                                                                                                                  #
                                                                                                                                                                 .,
                                                                                                                 /,
                                                                                                             #
                                                                                                    / /.
                                                                                          #
                                                                                       . @

?                                                                               H ‘;

                                                                   0
                                                                           #./.
                                                           #


      .. ..        ..:.      ,..,..    ,..:,>         F,’.,. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                ,4
                                                              \
                                                                  \
                                                                      -U*    ;
                                                                           -% -~
                                                                             .-          -.
        .   . . . . . .,.-...    ..      . . . . .,. .   .    . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . .



                                                                                                     t:
                                                                                                       \
                                                                                                           ~:
                                                                                                               ● ✌
                                                                                                                ✼
                      ✌✎                        ✌✌✌          ✎✌       ✎         ✎✌                               1... ... . .. .....
                                                                                                                /




                                                                                               I
                                                                                               1 . . . .
#                                                                                          “1




                                                                                                                I

                                .,..,.                                . . . . . ..   .   . .                   1     . . . . . . . . . . . .
                                                                                                           /




    o                                                                                                          o
         . . . . s-< . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . .   ., ...,       . . . . . . . . . . . ... . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
                      *N

                                     -:
                                              .\




$
.*                                                                                                                                                         o-
VI                                                                                                                                                         :

?
0




N



                                                   #
                                      :/
                                     #
                                /:
                           /,
                     0,

                                          I            I                     I                         I                        I

                                m

     0                          o                      o                                                                                              0
Figure13 Growth Rateversus indicator of Democracy


  0.10
                             +



  0.05                 +                          ++
                 +++                         +




 0.00


                  ++
 -0.05                       +
                             +




 -Omlo
    -0.2   0.0         0.2       0.4   0.6       0.8   1.0   1.2

                   index of political rights
       Figure        14      Histograms                  for   Inflation        Rate




 200



 150



 100



  50



   0
       0.00          0:30        0.’60           0.’90         1.20          1!’50

                                     Inflation      rate




12.5



10.0



7.5



5.0



2.5



0.0
          0:35               0:70                1.05                 1.40             1.75

                 itilttion   rob (for values        above 20% per Yem)
Figure         15        Standard        Deviation            of

inflation           Versus            Mean       inflation




                                                 .

                                                      .
                                             .        .
                                             ,.
                                             . .     .,




               m
                            .                         .




               b    4k          oh       0.’10            a




               ,,


         0:0        ok          1:0      1:5
Figure       16             Growth         Rate versus

              Inflation                   Rate




  OM .                             . ..
                      ,..
                               .


  Om.    ‘
                  :
              .
                                            .
                      Figure       17      Inflation           and
                      Central      Bank        Independence

    1.00

                                           +



    0.75


                                           +


    0.50




i
    0.25




    0.00
           0.1      0.2     0.3      0.4       0.5     0.6       0.7      0.8

            index    of   central-bank         independence,         1950–89
