NBER WOR~G

PAPER SERIES

INCENTIVES AND CAREERS IN
ORGANIZATIONS

Robert Gibbons

NBER Working Paper 5705

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

I thank John Abowd, George Baker, James Baron, Henry Farber, Bengt Holmstrom, Lawrence Katz,
David Kreps, Edward Lazear, Bentley MacLeod, Margaret Meyer, Kevin J, Murphy, Canice
Prendergast, and Michael Waldman for years of discussions of these topics. The Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences provided an ideal setting and financial support (through
a Fellowship funded in part by NSF grant SBR-9022 192). This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Robert Gibbons. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5705
August 1996

INCENTIVES AND CAREERS IN
ORGANIZATIONS

ABSTRACT

This paper surveys two related pieces of the labor-economics
careers in organizations.

literature: incentive pay and

In the discussion of incentives, I first summarize theory and evidence

related to the classic agency model, which emphasizes the tradeoff between insurance and incentives.
I then offer econometric and case-study evidence suggesting that this classic model ignores several
crucial issues and sketch new models that begin to analyze these issues. In the discussion of careers
in organizations, I begin by summarizing evidence on wages and positions using panel data within
firms.

This evidence is sparse and far-flung (drawn from industrial

relations, organizational

behavior, and sociology, as well as from labor economics); I identify ten basic questions that merit
more systematic investigation.

Turning to theory, I describe building-block models that address one

or a few pieces of evidence, but focus on more recent models that address broad patterns of evidence.

Robert Gibbons
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and NBER
Robert_Gibbons@ Comely. EDU

1

An outsider might be surprised to learn that mdem

labor economics has little to say

about activities inside firms. After all, isn’ t work (i.e., what workers do once they go through a
fro’s

doors) one of the field’s most natural areas of inquiry?
Let’s take stock. Several research areas in labor economics

employment

relationship

begins:

unemployment

duration

end precisely

and labor-force

when an

participation

are

examples, and even labor demand typically fmuses on how many workers should be hired rather
than on what the firm should then do with them. Other research areas in labor economics reduce
the employment relationship

to a wage, or at most a wage profile: on-the-job

supply, and human-capital models of earnings, for example.

search, labor

Even research on the return to

seniority more often focuses on econometric issues than on what actually happens during an
employment relationship; similarly, research on training more often focuses on pre-employment
government-sponsored

programs than on skill development in firms. Simply put, modem labor

economics contains little work on work.
The situation may k changing. In this paper I describe theory and evidence on two
aspects of some employment relationships: incentive pay and careers in organizations. 1 Most of
the theory I describe is recent, emphasizing
theories of lakr

games and contracts more than the workhorse

economics in the 1970s and ‘80s, human capital and search. Much of the

evidence is also new, at least in the sense of not having been pm of the published discourse in
labor economics over the last few decades. This same evidence is also old, however, both in the
sense of sometimes referring to events long past (sharecropping

in 1910 or a machine shop in

Chicago around 1950, for example) and in the sense of sometimes

being fairly well-known

outside labor economics.
Because there is not much empirical work on employment
economics,
industrial

I draw on other fields-including
relations,

Unfortunately,

and

organizational

data on employment

accounting,

human resource

sociology—whenever

relationships

relationships

my

often must be collectd

Doing the hard work of data collection and utilizing the rnicroeconometric

in labor

management,

exposure

allows.

virtually by hand.
expertise that has

become the hallmark of labor economics are crucial next steps for this emerging literature. In the
meantime, I limit discussion of theory to classes of models that seem likely to deliver empirical
implications (or, better still, have already done so).

1

Other aspectsof employmentrelationshipsalso deserveattention, such as job design, skill development,and
participative decision-m&ing. Researchon these issues seems less ready for summary and assessment, but
intriguingtheoryand evidencehas begun to emerge: sm Milgrom and Roberts (1988), Holmstrom and Milgrom
(1991), Itoh (1992), Prendergmt (1995), and Meyer, Olsen, and Torsvik (forthcoming) for theory and Osterman
(1994, 1995), Pencavel and Craig (1994), and Ichniowski, Shaw, and Prennushi (1995) for evidence.

2
1. Incentive

Pay

There are many senses in which pay maybe linked to performance. Perhaps the simplest
case is where workers’ productivities

differ and wages equal marginal products.

More often,

however, the phrase “pay for performance” connotes the provision of incentives. In this section I
discuss the dominant model of incentive contracting, the principal-agent model.z
Several of the main issues can be illustrated quite simply in the context of sharecropping.
Three standard sharecropping contracts are: wage labor, which imposes no risk on the agent;
crop sharing, which shares risk between the principal and the agent; and fixed-payment
The classic agency model,

rental, which leaves the agent with all the crop risk.
emphasizes the tradeoff between incentives and insurance,
crop risk there should also be more risk-sharing-more

land
which

implies that where there is greater

used of fixed wages and crop sharing

rather than land rental. Higgs (1973) presents evidence consistent with this prediction: for both
cotton and com, and for two empirical measures of risk, a cross-sectional
southern states of the US for 1910 finds more risk-sharing

analysis of the

in states with greater crop risk. But

Alston and Higgs (1982) document that Higgs’s comforting finding obscures both (1) enormous
variation within each of these three main classes of contracts and (2) significant variation across
the three classes of contracts even after controlling for risk.
Both the organization and the spirit of this section parallel this research on sharecropping.
Parallel to Higgs’s paper, I begin by summarizing the theory and evidence on the classic agency
model. Parallel to Alston and Higgs’s

paper, I then explore five new issues, in the hope of

accounting for some of the enormous richness in incentive contacting

that the classic agency

model simply chalks up as unexplained variation. I conclude that risk is a significant issue in
incentive

contracting,

but

that the principal-agent

literature’s

initial

obsession

with

its

consequences distracted us from a host of equally important issues.

A. The Much-Studied Tradeofbetween
The classic mdel

Incentives and Insurance

in agency theory involves an agent who takes an action (a) to produce

output of value y. The principal owns the output but contracts to share it with the agent by paying
a wage contingent on output, w(y). There is noise in the production function, so the agent’s
output is uncertain. Furthermore,

2

the agent is risk-averse. Paying a constant wage, independent

For lack of space, I ignore two smaller literatures on incentives: efficiency-wage and deferred-payment models,
which diffa from the principal-agent model in that wages do not vary with performance. In an efficiency-wage
model, a fm pays a high wage to all workers but subsequently fires those whose ~rformarrce is too low; w
Shapiro and Stiglitz (1984) for thmry and Capelli and Chauvin (1991), Krueger (1991), and Abowd, Kramm, and
Margolis (1994) for evidence. In a deferred-payment model, workers are again f~ for poor performance, but now

3
of y, would provide the agent with full insurance but no incentive; selling the agent the fm

for a

fee of F (or, equivalently, paying the agent w(y) = y - F) would provide the agent with full
incentives but no insurance.
An intuitive closed-form solution can be derived in the linear-normal-exponential

case.

The production function is linear, y = a + e, where e is a normally distributed noise term with
zero mean and variance &. The incentive contract is linear, w(y) =s + by, where the intercept s
is the salary and the slope b is the bonus rate. The agent’s utility function is U(x) = -e-n, where r
>0 is the agent’s coefficient of absolute risk aversion and x = w - c(a) is the agent’s net payoff—
the realized wage minus the convex disutility of action c(a).

The principal is risk-neutral and so

seeks to maximize the expected value of profit, y - w.
Given a contract w(y)= s + by, the agent’s problem is to choose an action to maximize
the expected utility
,e-r[$+b(u+E)-c(U)]~(

e)~E = _e-r[s+bu-c(u)]

~e-~~&~(E)~E,
E

&

where $(E) denotes the normal density function.

The agent’s optimal action, denoted a*(b),

solves c’(a) = b. The agent’s maximized expected utility is therefore
–e

–r(s+ba*(b)–c[a*

(b)]) ~e–rb& p{e)~e

= _e-r[s+ba*(b)-c[a*

(b)]-(1/z)rb202]

,

E

so the agent’s certainty equivalent is

cE(s,
b)= s+ bd(b)– c[~b)]

– ~rb202.
2

That is, the agent’s certainty equivalent from the contract w(y) = s + by is the expected wage
minus the cost of effort minus the cost of bearing risk. The principal’s expected profit is
ErI(s, b) = (1 – b)~b)

– s,

so the total surplus (i.e., the sum of the principal’s expectd

profit and the agent’s certainty

equivalent) depends on b but not ons:

cE(s,
b) + ErI(s, b) = Mb) – c[~b)] – ‘rb’a’

= Ts(b)

L

We can now determine the efficient contract slope, denoted b*: it is the slope that
maximizes the total surplus TS (b). If the parties agreed to a contract with some other slope then

forfeit higher wages later in their career (or after retirement, through a pension); sw bear
Goldin (1986), Hutchens (1987), and Margolis (1995) for evidence.

(1979) for theory and

both parties could be made ktter off by switching to a contract with slope b* and choosing an
appropriate value ofs to distribute the increased total surplus. The first-order condition for b* is
a*’ - c’s*’ - rb & = 0. Because c’[a*(b)] = b, we have a*’ = I/c” and hence
1
b* =
1 + ra2c”
This result makes sense. Since r, <, and c“ are positive, b* is between zero (full insurance) and
one (full incentives). Furthermore, b* is smaller if the agent is more risk-averse (r is higher) or
there is more uncertainty in production (~ is higher) or marginal disutility increases more quickly
(c” is higher).
This solution to the classic mtiel

is tidy but flawed: Mirrlees (1974) showed that the best

linear contract, w = s + b*y, is inferior to various non-linear contracts.

In particular, a step-

function con~act (where the agent earns w,{ if y 2 yObut w~ < W1lif y < Yo) can pefiorm

very

well, approaching the twin goals of full incentives and full insurance in the limit (as yO and w~
decrease in appropriate fashion, so that the agent almost surely receives WIIand yet has incentives
from fear of w~). Mirrlees’s result prompted a decade of research on how the optimal contract
depends on the details of the utility function and the condition

distribution of outpu t given the

agent’s action. In brief, this work showed that the optimal contract in the classic agency model is
extremely sensitive to these details. In particular, the optimal contract is linear only under very
special assumptions about the utility function and the conditional distribution of output.
Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987) reinterpreted the classic agency model so as to rescue
linear contracts. Rather than a single action (a) that influences a single outcome (y), Holmstrom
and Milgrom envision a sequence of actions (say, one per day, over the course of a year)
influencing a corresponding

sequence of outcomes. There are no connections across days (i. e.,

the action ~ on day t affects that day’s outcome, y,, but has no influence on any other day’s
outcome) and all past outcomes are observed kfore the next day’s action is chosen. The output y
from the classic model is interpreted as the aggregate output for the year in the sequential-action
model: y = Xy,.
Suppose that each day’s outcome takes one of two values—say L or H. Then a one-tiy
incentive contract is simply a pair of wages: w~ is paid if the outcome is H; w~ if L. Suppose that
the agent labors under the same one-day contract for all the days of the year. If there are T days
in the year and the agent produces H on N of these days then the aggregate output for the year is
y = TL + N(H - L) and the aggregate wage for the year is w = Tw~ + N(wII - w~). Thus, N = (y TL)/(H -L) and
w.

T(HwL – Lw~) +
H–L

WH

– WL

H–L

y=s+by.

5
That is, if the agent labors under the same one-day contract throughout

the year then the

aggregate wage is a linear function of the aggregate output. Given several other assumptions,
Holmstrom and Milgrom show not only that it is optimal for the agent to labor under a constant
one-day contract but also that the optimal slope in the aggregate representation

of this contract

(i.e., w =s + by) is b*, just as in the classic agency model.
In my view, the main contribution

of this Holmstrom-Milgrom

justifies linear con~acts (by imposing quite strong assumptions),
gaming as a natural consequence of non-linetity.

model is not that it

but rather that it alerts us to

For example, a step-function

contract of the

kind studied by Mirrlees (in the classic one-action model) induces no effort once the agent’s
aggregate output to date passes the hurdle yO (in the daily-action model). More generally, if the
incentive contract for the year is a non-linear function of yem-end aggregate output then the
worker’s incentives change from day to day, depending on the aggregate output to date. A
growing body of evidence is consistent with this prediction: see Healy (1985) on bonus plans
with ceilings and floors, Asch (1990) and Oyer (1995) on bonuses tied to quotas, Chevalier and
Ellison (1995) on the effects of even modest convexities in smooth pay plans, and Ehrenberg and
Bognanno (1990) on performance across rounds in professional golf tournaments.3
There is other evidence more closely related to the classic agency model. One basic
question is “Does pay vary with performance?” For example, by the early 1980s, the receivd
wisdom was that the compensation of chief executive officers (CEOS) in large US firms was
closely related to the firm’s size but unrelated (or even negatively related!) to its stock-market
performance.

Murphy (1985) noted, however,

firms have superior stcck-market

performance

cross-section regression of cash compensation
will be biased downwards,

that if big firms pay higher salaries but small
(the “small-ftrm

effect” from finance) then a

(salary plus bonus) on stock-market performance

unless there are adequate controls for firm heterogeneity.

Murphy

found that including fixed effects in a panel-data model produces a strong statistical relationship
between CEO pay and stock-market performance.4
A second basic question is ‘Do incentives matter?” In brief, the answer is “Yes.” For
example, the evidence summarized above on the effects of non-linear incentive plans motivates
this conclusion. Others have studied the proposition that steeper slopes create stronger incentives:

3

Incentive con~cE obviously exist outside as well as inside employment relationships, golf tournaments
being just one example. In trying to understand incentive contracts inside firms, I will sometimes tiw on
examples from outside, Much work remains to be done on how incentive contracts differ (by choice or by
constraint) depending on whether they are inside or outside firms; w Holmstrom and Milgrom (1991) and Baker,
Gibbons, and Murphy (1996) for initial explorations of this issue.
4

Jensen and Murphy (1990) estimate that the pay-for-performance slope for the CEO of a typical large US firm
is at most b = .003. Jensen and Murphy argue that such a pay-for-performance relation is statistically but not
economically significant, whera Haubnch (1994) argues that plausible parameter values in the classic agency
model can yield an efficient slope of this magnitude,

6
a*(b) increases with b. Lazear (1996), for example, finds that the output of workers installing
automobile windshields

increased after a switch from hourly wages to piece rates.5 Abowd

(1990) and Kahn and Sherer (1990) estimate the sensitivity

of managerial pay to current

performance and then estimate the effect of this sensitivity on subsequent

performance.G The

results are generally consistent with the theory but are somewhat noisy, in keeping with having
to estimate rather than observe the relation between pay and performance.
(1995) use data on medical partnerships,

Gaynor and Getiler

where the sharing rule is included in the data but was

chosen by the partners. Their instrumental-variable

estimates again are consistent with the simple

proposition that incentives matter. Finally, there is evidence that investors believe that incentives
matter: Bnckley, Bhagat, and Lease (1985) find that there is a significant increase in a firm’s
stock price (net of any movement in the market as a whole) when the firm announces a stockbased compensation

plan; Tehranian and Waegelein (1985) present analogous

announcements of accounting-based

evidence for

bonus contracts.

There is also evidence related to the main idea behind the classic agency model-the
tradeoff between incentives and insurance. For example, there is evidence that the slope falls as
risk or risk-aversion

increases.

As noted

earlier,

Higgs

(1973)

presents

evidence

from

sharecropping in 1910 that the slope falls as risk increases; Garen (1994) offers similar evidence
for CEOS of large US firms, Gaynor and Gertler (1995) find that the slope of the sharing rule in
medical pmtnerships falls as the partners’ risk-aversion increases.
The tradeoff between insurance and incentives produces further predictions in a richer
model with multiple performance measures, as follows. Suppose there is a second performance
measure, z = a + V, where v is a normally distributed noise term possibly correlated with &.
(Theoretical and empirical work in accounting often interprets y as the change in the firm’s stockmarket value and z as the firm’s

accounting

earnings,

but many other interpretations

possible.) Consider the contract w = s + by + dz. Holmstrom

are

(1979) shows that the optimal

con~act uses both performance measures (i. e., b* # O and d* # O) unless

one is a sufficient

5
Even this seemingly simple comparison raises several issues. Firsl, ou[put wm not zero kfore the
imposition of piece rates, suggesting that monitoring and/or efficiency wages should k included in lhe theoretical
and empirical analyses. Smond, as Lazear (1986a) and Brown (1992) analyze, high-productivity workers may prefer
piece rates to salaries, so the switch to pime rates may change the composition of the workforce; fortunately,
Lazear (1996) has data on individual workers over time. Third, and ~rhaps most important, many piece-rate plans
eventually run afoul of the “ratchet eff~t” described in the next sub-section.
6 Bmause the agent’s action is unobsemable, empirical work cannot directly test whether a*(b) increases with b,
and so relies on either performance (y) or profit (n = y - w) as a proxy for the agent’s action. Lazear uses
performanc~ Abowd uses various forms of profit; and Kahn and Sherer use numerical prforrnance ratings aby supervisors (which are more like y than like n, provided that supervisors are not judging performance relative
to wages). The distinction betwwn performance and profit affects the interpretation of the evidence. If observations
on b were randomly sprintdcd near b* (say, due to small mistakes) lhen a*(b) would increase with b, so E@)
would increase with b, but E(m) would be locally constant, because TS(b) is maximized at b*. On the other hand,
if variations in b were due to (say) unmeasured variation in risk or risk-aversion then both E(y) and E(n) would
increase in b.

7

statistic for the other. That is, d* = O only if z contains no additional information about the
agent’s action beyond what is contained in y (i.e.,

Z=

Y+$,

Orp=E+$,

Where

@iS

independent of c); likewise, b* = O only if y contains no additional information beyond z (i.e., y
= z + $, or E = u + $, where $ is independent

of ~). In Holmstrom’s

model, therefore,

performance measures are simply signals about the agent’s action, and a signal is not useful if it
conveys no incremental information.
Some performance measures come from outside the firm, such as from other firms in the
same industry.

Consider n firms, each subject to a common shock (6) and an idiosyncratic shock

(&i).Suppose yi = ai + f3+ &i, where (Q, El, . . .. en) me independent normal noise terms. Let zi
denote the average of then-1 other fins’
Wi = s + byi subjects
performance

contract

of the n-1 other

the agent

outputs

to two noise

W1= s + b(yl - z]) eliminates

idiosyncratic

error terms

(Ej).

(Yj).

Then the pure own-performance

terms,

t3 and Ei, whereas

6 but subjects

Holmstrom

the pure

contract
relative-

the agent to &iand to the average

(1982a) shows that the efficient

contract is wl = s + byl - dzi, where b* > d*> O. That is, the efficient contract reflects a tradeoff
between eliminating the risk from (3(through the pure relative-performance

contract) and avoiding

the risk from the average of then-1 other error terms (through a pure own-performance

contract).

If the variance of 6 is small then it is not worth introducing the risk from then-1 other error terms
so d* is close to zero; if the variance of 6 is large then it is important that the contract filter out t3,
even at the cost of introducing risk from the other error terms, so d* is close to b*.
Antle and Smith (1986) look for evidence of relative performance evaluation in CEO pay.
Using data on 39 firms in three 2-digit industries, they find weak support for the theory, even
though they carefully compute the correlation in “output” for each pair of firms, Gibbons
Murphy (1990) use a less-sophisticated

and

approach but a much larger dataset, including data on

pay and performance from 1000 firms, with performance comparisons

computed from data on

11,000 firms. Gibbons and Murphy find stronger support for the theory: CEO pay depends on
the firm’s stock-market performance relative to the market as a whole and (additionally) on the
firm’s stock-market performance

relative to its 1-digit industry.

Larcker (1992) estimate sepaate regressions

for each of 554 fms

Janakiraman,

Lambert,

and

(as opposed to the pooled

regression in Gibbons and Murphy). The mean of the firm-specific estimates in Janakiraman,
Lambert, and Larcker is similar to the pooled coefficient in Gibbons and Murphy.7

7

Antle-Smith, Gibbons-Murphy, and Janakiraman-Lambcrt-Larcker also examine the effect of accounting
earnings on CEO pay, again relative to the market as a whole and the fii’s industry. They all find little evidence
of relative performance evaluation involving accounting earnings. Sloan (1993) suggests why, by showing that
market-wide movements in earnings are not a major source of noise in earnings. Sloan also finds that mings are
closely correlated with the fum’s stock-market performance relative to the market as a whole. That is, an ownperformance contract based on the f~m’s earnings could have the effect of a relative-~rformance contract breed on
own and market stock movements.

8
In sum, there is a large body of theory and evidence related to the classic agency model.
The theory has developed several insights, such as the role of linear contracts in deterring gaming
and the interpretation of performance measures as signals of the agent’s action. The evidence is
broadly consistent with both the basic theory and its extension to multiple performance measures.
But the literature does not explain (or even hint at) why paying for performance is so problematic
for many fins.

B. Complications in Real Incentive Contracts
The main idea behind the classic agency model is that there is a tradeoff between
incentives and insurance,

but the most striking single fact about real attempts to tie pay to

performance is that it is a tricky business. The following examples are all t~ typical:
At the H.J.

Heinz Company,

increased from the prior year.

division managers received bonuses

only if earnings

The managers delivered consistent earnings growth by

manipulating the timing of shipments to customers and by prepaying for services not yet
received, both at some cost to the firm (Post and Goodpaster,

1981), At Bausch &

Lomb, the hurdle for a bonus was higher, often entailing double-digit earnings growth.
Again, managers met their targets in ways that were not obviously in the best long-run
interest of the firm (e.g., over half a million pairs of “sold” sunglasses were discovered
in a warehouse in Hong Kong; Maremont,
earned no commission

1995).

At Dun & Brads~eet,

unless the customer bought a larger subscription

credit-report services than in the previous year.

salespeople
to the firm’s

In 1989, the company faced millions of

dollars in lawsuits following chages that its salespeople deceivd

customers into buying

larger subscriptions by fraudulently overstating their historical usage (Roberts, 1989). In
1992, Sears abolished

the commission

plan in its auto-repair

mechanics based on the profits from repairs authorized by customers.

shops,

which paid

Mechanics misled

customers into authorizing unnecessary repairs, leading California officials to prepare to
close Sears’ auto-repair business statewide (Patterson, 1992).
In brief, “business history is littered with fms

that got what they paid for” (Baker, Gibbons,

and Murphy, 1994: 1125).s

8 Firms are not the only ones who get what they pay for—governments do, too. Anderson, Burkhauser, and
Raymond (1993) offer evidenw of cream-skimming in the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA): lhe program’s
goals are to reduce an individual’s unemployment and incrae the individurd’s earnings, but program operators m
paid basal on the measured unemployment and earnings of program participants, so operators have an incentive to
enroll participants who would have had short unemployment and high earnings without training. Using cross-state
variation in incentive intensity, Cragg (1995) finds that cream-skimming increases when incentives are stronger,
but so do the outcomes that the program is intended to indu~edu~
unemployment and inc~ti
earnings
conditional on the characteristics of those enrolled.

9
I find it hard to relate the classic agency model to this evidence (and the larger body of
evidence it represents). First, much of the evidence concerns non-linear contracts, whereas the
classic model began with (and has recently returned to) linear contracts.

Second,

I see no

necessary role for risk-aversion in this evidence, whereas in the classic model the only reason to
limit incentives is to provide insurance. Third, and most important,

the performance measures

used in these real incentive contracts differ from those envisioned

in the classic model,

describe below. In this sub-section,

therefore, I abandon the classic model, turning instead to

five other issues in incentive connecting—performance
mobility,

as I

the ratchet effect, and career concerns.

measurement,

To emphasize

implicit contracts,

labor

that these five issues

departures from the classic model, I assume throughout this sub-section

are

that the agent is risk-

neumal. For lack of space, I give only brief attention to labor mobility, the ratchet effect, and
career concerns; I focus on performance measurement and implicit contracts because I klieve
that together they offer an important complement to the classic agency model.
1) Performance Measurement.” I lack the information to assess whether the incentive plans
at Heinz, Bausch & hmb,

Dun & Bradstreet,

responses to tough environments),
are less reticent.

and Sears were mistakes (as opposed to kst

but some of my colleagues in organizational behavior (OB)

Kerr’s (1975) classic title conveys his field’s judgment:

“On the Foil y of

Rewarding A, While Hoping for B.” Kerr’s paper is so well known in OB that it has earned a
place in the canonical MBA core course on organizations; in econontics, in contrast, until recently
there was no model that could even express Kerr’s idea, not to mention evaluate or extend it.
Fortunately, Holrnstrom and Milgrom (199 1) and Baker ( 1992) now offer simple models
of such distortionary performance measurement,
agent’s total contribution

to fm

Both emphasize the distinction

value (henceforth

denoted

between the

y) and the agent’s measured

perfomlance (henceforth p). Even well-informed insiders may find it extremely difficult to assess
an agent’s total contribution

to firm value,

because

total contribution

performance such as the effects of the agent’s actions on co-workers
the agent’s current actions. Furthermore,
contribution, the p~ies

includes

aspects of

and the long-inn effects of

to enforce a contract contingent on the agent’s total

would have to specify ex ante how y is to be measurd

ex post (so that a

court would know what to measure if called in to enforce the contract).
These difficulties ~e assumed

away in the classic agency model: the agent’s total

contribution is called “output,” as though it could simply be counted at the end of the conmact
period, and contracts such as w = s + by are assumed to k
classic model may capture some employment relationships,

trivial to write and enforce. The
where there are few interactions

among co- workers and few long-run effects of current actions, Lazear’s (1996) study of piece
rates paid to workers installing auto windshields

may be one example; more generally, Brown

10
(1990) finds that piece rates are more likely to be used in jobs with a narrow set of routines than
in jobs with a variety of duties.
In a vast array of jobs, however, the Holmstrom-Milgrom

and Baker distinction between

total contribution and measured performance seems crucially important. For example, Eccles and
Crane (1988)
compensation

describe

how investment

through a subj~tively

banks deliver a substantial

fraction of a trader’s

determined bonus, even though many objective aspects of

the individual’s petiormance are easily measured on a daily basis. Similarly, B urtis and Gabarro
(1995) offer a fictitious but persuasive account of the difficulties of performance evaluation in a
law firm: nine objective measures paint a narrow and distorted picture (even when combined with
four subjective assessments). Evaluating the performance of almost any manager or professional
worker seems likely to involve similar issues—for

example, see Greene and Schlesinger (1992)

on incentive pay in a cable television firm. Finally, the recent enthusiasm for empowerment,
participation, and self-managed teams suggests that difficulties in performance evaluation may
become increasingly important for non-managerial workers as well.
Baker models the worker’s contribution to firm value as y = Ga + E, whereas measured
performance is p = ~a + v. As in the classic model, E and v are noise terms (independent of 6, V,
and each other), but B and L are features of the environment that are privately observed by the
worker before choosing an action. As motivated above, Baker assumes that a contract contingent
on y cannot be enforced, so the firm is reduced to contracting on p, through the linear contract w
= s + bp. Because the agent’s utility, w - c(a), depends on p, the agent will be induced to take
large actions when alp/da (i.e., y) is large; because the firm’s profit, y - w, depends importantly
on y, the firm will value large actions when dy/da (i.e., (3)is large. Hence B aker’s central insight:
a good petiormance measure induces the agent to do the right thing at the right time (i.e., to work
hard when doing so is valuable to the firm), so the quality of a performance measure depends on
the correlation between alp/da and dy/da. Thus, whereas the classic model views a performance
measure as a signal of the agent’s action, Baker focuses on the value of the actions that a contract
based on the performance measure will induce.
When measured performance omits important dimensions

of total contribution,

firms

understand that they will “get what they pay for,” and so may choose weak incentives in
preference to strong but frequently dysfunctional

incentives. In Kerr’s terms, the Holmstrom-

Milgrom and Baker models explore environments in which it might be necessary to reward A
while hoping for B, but these mdels

caution against over-rewarding A.g

9
Lazear (1989), Gibbons and Murphy (1990), and Dye (1992) issue similar cautions regwding unbridled use of
relative ~rformance evaluation: managers have incentives to choose a referem group they can beat, rather than
one that offers high returns; similarly, within a firm, managers have incentives to sabotage the performances of
co-workers as well m to improve their own performances.

11
2) Implicit Con[racts: A worker’s total contribution

to firm value may be impossible

court to measure using a method specified ex ante, but well-informed

agree ex post on a particular worker’s
contribution).

conrnbution

for a

insiders may nonetheless

(or at least on an estimate

of this

The great advantage of such ex post settling up is that the parties can take into

account events that occurred during the contract period that were not foreseen (or were not
articulated) ex ante. Thus, it might be possible for the worker and the firm to use an “implicit”
contract (i.e., an understanding

backed by the parties’ reputations instead of law) based on total

contribution (y) rather than an “explicit” contract backed by a court but based on distotiionary
performance measures (p). For example, the fm

might promise to pay a bonus if the worker’s

total contribution exceeds a critical level. The problem is that the fm

will be tempted to renege,

pocketing the worker’s contribution and saving the bonus.
Bull (1987) and MacLeod and Malcomson
repeated-game equilibria. In these models, the fm

(1989) model such implicit contracts

as

chooses not to renege only if the present

value of the ongoing relationship outweighs the immediate gain from reneging. For example,
suppose that y can be either L or H, and suppose that the firm pays a salary of S at the beginning
of the period and promises to pay a bonus of B at the end of the period if y = H. If the worker
believes that the fm

will keep its promise then the prospect of the bonus induces an optimal

action a*(B) from the worker, which in turn determines the firm’s expected profit per period
from keeping its promise, En(S,B).
Suppose that the worker will leave the fm

if the fm

reneges on a bonus.

(Stewart’s

(1993) account of the rupture of the subjwtive bonus plan at the investment bank First Boston
suggests how difficult it is for a firm to regain its workers’ trust after it is perceived to have
reneged on an implicit contract.) If the worker produces y = H then the fm

can either pay the

bonus, resulting in a payoff of H - S - B this period and a payoff of En(S ,B) in all future
periods, or renege on the bonus, resulting in a payoff of H - S this period but the loss of the
worker thereafter. For simplicity, normalize the firm’s payoff after reneging to zero, perhaps
from employing a new worker at a wage equal to productivity. Then, given an interest rate r, the
present value from paying the bonus exceds

the present value from reneging if

H–s–B+~EH(s,
B)2H–s+~.
o,
r
r
or En(S ,B) 2 rB. Thus, a decrease in the profitabilityy of the ongoing relationship may wreck an
implicit contract; the collapse of the junk bond market may have been just such a precipitating
event at First Boston.
Some firms use both explicit and implicit contracts. Lincoln Electric, for example, is
well-known for its use of piece rates, but about half of a worker’s
subjectively

determined

compensation

bonus @ast and Berg, 1975). Baker, Gibbons,

rides on a

and Murphy

(1994)

12
explore the simultanaus

use of explicit contracts based on distortionary performance measures

(e.g., w = s + bp) and implicit contracts based on total contribution (e. g., W = S + By, so that
total compensation
implicit-contract

is w + W). One role of the explicit contract is to reduce the size of the

bonus that the fm

could save by reneging; one role of the implicit contract is to

reduce the distortionary incentives created by the explicit contract. Baker, Gibbons, and Murphy
show that, under one set of circumstances,

the two types of contract are complementary: if the

performance measure (p) becomes less distortionary (i.e., if the correlation between alp/da and
dy/da increases) then the explicit contract increases the profitability of the ongoing relationship,
thereby making it crdible

for the firm to promise a larger bonus in the implicit contract. Under

the opposite circumstances,

explicit contracts hinder implicit contracts: if the explicit contract

alone is sufficiently effmtive then the firm’s payoff after reneging is not zero but rather the
payoff from using the optimal explicit contract alone; as this payoff increases, it becomes more
tempting for the firm to renege on an implicit contract, reducing the bonus the firm can credibly
promise.
3) Labor Mobili@: One of the fundamental

assumptions

in labor economics

is that

workers cannot be bound to firms. That is, firms may provide financial inducements for workers
to stay, but a contract stipulating that a worker must stay would not be upheld by a court (at least
in the US and similar settings). This assumption pervades the literature on wage determination,
from Becker’s (1962) analysis of general-purpose

human capital to Harris and Holmstrom’s

(1982) and Beaudry and DiNardo’s (1991) analyses of incomplete insurance. The classic agency
model, on the other hand, makes the opposite assumption: once the worker has been induced to
sign the incentive contract, its eventual consequences
following evidence from sharecropping
incentive

contracting,

especially

can be enforced on the worker.

The

suggests that labor mobility may be quite important in

if one

adopts

the Holmstrom-Milgrom

sequential-action

reinterpretation of the classic agency model.
Recall that Higgs (1973) found that states with higher crop risk have less risk-sharing
their sharecropping

in

contracts (i.e., more wage labor and less crop sharing and fixed-payment

land rental), but that Alston and Higgs (1982) found significant variation across the three classes
of conmact even after controlling for risk. Alston and Higgs argue that one important source of
this variation is the prospect of Iahr

mobility. For example, during harvests when the price of

cotton was high, bidding wars for labor ensued.

Hands paid as wage laborers had no incentive

to ignore tempting offers to move, whereas hands paid with crop sharing and hands renting the
land would forego their crop if they moved. Thus, in settings where risk considerations
would imply that wage labor is optimal, the addition of enforcement considerations

alone

might make

crop sharing efficient. (Crop sharing thus functions like a “hostage” in Williamson’s

(1983)

analysis. ) Consistent with this argument, Alston (1981) finds that, holding risk and other factors

13
constant,

farmers closer to urban areas (i.e.,

sources of temporary

labor that reduce the

likelihood and the effect of bidding wars) use wage labor more than either form of risk-sharing.
4) The ratchet effect: Lincoln Elmtric is well-known
avoided both the infamous ratchet effect (where the fm

for its piece rates because it has

reduces the piece rate if it learns that the

job can be done more easily than was at first thought) and its repercussion,

output restriction

(where workers anticipate that the firm will ratchet the rate and so work slowly to prevent the
firm from discerning the true pace at which the job could be done). A large body of evidence
suggests that Lincoln is a rare exception. Clawson (1980:170)

summarizes many case studies

and concludes that “employers insisted that they would never cut a price once it was set, yet
every employer did cut prices,”
concerning output resrnction,

Mathewson

(193 1) offers a huge collection

of vignettes

and Roy (1952) gives detailed evidence of carefully restricted

productivity in a machine shop.
To explore these qualitative accounts analytically,

it seems natural to consider

environment in which the workers have private information
worker’s effort cannot be monitored. In a two-period mtiel
(1987) shows that if neither the fm

an

about the job’s difficulty and a
of such an environment,

Gibbons

nor the worker can commit across periods (i.e., the fm

cannot commit in the fwst period to the second-period piece rate and the worker cannot commit in
the f~st period to remain with the firm for the second period) then both the ratchet effect and
output restriction are unavoidable: there is no quilibrium

compensation

scheme that induces

efficient effort.
Kanemoto

and

MacLeod

(1991)

and

Carmichael

and

MacLeod

(1993)

study

environments that allow firms to avoid the ratchet effect (and so avoid output restriction as well).
Kanemoto

and MacLeod analyze a two-period

model where the worker’s

output conveys

information about the worker’s ability, rather than about the job’s difficulty as in Gibbons. In the
Kanemoto-MacLeod

model,

competition

for the worker’s

services

from

the market

of

prospective employers gives the worker confidence that the firm will match the market in the
second period. Carmichael and MacLeod explore a repeated-game (rather than a two-period)
model in which the future value of the ongoing relationship may allow the firm to commit. For
example, they describe mutual-monitoring

arrangements among British cotton spinners in the

19th century in which piece rates were publicly posted and sanctions were administered (by other
firms!) against fms

that cut rates.

5) Career Concerm: When a worker’s current performance affects the market’s belief
about the worker’s ability, and hence the worker’s future compensation,

we say that the worker

has current incentives from “career concerns.” Fama (1980) suggested that career concerns could
eliminate the need for managerial incentive contracts, but Holmstrom (1982b) showed that, in the
absence of contracts, career concerns prduce

an inefficient (but intuitive) pattern of effort over

14
time: managers typically work too hard in early years (while the market is still assessing

the

manager’s ability and the manager has a long time to reap the rewards of improving the market’s
beliefl and not hard enough in later years (when the market’s klief

is hard to budge and the

manager has little time to go).
Gibbons and Murphy (1992) add incentive contracts (like those in the classic agency
model) to the Fama-Holmstrom
approaches

retirement,

model. Because caeer-concem

incentives decline as the manager

the slope of the optimal incentive contract increases,

incentives (roughly) constant.

Gibbons

keeping

total

and Murphy present evidence on CEO compensation

consistent with this prediction. Gompers and Lemer (1994) offer similar evidence for venture
capitalists.
C. New Dimensions
I have so far tried to make two points. First, risk matters in incentive contracting,
focusing on risk alone yields a sterile perspective,

Second, several promising

but

new classes of

models have been developed recently, emphasizing aspects of real incentive contracting that are
orthogonal to the tradeoff between insurance and incentives. To conclude this section I briefly
consider three new issues: motivation, social comparison, and groups.
Baron (1988:494)

describes the imagery of workers in economic mcdels of pay for

performance as “somewhat akin to Newton’s frost law of motion: employees remain in a state of
rest unless compelled to change that state by a stronger force impressed upon them—namely,
optimal labor conhact.” Many psychologists

an

subscribe to another view, based on the distinction

(and interaction) between intrinsic and extrinsic motivation, Staw (1977) considers two extreme
cases: insufficient justification

(i.e., low intrinsic rewards, say from a dull task, and no extrinsic

rewards) and oversufficient justification

(i.e., high intrinsic rewards,

say from an interesting

task, and high extrinsic rewards). Staw argues that those who choose to perform a task in the
insufficient-justification

condition may come to klieve

justify their behavior to themselves,

that the task is interesting,

in order to

whereas those in the oversufficient-justification

condition

may mistakenly infer that continued participation is motivated by high extrinsic rewards and so
come to believe that the task is not interesting.
As a test of the insuficienc-justification

hypothesis,

Staw (1974) measured the attitudes

and the performance of Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) cadets both kfore and after they
learned their draft numbers. As predicted, those with draft numbers such that there was no risk
of being drafted (who therefore were engaged in dull tasks with no extrinsic rewards) showed
improved
summarizes

attitudes

shut

ROTC

and even slightly enhanced

performance.

Staw

(1977)

several experiments that suggest limits to the applicability of the oversufficienf-

justification hypothesis,

such as that there should be no pre-existing norm for payment. These

15
limits suggest

that the oversufficient-justification

effect will & unlikely

to be central in

employment relationships, but might be important in voluntary organizations or with reference to
tasks in an employment relationship that are usually performed voluntarily.
Another prominent aspect of social psychology that kars on employment relationships is
social comparison theory (Vroom, 1968; Goodman,

1977). O’Reilly, Main, and Crystal (1988)

apply this theory CEO pay; Frank (1985) studies other monomic applications. After controlling
for firm performance,

sales, size, and industry effects (at something between the 1- and 2-digit

level), O’Reilly, Main, and Crystal find that CEO pay is significantly related to the average salary
of the outside directors (in their main jobs) and even more strongly related to the average salary
of the outside directors on the compensation committee. I would like to see this finding replicated
on richer cross-section data with finer industry controls, and on panel data with changes in board
composition.

More generally, I think such findings from other fields should be pursued rather

than dismissed. 10
The issue of social comparison leads naturally to the issue of groups-another
which economic
Recent economic

thinking often diverges from social-psychological
research

on the effects of group

incentive

arena in

and sociological

plans

documents

views.

non-rnvial

productivity increases, such as Kruse (1993) on profit sharing and Jones and Kato (1995) on
employee stock-ownership

plans. To an economist, these results raise the question of free-riding:

how do group incentive plans solve the so-called l/N problem (Alchian and Demsetz,
Holmstrom,

1972;

1982a)? Social psychologists and sociologists, however, have long emphasized the

importance of informal norms in influencing behavior in groups.
Some arguments involving norms have the “over-socialized”

character (i.e., norms so

strong that no room remains for individual choice) that economists have found troubling,

but

subtler arguments are also available, Granovetter (1985:486), for example, argues that “culture is
not a once-for-all influence but an ongoing process, continuously constructed and reconstructed
during interaction. It not only shapes its mem~rs

but also is shaped by them, in part for their

own strategic reason s.” Tirole’s (1996) analysis of corruption

has something

of this flavor;

similar analyses of u seful rather than destructive cultures should also be possible.
Economists

have just begun to think about groups in organizations,

but even the

seemingly small step of adding a third actor to the classic agent y model (i, e., a supervisor,

as

well as a principal and an agent) opens new horizons, as Tirole (1986) showed in his seminal
analysis of collusion. All three actors in Tirole’s model have the conventional preferences for
actors in an economic model. More recently, other theorists have begun to explore preferences

10 Hallock (1995) studies a related issue: ~iprocity via interlocking directorates (i,e., the CEO of firm A is a
dirwtor of firm B, and vice versa). Hatlock finds that, after controlling for firm characteristics, interlocking
directorates are associated with no more than 10 ~rcent higher pay.

16
drawn from the social psychology

and sociology literatures: see Kandel and Lazem (1992) and

Barron and Gjerde (forthcoming)

on peer pressure and Rotemberg (1994) on altruism in the

workplace. Gaynor and Rebitzer (1995) deserve s~ial

recognition for not only developing a

model involving group norms but also trying to test it!

2. Careers

in Organizations

Virtually all of the foregoing theory and evidence on incentive pay was cast as occurring
within a firm, but much of it could just as well have been cast as between firms. In this section I
step more resolutely

inside the firm, by focusing on careers in organizations.

Most of he

evidence I report concerns white-collar workers, especially managerial and professional workers.
Most of the work settings that generated the data are similar to the idealized employment system
Osterman (1987) calls “salaried” (as opposed to “industrial,” “craft,” or “secondary”).
I will treat jobs as defined in advance, independent of the people who fill them. This
assumption

may seem unremarkable,

but some firms have no jobs of this kind (Kaftan and

Barnes, 1991) and some firms with many highly formalized jobs nonetheless have an important
minority of jobs that do not fit this description (Miner, 1987). I will also largely treat jobs as
defined for individuals, rather than for teams, in spite of the recent surge of interest in the latter
(e.g., Katzenbach and Smith, 1993).
One might think that, having sidestepped these fashionable issues in job design, I would
be reduced to discussing a mature body of theory and evidence focused on a somewhat outdated
definition of a job. Unfortunately,

the situation is not that good, Instead, I see this section, like

the second half of the first section, as an attempt to survey an emerging literature—this time on
jobs, and how they are strung into careers in organizations. I begin with evidence, then turn to
theory, and finally suggest some new dimensions.

A. Evidence
In this sub-section I descrik

a wide range of findings concerning wages, promotions,

and performance evaluations inside firms. I attempt to assess which findings are true in a vtiety
of environments

and which may be limited to narrower settings such as a particular firm,

industry, or occupation,

Most of the evidence I present concerns white-collar, salaried workers

employed by large US firms. Nonetheless, the literature is large and varied. I therefore consider
only four categories of evidence: positions,
and performance evaluation.

wages, the interplay between positions and wages,

Even in a fairly narrow category such as positions, however, it is

difficult to compare and evaluate some of tie findings.

Different authors have asked different

questions of seemingly comparable datasets. It would be very helpful if authors of future studies

17
would address a common core of questions

before turning to spmific issues of their own

interest. Indeed, the same could be said of the existing studies: it would be very helpful if these
authors would return to their data to address remaining core questions. To prompt discussion,

I

propose a set of such core questions at the end of this sub-section.
1) Posifions: The first, simple finding is that demotions are rare.

This is intuitive but

rarely documented, in part because defining a demotion requires that jobs be ordered.

One way

to order jobs is by ranking their wages (Lazear, 1992); another is via patterns in observed job
transitions (Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom,
exist (Baron, Davis-Blake,

1994a); a third is to ask whether formal job ladders

and Bielby, 1986) and are used (DiPrete,

1987). Relatively few

studies produce job orderings; as far as I know, only Baker, Gibbs, and Holmstrom

(hereafter

BGH) document the unsurprising fact that demotions are rare.
Much more attention has been paid to promotions (which again require jobs to be ordered
by some method).

In particular, serial correlation in promotion rates (i.e., a “fast track”) has

been studied extensively

(Rosenbaum,

1984; Bri.iderl, Diekmann,

BGH,

and Petersen,

1993; Spilerman and Ishida,

1994a; Spileman

and Preisendorfer,
1994; and Podolny

Baron, 1995). There has also been some analysis of the hazard rate for job-to-job
within a fm

(Felmlee, 1982; Althauser and Kalleberg,

1991;

1990; and Lazea,

and

transitions

1992). This work

varies in its sensitivity to issues such as competing risks (e.g., promotion versus exit, or up
versus across job ladders) and unobserved
Felmlee and Althauser-Kalleberg
rate to another job in the fm

heterogeneity.

It also varies in its conclusions:

find positive duration dependence (i.e., an increasing escape
as time on the current job increases),

whereas hzear

finds

negative.
The natural extension of work on fast tracks and hazard rates is to analyze more detailed
information
analysis

from the history of a worker’s

by Chiappori,

job assignments

Salani&, and Valentin

within

a firm,

such as the following

(1996). Consider two workers who begin in level 1

at date 1 and are both in level 2 at date 3. Suppose worker A was promoted between dates 1 and
2, whereas worker B was promoted between dates 2 and 3. One can ask which worker fares
better after date 3. As predicted by a learning model akin to Harris and Holmstrom

(1982),

Chiappori er. al. find that worker B fares better after date 3.11
2) Wages: Using administrative records to study salaried managers during their careers ~
a single firm, BGH ( 1994b) find that nominal wage cuts are extremely rare (200 observations out
of more than 60,000), but that zero nominal increases are not. It would be interesting to use large

11 At first blush, this finding may seem inconsistent with the existence of a fast track. The Chiappori e[, al.
finding could be compatible with a fast track, however, becauw some fret-trackers may not be eligible for the
sample constructed by Chiappori et. al,: workers A and B are at level 2 at date 3, but a true fast-tracker may atready

18
panel datasets to study the generality of these findings across firms, but such efforts must
confront

several issues.

First,

for non-salaried

workers,

fluctuations

in hours

(e.g.,

via

overtime) would change earnings even if wages were constant. Second, there may be substantial
measurement

error in earnings or wages.

Third, there may be measurement

error in firm

affiliation, clouding the question of who stayed with the firm.
Card and Hyslop (1995) confront these issues using data from the Current Population
Survey (CPS) and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) covering hourly workers who
stayd

with their employer for two consecutive interview dates. Card and H yslop’s findings are

qualitatively similar to BGH’s: nominal wage cuts are rare (but not as rare as in BGH), but zero
nominal increases are not (indeed, they form a prominent spike in the distribution).

Kahn (1994)

presents similar evidence. Card and Hyslop, Kahn, BGH (1994b), and McLaughlin (1994) all
find that real wage cuts are not rare.
Taking a cue from the large literature on fast tracks, BGH (1994b) ask the analogous
question about wages: is there serial correlation in wage changes?

They find that the correlation

between Aw, (= w, - w,.]) and Aw,.l is .30, and between Aw, and Aw,.z is .25.

Of course, this

finding could reflect concave effects of experience and/or tenure, so BGH compute the analogous
correlations for changes in wage residuals rather than in wages.

These correlations are indeed

smaller: .17 and .12, respectively.
As with wage cuts, there has been some analysis of the serial correlation of wage changes
(and changes in wage residuals) using lmge panel datasets, Using data on American scientists,
Lillard and Weiss (1979) find statistically significant person effects in both the level and the
growth of earnings residuals, as well as a significant correlation between the two.

Similarly,

Hause (1980) finds significant person effects in the growth of earnings among young Swedish
males. Akwd

and Card (1989), however, analyze three larger and more heterogeneous datasets

(the PSID, the National Longitudinal

Survey,

and the Seattle/Denver

Income Maintenance

Experiment) and cannot reject a statistical model that has no person effect in the growth mte of
(experience-adjusted)

earnings.

Workers in the Lillard-Weiss,

Hause,

and Abowd-Card

samples did not necessarily

remain with a single employer, as was the case in BGH, but Topel (1991) and Topel and Ward
(1992) study within-fro
residuals

wage growth.

are serially uncorrelated,

Both papers find that within-firm

using data from the PSID and S~ial

changes in wage
Security earnings

records, respectively. Topel and Ward also find, however, that prior wage growth affects job

have been promoted to level 3 by this date. This is one example of how it would be useful for past, present, ti
future authors to address a core set of questions before turning to issues specific to their paper.

.

19
mobility, even after controlling for the current wage—a finding that would be easily explained by
person effects in wage growth.
In sum, three small, relatively homogeneous

samples (BGH, Lillard-Weiss,

and Hause)

find evidence of a person effect in the growth rate of earnings, whereas five large, heterogenmus
samples (three from Abowd-Cad,

one (related) from Topel, and one from Topel-Ward) do not.

This welter of findings deserves further attention. One possible explanation is that only certain
small groups of workers (such as the managerial and professional workers in BGH and LillardWeiss) exhibit such a person effect. If most groups of workers do not exhibit this effect then the
representative cross-sections in Abowd-Card, Topel, and Topel-Ward would not either.
Finally, BGH (1994b) find that a difference in the starting wages of two cohorts persists
as the cohorts age. Put differently, raises for workers already in the fm
regardless of cohort, so much of the wage difference ktween
difference in their starting wages.

me highly correlated,

two cohorts comes from the

This finding is reminiscent of Doeringer and Piore’s (1971)

description of how an internal labor market buffers workers from the vagaries of the external
market, and of Beaud~

and DiNardo’s (1991) evidence on the effect of previous unemployment

rates on current wages (although Beau@

and DiNardo find that the lowest unemployment rate

since being hired has the largest effect, rather than the unemployment rate at the date hired).
3) Positions and Wages: Just as the first, simple finding on positions was that demotions
are rare, the first, simple finding on wages and positions

is that the wage increase

upon

promotion is larger than for those not promoted. For example, in a study of 461 top executives in
72 large US manufacturing firms from 1964 to 1981, Murphy (1985) found that the average real
increase in salary plus bonus for the whole sample was 3.790 but the average increase for a Vice
President promoted to President was 20.9%, and for a President promoted to CEO 14.3%. On
the other hand, the wage change at promotion can be small compared to the difference in average
wages between the two levels. For’example,

Murphy found that the average salary plus bonus

for Presidents was 60% higher than for Vice Presidents (but only 13% higher for CEOS than for
Presidents).

BGH (1994b) replicate these results for lower-level managers in one fm:

wage

increases upon promotion are larger than for those not promoted, but smaller than the difference
in average wages between the two levels,
In keeping with the findings of serial correlation in promotion rates and in wage changes,
BGH (1994b) find that wage increases forecast promotions,

That is, among all the workers just

promoted to level n, the next raise is lower for those who subsequently

wait longer to be

promoted to level n+l.
BGH (1994a) find that promotions come disproportionately
wage distribution for the lower job, but not exclusively:

from the upper deciles of the

some promotions

come from each

decile. Similarly, some promotions go into each decile of the wage distribution for the upper job,

20
although most go into the lower deciles. At higher job levels, a larger fraction of promotions
come from the upper deciles of the lower job and go into the lower deciles of the upper job.
Murphy (199 1) describes the official schedule of wage-increase ranges at Merck & Co.:
controlling for performance evaluation, wage increases are smaller for those who begin in higher
qJartiles of the wage distribution of a given job level. BGH (1994a) replicate and extend this
finding: in the firm they study, the fact holds for those who are not promoted, for those who are,
and for the sample as a whole.
4) Performance Evaluations: Much of what we know about the relationship
wages and performance
Abraham (1980,

evaluations

between

is drawn from two influential papers by Medoff

198 1). They study managerial and professional

report three basic facts: wages increase with seniority;

and

workers in three firms and

wages increase with performance

evaluation; and the effect of seniority on wages is essentially independent of the presence of
controls for performance evaluation. An implication of these three facts (borne out in their data)
is that performance evaluation is essentially independent of seniority. All of this might cause one
to question the role of performance evaluation, but Medoff and Abraham find that increases in
performance evaluation predict raises and promotions. Gibbs (1995) presents similar evidence on
the effects of performance evaluations in the fm

studied by Baker, Gibbs,

and Holmstrom

(1994a,b).
Waldman and Avolio (1986) conduct a meta-anal ysis of 40 samples, largely from the
literature in industrial psychology. Waldman and Avolio find that productivity increases with age
but performance evaluation is essentially flat with age. Replacing “productivity” with “wage” and
“age” with “seniority” makes the two Waldman-Avolio findings identical to two of the MedoffAbraham findings.
5) Summary: There is a large and diverse set of findings concerning wage and promotion
dynamics within firms.

Some of the findings have so far been documented only in individual

firms, but I have attempted to report evidence from large panel datasets whenever possible.

1[

would be a great service if empirical researchers would provide evidence on a core set of
questions before studying specific issues of their own. Among these core questions might be: (1)
is there a fast track?, (2) are nominal wage cuts rare?, (3) are changes in wage residuals serially
correlated?, (4) are there cohort effects in wages?, (5) are wage increases upon promotion large
compared to normal wage changes but small compared to the difference in average wages
between the two levels?, (6) do wage increases forecast promotions?,

(7) do promotions

come

from and go to all the dwiles of the wage distributions for the lower and upper levels?, (8) are
wage increases smaller for those who begin in higher quartiles of the wage distribution for that
level?,

(9) do wages increase and are promotions

evaluations (both in cross-section

and in time-series)?,

more likely with

higher performance

and (10) is the effect of seniority on

21
wages

independent

of the presence

of controls

for performance

evaluation?

Thwreticd

researchers, for their part, could advance the literature by developing models that address broad
patterns of facts, abandoning the more common strategy of developing a model to explain one or
a few findings in isolation.

B, Towards a Theoq
There are at least four potential building blocks for a theory of wage and promotion
dynamics within fms:

task assignment, tournaments, on-the-job human-capital acquisition, and

learning. Each of these building blocks has received some development in the literature, but
many of tie resulting models were designed to explain at most a few stylized facts. I will
therefore briefly describe some of the major contributions

to these four literatures, indicating

some of the facts each was designed to explain. I will then argue, however, that future thmrizing
should aim at explaining broad patterns of evidence rather than a fact or two, and I will give
examples of recent theorizing in this vein.
1) Task Assignnzenr: The task-assignment

literature begins with static, full-information

models (Sattinger, 1975; Rosen, 1982; Waldman, 1984a) that offer an explanation for skewness
in the wage distribution; see Sattinger (1993) for a review.

A new line of research emphasizes

that the firm’s decision to assign a worker to a new task signals information
employers

about the worker’s productive

Bemhardt and Scoones,

1993).

ability ~aldman,

to prospective

1984b; Ricart i Costa,

1988;

This signaling effect offers an explanation for the large wage

increase upon promotion. Because prospective employers bid up the wage of promoted workers,
however, the current employer chooses an inefficiently tough promotion criterion: workers who
would be marginally more productive

in the new job are not enough

more productive

to

compensate for the wage increase.
2) Tournaments: The tournaments literature begins with the classic analysis by Lazear and
Rosen (198 1) that offers an explanation for large wage increases upon promotion.
(1986) sequential-elimination

Rosen’s

model shows that a big prize at the end (such as promotion

to

CEO) has important effects on incentives in the early rounds, so the distribution of prizes can be
quite convex and yet create constant incentives across rounds.

Meyer (1992) shows that in a

sequence of (non-elimination) tournaments it is efficient to introduce second-round

bias in favor

of the first-round

reduction in

winner.

(A small second-round

bias causes a second-order

second-round effort but a first-order increase in first-round effort.) Thus, a fast track can emerge
from an optimal incentive scheme.
3) Human Cqital: From the perspective of careers in organizations,
literature moves from Becker (1962)

to Hashimoto

(1981)

to Carmichael

the human-capital
(1983).

Becker

suggested that the firm and the worker will share both the costs and the benefits of investments in

22
specific capital. Hashimoto emphasized that such sharing would not be necess~

if the fm

and

the worker did not have private information about post-investment match quality. In the presence
of such private information,

however,

the optimal sharing rule produces inefficient turnover.

Carmichael made the first explicit reference to careers in organizations
promotion ladder (i.e., wages attached to jobs, with jobs assigned

by showing

that a

by seniority) can induce

investment and produce efficient turnover.
More recently, Kahn and Huberman (1988), Waldman (1990), and Prendergast
built on Carmichael’s
reinvestigated

insight

to analyze

the Becker-Hashimoto

derive a host of new results,
(plausible)

case in which

employers.

And Prendergast

promotion

and

up-or-out

rules.

(1993)

Others

have

sharing model. Chang and Wang (1996), for example,

including

underinvestrnent

human-capital

investments

in general human capital, in the

cannot

(1989), Acemoglu and Pischke

be observed
(1996),

by prospective

and Chang and Wang

(1995) show that the interaction of investment and turnover can create multiple equilibria: if
almost no one will be laid off then it is efficient to invest, so almost no one is laid off, and vice
versa.
4) Qarning:
passive response,
transmission.

I organize the literature on learning about workers
active experimentation,

catego~—information

responds

optimally (say, by changing

predictions.

problems,

and strategic information

Jovanovic (1979) and MacDonald (1982) are classic examples from the passive-

response

models-one

commitment

into four categories:

emphasizing

(say, about a worker’s
the worker’s

passive learning,

productivity)

wage).

Murphy

arrives and the fm
(1986) develops

the other incentives—and

Murphy’s evidence is inconclusive,

tests their distinctive

perhaps because both models are actually at

work in the data, but his paper is noteworthy for its attempt to distinguish
reasons why pay might be linked to performance.
passive-learning

two

between competing

O’Flaherty and Siow (1992, 1995) use a

model to study up-or-out rules.

Meyer (199 1) falls in the active-experimentation

category: in a sequence of contests

(similar to Meyer (1992), described above, but with learning about worker ability rather than
moral hazard), the firm finds it optimal to bias the second round in favor of the first-round
winner, (Without a second-round

bias either the f~st-round

winner wins the second round,

merely confirming the first-round information, or the first-round loser wins, canceling out the
first-round information.) Thus, as in Meyer (1992), a firm may find it optimal to create a fast
track.
Harris and Holmstrom (1982) show how learning can cause commitment problems.
risk-neutral firm would like to guuantee

A

a risk-averse worker a constant wage, but information

about the worker’s performance may cause prospective employers to bid up the worker’s wage.
If the current employer cannot bind the worker to the fm

then only those workers with poor

23
performances will be left working at the guaranteed wage. Consequently,

the fm

can offer only

limited insurance (in the form of a guaranteed wage) and must collect a premium for it up front
(in the form of a wage below expected productivity

during

the time before performance

information arrives).
Finally, Greenwald (1986), Lazear (1986 b), and the signaling papers noted above in the
task-assignment

literature analyze s~ategic information

transmission.

Greenwald

studies

the

winner’s curse that afflicts a prospective employer when making an offer; Lazea considers the
possibility that the prospective employer may have superior information,
who never get offers are stigmatized.

in which case workers

Gibbons and Katz (199 1) develop a similar model of

layoffs and present evidence consistent with the model: for white-collar workers (who are less
likely to be subject to inverse-seniority

layoff rules), the re-employment

wages of laid-off

workers are lower than those of observationally equivalent workers displaced in plant closings,
consistent with a layoff being a bad signal about the worker’s ability,
5) Beyond building blocks: These four literatures—task
capital, and learning-have

developd

assignment, tournaments, human

some important theory and met with some empirical

success. In the last few years, however, a new style of theory on career dynamics has begun to
emerge, in which models speak to broad patterns of facts rather than one or a few in isolation.
Harris and Holmstrom (1982), MacLeod and Malcomson (1988), Demougin and Siow (1994)
and Bemhmd t (1995) are contributions in this vein. I will briefly describe Gibbons and Waldman
(1996), because it makes the broadest attempt to relate to a detailed pattern of facts about careers
in organizations.
Waldman and I develop a model that blends task assignment,

on-the-job human capital

acquisition, and learning. The predictions of the model are consistent with much of the evidence
on positions, wages, and positions and wages describd

in the previous sub-section,

including:

(1) both demotions and (real) wage decreases will be rare, although demotions will k

much

more rare; (2) on average, workers who receive large wage increases early in their stay at one
level of a job ladder will be promoted more quickly to the next level; (3) promotions

will be

associated with large wage increases, but these wage increases will be small relative to the
difference between avemge wages across the relevant job levels; (4) there will be significant
serial correlation in both wage increases and promotion rates; and (5) individuals promoted from
one job level to the next will come disproportionately

(but not exclusively) from the top of the

lower job’s wage distribution and will arrive disproportionately
bottom of the higher job’s wage distribution,

Furthermore,

(but not exclusively) towards the

the model is also consistent with the

fourth category of evidence, on performance evaluations.
The main elements of the model are simple. A worker with innate ability 6 and labormarket experience x has productive ability T(6, x). A worker’s innate ability can be either high or

24
low; experience improves a worker’s productivity through learning by doing. There are three
jobs, which differ in their sensitivity to productive ability. Under full information, workers with
high values of q would be assigned to the top job, workers with intermediate values of q to the
middle job, and workers with low values of ~ to the bottom job. With imperfect information
about innate ability, workers are assigned to jobs based on their expected productive abilities and
paid their expected outputs in their assigned jobs.
In each period, a worker’s output provides a noisy signal about his or her productive
ability. Because labor-mmket experience is observable, the signal about productive ability can be
translated into a signal about innate ability. Growth in productive ability with experience implies
that, on average, workers progress up the job ladder, receiving wage increases every period and
promotions every so often. But learning about innate ability implies that wage cuts sometimes
occur; indeed, demotions,

while rare, are possible. Serial correlation in promotion

rates and

wage increases follow from the differences in innate ability, as does the finding that wage
increases forecast promotion. Large wage increases at promotion follow in pm from a selmtion
effect: those who get promoted in a given period are disproportionately

those who received good

news about their abilities. Finally, the findings on performance evaluations follow if it is innate
ability ((3)rather than productive ability (q) or realized output that is evaluated; that is, evaluators
adjust realized output for the skill acquired with experience.
The Gibbons-Waldman

model (and others like it) address broad patterns of facts about

careers in organizations, Nonetheless, each existing model fails to produce some of the existing
facts. There are four main facts that do not emerge from the Gibbons-Waldman

model: nominal

wage cuts are rare (but see MacLeod and Malcomson (1993) for a theory of nominal rigidity),
wage differences between cohorts are primarily a function of differences in their starting wages,
wage increases are smaller for those who begin in higher quartiles, and wage distributions
different job levels overlap (although
definitions in some datasets).

this last fact could be due to excessively

Of course,

for

coarse job

some of these existing “facts” have not yet been

established beyond a single firm, hence my appeal for systematic empirical analysis of core
questions.

C. New Dimensions
Sociologists have long explored the effects of aggregate-level variables such as vacancy
chains, social networks,
attainment and turnover.

and organizational demography on individual-level
It would

b

interesting

to consider

whether

outcomes such as
the theoretical

econometric tools of labor economics can shed any new light on the sociologists’
interpretations of these effects.

or

prefemed

25
White (1970), for example, introduced and explored the consequences of vacancy chains:
if worker A gets promoted from job 2 to job 3, it creates an opportunity

for worker B to be

promoted from job 1 to job 2. The basic idea is not startling, but it is sensible; see Stewman
(1986) for elaborations. Demougin and Siow (1994) and Rebitzer and Taylor (1995) have made
nice starts towards incorporating

such demand-side

effects into theoretical models

in labor

economics.
Granovetter

(1974) analyzed the importance

information for job-seekers.

of friends

and relatives as sources

More recently, Burt (1992) and Podolny and Baron (1995) have

studied analogous networks within firms, asking how the size and interconnectedness
individual’s

of

net work influences

the individud’s

promotion

prospects.

of an

Burt gives

special

prominence to the idea of a “structural hole,” where worker A knows several workers of type B
and several of type C, but no B worker knows a C worker. The existing smiological

research

largely treats networks as exogenous and asks what they do. This approach has already migrated
into the economics literature; see Montgomery (199 1), for example. But if certain network forms
are advantageous, such as Burt’s structural hole, then it would be interesting to consider under
what circumstances such networks might be formed or modified endogenously.
Finally,

Pfeffer

(1983)

pioneered

the study

of “organizational

demography”

by

suggesting how the distributions of individual attributes (such as age, sex, race, education level,
and seniority)
innovation,

within an organization

productivity,

satisfaction,

or work group might

influence

outcomes

such as

and turnover.

A large empirical literature now exists.

Wagner, Pfeffer, and O’Reilly (1984), for example,

study turnover in 599 top-management

groups in 31 Fortune 500 firms.

In a logistic regression

on individual

turnover,

including

controls for the individual’s age and the firm’s performance, the extent to which the individual is
similar in age to other group members decreases the chance of turnover.

3. Conclusion

I hope

understanding

to have shown

that labor economics

has made some progress

two limited aspects of employment relationships:

towards

incentive pay and careers in

organizations. Several other concrete questions also deserve attention, including job design, skill
development, and participative decision-making.

A more fundamental and abstract question also

needs work: what is an employment relationship?
Williamson,

Wachter,

and Harris

(1975)

provide

The classic papers by Simon (1951) and
good

starts.

An ideal answer

to this

fundamental question would also shed light on some of the concrete issues—incentives,
design, and the like.

job

26
Much of the theory and evidence I have described is geared towards white-collar workers
(especially

managers

and professionals)

in large US firms.

Osterman’s

(1987) “salaried” employment

system,

That is, I have focused

rather than the “industrial,”

on

“craft,” or

“secondary” employment systems. All four systems deserve more attention, as do systems (and
their institutions) in other countries and from other eras.
One view is that economics is abut

markets, so labor economics should focus on the

labor market, leaving the study of what goes on inside firms to fields such as human resource
management,

industrial

relations,

organizational

psychology,

and organizational

sociology.

Obviously, I disagree: I think labor economics has too many theoretical and empirical tools at its
disposal to make such an allocation of attention socially optimal. At the same time, I hope to have
suggested several areas in which labor economics could benefit from an exchange of theory and
evidence with the many other fields that study employment relationships.

References
Abowd, John. 1990. “Does Performance-Based Managerial Compensation
Performance?” Industrial and Lubor Relations Review 43: 52S-73S.

Affect Corporate

and David Card. 1989. “On the Covariance Structure of Earnings and Hours
Changes.” Ecorzometrica 57:411-45.
Francis Kramarz, and David Margolis. 1994, “High Wage Workers
Wag: Firms.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper #4917.
Acemoglu, Daron and Jom-Steffen Pischke. 1996. “Why
Evidence.” NBER Working Paper #5605,

Do Firms

Alchian, Armen and Harold Demsetz. 1972, “Production, Information
Organization.” American Ecorwmic Review 62:777-95.
Alston, Lee. 1981. “Tenure Choice in Southern
Economic History 18:211-32.

Agriculture,

and High

Train? Theory

and

Costs, and Economic

1930 -1960.”

Explorations

in

and Robert Higgs. 1982. “Contractual Mix in Southern Agriculture since the Civil
War: Facts, Hypotheses, and Test.” Journal of Ecorwmic History 42:327-53.
Althauser, Rokrt and Ame Kalleberg. 1990. “Identifying Career Lines and Internal Labor
Markets Within Firms: A Study in the Interrelationships of Theory and Methods.” In R.
Breiger (cd.), Social Mobility ad Social Structure. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Anderson, Kathryn, Richard Burkhauser, and Jennie Raymond. 1993. “The Effect of Creaming
on Placement Rates under the Job Training Partnership Act.” Industrial and Wor
Relations Review 46:613-24.
Antle, Rick and Abbie Smith. 1986. “An Empirical Investigation of the Relative Performance
Evaluation of Corporate Executives.” Journal of Accounting Research 24:1-39.

27
Asch, Beth. 1990. “Do Incentives Matter? The Case of Navy Recruiters.” lndus[rial d
Relations Review 43:89-106.

Lubor

Baker, George. 1992. “Incentive Contracts and Performance Measurement.” JournaZ of Political
Economy 100:598-614.
Robert Gibbons, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1994. “Subjective Performance Measures
in O~timal Incentive Contracts.” Qwrterly Journal of Economics 109:1125-56.
, and
. 1996. “Implicit Contracts and the Theory of the
Firm.’” Unpublished manuscript, Cornell University,
Fti~

Michael Gibbs, and Bengt Holmstrom. 1994a. “The Internal Economics of the
Evidence from Personnel Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109:881-919.

, and
Jour;al of Economics 109:921-55.

1994b. “The Wage Policy of a Firm.” Quatier@
-

Bmon, James. 1988. “The employment relation as a social relation.” Journal of rhe Japanese ad
International Economies 2:492-525.
Alison Davis-Blake, and William Bielby. 1986. “The Structure of Opportunity:
How ‘Promotion Ladders Vary within and among Organizations.” Atiinistrative
Science
Qwrterly 31:248-73.
Barron,

John and Kathy Paulson
Forthcoming, Journal oftibor

Gjerde. “Peer Pressure
Ecorwmics.

in an Agency

Relationship,”

Beau dry, Paul and John DiNardo. 1991. “The Effect of Implicit Contracts on the Movement of
Wages over the Business Cycle: Evidence from Microdata.” Journal of Political Economy
99:665-88.
Becker, Gary. 1962. Human Capital, New York: Columbia University Press.
Bernhardt, Dan. 1995, “Strategic Promotion and Compensation.”
62:315-39.
and David Scoones. 1993. “Promotion,
American Economic Review 84:771-91.

Review of Economic Studies

Turnover, and Preemptive Wage Offers.”

Brickley, James, Sanjai Bhagat, and Ronald Lease. 1985, “The Impact of brig-Range
Managerial Compensation Plans on Shareholder Wealth,” Journal of Accounting and
Economics 7:115-30,
Brown,

Charles. 1990. “Firm’s Choice of Method of Pay.” Industrial and Lubor Relations
Review 43:165 S-182S.
1992. “Wage Levels and Methds
75.

Bruderl,

of Pay.” Rand Jownal of Economics

23:366-

“

Josef,
Andreas Diekmann,
and Peter Preisendorfer.
1991. “Patterns
of
and Early
Intraorganizational
Mobility: Tournament Models, Path Dependency,
Promotion Effects.” Social Science Research 20:197-216.

Bull, Clive. 1987. “The Existence of Self-Enforcing
Economics 102:147-59.

Implicit Contracts,”

Quar[erly Journal of

Burt, Ronald, 1992. Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition.
University Press.

Cambridge: Harvard

28
Burtis, Andrew and John Gabarro.
School Case #9-485-037.

1995. “Brainad,

Bennis & Farrell.” Harvard

Business

Card, David and Dean Hyslop. 1995. “Does Inflation ‘Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market’?”
Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #356, December.
Cappelli, Peter and Keith Chauvin. 1991. “An InterPlant Test of the Efficiency
Hypothesis.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:769-87.
Carmichael, hme.
Economics

Wage

1983. “Firm-specific human capital and promotion ladders.” Bell Jourti
14:251-58.

and Bentley MacLeod. 1993, “Worker
Unpublished manuscript, Queen’s University.

Cooperation

of

and the Ratchet Effect.”

Chang, Chun, and Yijiang Wang. 1995. “A Framework for Understanding Differences in Labor
Turnover and Human Capital Investment.” Journal of Economic Behavior and
Organization 28:91-105.
Chang,

Chun, and Yijiang Wang. 1996. “Human Capital Investment
Information: The Pigovian Conjecture Revisited.” Forthcoming,
Economics 14:505-19.

under Asymmetric
Journul of Lubor

Chiappori, Pierre-Andr6, Bernard Salani6, and J. Valentin. 1996, “Insurance, Learning,
Career Profiles: An Empirical Test.” INSEE (CREST) Working Paper #9623.

and

Chevalier, Judith and Glen Ellison. 1995. ‘(Risk Taking by Mutual Funds as a Response
Incentives.” NBER Working Paper #5234, August.
Clawson, Daniel. 1980. Bureaucracy and the hbor
1980.

to

Process. New York: Monthly Review Press,

Cragg, Michael. 1995. “Performance Incentives in Government Sukontracting: Evidence from
the Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA).” Unpublished
manuscript,
Columbia
University.
Demougin, Dominique and Aloysius Siow. 1994. “Careers in Ongoing Hieruchies.”
Economic Review 84:1261-77.
DiPrete, Thomas. 1987. “Horizontal and Vertical Mobility in Organizations.”
Science Quarterly 32:422-44.

American

Ahinistrative

Doennger, Peter and Michael Piore. 1971, Internal L.ubor Markets and Manpower
Lexington, MA: Heath Lexington Books.
Dye, Ronald. 1992. “Relative Performance
Accounting Research 30:27-52.

Evaluation

and Project Selection.”

Analysis.
Journal of

Eccles, Robert and Dwight Crane, 1988. Doing Deals: lnvestmerz~ Banks at Work.
Harvard Business School Press.
Ehrenberg, Ronald and Michael Bognanno. 1990. “Do Tournaments
Jourml of Political Economy 98:1307-24.

Boston:

Have Incentive Effects?”

Fama, Eugene. 1980. “Agency Problems and the Theory of the Firm.” Jourwi
Economy 88:288-307.
Fast, Norman and Norman Berg. 1975, “The Lincoln Electric Company.” Hward
School Case #376-028.

of Political
Business

29
Felmlee, Diane. 1982. “Women’s
47:142-51.

Job Mobility Processes.”

American

Sociological

Review

Frank, Robert. 1985. Choosing the Right Pond: Human Behavior and the Quest for Status. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Garen, John. 1994. “Executive Compensation
Economy. 102:1175-99.

and Principal-Agent

Theory.” Journal of Politicai

Gaynor, Martin and Paul Gertler. 1995. “Moral hazard and risk spreading in partnerships.” Rand
Journal of Economics 26:591-613.
and James Rebitzer. 1995. “Equity and Effort: A Study of Group Norms
Incentives in Pay Systems.” Unpublished manuscript, Carnegie Mellon University.
Gibbons, Robert. 1987. “Piwe-Rate Incentive Schemes.” Jourml
29.
and Lawence
9:351-80.

of Lu.bor Economics

and

5:413-

Katz. 1991. “Layoffs and Lemon s.” Journal of Lu.bor Economics

and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Relative Performance Evaluation for Chief Executive
Officers.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 43: 30S-51S.
and
1992. “Optimal Incentive Contracts in the Presence of Career
Concerns: Theory and Evidence.” Journul of Political Economy 100:468-505.
and Michael Waldman. 1996. “A Theory of Wage and Promotion Dynamics Inside
a Firm,” Unpublished manuscript, Cornell University.
Gibbs, Michael. 1995. “Incentive compensation in a corporate hierarchy.” Journal of Accounting
and Economics 19:247-77.
Goldin, Claudia. 1986. “Monitoring Costs and Occupational Segregation
Analysis.” Journal of Labor Economics 4:1-27.

by Sex: A Historical

Gompers, Paul and Josh Lemer. 1994. “An Analysis of Compensation in the U.S.
Capital Partnership.” Unpublished manuscript, Harvard Business School.
Goodman, Paul. 1977. “Social Comparison Processes in Organizations.”
Salancik (eds,), New Directions in Organizational Bebvior.

Venture

In B. Staw and G,

Granovetter, Mark. 1974. Getting a Job: A Study of Contacts and Careers. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
1985: “Economic Action and Sccial Structure: The Problem of Embeddedness.”
Ame;ican Journal of Sociology 91:481-510.
Greene, Sarah and Leonard Schlesinger, 1992. “Gain Sharing
Harvard Business School Case W-692-012,
Greenwald, Bruce. 1986. “Adverse Selection in the Labr
Studies 53:325-47,

at Star Cablevision

Market.” Review

Group.”

of Economic

Hallock, Kevin. 1995. “Executive Pay and Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors.”
Princeton University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #340.
Harris,

Milton and Bengt Holmsrom.
Economic Studies 49:315-33.

1982. “A Theory of Wage Dynamics.”

Review

of

30
Hashimoto, Masanori. 1981. “Firm-Specific Human Capital as a Shared Investment.” American
Economic Review 71:475-81.
Haubrich, Joseph. 1994. “Risk Aversion, Performance Pay, and the Principal-Agent
Journal of Political Economy 102:258-76.

Problem,”

Hause, John. 1980. “The Fine Structure of Earnings and the On-the-Job Training Hypothesis.”
Ecorwmtrica 48:1013-30.
Healy, Paul. 1985. “The Effect of Bonus Schemes on Accounting Decisions,”
Accounting and Economics 7:85-107.

Jownal

Higgs, Robert. 1973. “Race, Tenure, and Resource Allocation in Southern Agriculture,
Journa[ of Economic History 33:149-69.
Holmstrom,
91,

of

1910.”

Bengt, 1979. “Moral Hazard and Observability.” Bell Journal of Economics

10:7-

1982a. “Moral Hazard in Teams.” Bell Journal of Economics 13:324-40.
1982b. “Managerial Incentive Problems-A
Dynamic Perspective,” In Essays in
Economics and Management in Honor of Lars Wahlbeck. Helsinki: Swedish School of
Economics.
and Paul Milgrom. 1987. “Aggregation and Linearity
Intertemporal Incentives.” Econometrics, 55:303-328.

in the Provision

of

and
1991, “Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,
Asset Ownership, and Job Design.” Journal of Luw, Economics, and Organiztiion 7:2452.
Hutchens, Robert. 1987. “A Test of Lazear’s Theory of Delayed Payment Con tracts.” Journal of
Lubor Economics 5:S 153-S 170.
Ichniowski, Casey, Kathryn Shaw, and Giovanna Prennushi. 1995. “The Effects of Human
Resource Management Practices on Productivity.”
National Bareau of Economic
Research Working Paper #5333,
Itoh, Hideshi. 1992. “Cooperation in Hierarchical Organizations:
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 8;321-45.

An Incentive Perspective.”

Janakiraman, Surya, Richard Lambert, and David Larcker. 1992, “An Empirical Investigation of
the Relative Performance Evaluation Hypothesis.” Journal of Accounting Research
30:53-69.
Jensen,

Michael, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990. “Performance
incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 98:225-64.

Pay and Top-Management

Jones, Derek and Takao Kate. 1995. “The Productivity Effects of Employee Stock-Ownership
Plans and Bonuses: Evidence from Japanese Panel Data.” American Economic Review
85:391-414.
Jovanovic, Boyan. 1979. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover.”
Economy 87:972-90.
Kaftan, Colleen and Louis Barnes.
School Case #491- 119.

1991. “Sun Hydraulics

Corporation.”

Journal of Political
Harvard

Business

31
Kahn, Charles and Gur Huberrnan. 1988. “Two-sided Uncertainty and ‘Up-or-Out’ Contracts.”
Journal of Labor Economics. 6:423-44.
Kahn, Lawrence and Peter Sherer. 1990. “Contingent Pay and Managerial Performance.”
Industrial andhbor
Relations Review 43: 107S-120S.
Kahn, Shulamit. 1994, “Evidence of Nominal Wage Stickiness from Microdata.” Unpublished
manuscript, Boston University.
Kandel, Eugene and Edward Lazear. 1992. “Peer Pressure and Partnership.”
Economy 100:801-17.

Journal of Poliricd

Kanemoto, Yoshitsugu and Bentley Mac~.
1991, “The Ratchet Effect and the Market for
Secondhand Workers.” Journal of Labor Ecorwmics 10:85-98.
Katzenbach, Jon and Douglas Smith. 1993. The Wisdom of Teams: Cre&ing the HighPe@ormance Organization, Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Kerr, Steven. 1975. “On the Folly of Rewinding
Mamgement Journal 18:769-83.

A, While Hoping

for B.” Academy

of

Krueger, Alan. 1991. “Ownership, Agency, and Wages: An Examination of Franchising in the
Fast Food Industry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106:75-101.
Kruse, Douglas. 1993. Projit Stiring: Does It Make a Dl&erence? Kalamazoo,
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research.
Lazear, Edward. 1979. “Why is there mandatory retirement?” Jourml
87:1261-84.
. 1986a. “Salties

MI: W.E.

of Political Economy

and Piece Rates,” Journal of Business 59:405-431.

. 1986b. “Raids and Offer Matching.” Research in Labor Economics 8:141-56.
1989.
97:561-80.

“Pay Equality and Industrial

Politics.”

Journal of Political Economy

, 1992. “The Job as a Concept.” In W. Bruns (cd.), Pe~ormance
Evaluations, and Incentives. Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
1996. “Performance Pay and Productivity.”
University.

Unpublished

Measurement,

manuscript,

Stanford

and Rosen, Sherwin. “Rank-Order Tournaments as Optimum Labor Contracts,”
Jourml of Political Economy, 89 (October 1981): 841-8@.
Lillard, Lee and Yoram Weiss. 1979. “Components of Variation in Panel Data: American
Scientists 1960 -1970,” Econometrics 47:437-54.
MacDonald, Glenn. 1982. “A Market Equilibrium Theory of Job Assignment
Accumulation of Information.” American Economic Review 72:1038-55.

and Sequential

MacLeod, W. Bentley and James Malcomson. 1988. “Reputation and Hierarchy in Dynamic
Models of Employment.” Journal of Political Economy 96:832-854.
and
1989. “Implicit Contracts,
Involuntary Unemployment.” Econometrics 57:447-80.

Incentive

Compatibility,

and

32
and

Contacts.”

1993. “Investments, Holdup,
American E;onomic Review 83:811-37.

and

the Form

of Market

Maremont, Mark. 1995. “Blind Ambition: How the pursuit of results got out of hand at Bausch
& Lomb.” Business Week, October 23.
Margolis, David. 1995. “Firm Heterogeneity and Worker Self-Selection Bias Estimated Returns
to Seniority.” CRANO, University of Montreal, Working Paper #95s-4.
Mathewson, Stanley. [193 1] 1969. Restriction of Ou@ut Among
Cmbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.

Unorganized

Workers.

McLaughlin, Kenneth. 1994. “Rigid Wages?” Journal of Monetary Economics 34:383-414.
Medoff, James, and Katharine Abraham. 1980. “Experience,
Quarterly Journa[ of Economics 95:703-36,
and
of Human Resources

Performance,

and Earnings.”

. 1981. “Are Those Paid More Really More Productive?” Journal
16:186-216.

Meyer, Margaret. 1991. “Learning from Coarse Information:
Profiles.” Review of Economic Studies 58:15-42.

Biased Contests

1992. “Biased Contests and Moral Hazard: Implications
Anna~es d’Economic et de Statistique 25/26: 165-87.

and Career

for Career Profiles.”

Trend Olsen, and Gaute Torsvik. ‘Limited Intertemporal Commitment
Desi~n.” Forthcoming, Journal of Economic Betivior and Organization.

and Job

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. 1988. “An Economic Approach to Influence Activities in
Organizations. “ American Journal of Sociology 94:S 154-79.
Miner, Anne, 1987. “Idiosyncratic Jobs in Formalizd
Quurterly 32:327-51.

Organizations.”

Administrative

Science

Mirrlees, James, 1974. “Notes on Welfare Economics, Information, and Uncertainty.”
Balch, D. McFadden, and S. Wu (eds.) Essays on Economic Behavior
Uncer[ain~, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Montgomery,

James.

Economic

1991.. “Smial

Networks

and Labor-Market

Outcomes:

In M.
Under

Toward

an

Analysis. “ American Economic Review81: 1408-18.

Murphy, Kevin J. 1985. “Corporate Performance and Managerial Remuneration:
Analysis.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 7:11-42.

An Empirical

1986. “Incentives, leming,
and compensation: a theoretical and empirical
inves~igation of managerial labor contracts.” Rand Journal of Economics 17:59-76.
.1991. “Merck&

Co., Inc. (A).” Harvard Business School Case #9-491-005.

O’Flaherty, Brendan and Aloysius Siow. 1992. “On the Job Screening, Up or Out Rules, and
Firm Growth.” Canadian Journal of Economics 25:346-68.
and
1995. “Up-or-Out Rules in the Market for Lawyers.” Jourml of
Labor Economics 13:7”@-35.
O’Reilly, Charles, Brian Main, and Graef Crystal. 1988. “CEO Compensation as Tournament
and Social Comparison: A Tale of Two Theories.” Administrative Science Qwterly 33:
257-74.

33

Osterman, Paul. 1987. “Choice of Employment Systems in Internal Labor Markets.” Industrial
Relations 26:46-67.
1994. “How Common is Workplace Transformation
Industrial and Lubor Relations Review 47; 173-88.
1995. “Skill, Training,
Industrial Relations 34:125-46.

and Work Organization

and Who Adopts

It?”

in American Establishments.”

Oyer, Paul. 1995. “The Effect of Sales Incentives on Business
University Industrial Relations Section Working Paper #354.

Seasonality.”

Princeton

Patterson, Gregory. 1992. “Distressed Shoppers, Disaffected Workers Prompt Stores to Alter
Sales Commission,” Wall Street Journal, July 1.
Pencavel, John, and Ben Craig. 1994. “The Empirical Performance of Orthodox Models of the
Firm: Conventional Firms and Worker Cooperatives.” Journal of Political Economy
102:718-44.
Pfeffer, Jeffrey. 1983. “Organizational Demography.” In L. Cummings
Research in Organizational Behvior. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Podolny, Joel, and James Baon.
Mobility, and Satisfaction
University.

and B. Staw (eds.),

1995. “Resources and Relationships: Social Networks,
in the Workplace.” Unpublished
manuscript, Stanford

Post, Richard J. and Kenneth E. Goodpaster. 1981. “H.J. Heinz Company: The Administration
of Policy,” Harvard Business School Case #382-034.
Prendergast, Canice. 1989. Theories
dissertation. Yale University.

of Inter~l

Labor

Markers,

Unpublished

doctoral

1992. “Career Development and Specific Human Capital Collection.” Journal of
the Japanese and International Economies 6;207-27.
1993, “The Role of promotion in Inducing Specific Human Capital Acquisition.”
Quar;erly Journal of Economics 108:523-34.
1995. “A Theory of Responsibility in Organizations.” Journal of Labor Economics
13:387-400.
Rebitzer, James and bwell
Taylor. 1995. “When Knowledge is an Asset: Explaining the
Organizational Structure of Large Law Firms.” Unpublished manuscript, Carnegie
Mellon University.
Ricart i Costa, Joan. 1988. “Managerial Task Assignment and Promotions.”
449-66.

Economtrica

56:

Roberts, Johnnie L. 1989. “Credit Squeeze: Dun & Bradstreet Faces Flap Over How It Sells
Reports on Businesses,” Wall Street Journal, March 2.
Rosen, Sherwin. 1982. “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings.” Bell Journal of
Economics 13:311-23.
1986. “Prizes and Incentives in Elimination Tournaments.”
Review 76:701-15.
Rosenbaum, James. 1984. Career wbility

Awrican

Economic

in a corporate hierarchy. New York: Academic Press.

34

Rotemberg, Julio. 1994. “Human Relations in the Workplace.” Jownal of Political Economy
102:684-717.
Roy, Donald. 1952. “Quota Restriction and Goldbricking in a Machine Shop,” American Joti
of Sociology 57:427-42.
Sattinger, Michael. 1975. “Comparative Advantage
Abilities.” Ecorwmetrica 43:455-68.

and the Distributions

1993. “Assignment Models of the Distribution
Literatwe 31:831-80.

of Earnings

and

of Earnings.” Journal of Economic

Shapiro, Carl and Joseph Stiglitz. 1984. “Equilibrium Unemployment
American Economic Review 74:433-44.
Simon, Herbert. 1951. “A Formal Model of the Employment
19:293-305.

as a Discipline Device.”

Relation ship.” Econometrics

Sloan, Richard. 1993. “Accounting earnings and top executive compensation.”
Accounting and Economics 16:55-100.

Jowml

of

Spilerman, Seymour and Hiroshi Ishida. 1994. “S~atification and Attainment in Lmge Japanese
Firms.”

Unpublished

manuscript,

Columbia

University.

and Trend Petersen.
1993. “Organizational
Structure, Determinants of Promotion,
and Gender Differences in Attainment.” Unpublished manuscript, Columbia University.

Staw,

Barry.

1974.

Organizational

Psychology

“Attitudinal
and Behavioral
Consequences
of Changing
Journal of Personali~
Reward: A Natural Field Experiment.”

a

Major

and Social

6:742-51.

1977. “Motivation in Organizations: Tow~ds Synthesis
Staw and G. Salancik (eds.), New Directions in Organizatioti
Clair Press.

In B.
Chicago: St.

and Redirection.”

Behavior.

Stewart, James. 1993. “Taking The Dare.” The New Yorker, July 26, pp. 34-39.
Stewman, Shelby. 1986. “Demographic
Science Quarterly 31:212-47.

Models

of Internal Lahr

Markets.” Administrative

Exmutive
Tehranian, Hassan and James Waegelein. 1985. “Market Reaction to Short-Te~
Compensation Plan Adoption.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 7:131-44.
Tirole, Jean. 1986. “Hierarchies and Bureaucracies: On the Role of Collusion in Organizations.”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization2:181-214.
1996. “A Theory of Collective Reputations (with applications to the persistence of
corruption and firm quality).” Review of Economic Studies 63:1-22.
Topel, Robert. 1991. “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,
Journal of Political Economy 99:145-76.
and Michael Ward. 1992, “Job Mobility and the Cmeers of Young Men.” Qmrter~
Journal of Ecorwmics 107:439-79,
Wagner, W. Gary, Jeffrey Pfeffer, and Charles O’Reilly. 1984, “Organizational Demography
and Turnover in Top-Management Groups.” Atiinistrative
Science Quarterly 29:74-92.

35

Waldman, David and Bruce Avolio. 1986. “A Meta-Analysis
Performance,” Journal of Applied Psychology71 :33-38.
Waldman, Michael. 1984a. “Worker Allocation,
Review of Economic Studies 51:95-109,
1984b. “Job Assignment,
Econjmics 15:255-87.
1990. “Up-or-Out
Economics 8:230-50.

Conhacts:

Hierarchies,

Signaling,

Perspective,”

System Mo&ls

Williamson, Oliver. 1983. “Credible Commitments:
American Economic Review 83:519-40.

in Job

and the Wage Distribution.”

and Efficiency.”

A Signaling

White, Harrison. 1970. Chains of Opportunip:
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

of Age Differences

RAND
Jourti

JournaZ of
of Lubor

of Mobility in Organization.

Using Hostages

to Support Exchange.”

Michael Wachter, and Jeffrey Hams. 1975, “Understanding the Employment
Rela~on: the Analysis of Idiosyncratic Exchange.” Bell Journal of Economics 6:250-78.
Vroom, Victor. 1968. “Industrial Social Psychology.”
The Handbook of Social Psychology.

In G. Lindzey and E. Aronson

(eds.),

