                               NBER WOR~G          PAPER SERIES




                         DOES ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY MATTER
                         FOR INTERNATIONAL SPECIALIZATION ?




                                        Donald R. Davis
                                       David E. Weinstein




                                   NBER Working Paper 5706




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1996




Special thanks are due to Jim Harrigan for providing us with access to the COMTAP data. Trevor
Reeve provided first-rate research assistance. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in
International Trade and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research,

O 1996 by Donald R. Davis and David E. Weinstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                         NBER Working Paper 5706
                                                                                     August 1996



                          DOES ECONOMIC GEOGRAPHY MATTER
                          FOR INTERNATIONAL SPECIALIZATION?



                                            ABS TRACT


       There are two principal      theories of why countries     trade: comparative   advantage   and

increasing returns to scale. Yet there is no empirical work that assesses the relative importance of

these two theories in accounting for production structure and trade. We use a framework that nests

an increasing returns model of economic geography featuring “home market” effects with that of

Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek.        We employ these trade models to account for the structure of OECD

manufacturing   production.      The data militate   against   the economic   geography   framework.

Moreover, even in the specification most generous to economic geography, endowments account for

90 percent of the explainable variance, economic geography but 10 percent.




Donald R. Davis                                                        David E, Weinstein
Department of Economics                                                Department of Economics
Harvard University                                                     Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138                                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                               deweinstein@harvard. edu
DDAVIS @fas.harvard.edu
 1      Introduction

        Why do countries trade? What determines the pattern of trade? It is difficult to conceive of

more fundamental problems for international trade economists. Two broad theones of international

trade patterns have been devised. One is comparative advantage and the other is increasing returns.

In reviewing the empirics of new trade thm~,      Krugman asks:

        “How much of world trade is explained by increasing returns as opposed to comparative
        advantage? That may not be a question with a precise answer. What is quite clear is that if
        a precise answer is possible, we do not know it ,“ (1994, p. 23).

This is a d~ply unsatisftiory   state. Our paper will make progress in two directions. The first is that

we implement     tests designed to distinguish a trading world of increasing returns fi-om one of

comparative advantage. The second is that we estimate the relative contribution          of each to the

explanato~   power of our model.

        While our model is of a trading world, the direct object of estimation is the structure of

manufacturing    production in the OECD, We chose this focus as it is commonly argued that it is

precisely there that increasing returns plays its most important role. Thus this provides the most

promising setting for identi&ng the effects of increasing returns,

       Of course, comparative advantage and increasing returns represent two classes of trade

models. To make progress on the question, one is forced to select a model to represent each class.

For amparative    advantage we will rely on a variant of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek      (HOV) model.

For increasing returns, one is forced immediately to cotiont         a fundamental divide within these

models. On one side is the set of zero transport cost models surveyed in Helpman and Krugman

(1985). We do not pursue this avenue since, as we argue below, it is difficult to identifi features of

production or trade structure that distinguish these models from a variety of comparative advantage
                                                                                                          2

models. The second set interacts increasing returns with transport costs to create what Krugman

(1991) has dubbed models of “economic geography.”

        Even the ltier represents a set of models, rather than a specific alternative. In selecting among

the set of potential representative models for ~onornic geography, we had three aims in mind. First,

we wanted it to be a model that has f-tured      prominently in discussions of the role of increasing

returns in trade. Second, we needed its central theoretical result to be robust to the departures

required to take a theory from blackboard to data. Finally, we needed it to present a clear contrast

in its predictions relative to those of comparative advantage theories. These criteria yield a clear

candidate, drawn horn the classic paper of Krugman (1980).1 This model features what has long been

termed the “home market effect .“ This element of economic geography is then nested with a

Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek     model to ready it for empirical tests.

        Our empirical results do not support the idea that this model of increasing returns contributes

to an understanding of the structure of OECD manufacturing. One specification of our model does

provide a glimmer of hope of finding these home market effects. However, the result is not robust

to inclusion of endowments as explanato~ variables at a 6ne level of production structure. Moreover,

even in the s@ution     most favorable to economic geography, the home market effects are of very

muted importance in understanding     OECD production. Of the explainable variance, 90 per cent is

accounted for by differences in factor endowments, and but 10 per cent by economic geography.




        1It should be emphasized that this is one model of economic geography, and so camot
represent the fill breadth of this work. Nonetheless, it is a particularly prominent and influential
version. For a broader cross-section of the theory, see Krugman (199 1). Our focus on this model
was strongly itiuenced by its amenability to empirical implementation on cross country data.
                                                                                                        3

          Our results do not provide a complete answer to Krugman’s          question of the relative

irnwtt.ante of mmparative advantage and increasing returns for trade. The first reason is simply that

our dependent variable is not trade but production. The second reason is that we have examined ordy

one incr-g       returns mode~ and this with a variety of strong identi~ing assumptions. Nonetheless,

the absenm of a significant wntribution by increasing returns in explaining the OECD manufacturing

production structure should be troubling for those who believe that increasing returns are pervasive

there. And the excellent ability of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek         framework to account for that

structure is very promising for the comparative advantage theories,




2         Increasing Returns and Comparative Advantage:
                Separating the Models

          2.1    Theory

          In the last fifieen years, the analysis of international trade has undergone what Krugman

(1990) describes as a “quiet revolution.” This denotes the challenge of theories based on increasing

returns    to scale to the previously dominant paradigm of trade relations, that of comparative

advantage.

          From the start, the increasing returns theory has promised to account for a number of

important observed phenomem that had ~rned       ptig    based on models of comparative advantage.

It offered a simple account of intraindustry trade, the simultaneous import and export of goods of

similar factor intensity. It promised to help us understand why so much of world trade is among

wuntries with relatively similar endowment proportions, apparently at odds with the Heckscher-Ohlin

theory. And it promised to provide a transparent theoretical underpinning for the gravity model,
                                                                                                              4

 perhaps the empirical trade model with the greatest success. Each of these has been held up as an

important advantage of the increasing returns models over those based on comparative advantage [see

Helpman and Krugman (1985)].

         These claims have bwn questioned, both theoretically and empirically. Work by Chipman

(1992), Davis (1995, 1996), and Deardorff (1995) challenges the theoretical                exclusivity of the

increasing returns modd in auntiig         for these phenomena. h a variety of settings, they demonstrate

how each of these observations can arise quite naturally in a world of comparative advantage. This

suggests a common feature that links these trade patterns in the two theoretical frameworks. In a

wor~ it is specialization. Anything that gives rise to a high degrw of specialization will generate these

trade patterns.      It can be increasing returns, Ricardian      technical differences,    Rybczynski-like

“m@cation”          effis,   or Armington preferenm.   The sense of this is appreciated by considering the

simplest monopolistic competition trade models: what role does increasing returns play, apart from

specialization, in giving rise to the characteristic trade patterns? The answer is none. In effect, the

recent theoretical work demonstrates       that the simple increasing returns models are observationally

equivalent   to a variety of models based on comparative          advantage featuring a high degree of

specialization. 2

        This cumulation of tharetical      and empirical studies has underscored a perverse success of

the increasing returns tkry.     The work of Helpman (1981), showing how to integrate the increasing




         2 The reader should bear in mind that this obsemational equivalence cuts both ways, Our
evidence that Heckscher-Ohlin does an excellent job in accounting for the structure of OECD
production cannot be read as a rejection of the zero transpofi cost increasing returns model. In
fact, this is exactly what one might expect from models such as that ofHelpman(198 1), where
Heckscher-Ohlin explains the broad industrial structure and increasing returns accounts for
intraindustry exchange.
                                                                                                       5

returns theory with the more Wltional   models, was a milestone in winning broad acceptance for the

new work. Yet the integration of the theories is now so complete that there seem to be no empirical

elements that can separate them. If this were the end of the story, one would have to be profoundly

disappointed that a theo~ with such apparently revolutionary implications has come to so little. Yet

we believe that this dejection is unwarranted.

        We have to agree with Kru-       (1991) that the truly revolutionary element in the increasing

returns framework    lies in the work which he has dubbed the new “economic geography.”           The

distinctive element of this work is the interaction of increasing returns with transport costs across

countries (or regions).3 In such a world, a fundamental contrast emerges with respect to models of

comparative advantage. This concerns the role of demand in determining trade patterns, In a model

of comparative advantage, ceteris puribus, unusually strong demand for a class of goods will turn

those goods into i.mportables. Transport wsts may diminish the trade volume, but will never lead the

good to be exported. This result dfiers importantly with that which emerges in a world of increasing

returns. The scale economies lead producers of individual goods to concentrate their production in

a single location. If a count~   has an unusually strong demand for a class of goods, that country

becomes a good choice as a site for production, and so it is likely to export the goods in question.

[See Krugman (1980)]

       International transport costs play a crucial role herein allowing us to separate comparative

advantage from increasing returns. Yet we know that shipping and communications      costs have fallen

sharply in recent decades. Nonetheless, we would assert that costs of trading between nations may




        3 Although we will speak of transport costs, the reader should interpret this broadly as any
per-unit rests that exist for transactions between but not within countries.
                                                                                                                6

yet substantially ex~       that of trade within nations. Important evidence of this appears in McCallum

 (1995), which shows that the international border matters a great deal, as seen in the contrast between

the volume of Canadian inter-provincial trade versus trade with similwly distant US states. We believe

that this justifies our focus on an increasing returns model with transport costs.

         In sum, when there are costs of trade, unusually strong demand for a good yields opposing

predictions      in a comparative advantage vs. an increasing returns world. Comparative           advantage

suggests you will import that good; increasing returns suggests that you will export it. It is this basic

contrast that we will exploit to separate the models in our empirical work.




        2.2        Empirics

        Are increasing returns empirically important for explaining trade patterns? A natural first

approach to answering this quaion       is to ask whether they are of measurable importance at the plant,

@     and industry level. This has been a major empirical research question in industrial organization.

The literature has tended to reject the idea that economies of scale are crucial for industrial market

structure, with the exception of electrical power, telecommunications,         and products with very high

transportation    costs. [See excellent sumeys in Jorgenson (1986) and Scherer and Ross (1990)].

        However this direct evidence is in any case unlikely to settle the issue of the importance of

scale anomies       for understanding trade patterns. From a theoretical perspective, it is the existence

of =nornies      of scale rather than their degree that is crucial in determining trade patterns. The results

of economic geography         could be driven by economies of scale too small to be detected by

anometric     tahniques.    Even if there are no economies of scale at the indust~ level, or economies

of scope at the firm level, small economies at the level of the individual product suffice for the
                                                                                                          7

tharetical   framework. On the other hand, if the alternative hypothesis is a world of constant returns

to scale, the ti   that any error bounds will always include a region of increasing returns means that

dir=   evidenw in principal cannot refite the increasing returns hypothesis. Finally, even if one were

convinced that increasing returns is important at some levels, it does not follow that it matters for

trade patterns. For example, if average cost curves declined over some region, so that constant

returns to scale is literally incorrect, they may yet become flat or U-shaped at a level of output small

enough to admit entrants that lead us to a competitive world. In effect, direct evidence on scale

economies is urdikely to be decisive in settling their importance for trade patterns.

        This suggests looking for the effms of de        anomies   in terms of their implications for trade

patterns. A voluminous literature has sought to do this by examining the way that a variety of proxies

for scale economies help to account for intraindustry trade. Our discussion of the theory above

suggests that such studies camot provide evidence that helps us to separate the theories, 4 As well,

an uncertain match between the theoretical categories and the division of industries in the data

provides additional cautions to this line of inquiry.s

        Another effort to cordirm the importance of scale economies in giving rise to trade has

mncemed the volume of bdateral trade. Again, we have outlined above the theoretical objections to

using evidence on bilateral trade volumes as a way to separate increasing returns and comparative




       4 For example, Harrigan (1994) notes that “A major difficulty in interpreting statistical
models to explain the Grubel-Lloyd [intraindustty trade] indices is that the monopolistic
competition model has very little to say about the cross-country and cross-industry variability of
the Grubel-Lloyd index.”

        SBased on such considerations, Krugman (1 994, p. 19) concluded: “Conceptually, then,
the data on intra-industry trade area very ambiguous tool for investigating economies of scale and
trade,” See also Davis and Bhagwati (1995).
                                                                                                         8

advantage theories, Here we take the studies on their own terms, Relatively simple gravity models

have long been known to do a good job of accounting for the volume of bilateral trade. Helpman

(1988) employed a variant of a gravity model based on an underlying monopolistic           competition

*work         to examine time series data for fourteen industrial countries. Generally the model worked

well, and Helpman viewed the results as evidence in favor of the scale economies framework.

Hurnmels and~hn(1995)             approached these results with a clever twist. They applied a variant

of Helpman’s approach to a data set consisting mostly of developing countries for which the

monopolistic    competition model was ex ante not expected to work. Their results showed that the

model “worked”       almost as well as in the study of Helpman. Evidently something more than just

increasing returns was at work.

          Only a few years ago, chastisement of the increasing returns account of trade patterns for a

paucity    of empirical support would have been tendencious. Mer          all, empirical work on the

comparative     advantage theories hardly inspired confidence. The studies of Leontief (1953), and

Bowe~ Learner, and Sveikauskas (1987), suggested deep problems. Yet the last several years have

witnessed a revival of empirical work on comparative advantage. This includes the work of Trefler

(1993, 1996), Davis, Weinstein, et al. (1996), Brecher and Choudhri (1993), and Harrigan (1996).

To be sure, all of these have departed from the simplest factor price equalization          models of

Samuel son and Vanek. Yet the deviations have been very simple, and in the spirit of traditional

wmparative advantage, such as Ricardian technical differences, failures of factor price equalization,

and consideration of cross-count~     differences in demand patterns. And they have shown that with

sensible alterations, the simple comparative advantage models seem to do quite well.
                                                                                                           9

3         A Theoretical Framework for Empirical Tests

          3.1      Introduction

          The aim of this section is to provide a theoretical framework for empirical examination of the

structure of production across the OECD wuntries. The null hypothesis will be that the structure of

production      is determined   entirely according    to the multi-factor   Heckscher-Ohlin    theo~.   The

alternative mnsidered is that Heckscher-Ohlin        must be augmented with a simple model of econotic

geography.

          There are no prior tests for a ve~ good reason. To be empirically implementable, a complete

anornic     geography theory must allow for increasing returns and transport costs. It must allow for

many countries, and for these to vary in endowment proportions,              economic size, and demand

patterns. Finally, it must allow for differences across industries in input proportions       and size. Yet,

there is no theoretical model that incorporates all of these elements. We do not filly remedy this

shortmrning – our aim is more modest. We propose to explore these variations separately to reveal

the logic governing production patterns. Where necessary, we are willing to make strong maintained

assumptions on the structure of the technology. And then -- cognizant of the potential pitfalls -- we

wills-       an estimating equation that embodies what we view as the robust core of these models,

We believe that the necessity to initiate empirical work that places these elements in a common

framework justifies the approach we take.

          Our tharetica.1   work proceeds in two broad stages. The first is to explore the role of

idiosyncratic elements of demand in determining production patterns both in models of economic
                                                                                                      10

geography and comparative advantage. We then proceed to show how to nest the two frameworks

in a mmer     amenable to empirical testing.




        3.2      Economic Geography and the Home Market Effect

        In this sectiom we employ a model of =nomic      geography to develop a number of results that

form the foundation for our empirical work. The model draws strongly on the pioneering paper of

Krugman (1 980). We summarize one elaboration of this framework due to Weder (1995). And we

extend the basic model to check the robustness of the results for problems that become important

when we turn to empirical implementation.

        The model is developed with very strong symmetry conditions that provide a basis for factor

price equalization. Consider a world of two countries endowed in equal amounts with the single

factor labor, so that L = L*. In this world, there are two monopolistically    competitive industries,

indexed by X, and X2 Production of a variety in either indust~ takes place under increasing returns

to scale with identical production finctions across both varieties and industries, The labor usage in

the production   of an individual good j is given as F = a + b N, for g = 1, 2. The aggregate labor

constraint, for example in the home country, requires L = Zg F.

        There are two types of mnsumers in the world, those who consume only good X,, and those

who consume only good X2 A key assumption of the model is that the former type are more

prevalent in the home country, and the latter in the foreign country -- in fact that the two are mirror

images. Atypical consumer with a preference for the type Xl goods will maximize a utility finction

of the Dixit-Stiglitz kind, Max V = [Zg ,x, D ~ P]i’psubject to the available labor income.
                                                                                                     11

         An extremely mnvenient f~ture of Krugman’s model is that even in the presence of transport

 costs output per firm in equilibrium is at the same level in each of the countries. Along with the

 symmetries in demand and productio~ this implies that the production patterns of the two countries

can be filly described by the number of varieties produced in each of the industries. Let P be the

number of varieties of good g produced at Home relative to those produced abroad. Let 0<1        be the

ratio of demand for a typical import relative to a domestically produced variety. Let 2 represent the

ratio of demanders for good g at Home relative to the number in Foreign. Krugman shows that in the

range of incomplete specialization, the relative production levels p can be described as:


                                             ~=       A-u
                                                      1-AU


When 2 = / demand patterns are identical and the countries produce the same number of varieties

in each industry, leaving a zero net balance. This will play an important role when we turn to our

empirical implementation    as it suggests that predictions of production structure, ceteris paribus,

should be centered around an even distribution of the industries across the countries. Idiosyncratic

demand components will then explain deviations from this neutral production structure.

       Mormver, we need to consider closely the way in which idiosyncratic demand components

will translate into alterations in production structure. From above, and for the range of incomplete

specialization for which these relations are valid,




Krugman emphasized that this will imply that countries with a large “home market” for a good will

be net exporters of that good. For our purposes it is convenient to focus directly on the implications
                                                                                                      12

for production. That is, idiosyncratic demand patterns (indexed by A) have a magnified impact on

 production patterns. This will play a crucial role in our empirical implementation, helping to separate

the influences of economic geography from that of comparative advantage. These relations appear

in Figure 1 in schematic form.




  m“ema”d
       x;
                     I   x;
                                    I   Demand *

             ~j;,x::;
  =P,.,.C,..*
  X*
       ~     $:$$~



                                ❑ = Net Exports
Figure 1         Demand Idiosyncrasies have a Magnified
                          Impact on Production


            Krugman (1980) briefly considers a case in which the countries differ not ordy in demand

patterns, but also in population. One version of this case is considered at length in Weder (1995). In

the latter, the “mirror image” of the two countries is preserved in the sense that the share of

individuals of each type is exactly opposite for the two goods and countries. However it is also

assumed that one muntry is Imger, so may even have an absolutely larger demand for all varieties of

both goods.
                                                                                                       13

         Weder shows that there are in principle three influences on the pattern of production in his

 model: relative wages, w/w*; relative count~ size, DL*; and relative spending patterns, Wx where

his the proportion of consumers of the X, good at home, and~is the corresponding proportion for

the foreign country. Weder shows that the first two iduences          in effect net out, His main result

appears as Proposition 3: “In the open-economy equilibrium, each country is a net exporter of that

group of differentiated goods where it has a comparative home-market advantage.” And a country

is said to have a comparative home-market         advantage just when it has a higher proportion       of

demanders of one type relative to the other.




  ED’”’”’

                              ❑ = Net Exports
Figure 2     Production Patterns when Country
                       Size Differs

        Thus the wuntry with the relatively high share of X, demanders will be the net exporter of the

X, type goods. This remains true even when one country has an absolutely larger market for all

varieties in both industries. Ultimately, this is not surprising for an economist trained in the theo~ of
                                                                                                      14

 mmparative advantage. The aggregate resource constraint for each country is going to force some

ordering on the location of production, It is intuitively pleasing that this is decided, as above, by the

comparative strength of the demand patterns. This result is depicted schematically in Figure 2.

        There are two other directions in which generalizations are warranted. The first is to consider

what happens when there are more than two industries. The mnd        is to consider what happens when

there are more than two countries, A brief acquaintance with the simpler cases of Krugman (1980)

and Weder (1995) will mnvince the reader that such extensions threaten to become mired in a dense

jumble of algebra. Hence we eschew brute force, Rather, we will seek to capitalize on the beauty of

Krugman’s symmetry assumptions to explore th~       problems. One element of this symmetry that will

be key to the results that we examine is the fact that it results in factor price equalization among

muntriw in spite of being separated by transport costs, facing different vectors of goods prices, and

having quite distinct production and consumption patterns.

       We will now examine the problem of trade in the goods of more than two industries. We

approach this indirectly. Let there be two trading blocs isolated from each other, each bloc formed

of two countries. Each pair of countries is in a trading equilibrium similar to that of Krugman

described above (equal sti, etc.). There are only two differences. One is that the goods being traded

differ between the blocs. As before, the countries in Bloc One are trading in the industries X, and Xr

In Bloc Two, the muntries instead are trading in industries Y, and Yz,with their populations divided

between those who consume the respective goods. The second difference is that the strength of the

demand idiosyncrasies may vary across the two blocs. We assume that the demand differences are

greater with respect to Bloc Two goods. Now consider what would happen if each of the countries

in one bloc merged with one of the countries in the other bloc. This would have no implications for
                                                                                                         15

the real anomy,       although there would now be recorded trade between the two enlarged countries

in all four goods. Assuming that there was initially incomplete specialization in both blocs, this will

continue      to be true in the two erdarged countries. Because of the symmetry, the two enlarged

antries       will have exactly opposite rankings in degree of demand specialization. The key result for

our purposes       is that the degree of production    specialization will be greater for the goods with

stronger demand specifllzation.

            A sirnilw approach can be used to investigate trade patterns in a three country, three indust~

world. Let the industria be indexed by X,, X= and XY We will consider a case in which each country

has only two types of consumers: Country One has consumers who demand only goods from

industries Xl and Xz; Country Two has consumers who demand only goods from industries Xz and

X3; and CountV Three has has consumers who demand ordy goods from industries Xq and Xl.

Assume again that the countries are the same size, and that the proportion of the consumers that

demand the respective goods are j and (1 -~           in each country, with ~ > 1/2. It is clear from the

symmetry that the equilibrium will again feature factor price equalization. Moreover, given that the

cost conditions are unchanged, and the local demand conditions in the two markets that demand a

particular good are effectively the same as in the two country model, producers will face the same

tradaffs,    and so we will obsewe the same division of production between the markets with positive

demand. Thus while the move to more muntries makes the story marginally more intricate, the exact

same kind of home market effects can be obsewed in a world of many countries (and goods).
                                                                                                    16

        3.3      Production and Idiosyncratic Demand under Comparative Advantage

        We have already examined the relation between patterns of idiosyncratic          demand and

production    in a model of economic geography. We now ansider        the same problem in models of

comparative    advantage. A usefi.d benchmark case is that with zero transport costs. For simplicity,

consider a conventional freely-trading Heckscher-Ohlin     world with two goods, X and Y, and two

factors, capital and labor (each consumer supplying a unit of labor). Assume that we meet the

mnventional requirements for factor price equalization. Let there also be two types of consumers --

those who consume ordy X and those who consume ordy Y, Assume that the two types are initially

distributed uniformly across the muntries, Then trade patterns will be determined precisely according

to the standard Heckscher-Ohlin determinants of deviations from an average production pattern. Now

consider a redistribution of the mnsumer types across countries that leaves the aggregate labor force

in each unaffected. This will yield the same equilibrium relative goods price [see Dixit-Norman

(1980)], but the muntries now have an idiosyncratic component of demand. Our concern is whether

the idiosyncratic demand pattern affects production. It does not. The reason is that with a fixed

production    set, the equilibrium goods prices are sufficient to determine production structure. The

goods prices themselves depend on the structure of world demand (not directly its local component).

[See Figure Three]
                                                                                                      17



           K
                                    ,kx




                                                          ‘Y
                  x




Figure 3



        The problem is ordy slightly more complicated when we consider a competitive world with

transport costs. Unfortunately,    once we introduce transport costs it is no longer simple to conduct

experiments that change the pattern of local demand while leaving world demand (so equilibrium

goods prices) uti@ed.       Thus we turn to a slightly different experiment, that of considering shocks

to the pattern of local demand (not compensated elsewhere). The intuition comes through simply

enough in a partial equilibrium framework.G

       Consider       a world with N countries -- Home and N -1      (potential) suppliers of the home

importable. Let the home supply curve be given by P = a + h ~,       Each of the foreign suppliers has




        GOne can derive essentially similar results in a general equilibrium fiamewor~ although it
is more cumbersome, The partial equilibrium results nevertheless provide the intuition for the
workings of a true comparative advantage model.
                                                                                                       18

a parallel excess supply cume, P = a + r + bX, where T > 0 is a per-unit transport cost. This is

illustrated in Figure 4 for the case of a single foreign supplier.


                                                      S*
              P

                                ~,,

                         D’
                    D                                 ,.
                                                               SW

                        ,....

       a+t(     “




           a{




Figure 4      Idiosyncratic Demand in a Competitive World
                       with Transport Costs

        Our problem now can be broken down into two parts. When the equilibrium price falls in the

range [~ a + r] there are no imports, For local demand shifts that leave the equilibrium price in this

range, all local demand (idiosyncratic or not) must be met by local production. Hence in this range,

production and demand move one-for-one. However the good is not traded. If instead we consider

a positive local demand shock that moves us between equilibria with trade, then there is a supply

response from each of the muntries. In fact, it is straightforward to see that in this simple case if the

equilibrium change in quantity is W, then only&       =W      of it will be met through increased local
                                                                                                        19

supply. IfN is large (so that the typical country is relatively small amidst the aggregate), then the local

supply response at the margin will be close to zero.

        We must ponder one final fillip. This is the case when the number of goods exceeds the

number of ftiors.   It is well known that in such a case the HOV model does not filly determine the

mo~ntry       distribution of productio~    although it still determines the net factor content of trade.

In determining production there are degr=     of freedom equal to the excess number of goods relative

to factors. Ceieris puribus, this implies that even small costs of trading some of the relevant goods

could M    the fill measure of trade onto the remaining goods. For the goods with positive costs of

trade, local production and absoprtion may move one-for-one, even if these costs of trade are small.

       Our conclusio~     then, is that comparative     advantage can account for relations between

idiosyncratic demand and production that range from zero to one-to-one. The interpretations          vary,

though. The relation will be zero in the N-good, N-factor, frictionless trading world. In this same

world, but with transport mst~ there will be one range in which demand and production move one-to

one, and a region in which the relation is close to zero. Thus, the measured relation could be

anywhere between zero and one, depending on how the level of transport costs affects the weight that

should be placed on each of these regions. Finally, we saw that in a simple world in which the number

of goods exceeds the number of factors, it is possible that even small transport costs could lead

production and idiosyncratic demand to move one for one. In no case, though, would there ever be

a more than one-to-one relation in a comparative advantage world.
                                                                                                        20

          3.4     Nesting Heckscher-Ohlin        and Economic Geography

          In this section, we turn to the problem of nesting the models in a framework that will be

suitable for our empirical work. We begin with a simple model of the structure of production in a

Heckscher-Ohlin     world. The basics of this model are well know       so we review them only briefly.

Consider     a world in which all relevant countries       share identical,    constant   returns to scale

t~hnologies. It will prove convenient throughout our exercise to consider a model in which the input

coefficients are fixed technologically.   We assume throughout     that production in the countries of

interest is at least wdy   diversified across all goods of interest. For the case of two goods and two

ftiors,   the determination of production patterns for one of the muntnes     can be depicted as in Figure

3.

          When we mnsider placing the anomie      geography model in this setting, we must distinguish

betwm      industries, goods within an industry, and varieties of each of the goods. The approach that

we work with follows thatofHelpman(198       1). The broad structure of production at the indust~ level

is determined by Heckscher-Ohlin,      However, production of goods within each of the industries is

determined according to the influences identiied in the models of economic geography above, Given

the output level, we can compute directly the commitment of resources to an industry by each

country. Countries differ in the scale of their industries but not in the factor composition within an

industry. These differences in industry size will play a key role as an aggregate resource constraint

that insures that it is the relative (not absolute) market sizes that matter for production patterns.
                                                                                                   21



            K




                  X2
                                                        ‘Y


             x,




Figure 5


         When we think about a single industry across wuntries, this mmes close to exactly mimicking

the simple monomic geography models. The presence of many factors is not a problem since the

fixed coefficients effectively turn the many into one composite factor. The level of resources

committed by each to the indust~ is fixed and works similarly to the fixed labor endowment in the

simpler models. The one important difference between this more complex setting and the simpler

mnomic     geography models is that the relevant factor prices are determined in a model broader than

the single four digit industry. Nonetheless, the fact that each country faces an aggregate resource

constraint specific to the industry (under our maintained assumption of fixed coefficients) strongly

suggests that relative demand will continue to figure prominently in the assignment of production of

specific goods across countries.
                                                                                                      22

4       Empirical Implementation

        4.1     Focalizing      the Hypotheses

        Our formalization of the Hwkscher-Ohlin         production model is straightfo~ard   and mirrors

that of a long line of empirical trade papers [S-,        Learner and Levinsohn (1995)]. We start by

assuming that the location of production can be determined by factor endowments according to the

following formula:


(1)                                               X’QV



where X is a N x C matrix of output, V is a M x C matrix of factor endowments, and Q is a N x A4

matrix of parameters that in the case of equal numbers of goods and factors equals the inverse of the

Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek technology matrix. In our implementation of (l), N> A4, but following a long

tradition in empirical trade, we will assume that the number of goods in the real world equals the

number of factors and that missing factors are contained in the error term, Whether it is reasonable

to think of world production as being driven by ftior    endowments can then be assessed by examining

how well equation (1) fits the data.

        Following our theoretical model, let’s assume that there are N= A4 industries that use factors

in different proportions   per unit output, and that technology is Leontief. Suppose that within an

industry n, there are Gn goods that are produced using factors in the same proportions but enter into

the utiity finction separately. Within an indust~ like textiles, these goods might correspond to spun

textiles, knit fabrics, carpets and rugs, etc. Since all of these goods are produced using the same

techniques, we can rewrite equation 1 as
                                                                                                        23



(2)                         x“.    :X--=Q”V     ,
                                  g=l



for all industries n and goods g. Here f? denotes the nth row of the D matrix. Our formulation allows

us to have a very special type of indeterminacy. While the aggregate output of industries is assumed

to be driven by ftior   endowment% the output shares of goods within the indust~ is fisumed not to

be driven by f-or     endowments. In other words, to draw an example from the economic geography

literature, ftior   endoments     may tell us something about which muntries are large textile producers,

but they may be very poor predictors of where goods like carpets are located.

         Since a maintained assumption is that Heckscher-Ohlin      models of production camot explain

production patterns below a certain level of aggregation, we need a theory to explain the location of

production of goods within an industry, Let’s suppose that each good is comprised of a number of

varieties that are produced using increasing returns technology. To continue our example, we are

assuming     that within the industry “textiles” there is a good “carpets”          that is comprised   of

monopolistically mmpetitive varieties like “wall-to-waU carpets,” “Persian carpets,” “rugs,” etc., each

of which is produced with economies of scale. It is at the varieties level that we assume economies

of scale drives specialization.      This assumption    of specialization   for varieties at this level of

disaggregation seems reasonable in light of Grubel and Lloyd’s (1975) haling that at the SITC 5-digit

level, intraindustry trade ordy accounts for only 14% of all trade.

        Empirically, the challenge is to determine whether the assumption that economies of scale

form the s~ialization     helps us understand production patterns at the goods level. Following Weder

(1995), we model goods production as
                                                                                                         24



(3)
                                 ‘~w=i~xnc[:-$)xn
where D denotes absorption in either the country or the world and the first derivatives are expected

to be non-negative. The first term in~captures       the tendency for each country to produce the same

relative ties   of each good. Absent any demand differences, the share of production of any good g

in industry n should be approximately      equal to the share in the world, The second term mirrors

Weder’s rendition for tilng a net exporter of a wmmodity in a two muntry world where one country

diffws in Sk from the other. High relative demand for a good in one country causes more vaneties

to locate in that muntry and thus raises production of that good. In our specification we suggest that

this Wlght lirdcing relative demands in two countries should be expendable to comparisons between

one muntry and the rest of the world. This specification captures the notion that production should

locate in muntries with idiosyncratically high relative demands. Using the fact that world production

must equal world consumptio~     we can rewrite (3) as


                                             nW
(3’)                             X;w:
                                           D
                                           ~xnc
                                           D“”       ‘
                                                         [
                                                             D;
                                                             _-—
                                                             Dnc
                                                                 D:w
                                                                    D“”
                                                                              Xnc

                                                                                    1
SinW in our mple    all goods are produd     in all countries, equation (3’) should be differentiable. This

enables us to employ the first order approximation of version of (3’) presented below:


                                                   nW
                                            D                           D:  D;w     xnc+e~
(4)                              XJw=aj+~l~X”c+p                        —-—
                                                  D nW                  Dnc   Dnw
                                                                   (1
or
                                                                                                     25


(4’)




where


                                        SHAREg”= ~Xnw
                                                 D n.

and




The fls wrrespond
                                  IDIODEIU;=
                                                   (1
                                                   Dgw D;w
                                                   —-—
                                                   D..   Dnw
                                                                 x..




                     to the first terms in a Taylor expansion and the emor corresponds to the higher

order terms. The structure that we have placed on the analysis enables us to directly test the

hypothesis of whether economic geography can improve our understanding of production patterns

at the 4-digit level relative to the alternative    hypothesis   that all production   at that level is

indeterminate.

        A few more words are in order about the specification. If the absorption of goods within

countries is proportional   to world production    of goods (i.e. consumption    is homothetic),   then

SHARE will equal the average level of production of a sub-industry within a Heckscher-Ohlin

industry. In general, one should expect the coefficient on SHARE to be one.

        We can now move to formal hypothesis testing. The coefficient on IDIODEM captures the

impact that idiosyncratic patterns of demand have on production. If we estimate equation (4’), we can

evaluate three hypotheses. First if PI is zero, then we conclude that we are in a world in which

transport   costs do not matter. As we have seen in the theoretical      section, however, even in a

comparative advantage world transportation costs can cause output to move as much as one for one

with demand. This is esp=ially true in cases where there are more goods than factors -- a maintained
                                                                                                           26

 assumption in our analysis.’ We can test this hypothesis by examining if fll is between zero and one.

 If~l fds within this range, then we mnclude that we are in a world in which transportation         costs and

 demand patterns affect the location of production              but there are no economies of scale driving

 specialization. Finally, if ~1 exceeds one, then we conclude that the magnification or home market

effects associated with economies of scale are playing some role in driving production.                These

hypotheses are summarized below:

                                      Interpretation   of fll

             1) pl = o:               Frictiordess Comparative Advantage World

         2) p, E (o, 1]:              Comparative Advantage World with Transport Costs

         3)p1>l:                      Economic Geography

         There is a probleq          however, with simply relying on estimates of equation (4’) to test

hypotheses. Remember that the maintained null hypothesis in all of these cases is that after industry

output is determined, factor endowments play no role in determining the location of production at

the goods level. An alternative approach would be assume that there are an equal number of goods

and ftiors      and test the specification outlined in equation (4’) against a specification that postulates

that ftior     endowments determine levels of production of goods within industries, i.e. we would like

to test the specification suggested by equation (4’) against the specification below:


(2’)




         7 Whilewe assumetiat tbenumbergoodsexceedstie numberoffactors,we alsowsume thatthe numberof
industries equals the number of factors.
                                                                                                     27

The specification test would then consist of estimating a nested model,


(4”)                      X~m=a~+~lSHAMgM+~JDIOD~gM               +Q~Vc+E~ ,




and seeing if the coefficient on ~IODEM       was robust to the inclusion of factor endowments.

         There is also one additional theoretical issue that we need to address at this stage. Since we

are considering a model with transport costs, even in a standard Heckscher-Ohlin       framework, the

FOB price is going to be lower than the CIF price. This implies that there may be a tendency for

domestic absorption to be higher if a muntry is a net exporter of a good because domestic consumers

pay the FOB price while mnsumers in muntries that import the good must pay the CIF price plus the

cost of transportation. In order words, absorption may mvq     with production because countries with

higher production levels are more likely to be net exporters of goods and therefore have lower prices,

One way to ~rrect for this problem is to include a dummy variable that is one if the country is a net

exporter of the good and zero otherwise. However, because the impact of this effect is likely to be

proportional to the size of demand, we created EXPORTD which is the interaction of a net export

dummy with domestic absorption.




        4.2     Econometric Issues

        Equations (2) and (4’) can be estimated separately or as a system of seemingly unrelated

regressions.   The main problem with estimating        each of the equations    separately   is missing

obsewations    at the 4-digit level. At the 3-digit level we have observations for each industry for 22

countries but at the 4-digit level we lose 9 countries. This greatly reduces the number of available
                                                                                                                    28

 degrees of freedom especially in specifications where we would like to nest the two hypotheses. We

 therefore   opted to estimate all of the equations both individually and as a system of seemingly

 unrelated regressions where we imposed the restriction that the coefficients on the IDIODEM and

 SHARE had to be the same across equations.”

         There are a series of econometric issues, however, that prevent direct estimation of these

equations. First, in equation (4’) there is a simultaneity problem arising from the fact that X~= is an

element of ~.    This makes the estimated mf6cients           biased and inconsistent. However, if we assume

that Heckscher-Ohlin is valid at higher levels of aggregation, then theory provides us with a good set

of instruments. Namely, if we assume that equation (2) is valid, we can use factor endowments as

instruments for the sectoral level of output.

         Second, we also must deal with two types of heteroskedasticity.               First, larger countries tend

to produce more of everything and therefore the errors are likely to be correlated with country size.

bnd,     when we estimate equations (4’) and (4”), there is an additional element of heteroskedasticity

that arises from the fact that industries that are larger are likely to have larger errors. We correct for

this heteroskedasticity      by assuming that errors across countries are determined by the following

stochastic process:

                                                                       0
(5)                                                      e:=ygGNPC ‘ +pgC




          8Degr=s of frdom    considerations also ford   us to impse a diagonal variance-invariance matrix on the
residuals.
                                                                                                        29

where y~ and 0~ are parameters and pw is assumed to be normally distributed across countries.

BHse      equation (5) was estimated in low our heteroskedasticity corrected indust~       standard errors

were close to unity but not exactly equal to one. In order to avoid spuriously weighting some

industrim more than others bse         of the log form of the regressio~   we forced all industry standard

errors to equal one by dividing all observations by the heteroskedasticity      corrected standard errors

appropriate for that good.

         Finally, one may wonder whether it is appropriate        to assume spherical errors when our

dependent     variable is bounded below at zero. This is not just an econometric           problem but a

theoretical problem too. If a country does not produce a particular good, it could indicate that the

country is no longer in the factor price equalization set and may be using different production

techniques.   Fortunately,     in our sample, all countries produced positive amounts at all levels of

disaggregatio~ so we f~l that our assumption regarding the normality of the disturbances probably

does not affect our results.




        4.3     Data

        Theory does not indicate how to find a level of disaggregation         where factor endowments

_      determining production structure and specialization is driven by increasing returns and demand

patterns. Our strategy was to use the most detailed cross-national data we could find and then assume

that industries at the most disaggregated levels were monopolistically competitive.

        The data source most appropriate for our purposes was the OECD’S Comparative Trade and

Production    (COMTAP)       data set. This provides comparable trade and production          data for 13
                                                                                                          30

 members of the OECD at the 4-digit level and 22 members of the OECD at the 3-digit classification

 level. These countries are listed in Table 1.

          In principle, working at the 4digit level enabled us to break manufacturing up into 82 4-digit

sectors, but because in 13 cases there was ordy one 4-digit sector within a three digit sector, our

sample was reduced to 69 4-digit and 27 3-digit sectors. In addition, we had to drop another 134-

digit ~ors      due to missing observations for some countries. Domestic absorption was calculated by

subtracting net exports from production, In two sectors (fir dressing and dyeing and manufacturing

goods, not elsewhere classified), we obtained large negative numbers for domestic absorption for a

number of countries so we dropped those industries. For a few out of the remaining 897 obsewations,

imputed domestic absorption was negative but vety small (1 -2°/0 of production),         and we attributed

these negatives to measurement error and reclassified these amounts as zeros. Table 2 reports the 54

4-digit industries that we eventually used in the analysis. As one can see from the table, many of the

industries    at the 4-digit level, such as carpets and rugs and motor vehicles, have been used as

examples of monopolistically      competitive industries. Indeed this level of disaggregation   is basically

the same as the one used by Krugman (1991) to support his hypothesis that geography matters for

trade.

          Because of data limitations we were forced to measure domestic absorption as a residual.

Measuring      domestic absorption by using a residual potentially introduces a bias into our sample

through      the mismeasurement    of production.   If production    is recorded at too high a level for a

particular year, that will also tend to cause measured absorption to rise. This creates a simultaneity

problem if we use contemporaneous        demand. Furthermore,       since the spirit of economic geography

models is to explore how long-inn historical demand deviations tiect            production,   we thought it
                                                                                                         31

 inappropriate to regress current production on current demand. In order to deal with both of these

 issues, we decided to use average demand over the period 1970-1975 to identi~                idiosyncratic

 mmponents of demand, while other variables in our regressions were values for 1985. We also ran

 all speci.lications with demand dculated   over the time period 1976-1985 and just 1985 and obtained

results qualitatively the same.9

        Table 3 presents some sample statistics on the data. The first panel presents a correlation

matrix of 4-digit output across our sample of countries. The striking f~ture of this table is that output

is always positively mrrelated tithin our sample of countries and sometimes the correlation between

wuntries is quite high. This table demonstrates the ofien expressed notion that OECD countries have

a broadly similar production structure. Indeed, this absence of substantial variation in the relative sizes

of sectors within countries is often viewed as a prima facie case against Heckscher-Ohlin,

        Table 3 also reports sample statistics for our consumption variables. The data reveals that

there are typically four 4di@t =ors    within a 3-digit sector. Furthermore,   it appears that absorption

distortions are ftirly symmetrically distributed around zero in our sample.

        Our data on ftior   endowments came from a number of sources. Country capital stocks were

Aculated by usiig a perpetual inventory method using investment and price data from Summers and

Heston (1988) and a depreciation rate of 0.133. The rate was chosen to be consistent with earlier

studies such as BoweL Learner, and Sveikauskas (1987) and Davis, Weinstein et. al. (1996). World

endowments of labor force by educational level were taken from the UNESCO Sfalistical Yearbook,




        9 Avinash Dixit pointed out to us a second potential bias in favor of the geography model,
One can imagine a variety of reasons why local demand and production structure may positively
covary independent of the elements that define economic geography. This would tend to bias our
estimates of the home market effect upwards.
                                                                                                       32

 and hel production is equal to the sum of the production of solid fiels, liquid fiels, and natural gas

 in coal-equivalent units as recorded in United Nations’ Ener~      Statistics Yearbook,




         4.4       Estimating the Heckscher-Ohlin Production Model

        We append an additive error term on the end of equation (2) in order to estimate the

Heckscher-Ohlin      production   equation. Although many authors have regressed trade on a cross

section of ftior   endowments, it is worth noting that as fw as we know, no one has directly estimated

equation (2) across countries. The closest work in this spirit is that of Harrigan (1995). Harrigan

decided not to estimate 2 directly because he was concerned that with 20 countries and 4 factors (in

our case we will use 22 countries and 5 factors), he would not have many degrees of freedom.

Mq       he estimated equation (2) using time series data with a constant term for each industry and

a procedure    that allowed the coefficients to vary somewhat over time. Although the time series

estimates all had R2 in excess of 0.9, when he compared the relative magnitudes of the fitted values

to the actual outputs, Harrigan found very large predictive errors. In other words, his estimates were

largely driven by the time series variation, but had little to say about the between variation. Harrigan

therefore concluded that “the ~eckscher-Otdin]        model does not do a particularly good job at

explaining cross-country variation in output.”

        The results were not promising for the Heckscher-Ohlin     model, but, as Harngan noted, it is

~cult   to ~       whether the ftiure was due to a failure of the theory or simply in the way in which

f? was allowed to vary over time. Consider the following problem. Suppose productivity or price

changes causes the technology matrix to move according to some well-behaved pattern, how would

those changes appear in the ~matnx?    Since the elements of the Omatrix are going to be a complex
                                                                                                          33

 non-linear transformation    of the elements of the technology matrix, it would be very surprising if

 movements in the Owere also well behaved. We therefore should not be surprised if it is difficult to

 characterize movements in Q over time.

          Since rigorous application of the theory requires cross-sectional     estimatio~   this is the path

we will follow. Even so, we must bear in mind that the theory may fail an F-test and the regression

may have a low adjusted R2 because we are working with few degrees of freedom.

         Table 4 presents the results of estimating equation (2) using 3-digit output data. Overall,

output seems to be highly correlated with factor endowments with R2 that are on average 0.90 and

in most regressions the coefficients of several of the factors have significant t-statistics indicating that

the tifficients   can be measured with a reasonable amount of precision. We find the good fits of these

regressions quite surprising, especially in light of Harrigan’s results. Our results clearly suggest that

production patterns are actually extremely highly correlated with factor endowments.

         We do not report the coefficients because, beyond their sign, their values are dependent on

both the sti of the sector and the units used to measure the factor endowments. This makes it very

difficult to interpret magnitudes,    The coefficient on capital is almost always significant, which

indicates that aggregate capital stocks play an important role in the level of manufacturing activity.

There does not seem to be much of a pattern to the estimates of the other coefficients, At first glance,

this might appear troubling but a bit more thought suggests that one should not be concerned. First,

even if we ~pt     the strong maintained assumption that there are an equal number of industries and

factors and hence that our coefficients are Rybczynski derivatives, the coefficients we estimated

correspond to elements in the inverse of a twhnology matrix with a dimension of around thirty. Since

it is impossible to infer the coefficients of a high dimension technology matrix from parts of its
                                                                                                        34

inverse, we f~l that the coefficients cannot be interpreted. Second, if there are more industries than

ftiors,    then despite the indeterminacy of the system, it still maybe the case that production patterns

are correlated with factor endowments,         but the coefficients will not necessarily correspond     to

technological parameters.

           These production results are somewhat better than the results that typically obtain when net

trade flows are regressed on factor endowments. Learner (1 984), for example, used ten factors and

ten industries and obtained an average R2 of 0.64 on 1975 data. One possible reason for our better

fit is that in this sample we have restricted ourselves to ordy looking at the OECD while other

authors,     e.g. Learner (1984),    have typically used much broader       samples of countries.    Core

assumptions of the Heckscher-Ohlin       model such as identical technologies, factor price equalization,

and the absence of barriers to trade are likely to be much closer to the truth for the OECD than for

developing countries. Second, it may also be the case that factor endowments predict output better

than consumption,      causing the production side of the model to work better than the consumption

side. Hunter and Markusen (1989) and Hunter (1991) have shown that non-homothetic             preferences

may bean irnpo-t       ftior   in explaining trade flows. Since d~erences in income are likely to be more

pronoud        in samples that include both the OECD and developing countries, it is possible that the

relatively poorer fit in previous studies of trade are due to consumption distortions across countries

with very different per capita incomes. On the other hand, the fact that Heckscher-OMin           is ofien

thought to explain North-South trade more than North-North trade because of the greater differences

in factor endowments      between developed and developing countries tends to run counter to this

second argument.
                                                                                                      35

         Oddly enough, the more troubling fmture of these results is the very high R2. We did not

 exp    the HO model to fit cross-sectional data for the OECD this well. The most obvious candidate

for a spurious correlation is country size. Our data contains two sorts of variation. The first type of

variation is due solely to size factors. Suppose two countries have identical factor proportions,    but

one country is simply larger than the other. In this case one might obtain very good fits of a

regression of output on factor endowments         bwause factor endowments      are simply a proxy for

muntty size and country size is proportional to output in each sector. The second type of variation

arises solely from ftior   proportion d~erences. If two countries had the same GDP but differed only

in their relative endowments, it also should be possible to predict output patterns knowing factor

endowments. While theoretidy       both sources of variation should be related in the same way to factor

endowments, it would be troubling if size were the ordy factor driving our results. Indeed, looking

at the bgh correlations of output at the 4-digit level revealed in Table 3, it seems plausible that the

first explanation could be driving our results.

        Fortunately, this potential problem can be easily resolved. All of the size based variation can

be eliminated by forcing 0 to equal 2 in our heteroskAicity    correction. This deflates all output and

factors by GDP and eliminates all of the size based variation leaving us with only the factor

proportion based variation. Table 4A reports the results of indust~ by industry estimation making

this mrrection.   As one might suspect, the size based variation did tend to increase our R2’s, but not

by that much, On average, our adjusted R*’s averaged 0.7, which is still quite respectable, We

therefore conclude that even when looking only at the purely compositional component of output

variatio~ factors endowments explain a very large share of output within the OECD,
                                                                                                      36

        4.5      Testing for the Home Market Effect

        The relationships that we ~k   to test can be portrayed graphically, and it makes sense to look

at the data before plunging into the econometrics. Obviously, it is impossible to display a multivariate

relationship   in a bivariate graph but we can obtain some sense of the data through the following

exercise. If we divide both sides of equation (4’) by X and then set fll equal to 1 and bring the share

term over to the left-hand-side, we obtain




The left-hand-side   represents how much the share of a given 4-digit indust~       deviates relative to

world levels while the term in parentheses tells us of the magnitude of the idiosyncratic demand

distortion. Figure 6 presents the results of graphing the Iefi-hand-side of the above equation against

the term in parentheses. Plotting the data in this manner enables us to visually examine the various

hypotheses that we have been considering. If transportation      costs were zero and production was

CRS, one would expect to see a scatter of points lying along the horizontal line through zero. In this

case, demand distortions would have no impact on production distortions. If the world is CRS but

there are transportation rests one would expect the scatter of points to lie somewhere in between the

450 degree line and the horizontal line through zero. Finally, in the world of economic geography,

one would expect the points to be scattered along a line with a slope larger than 1 because

idiosyncratic demand patterns should have magnified effects on production. The data clearly reject

the hypothesis that we are in a frictionless comparative advantage world, The two series are highly
                                                                                 Figure 6


                               Production                Deviation versus Idiosyncratic                                          Demand


                                                                   (3 and 4-Digit Data)




        0.6-

                                                                                                                    .
                                                                                                                ●

                                                                                                                ●

        0.4-                                                                                            ●

                                                                                              ●



                                                                                              ●.9’*
                                                                                              ● %
                                                                                                            .
3m      o.2–                                                                     8
 Q
 -
3
 n
   I      0“                                                             *
                                                                         ●
2                                                                                            ~
G
x                                                    9                                                :,.
       -o.2-                                                                                 ‘.
                                                          .                                       9



                                                 .
       -o.4-



       -0.6-



       -0.8          r
                           I
                                  r   ,
                                            I
                                                              r
                                                                    I
                                                                             ,       r            ,    ,            I   ,    I    ,   r
                                                                                                                                           I    r


              -0.8       -0.6             -0.4                    -0.2                   0                      0.2         0.4           0.6       0.8

                                                                         lDloDEM/x3
                                                                                                         37

 mrrelated @ = 0.77), and the data appears to be distributed along a line with a slope of about one. 10

 This seems to suggest that either a weak home market effect or indeterminacy are apparent in these

data, We also experimented by plotting the same variables for 2 and 3-digit industries instead of 3 and

4-digit ones. The results displayed in Figure 7 seem to lend support to the view that, at least at this

level of aggregatio~     mnomic     geography eff~s    do not seem important.

          Regression analysis mrdirms the general imprtion    of the data we obtained in Figure 6. Table

6 presents the results of estimating equation 5 under a variety of specifications.   In the first panel, we

estimate aversion of the model in which ordy geography effects are allowed to operate at the 4-digit

level. In this specificatio~ the ~flicient   on IDIODEM is precisely measured and significantly larger

than one, indicating that historical idiosyncratic demand patterns are associated with even larger

fiture production shares. In other words, at the mea~ a country that had idiosyncratic demand that

was lW!O larger than the world share of a given 4di@t good will see its production of that good rise

120Y0. It is also comforting to note that the coefficient on SHARE is close to one, as one would

expect.

          We were wncemed that this might be the result of FOB prices being lower than CIF prices,

so we corrected for this by adding EXPORTD. While the results indicate that being a net exporter

is highly correlated with production, it had almost no impact on any of the other point estimates in

the regressions.    This suggests that our results are not being driven by the fact that countries that

produce a lot tend to have lower prices and therefore consume more.




          10The fitted line has a slope of 1.03 with a standard error of 0.03.
                                                                                                   Figure 7


                               Production Deviation versus Idiosyncratic                                                                 Demand


                                                                         (2 and 3-digit Data)




 0.6-
                                                                                                                                   45° Line

                                                                                                                              ●
 0.4-
                                                                                                                         ●   m
                                                                                       .*
                                                                                                                              ●

                                                                                                   ●
                                                                                                               ,:              ●


 0.2-                                                                                  ●           ●*
                                                                                                           ■



                                                                                                   w
                                                                                  ●

                                                                                  ●:
                                                                                       ●       V



   o                                                                     ●   -
                                                                             *’

                                                                                                                    ● S9




                                                        X
                                                                             h“                                f :.
                                                                     i“t”.
-0.2-
                                                       -’/                   a“1. .,”
                                                                             ●●
                                                      z                         ●“
                                              >                      .
        i                           0’/                              ■            ■
                                                                                                        I


                                                                                                       I
-U.u y      r   ,
                      I    1    r   ,
                                          I       ,          ,   I                ,        ,                   r     I
                                                                                                                               I    I      r
                                                                                                                                                I    ,

   -0.8             -0.6                -0.4                 -0.2                                   0                        0.2   0.4         0.6       0.8

                                                                         lDloDEM/x2
                                                                                                         38

         As we have seen in figure 6 and our regression results, economic geography does very well

 against a null speci&ng        that factor endowments matter at the 3-digit, but not the 4-digit level.

 However,     there is reason to suspect that our results may be driven by an omitted variables bias.

 Suppose that one’s view of the world was that factor endowments mattered at the 4-digit level, i.e.

that equation (2’), not equation (2), was the true description of international production. If this were

the case, absorptio~      which contains the demand for intermediate inputs, might be correlated with

ftior   endowments because industrial production (and hence industrial demand for inputs) would be

driven by factor endowments,            Suppose, for example, the same factors that give countries        a

comparative      advantage in automobile production also give them a comparative advantage in steel

production.      If we then regressed steel production on steel absorption we would obtain a spurious

acceptance of economic geography because the same factors that caused the automobile sector to

expand, and therefore demand more steel, would also generate a comparative advantage in steel

production.

         Clearly a s~fication     test of the type described by equation (4”) is warranted. The third and

f-h     columns of Table 6 perform this experiment. Adding factor endowments to the model causes

the point estimate for the tifficient    on IDIODEM to drop below one and the coefficient on SHARE

becomes insignificant. In other wor&, we can formally reject a model of economic geography in

fmor of a comparative &ntage             mdl   with transport costs. We believe that this is the first time

that a model of mnomic      geography has ever &n rejected by international data using a theoretically

rigorous test.

         Several caveats are in order. Even in this more general specification, the coefficient on

IDIODEM       is still much larger than zero. Within the context of the hypothesis tests that we have
                                                                                                        39

constructed,    our interpretation is either that transpofiation   costs matter or that economies of scale

are only present in a subset of OECD manufacturing. There is reason for concern about whether

transpoti costs, which are usually measured to be relatively small, could cause production to rise by

70?? as much as idiosyncratic demand. In defense of this estimate, we need to remember that if factor

endowments matter, but there still is some indetetinacy        in production patterns at the 4-digit level,

then it is not su~rising to see this sort of mrrelation.   Indeed, McCallum (1995) has found that even

apparently small tiers      at the border have tremendous impacts on trade flows between the US and

Canada,

          In considering these results, it is usefil to consider one final twist. Krugman (1980) also

develops a model with transport costs and two countries, one large and one small, The twist is that

he allows for a mix of industries, one subject to increasing and the other to constant returns to scale.

His conclusion was that even if the entire increasing returns to scale industry could fitinto the smaller

count~,    there would be a tendency for this industry instead to locate in the larger country because

of the improved market access. That is, when there are a mix of constant and increasing returns

sectors, and in contrast to the results of Weder, absolute -- not only relative -- market size may

matter.

          In applying    this insight to our results, one must pay carefil      attention to the level of

aggregation that is being considered. If some (3-digit) industries are increasing and others constant

returns to scale, then the coefficient on IDIODEM           pooled across industries does not have the

structural interpretation that we have given it. Nevertheless, our use of the Weder framework based

on relative demand will continue to hold exactly for those industries featuring increasing returns. The
                                                                                                        40

 reason is that our assumption of Leontief technologies has made the resource constraints industry-

 specific. This suggests looking at coefficients on individual industry runs.

           In order to see if there was a pattern to the magnitudes of the coefficients, we reran equation

(4”) with tier     endowments separately for each industry. The lack of degrees of freedom meant that

it was difficult to obtain precise estimates of the coefficients, but even so, as Table 7 demonstrates

we were able to reject a coefficient of zero in most industries. This suggests that in most industries

demand d~        have some role on the location of production. Unfortunately for economic geography,

however, we only obtained point estimates of larger than one in one third of the sample and could

reject a null of 1 for ordy 1 of 54 industries (one-sided t-test, 95°/0 cofidence    level). Of course, it

must be emphasized that the small number of degrees of freedom make it very difficult to see

statistical patterns in this type of analysis. Even if we expand our criteria to only look at industries

with point estimates larger than one, there does not seem to be a pattern to the industries that have

(insi@cant)      -fficients   larger than one and our priors about which industries are likely to exhibit

economies of scale.

        There is a second way that a mix of increasing returns and constant returns sectors might

mmplitie      our analysis. If (3digit) industries are themselves a mix of (4-digit) goods, some of which

are constant and others increasing returns to scale, then even the coefficients on IDIODEM in the

individual industry runs fail to have the structural interpretation we have placed on them, In such a

case, the results of Krugman (1980) suggest that countries with absolutely small markets will tend

to concentrate     on constant returns goods, while those with absolutely large markets will tend to

concentrate    on increasing returns goods. A rough test of this can be devised based on our earlier

examination of output correlations. Since countries like the US and Japan are likely to have much
                                                                                                         41

 larger domestic markets than countries like Belgium and Holland, one would expect the increasing

 returns industries to locate in large countries and constant returns industries in small countries. This

 implies that we should see a negative correlation in industrial composition between large and small

auntries.    Howevti, Table 3 demonstrates that industrial imposition   ispsilively   correlated between

every country pair in our sample. This seems very hard to reconcile with absolute market size driving

international specialization.

           In light of these results, we conclude that while we can detect a weak relationship that is

supportive of economic geography in certain specifications, it is not robust to the inclusion of factor

endowments. bnomic         geography does not appear to drive production in OECD manufacturing in

general, but, in the most generous interpretation of the dat~ geography may play some role in the

determination of production in as much as a third of all OECD manufacturing sectors. 11

           So fm, most of the analysis has focused on trying to identi~ statistically whether econotic

geography      has an impact on production    patterns. However,    there is another equally important

question surrounding the anomie       significance of the coef6cients, Harking back to Krugman’s initial

question     regarding the importance of increasing returns, we would like to know how sensitive



        11
                Our results also have implications for those who would use restrictive trade policy
as an instrument of industrial or export policy. Krugman (1984) has outlined a theoretical link
between protection of the home market and increased export penetration abroad, While
Krugman’s focus was on oligopolistic trade within a single market, others have been less carefil,
applying these ideas to broader industrial aggregates and even all of manufacturing. The practical
question is whether a larger home market (due either to demand idiosyncrasies or protection) will
be associated with increased exports. A necessa~ condition for this would be identification of
what we have termed the “magnification effect” of demand on production. Our failure to find this
effect strongly suggests that the “import protection as expott promotion” idea should not be
applied to these broad aggregates. It also raises an important question as to how prevalent such
effects are generally, even within OECD manufacturing.
                                                                                                     42

 production patterns we to demand ftiors,   Following Learner (1 984), we try to ascertain the relative

importanu of ftior      endowments and economic geo~hy        by examining P coefficients, Let Z denote

our matrix of obsemations for the independent variables and ZM the same matrix with the entries for

only the variable(s) M set equal to their sample means. 12We define P as




In other word% P tells us how many standard deviations of the dependent variable can be explained

by a one standard deviation movement in the variable(s) A4.

        There are two ways we can calculate these ~s.    The first is to nest the economic geography

models and the ftior    endowment models and examine how much of the variance at the 4-digit level

can be explained by IDIODEM and SHARE relative to factor endowments.             The results fi-om this

exercise tell us how much of the explainable variance is driven by an economic geography model

nested tithin a ftior   endoment   model relative to a model that postulates that production patterns

are always driven by factor endowments. The results from this exercise are as follows:




                                         ~WARE, IDIOD~=O.26




The P coefficients indicate that a pure factor endowments model explains 2.5 times more of the

variance than a combined model with increasing returns at the 4-digit level and factor endowments



        12Means were calculated separately for each 4-digit sector.
                                                                                                       43

driving production at the 3digit level. In other words, a combined economic geography Heckscher-

Ohlin model only accounted for about one quarter of the explainable OECD output variation.

          To some degree, this experiment overstates the importance of economic geography because

much of the variance attributed to the SHARE term is really due to Heckscher-Ohlin      operating at the

3-digit level. If we attribute the explanatory power of SHARE to the Heckscher-Ohlin          model, we

obtain:




In other words, demand fluctuations only seem to account for around 10% of OECD production

patterns at the 4-digit level, with 90% being accounted for by factor endowments. If we believe that

part of the effe   that has&n    attributed to economic geography is really due to transportation   costs

interacting with CRS industries, then this 10VOnumber overstates the role of economic geography.

This also puts the results of Figure 6 and the non-nested results into perspective. Deflating the

variables in Figure 6 by 3-digit production and allowing production at the 3-digit level to be driven

by Heckscher-0~       resulted in tiy     all of the production variance being attributed to Heckscher-

Ohlin. In other words, even though we can see a pattern in Figure 6, its importance for overall OECD

production    is small, We therefore conclude that economic geography          is not only statistically

insignificant, but economically small as well.
                                                                                                      44

5        Conclusion

         This paper reports the first tests that nest the trade models of economic geography and

Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek       for estimation on international data. The particular model of economic

geography which we employ is based on Krugman (1980), and features the “home market” effect.

To test this, we select a setting ofien cited as f~turing    pervasive increasing returns -- i.e. one we

believed ex ante to be most propitious for finding the effects of economic geography, Accordingly,

our study fmuses on explaining the structure of manufacturing production across the OECD,

        Our results provide little support for the economic geography model. We find that the

structure of OECD manufmring       production is best explained by a model which allows endowments

to determine      output at all levels. Some indication of     “home market” effects appears in the

specification    in which HOV determines output structure        at the 3-digit level, while economic

gmgraphy does w at the 4-digit level. However these results are not robust. Allowing endowments

to matter for production      at the 4-digit level eliminates the home market effect. Similarly, a

specification in which endowments determined output structure at the 2-digit level, while economic

geography determined output at the 3-digit level likewise fails to support the “home market” effect.

Moreover, even in the model most supportive of the presence of home market effects, the results

suggest that these are of relatively minor importance. Of the explainable variance, endowments

account for 90 per cent, and home market effects just 10 per cent. In sum, the big picture is that

endowments       are the crucial element in understanding     the cross-country   structure   of OECD

manufacturing.
                                         References
Bowe~ Harry P., Edward her,   and Leo Sveikauskas (1 987) “Multicountry, Multifactor Tests of
      the Factor Abundance Theory,” American fionomic Review, v. 77.

Brecher, Richard A and Ehsan Choudhri (1993) “Some Empirical Support for the Heckscher-Ohlin
        Model of Productio~” Ctiian    Journal of Economics, 26:2.

Chipm~    John S. (1992) “Intra-Industry Trade, Factor Proportions and Aggregation,” in Economic
         %ory andIntemati&        Tr&: -s       in Memorial, J Trout Mr,    NY: Spnnger-Verlag.

Davis, Donald R. (1996) “Critical Evidence on Comparative Advantage? North-North       Trade in a
       Multilateral World.” Mimeo, Hmard University.

Davis, Donrdd R (1995) “Intraindustry Trade: A Heckscher-Ohlin-Ricardo     Approach,”, Journal of
       International Economics, 39:3-4, November.

Davis,    Donald R. and Jagdish Bhagwati (1995) “Intraindustry Trade: Issues and Theory”,
         forthcoming in James Melvin, James Moore, and Ray Riezrnan, eds., Tr~, We~are, and
         Econometrics: &says in Honor of John S. Chipman, New York: Routledge.

Davis, Donald R., David E. Weinstein, Scott C. Bradford and Kazushige Shimpo (1996) “The
       Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Model of Trade: Why Does it Fail? When Does it Work?” NBER
       Working Paper #5625, June,

Deardofl, Alan V. (1995) “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
       World?” forthcoming in Jefiey Frankel, cd., “Regionalization of the World Economy,”
       Chicago: U. of Chicago and NBER.

Dixi~ Avinash K,, and Stiglitq Joseph E. (1977) “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum Product
       Diversity,” American Economic Review 67 (3), 297-308.

Dixit,   Avinash K,, and Norman,    Victor (1980)   ~eory   of International   Trade, Cambridge:
         Cambridge U, Pr.

Grubel, H.G. and P.J, Lloyd (1975) Intra- Itistry      Tr&: me fieory and Measurement          of
       Internatioml Tr& in Dt~ferentiatedProducts,     New York: John Wiley and Sons,

Harrigan, James (1994) “Scale Economies and the Volume of Trade,” Review of Economics and
        Statistics, 76:2.

Harrigan, James (1995) “Factor Endowments and the International Location of Production:
        Emnometric Evidence from the OECD, 1970- 1985,” Journal of International Economics.
Harrigq     James (1996) “Technology, Factor Supplies and International Specialization: Testing the
          Neoclassical Model,” Mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Pittsburgh.

Help~Elhanan(198       1) “International Trade in the Presenw of Product Differentiation, Economies
       of Scale and Monopolistic Competition: A Charnberlin-Heckscher-Ohlin Approach” Journal
       of International Economics, 11;3.

Help-       Elhanan (1988) “Imperfii Competition and International Trade: Evidence From Fourteen
          Industrial Countries, “ in A. Michael Spence and Heather Hazard, eds., International
          Competitiveness, NY: Ballinger Publishing.

Help-       Elhanan and Krugmw    Paul (1985) Mmkt   Structure andFmei~      Tr4,   Cambridge: MIT
          Press.

Hummels, Datid, and Levinso@ James (1995) “Monopolistic Competition and International Trade:
      Reconsidering the Evidence,” ~arter~ Journal of Economics, Vol. CX, August, pp. 799-
      836.

Hunter, Linda and James R. Markusen, (1989) “Per-Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade,” in
        Feenstr~ Empirical Metti   for International Trade, 89-109.

Hunter,     Linda. (199 1) “The Contribution of Nonhomothetic   Preferences to Trade,” Journal of
          International Economics, May, 345-358.

Jorgenson Dale (1986) “Econometric Methods for Modeling Producer Behavior,” in Griliches, Zvi,
        and Michael Intriligator, eds., Handbook of Econometrics. Volume 3, New York: Elsevier
        Science,

Krugma~ Paul R. (1980) “Scale Economies, Product Differentiation,         and the Pattern of Trade,”
      American Economic Review, 70, 950-959.

Krugman, Paul R. (1984) “Import Protection as Export Promotion,” in H. Kierzkowski,              cd.,
      Monopolistic Competition and Internatiowl Tr&, New York: Oxford U. Pr.

Krugman, Paul R. (1990) “Introduction,”   Rethinking International Trade, Cambridge: MIT.

Krugmw      Paul R. (1991) Geo~aphy    and Trade, Cambridge: MIT.

Krugm~       Paul R. (1994) “Empirical Evidence on the New Trade Theones: The Current State of
          Play,” in New Tr& ~eories: A Look at the Empirical Evidence, London: Center for
          Economic Policy Research.

Learner, Edward (1984) Sources of International Comparative Advantage, Cambridge: MIT Press.
her,      Edward (1980) “The Leontief Paradox Reconsidered,” Journal of Political Economy, 88,
         495-503.

Learner, Edward and James Levinsohn (1 995) “International Trade Theory: The Evidence” in Gene
        Grossman and Kemeth Rogoff, eds., Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, New
        York: Elsevier.

hntie~    Wassily (1953) “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital Position
         Re-Examined,” Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 97, 332-349.

McCalluW John (1995) ‘National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns,” American
       Economic Review, 85:3.

Markusen, James R. (1986) “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach,” American
       Economic Reviw, 76, 1002-1011.

Markuse~ James R. and Wlgle, Randall M. (1990) “Explaining the Volume of North-South       Trade,”
       Economic Journal, 100, 1206-1215.

Scherer, F. M. and David Ross (1990) Industrial Market Structure and Economic Performance,
        Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company.

Trefler, Daniel (1993) “International   Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right !“, Journal of
        Political Economy, 101.

Trefler, Daniel (1996) “The Case of the Missing Trade and other Mysteries,” American Economic
        Review.

Weder, Rolf(1995) “Linking Absolute and Comparative Advantage to Intra-Industry    Trade Theo~,”
       Review of International Economics, 3:3, October.
              Table   1

   Countries     in Data Set

   Countries      No 4-digit dal
    Used            Available
Australia

Aushia                    x
Belgium/Lux

Canada

Denmark                   x
Finland
France

Germany

Greece                    x
Ireland                   x
Italy

Japan
Netherlands
New Zealand               x
Norway

POrtugal                  x
s pain                    x
s weden
Turkey                    x
UK
u SA
Yugoslavia                x
                                     Table 2

                    Industries     Used in the Analysis

Dropped K)   ISIC   Industry
             311    Food prOdUCtS
             3111   Slaughtering, preparing and preserving meat
             3112   Dairy prOdUCtS
             3113   Canningand preserving of Iiuits and vegetables
             3114   Canning, preseming and processing of fish, crustacea and similar foods
             3115   Vegetable and animal oils and fats
             3116   Grain mill products
             3117   Bakery prOdUC~
    x        3118   Sugar factories and refineries
             3119   Cocoa chocolate and sugar confectionery

             312    Other fd products
    x        3121   Food products not elsewhere classfied
             3122   Prepared animal feeds

             313    Beverage industries
             3131   Distilling, rectifying and blending spirits
    x        3132   Wine industies
             3133   Malt liquors and malt
    x        3134   Soft drinks and carbonated waters industries

   x         314    Tobacco manufactures

             321    Textiles
             3211   Spinning, weaving and finishing textiles
             3212   Made-up textile goods except wearing apparel
             3213   Knitting mills
             3214   Carpets and rugs
             3215   Cordage, rope and twine industries
             3219   Textiles nec

   x         322    Wearing apparel, except footwear

             323    Leather and products of leather, leather substitutes and fur, except fmtwear and
                    wearing apparel
             3231   Tanneries and leather finishing
   x         3232   Fur dressing and dyeing industries
             3233   Products of leather and leather substitutes, exapt footwear and wearing apparel

   x         324    Footww, ex~pt vulcanized or molded rubber or plastic footwear

             331    Wood and wood and cork products, except furniture
             3311   Sawmills, planing and other wood malls
             3312   Wooden and cane containers and small cane ware
             3319   Wocd and cork products nec

   x         332    Furniture and fixtures, except primarily of metal
                             Table 2 (Condnued)
                            Table     2 (Continued)

                    Industries      Used in the Analysis


Dropped B)   ISIC    Indush-y
             341     Paper and paper products
             3411    Wp, paper and paperboard
             3412    Container’sand boxes of paper and paperboard
             3419    Wp, paper and paperboard articles nec

    x        342    Printing, publishing and allied industries
                    Plastic Products
             351    Industrial chemids
             3511   Basic indush-ial chemicals except fertilizer
             3512   Fertilizers and pesticides
             3513   Synthetic resins, plastic matetis and man-made fibers except glass

             352    Other chemid products
             3521   Paints, varnishes and Iaquers
             3522   Drugs and medicines
             3523   Soap and cleaning preparations, perfumes, cosmetics and other toilet preps.
             3529   Chemical products nec

    x        353    Petroleum refineria

    x        354    Miscellanaus products of petroleum and coal

             355    Rubber products
             3551   Twe and tube industries
             3559   Rubber products nec

   x         356    Plastic products nec

   x         361    Potte~, china and earthenware

   x         362    Ghs and glass ~OdUCtS

             369    Other non-metallic mineral produc~
             3691   structural clay products
             3692   Cement, lime and plaster
             3699   Non-metallic mineral products nec

   x         371    Iron and steel basic industries

   x         372    Non-ferrous metal basic industries
                              Table    2 (Continued)

                       Industries     Used in the Analysis


Dropped   (x)   ISIC   Industry
                381    Fabricated metal products, exmpt machinery and equipment
                3811   Cutlery, hand tmls and general hardware
                3812   Furniture and fixtures primarily of metal
                3813   Shuctural metal products
                3819   Fabricated metal products except machinery and equipment not elsewhere
                       classified

                382    Machinery except electrical
                3821   Engines and turbines
                3823   Agriculture machine~ and equipment
                3823   Metal and wood working machinery
                3824   Special industrial machinery and equipment except metal and wood working
                       machine~
                3825   OffIce, computing and accounting machinery
                3829   Machinery and equipment except electrid nec

                383    Electrical machine~ appmtus, appliance and supplies
                3831   Elmtrical industrial machine~ and apparatus
                3832   Radio, television and communication equipment and apparatus
                3833   Electrid appliances and housewares
                3839   Elecrncal apparatus and supplies nec

                384    Transport equipment
                3841   Shipbuilding and repairing
          x     3842   Mead equipment
                3843   Motor vehicles
          x     3844   Motorcycles and bicycles
          x     3845   Aircraft
          x     3849   Transport equipment nec

                385    Professional and scientilc and mating    and controlling equipment ncc, and of
                       photographic and optical goods
                3851   Professional and scientilc, and measuring and controlling equipment
                       E
          x     3852   Photographic and optical goods
          x     3853   Watches and clocks

          x     3901   Jewelry and related articl~
          x     3902   Musical instruments
          x     3903   Sporting and athletic goods
          x     3909   Manufacturing industries nec
                                  ‘l’able 3

                         Sample       Statistics

      Correlation    of 4-digit     Output    by Country   (1985)

             CAN              USA                  JPN         AUS
CAN           1.00
USA          0.82              1.00
JPN          0.76             0.91                  1.00
AUS          0.80             0.77                 0,62         1.00
BLX          0.79             0.79                 0.76        0.63
FIN          0.51             0.33                 0.14        0.36
             0.77             0.88                 0.77        0.79
GER          0.83             0.89                 0.88        0.70
ITA          0.75             0.78                 0.81        0.60
NTH          0.33             0.50                 0.32        0.46
NOR          0.40             0.34                 0.17        0.45
SWE          0.91             0.82                 0.72        0.72
UK           0.62             0.88                 0.81        0.64



             BLX              FIN                             GER
BLX          1.00
FIN          0.20            1.00
             0.73            0.32                  1.00
GER          0.90            0.16                  0.80       1.00
lTA          0.85            0.19                  0.77       0.88
NTH          0.53            0.36                  0.52       0.38
NOR          0.23            0.65                  0.34       0.20
SWE          0.64            0.69                  0.74       0.73
UK           0.75            0.24                  0.84       0.81



            lTA              NTH                   NOR        SWE
lTA         1.00
NTH         0.44             1.00
NOR         0.19             0.49                  1.00
SWE         0.61             0.32                  0.50       1.00
UK          0.73             0.60                  0.29       0.66
                      Table   3 (Continued)

                         Sample   Statistics



  Variable     Mean            Std Dev         mu           Maximum
IDIoDEM/x3          0.01             0.11           -0.59          0.61

SHAFWX3             0.27             0.21           0.01           0.87
CAP85        1155980000       1590040000       112748000    5714800000
LABOR85           20763            23547            1796         79190
EDUC85             5287             10145            243         37610
LAND85            26480            51487             771        189799
FUEL85           239358           520333               22      1935810
RGDP85       709383000        105451OOOO       59084700     3962220000
.
m   I   w   I   I   1
                                            Table 5

         Resulk   of 4-digit     Output    Regressions       on Factor    Endowments

                                          (NOBS   = 13)

 Ind.   F-Stat    R2           Adj. R2                Ind.       F-Stat     R2         Adj.    R2
 3111   25.7      0.948        0.9i2
 3112   37.7      0.964        0.939                3821        335         0.996      0.993
 3113   1580      0.999        0.998                3822        38.6        0.965      0.940
 3114   2.86      0.671        0.437                3823        143         0.990      0.983
 3115   142       0.990        0.983                3824        628         0.998      0.996
 3116   101       0.986        0.976                3825        517         0.997      0.995
 3117   47.3      0.971        0.951                3829        121         0.989      0.980
 3118                                               3831        49.0        0.972      0.952
 3119   1396      0.999        0.998                3832        24.7        0.946      0.908
 3121                                               3833        12.6        0.900      0.829
 3122   509       0.997        0.995                3839        346         0.996      0.993
3131    4.30      0.754        0.579                3841        51.9        0.974      0.955
3132                                                3842
3133    25.0      0.947        0.909                3843        45.7        0,970      0.949
3134                                                3844
3211    60.0      0.977    0.961                    3845
3212    858       0.998    0.997                    3849
3213    349       0.996    0.993                    3851        780        0.998       0.997
3214    392       0.996    0.994
3215    3.73      0.727    0.532
3219    9.33      0.870    0.776
3231    2.74      0.662    0.420
3232
3233    75.2      0.982    0.969
3311    28.5      0.953    0.920
3312    1207      0.999    0.998
3319    7.97      0.851    0.744
3411    599       0.998    0.996
3412    3830      0.999    0.999
3419    1244      0.999    0.998
3511    1727      0.999    0,999
3512    79.2      0.983    0,970
3513    34.3      0.961    0.933
3521    899       0.998    0.997
3522    424       0.997    0.994
3523    195       0.993    0.988
3529    62.2      0.978    0.962
3551    125       0.989    0.981
3559    437       0.997    0.995
3691    17.6      0.926    0,874
3692    19.1      0.932    0.883
3699    10.2      0.880    0.794
3811    71.2      0.981    0.967
3812    134       0.990    0.982
3813    8.68      0.861    0.762
3819    124       0.989    0.981
                              Table 6

         Seemingly     Unrelated     Regression         Results

        Dependent     Variable     is 4-Digit   Production



                         1              2          3                4

IDIODEM               1.229        1.229        0.712             0.725
                      0.005        0.005        0.033             0.033

SHARE                 1.103        1.161        0.259             0.478
                      0.002        0.004        0.198             0.199

EXPORTD                            -0.088                     0.211
                                   0.004                      0.025

FACTORS                 No          No            Yes             Yes


(Standard errors are below estimates)
                                                                             Table     7


                  Equation    by     Equation       Estimation          of    Nested       Model      (Std.   Errs.     below     estimates)

 Ind     F-Stat    R2         Adj.R2             IDIODEM          SHARE                Ind         F-Stat        R2              Adj. R2       IDIODEM    SHARE

 3111    64.7      0.989      0.974              0.857            0.702
                                                 0.332            2.09
                                                                                       3214        275           0.997           0.994          1.22      1.53
 3112    65.8      0.989      0.974              1.59             -7.34                                                                         1.04      3.51
                                                 0,808            8.56
                                                                                       3215        13.6          0.950           0,880          0,257     -3.89
3113     12397     0.999     0.999               0,508           -1.69                                                                          0,415     2.91
                                                 0.092           0.555
                                                                                       3219        34.6          0,980          0.951           0.676    -1.80
3114    265       0,997      0.994               1.17            1.12                                                                           0.366    2.24
                                                0.166            1,17
                                                                                     3231          188           0.996          0.991          1.16      -18.0
3115    481       0.999      0.996               1.29            12,8                                                                          0.410     4.72
                                                0.293            5.80
                                                                                     3232
3116    290       0,998      0.994              1.42             -0,584
                                                0,356            6.21                3233          69,2         0.990           0.975          0.767     6.30
                                                                                                                                               0.472     5.31
3117    295       0.998      0,994              0,918            2.05
                                                0.198            1.22                3311      33.3             0.979           0.950          6.60      47.9
                                                                                                                                               4.42      19.4
3118
                                                                                     3312      1061             0.999           0.998          -0.124    -2.12
3119    1037      0.999      0.998              -0.472           -2.40                                                                         0.101     1.11
                                                0.315            1.77
                                                                                     3319      110              0.994           0,985          0.292     -12,1
3121                                                                                                                                           0.351     2,32


3122    768       0,999      0,998              0.063            -3.75               3411      531              0.999           0,997          0.436     -16,8
                                                0,135            1.49                                                                          2.73      11,0


3131    5,0       0,875      0.701              0,005            -4,78               3412      2364             0.999           0.999          0.258     -0,827
                                                1.38             5,67                                                                          0,401     2.16


3132                                                                                 3419      2064             0.999           0,999          1,54      5.01
                                                                                                                                               0,580     9.46
3133    41.0      0,983      0.959              1,98             13.2
                                                0,659        9.02                    3511      895              0.999           0,998          0.255     0.124
                                                                                                                                               4.45      16.3
3134
                                                                                     3512      166              0.996           0,990          0.676     5.11
3211    107       0,993      0.984              3.56             12.8                                                                          0.211     2.72
                                                1.34         3.85
                                                                                     3513      22.5             0.969           0.926          1.01      7.15
                                                                                                                                               0.902     6.37
3212    11681     0.999      0.999              4,09         8.25
                                                0.367        0,739                   3521      1606             0.999           0.999          0.896     6.17
                                                                                                                                               0,260     3.27
3213    213       0.997      0,992              -0.961       -23.9
                                                2,35         36,8                    3522      219              0,997           0.992          -0.580    -2,01
                                                                                                                                               3.09      9.13
                                                                             —
                                                                             Table     7

                  Equation    by      Equation      Estimation          of    Nested       Model         (Std.   Errs.     below     estimates)


 Ind     F-Stat    R2         Adj. R2             IDIODEM         SHARE                Ind          F-Stat          R2              Adj.R2        IDIODEM   SHARE

 3523    116       0.994      0,985               -4.39           -49.8
                                                  4.89            59.5
                                                                                       3823        336              0.998           0,995          -1.59     -27.1
3529     99,0      0.993      0,983              1.51             1.60                                                                             0.862     8.75
                                                 0,945           2.88
                                                                                       3824        475              0.999           0.996          0.497     -0.314
3551     73.9      0,992      0.979              1.03            4.66                                                                              0.338     3.00
                                                 0.760           4.31
                                                                                       3825        370              0.998          0.995           -1,20    0.017
3559    761       0.999      0.998               2,27            9.87                                                                              1.83      13.4
                                                 0.807           4.69
                                                                                     3829          574             0.999           0.997           2.11      12,8
3691     13.2     0.949      0.876               -0,412          -1.29                                                                             0.644    8.96
                                                 0.282           2.52
                                                                                     3831          26,8            0.974           0,938           -0.344   -.0493
3692    9.9       0.933      0.838               -0,187          -0.917                                                                            0.701    4.89
                                                 0,793           7,10
                                                                                     3832          49,5            0.986           0.966          4,53      1.22
3699    11.9      0,943      0.864               1.28            -3.56                                                                             8.42     6.24
                                                 0.810           5,20
                                                                                     3833          16,9            0.959           0.902          -0.633    -3,83
3811    48.2      0,985      0.965               -0.647          -8.16                                                                            0.744     1.90
                                                 0.656           6.89
                                                                                     3839          355             0,998           0.995          0.387     3.82
3812    538       0.999      0.997               -0.330          -5.59                                                                            0,904     3.13
                                                 0.174           1.28
                                                                                     3841          72.2            0.990           0.977          0.937     1.28
3813    7.6       0.914      0.795               0.585       -0.642                                                                               0.481     1.34
                                                 0.615       3,08
                                                                                     3843          120             0.994           0.986          2.64      -20,9
3819    95,0      0.993      0,982               0.997       5,14                                                                                 3.04      43.5
                                                 0.682       4.22
                                                                                     3851      928                 0.999           0.998          1.20      9.62
3821    210       0.997      0.992           0.010           -3.39                                                                                1.19      4.27
                                             0.264           4.07


3822    35.4      0,980      0.953           1.04            1,76
                                             0.946           4.75
