NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CONSTRUCTION OF THE EARNINGS AND
BENEFITS FILE (EBF) FOR USE WITH
THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT SURVEY

Olivia Mitchell
Jan Olson
Thomas Steinmeier

NBER Working Paper 5707

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

The authors gratefully acknowledge the helpful assistance and comments of Benjamin Bridges, Tim
Cheney, David Howell, Mike honesio, and Larry Smith, and research support from Texas Tech, the
Wharton School, and the University of Michigan. Programming assistance was furnished under a
National Institute on Aging Grant to the University of Michigan’s Institute for Survey Research.
Opinions are solely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the institutions with which
they are affiliated, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. This paper is part of NBER’s
research programs in Aging and Labor Studies.
O 1996 by Olivia Mitchell, Jan Olson and Thomas Steinmeier. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5707
August 1996

CONSTRUCTION OF THE EARNINGS AND
BENEFITS FILE (EBF) FOR USE WITH
THE HEALTH AND RETIREMENT SURVEY

ABS TRACT

Analysts

using the Health and Retirement

Survey (HRS) often require information

on

earnings, labor market attachment, and social security benefits in order to better understand the
factors affecting retirement and well-being at older ages. To this end, several derived variables were
constructed

and documented

in the Earnings and Benefits File (EBF) described here. The EBF

provides a set of summary earnings, employment, and social security wealth measures for a subset
of HRS respondents in Wave 1 of the survey, for whom administrative

records are available.

The EBF, a restricted data file, is available from the University of Michigan’s Institute for
Social Research for matching only with versions of the HRS containing geographic detail no finer
than the Census Division level. Interested users should contact hrsquest@umich.edu

by email for

further information on access to the data.

Olivia Mitchell
Department of Insurance
& Risk Management
University of Pennsylvania
The Wharton School
3651 Locust Walk, 307 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
MITCHELO@ WHARTON. UPENN ,EDU
Thomas Steinmeier
Department of Economics
Texas Tech University
Lubbock, TX 79409

Jan Olson
Office of Research, Evaluation
& Statistics
Social Security Administration
6401 Security Boulevard
Baltimore, MD 21235

construction
of the Earnings
and Benefits
for Use With the Health and Retirement
This paper documents
created for researchers
access conditions.

the Earnings and Benefits File (EBF).

working with the Health and Retirement

no geographic

Details on the rationale for, and definitions
security wealth variables in the EBF are provided,
information

Survey who authorized

conceptual

detail below the Census Division level. 1

of, constructed

employment,

as well as a bibliography

the University

derived for respondents
of Michigan’s

earnings,

for those wishing

of the 1992 Health and Retirement

The EBF is described below, first in

terms in Part 1, and then in more technical detail in Part II. Appendices

detailed layout of variables

I. A General Description

and codebook for the data file along with additional

and Benefits File (EBF) contains three types of variables,

First, HRS researchers

earnings,

respondents’

retirement

descriptive

statistics.

aimed at meeting

working with the Health and Retirement

often desire summary measures of labor market attachment,

retirement

on aggregate

contain a

of EBF Variables

specific data needs of the research community

useful for modeling

and social

Institute for Social Research to obtain

records from the Social Security Administration.

The Earnings

Survey, and

on the rules by which social security earnings data are used in calculating

The EBF contains information

administrative

dataset

Survey (HRS) under a set of limited

users of the public use file of the Health and Retirement

may be linked only with HRS files containing

benefits.

The EBF is a restricted

The EBF and all derived variables contained therein are intended for research

purposes only, by registered

additional

File (EBF)
Survey

and saving patterns.

Second, researchers

Survey.

particularly

often require information

measures of interest in their own right and also of use to those assessing
saving.

Third, researchers

need computed social security wealth variables

1 Readers interested in obtaining detailed information about social security rules should consult the
Bibliography for citations. The SSA world wide web site also provides useful information and
references to social security data and rules (http ://w w w .ssa. gov), The EBF is a restricted file and
users are prohibited from linking the EBF dataset to any HRS file containing identifiers below the
Census Division level. Questions regarding the EBF and HRS datasets should be directed by e-mail
to hrsques@umich.edu.

EBF Working Paper

Mitcll(,lJ/O1.~O1]
/Steil]llleicl

c,elsioo 8/1/96

2

for studies of retirement
Retirement

behavior,

and preparedness

In the context of the Health and

Survey, first fielded in the year 1992, it is useful to have measures of social security

wealth as of that year for comparability
interview

for retirement.

purposes with other wealth measures obtained

at that

date.

We have constructed
only for age-eligible
University

measures of these three types of variables in the EBF dataset, derived

HRS respondents

of Michigan’s

who authorized

the release of earnings and benefit data to the

Institute for Social Research,

Specifically,

only HRS respondents

and

spouses age 51-61 in 1992 were eligible for inclusion in the EBF file. In this section we describe in
general terms the nature of the data creation effort, and further technical details follow in Part II
below.
A. Creation

of Employment

Summary

Data in the EBF

The EBF contains a variety of employment
Retirement

Survey respondents.

Social Security Administration
for Social Research
respondents

summary measures created for Health and

These are derived from administrative
(SSA), in accord ante with agreements

(ISR) at the University

asked to sign a permission

records supplied by the

signed between the Institute

of Michigan and the SSA. Of the HRS survey

form in 1992 allowing access to their earnings and benefit

records at SSA, some 75% complied with the request. ~ ISR provided identifiers
individual

earnings records were obtained for cases with matching identifiers.

66% of the entire Wave 1 HRS sample was obtained.
could not be generated,

no employment

Table 1 summarizes

If no permission

to SSA, and
A final match rate of

was obtained, or if a match

variables were generated in the EBF file for that case lD.

several of the labor market attachment

The sample included in this Table covers individuals

variables included in the EBF.

who were not in receipt of disability benefits

from social security as of 1991, and who had nonzero earnings at some point in their careers.~

One

~ These figures refer to the HRS ~JTave1 respondents. In Waves 2 and thereafter additional
respondents supplied permission forms, but these respondents have not yet been included in the EBF
dataset supplied with this release of the EBF file,
3 Respondents with no positive covered earnings are excluded from the EBF file. Some of these never
worked for pay, but others probably worked in noncovered sectors. These latter sectors have

EBF Working Paper - Mitch t+ll/Olsol~/Stei]ll
]~eier

versio)l 8/IL9G

3

summary measure indicates how many years arespondent’s

record showed zero covered earningsby

decade of age from age 20-29, 30-39, . to age 80-89 (see variables 44-50 in Appendix
years 1951 through

1991, inclusive,

are used in this computation.

A). Only the

If the respondent’s

current age

was part-way through a decade at the time of the HRS survey, only the relevant years “at risk’ are
included in the count. Thus, for instance, a 52-year old respondent
. years in the column pertaining
Descriptive
respondents

would have a value of at most 3

to the number of years with zero covered earnings from age 50-59.

statistics on this variable by sex and marital status appear in Table 1 for

who had had some positive covered earnings over their lifetimes. q Here we see that men

with at least some nonzero earnings in the HRS cohort devoted 80-90 percent of their potential
years in covered employment.

work

whereas women with nonzero earnings devoted about half the time in

covered jobs during their twenties and thirties, with the fraction rising to 60-80 percent thereafter.
The fraction of time spent in covered employment
nonmarried

men were in covered employment

varies with marital status:

more married than

all their lives, whereas more nonmarried

than married

women were in covered jobs.
See Table i. Descriptive

Sta tistics on EBF Covered Employmen

A dtiferent variable measuring

respondents’

t Variables

length of time working under the social security

system focuses on total quarters of coverage (QC’S), or the number of quarters an individual
in jobs covered by social security rules,
for establishing

eligibility

Specific numbers of quarters of coverage

for social security benefits;

(QC’S) are needed

persons reaching age 62 after 1990, for

instance, must have 40 quarters of coverage to be insured for Social Security retirement
Historically,

worked

benefits.

QC’S referred to earnings in a calendar quarter, but more recently, one quarter of

coverage has been credited for a specified amount of earnings.

For example, in 1992, a worker was

entitled to a quarter of coverage for each $570 in earnings in covered employment,

up to 4 per year;

narrowed over time, but most often would be thought of as government (e.g. federal, state, and local),
agricultural, and nonprofit workers.
q Tabulations in Table 1 are weighted by HRS sample weights, Some HRS respondents do not have
covered earnings reported in the administrative records, since their jobs were not covered by social
security in times past. For a discussion of covered and uncovered jobs see Myers (1991),

EBF lVorking Paper

Mitch ell/OIso]l/Stei]l~lleier

- version 8/1/96

4

that figure is indexed over time (SSA 1992, Table 2.A. 7)
requirements

For the EBF datafile, quarters of coverage

in the past were computed by the ANYPIA software program.

This is a computer

program prepared by the Office of the Actuary, Social Security Administration,
current as well as historical social security rules relevant to HRS respondents

that incorporates
(Office of the Actuary

1995).

The EBF reports total quarters of coverage for each individual,

as well as quarters of

coverage over each two-year period from 1982 through 1991. Table 1 summarizes
of quarters reported in covered employment
quarters by two-year pairs between

(variable 30; see Appendix

the total number

A), the number of covered

1982-1991 (variables 32-36), and our computation

number of years in covered employment

of the total

between the ages of 20 and 50. As before, the employment

variables indicate that married men have the highest numbers of years in covered employment
between age 20 and 50 (26 years) as well as total quarters in covered employment
nonmarried
quarters;

men (25 years, 115 quarters) as well as married and nonmarried

18 years and 85 quarters respectively),

(125) compared

to

women (16 years, 72

Both men and women averaged

5-7 quarters of

coverage within the last several pairs of years leading up to the HRS survey.
Also included in the EBF is a variable (31) indicating the individual’s
Social Security Disability

Insurance

men (84°/0) and nonmarried
somewhat

program as of yearend

status for the

1991, Table 1 shows that most married

men (75°fi) are eligible for SSDI based on their own work record, whereas

fewer married women (59[%) and nonmarried

Part II of the discussion,

eligibility

any HRS respondents

women (72°/0) are eligible.

As is clarified in

in receipt of Disability Insurance payments

time of the survey have no social security retirement

EBF Working Paper - Mitch elI/Olson/Stei)] mcier - versio]~ 8/lL96

benefits computed in the EBF

at the

5

(but their earnings

and employment

excluded from computations
B. Computation

insured status,

Individuals

receiving DI benefits are therefore

in Table 1.6

of Aggregate

As described

are shown).s

Earnings

Data

above, QC’S measure the work attachment

requirement

for Social Security

Once eligible, retiree benefit amounts are based on the respondent’s

term covered earnings.

Speciflca lly, the number of years in the averaging

average long-

period equals the number

of full calendar years after 1950 (or, if later, after age .21) and up to the year in which the worker
attains age 62, becomes disabled, or dies--generally
respondents,

the result is 35 years. For the EBF, the Average Indexed Monthly Earnings

amount was computed

using the ANYPIA program

To compute the respondent’s
algorithm

minus 5 “dropout” years. For most HRS

(Office of the Actuary,

(AIME)

1995).

current AIME (that is, based on earnings through

1991), the

used covered earnings from 1951 to 1991, recorded Llp to the taxable maximum

ceiling in the administrative
this maximum

records file supplied by the Social Security Administration,

earnings
(In 1992

was an annual $55,500; for historical amounts, see SSA, 1995, Table 2.A.3).

program then indexes earnings up to age 60 by economy-wide

average wage increases;

The

for example,

earnings in 1951 were inflated by a factor of almost 9 to convert them to 1992 dollars, Subsequently
the respondent’s

highest indexed earnings are averaged after eliminating

dropout years (see Part 11 for a inore detailed discussion).

This computation

the requisite number of
yields the respondent’s

current AIME amount, in $1992 (variable 5). Zero earnings years -- including imputed future zeros are included

as necessary

in the AIME calculation. T

s As noted below, disability benefits are not included in the EBF file.
6DI recipients are identified (variable 4 is set to 1) and they have a missing value code (-9) inserted in
lieu of social security benufit amounts in the social security benefit fields (variables
A), In this way, DI recipients can be distinguished from those ineligible for benefits
insufficient quarters of coverage; those not eligible to receive social security benefits
benefits variable fields (variables 9-29). If a DI recipient was married, no benefit is
that person’s spouse either, and a missing data value (-9) appears in variables 9-29.
~ Users should note that the respondents’ consent agreements allowed the provision
date and annual earnings before 1951 are not available in electronic form at SSA.

EBF Working Paper - Afitchell/Ols[]l l/Stci:lmeier - version 8/1/96

9-29 in Appendix
due to
have a O in their
computed for
only of records to

Two other AIME measures were also created (but not retained in the EBF), namely the
AIME that the respondent

would have had at the early, and also at the normal, retirement

Because some HRS respondents
social security retirement
determine

age.

(and their spouses) were not old enough to be eligible to receive

benefits in 1992, it was necessary to project earnings forward in order to

what these potential AIME amounts might be if they did work to the social security

entitlement

ages.

Each non-disabled

respondent’s

earnings were therefore projected

to age 62, which

is the earliest age he/she could file for retired worker benefits under social security rules, and also to
that respondent’s

normal retirement

age. This normal retirement

age is age 65 for older members of

the sample, but has been raised to age 67 for those born in 1960 or later, with gradual increases for
ages in between.

We projected carnlngs for each person using a weighted

earnings over the past five years, corrected for inflation.
These earnings calculations
respondents’

in several ways.

Table 2 describes

For each decade of age, average earnings are computed

social security taxable maximum,
(variables

37-43).

stood at approximately
nonmarried

(Details are given in Part II of this report).

average annual real taxable earnings by decade of life, computed beginning

29, and running to age 80-89.

earnings

may be summarized

average of hislher own

and only over the years in which the individual

at age 20-

only to the

had nonzero

Tab] e 2 indicates that average annual taxable earnings while age 50-59

$27,700 for married men, with nonrnarried men averaging

about $20,500,

women about $14,700, and married women about $10,600.S

See Table 2. Desc~iptive

Statistics

Table 2 also replicates

on Earnings

the computation

Variables in the EBF
representing

respondents’

current AIME amounts

(variable 5), which as noted earlier include zero earnings years as necessary in the calculation.
Married men’s AIME averages

$ 1.,!)90, with nonmarried

men close behind at about $1,570; married

women’s lower earnings anti fewer years of covered employment
average AIME of about $640, while nonmarried
information

~ Earnings

no doubt contributed

women are higher at about $840.

to the lower

Additional

is also provided in the EBF file regarding the twenty lowest earnings years in the AIME

while age 50-59 are averaged only over possible work years in Table 2.

h’BF Workillg Paper - A4itc}]c11/01.vet)/St(il]oleier

vcrsio[] ,9/1/96

average, arranged in ascending
computations
primarily

order (variables

51-70; we do not display the results of these

since lowest ea~nings tend to be zero in most cases.)

These variables are included

to allow analysts to update the AIME using survey-reported

earnings for 1992 and later.

In addition, analysts wishing to compute alternative AIME figures may use these lowest earnings
years to recompute

AIME values for other retirement

dates (Office of the Actuary

1995; Myers

1993).9
C. Computation

of Social Security

Wealth Amounts

Social security wealth variables were generated for EBF respondents
could be computed,

and who were not currently receiving

(SSDI).’O This was accomplished
respondent’s

for whom the AIME

Social Security Disability

using the ANYPIA algorithm described

Insurance

above, which combines

AIME with the relevant formula to obtain that person’s primary insurance

the

amount, or

PIA. The PIA is the monthly amount payable to a retired worker who begins to receive benefits at
the normal retirement
retirement

age (currently,

age 65) or to a disabled worker who has never received

a

benefit reduced for age. The 1992 formula is as follows (the “bend points” are indexed

over time):
PIA = 90(X)of AIME Up to $387
Plus 32(X,of excess up to $2333
Plus 15% of any excess above that.
If a respondent

was not eligible to receive social security benefits based on quarters of coverage

through December

1991, the PIA and all social security wealth variables are set to zero (along with

the spouse benefits if there was no spouse, or if the spouse was ineligible
respondent’s

for benefits based on the

earnings record).

~A different method of sLlm111
arizing the AIME computations appears in Appendix B, which reports
descriptive tabulations of linear regression coefficients for models using as dependent variables
computed values of AIMEs and Primary Insurance Amounts (PIA).
10Retirees maY also qualifv for other benefits including disability and Medicare payments, among
others, but these are not the focus of the present analysis.

h’BF Working Paper

Mitch ell/0Ls(]t1L9tei:l]neier

velsion 8/1/96

8

Having computed

the respondent’s

PIA, we then derived the social security benefits he/she

and his/her spouse (if any) could receive at the retirement
benefit determination

ages under consideration,

specify that the PIA is the retirement

Workers can also receive early retirement

The rules for

benefit at the normal retirement

benefits (assuming eligibility)

age.

at age 62; under the law,

early retirees receive a benefit equal to the PIA reduced by 5/9 of 1 percent or 1/180 per month of
entitlement

before age 65.

The normal retirement

benefit computations

that the full PIA has been payable at age 65 but the normal retirement

take into account the fact
age will be gradually

moved

up in the future,
In addition to computing
HRS respondent

the retired worker benefits, we also derived spouse benefits if the

had a spouse and if sufficient data were available with which to compute these.

Each member of a married couple is entitled to receive social security benefits based on his/her own
earnings record, and perhaps based on the spouse’s PIA if such benefits would be higher.
benefits are generally

equal to 50% of the worker’s PIA).

woman’s (man’s) benefit computed
spouse.

dual entitlement

arises if the

on her (his) own earnings record is lower than that computed

In this instance, at retirement

own entitlement

Specifically,

(Spouse

as well as an additional

she (he) will receive a dual benefit reflecting

as a

both her (his)

amount taking her/him to the level she/he is entitled to as a

spouse.
To illustrate this point, suppose that a woman is married to a man who is eligible for retired
worker benefits from social security based on his own work record,
50~o

of his PIA as a spouse benefit if she were age 65 at retirement;

The wife in this case can receive
if she were 62-64, her spouse

benefit would be reduced by a monthly amount which comes to 8 1/3% per year she was under age
65, For the EBF complete computation,
on her own work history.

we also compute the benefits she would be entitled to based

The computer algorithm inquires which calculation

associates with the wife the higher of the t~~~obenefit amounts.
that the constructed

spouse variables in the variable

EBF Working Paper - Mitch clI/Olsotl/Stei]l meier - versio!l 8/IL96

is higher, and

Users of the EBF file should note

10-29 series described in Appendix

A do not

distinguish

between respondents

projected to receive only spouse benefits, and those projected

to be

dually entitled. 11
For currently married persons, the ANYPIA code was also used to project survivor’s
under social security rules.

If an eligible worker dies, the surviving widow/er can receive up to 100

percent of the deceased worker’s PIA; such benefits, reduced for early retirement,
as age 60. Remarriage
For nonmarried
determined.

benefits

can begin as early

after age 60 does not result in the loss of benefits.
persons, eligibility for survivor or other auxiliary benefits could not be

For example,

in the event that a couple was divorced after a marriage of at least ten

years, the divorced spouse would be eligible for spouse benefits; after the death of the former spouse,
to surviving
surviving

divorced spouse benefits.

might be entitled.

Users of this database should therefore be alert to the

that social security benefits derived for divorced persons will be understated.

benefits computed
payments

from

divorced former spouses in the HRS, we could not compute spouse benefits to which HRS

divorced individuals
possibility

Because the HRS did not obtain Social Security Numbers

for persons widowed at the time of the survey recognize

Likewise

only prospective

based on their own record as workers, since we cannot compute widowler benefits to which

an HRS widowed individual

might be entitled. Evidence suggests the results will underestimate

social security benefits and wealth of many widows and divorced women, 12

11So for instance, if a spouse’s dual entitlement

benefit is higher than the benefit she could receive

based on her own earnings record, the larger benefit is entered in her husbands variable 14 (see
App. A) and a zero is entered in his variable 13. In her record (assuming she is included in the EBF
file), the values of her variables would be compatible with those appearing in her husband’s file (i.e.,
her variable 11 equals his variable 14, and her variable 10 equals his variable 13).
12Uslng a dlfferent data source, the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), estimates
show that a large majority of aged widows receives benefits based on her husbands earnings record.
An internal SSA study found that 77.6 percent of aged widows in 1990 who were receiving social
security benefits, received benefits based wholly or partially on their deceased husband’s earnings
record. This suggests that EBF-computed benefits data for nonmarried women will underestimate
the eventual benefits that many of these women will receive, since we do not have deceased spouses’
earnings records linked to the file. For divorced women the in-house study suggested that
approximately 30 percent of divorcees received social security benefits either wholly or partially
based on their (deceased) former husbands’ earnings records. This suggests that the understatement
of likely benefits may be less serious for divorced than currently widowed women.

EBF Worki)lg Paper

hfitchelI/Olso~ ]/Stei]llneier

version 8/1/96

Having computed
best way to summarize

these various social security benefit amounts, the question arises as to the

their value to the retiree.

In the EBF file we have adopted the concept of

social security wealth for this purpose, which simply refers to the present value of the social security
benefit payable in the form of an annuity from retirement
retirement
multiplying

are multiplied

by survival probabilities

by the conditional

probability

until death.

Benefit values after

from that age forward, and discounted

of being alive at that retirement

to 1992 by

age, given that he/she is

alive at his current age in 1992
The social security wealth computation
respondent

leaving the workforce

at age 62. Mathematically,

payable from age 62 on, multiplied
appropriate

is straightforward

with the intermediate

at each age, and divide by an

mortality rates by birth cohort were supplied by the Office of

the Actuary at the Social Security Administration;
profile consistent

we simply sum annual benefit amounts

by the survival probability

discount rate. Age-specific

for the case of a nonmarried

for the discount rate we use the interest rate

set of assumptions

chosen by the Social Security Trustees

(Board of Trustees

1995), A similar wealth value can be computed

normal retirement

age, by using the AIME and PIA computed as of that age,

Computing

social security wealth for married respondents

the system pays different benefit amounts depending
as both members

more complex,

on the couple’s mortality experience.

since

As long

However

of the couple dies, the other may receive a survivor benefit if it exceeds the

own retired-worker

benefit. 13 Hence the derivation

that the present value computation
benefits, weighted

is somewhat

of a couple survive, retired worker andlor spouse benefits can be paid.

when one of the members
survivor’s

assuming the worker retires at the

by the probability

profile used is the one consistent

incorporate

of social security wealth here requires

retiree, along with possibly spouse and survivol

of the different outcomes obtaining.

with the Intermediate

set of assumptions

Here too, the interest rate
chosen by the Social

Security Trustees,

13Under current social securitv rules, persons receiving survivor’s benefits are sometimes entitled to
retired-worker benefits on their own record, and to higher survivor benefits based on their spouse’s
record. As noted above in the discussion of spouse benefits, these dually entitled beneficiaries are
classified in the EBF simply as spouse or survivor beneficiaries.

ICBF Working P:]per

Mitch cII/Ols<){l/Stei]]meier - versio)l 8/IL9G

11

An overview

of the various social security variables created for the EBF file appears

3. This Table reports descriptive
computed

statistics on each respondent’s

Primary Insurance Amount

in 1992 when the HRS was first fielded based on the respondent’s

also two projected
normal retirement

n Table

earnings to date, and

PIA amounts using earnings projected to the early retirement

age and to the

age (variables 6-8). For married men, Table 3 indicates that the PIA based on

earnings to 1992 totaled approximately
age; levels for nonmarried

$800, rising to $882 with earnings to the normal retirement

men were, respectively,

rising to $420 and $520 at the normal retirement

about $680 and $750. Women’s PIAs are lower,
age for married and nonmarried

women,

respectively .14
See Table 3. Descriptive

Statistics

on Social Securi~F Va]YabIes in the EBF

The EBF file also supplies three total social security wealth variables.
reflects HRS respondents’
age 62 with zeros.
the respondent

entitlements

as of 1992 (“current”),

One (variable 9)

filling in future years of earnings to

The other two social security wealth values are based on the benefits receivable

continued

to work until the early retirement

worked until the normal retirement

age (variable

if

16), and also if he/she

age (variable 23), These values are given as household

social

security wealth variables in the second panel of Table 3. The present values amount to about
$170,000-180)000

for married men and women working until their normal retirement

more than double the values for nonmarried

men and women.

age, much

The fact that married persons’ social

security wealth is larger reflects the fact that social security retirement

benefits are payable to both

members of an eligible couple, as well as survivor benefits if one of the members of the couple should
die. By contrast, because of data limitations,
nonmarried

individual

the social security wealth computation

for a

does not include any survivor or divorced spouse benefit, though as noted

above, perhaps as many as three-quarters

of the widows may receive a survivor benefit over their

lifetimes.

II Social security wealth variables

are also described using linear regression

EBF Working Paper - Mitch eI1/OJ.~(][]/Stei]lll]
eier

version ,9/JL96

models in Appendix

C.

12

A clearer idea of the separate computations

that are incorporated

into a married couple’s

security wealth figure is also available from Table 3. Here we report the expected present value of
social security

retirement

benefits that an eligible respondent

and spouse can collect based on

his/her own earnings records, the spouse’s earnings records (if any), and as a survivor based on
his/her partner’s

earnings record (if applicable).

men’s “respondent”

Thus for example, the wealth value for married

benefits as of the normal retirement

age totaled approximately

$89,000, with the

spouse’s benefit on her own account totaling $28,000; the figures are roughly reversed when the
married women are the unit of analysis. 15
These social security wealth variables will be reasonable
future value of benefit payments
the EBF projections

of the expected

in most cases, but the reader should be alert to two instances

where

may be low. 16 One case arises in the event of a widow/er whose actual future

benefits will often be based on the deceased spouse’s record.
information

representations

The HRS did not attempt to collect

on the social security numbers of deceased spouses, so for these people, earnings records

for deceased spouses (and hence eventual social security survivor benefits) are not available.

A

second case is that of divorced persons who had been married 10 or more years prior to divorce.
Under the regulations,
history.

divorced persons may file for benefits based on their former spouses’ earnings

For the purposes of the EBF file, however, we could not compute benefits based on the

former spouse’s earnings since these earning files were not available to us. Therefore
security wealth variables in the EBF file may be a substantial
likely be received for nonmarried
previously

women, and specifically

understatement

widowslers

the social

of benefits that will

and for divorced women who

had been married for 10 or more years.

Users of the EBF file should also be alert to the point that estimated benefits and social
security wealth are also likely to be low for those respondents

having had Social Security disability

15The higher benefit values reported for male as compared to female HRS respondents

in Table 3

reflect the fact that HRS age-eligible male respondents are somewhat older on average, as compared
to HRS women respondents.
16Those already divorced or widowed at the time of the HRS survey will have benefit amounts
computed based only on theil own records, as noted above,
disability benefit receipt status (or their spouses).

EBF Working Paper - Mitchell/Olso]l/Stci]lmeier

- version 8/1[96

No benefits are computed

for those in

13

benefits in their past. This is because during such periods, SSA protects against the loss of or the
reduction

in the amount of retirement

insurance benefits, by providing

the person is disabled will generally be excluded from determining

that the period during which

either retirement

benefits

and

social security wealth. I~
D. Layout of the EBF
In this section we offer an idea of the EBF layout, with the idea that a general reader maybe
satisfied with this description
supplied in Appendix

of the EBF variables along with the detailed variable list for the file

A. Part II, below, provides more detailed file construction

The EBF contains one record for each individual

information.

in the HRS from whom a valid permission

form was obtained,

and who had nonzero earnings at some point in his/her career.

the file is identified

by a case ID, that matches the same variable in the HRS records and is the

variable for linking these records to the HRS data set. 18 For individuals
time of the HRS interview,
spouse.

Each person in

who were married at the

there is also a spouse ID, which is the HRS case ID of the record of the

This variable has a value of O if there is no spouse, and a value of 99999 if there was a

spouse but the spouse does not have a record in the main HRS data set. 19 All other variables
described in Appendix

II. Technical

A, with the caveats discussed above.

Discussion

of Algorithms

and Assumptions

This section is intended to provide additional
constructed.

in the EBF

technical details on how the EBF dataset was

In addition to the case ID variables noted above, the other variables in the record are

grouped into three categories
attachment

ale as

variables,

and discussed in turn, These three sets of variables

earnings aggregates,

are: labor market

and measures of family social security wealth.

17For each of these cases, the EBF total social security wealth variables can be modified using social
security benefit files in conjunction with the earnings records.
18The EBF can be linked only to HRS data containing no geographic

detail below the Census

Division level. Information about access to the restricted files is available over email from
hrsques@umich.edu,
19This might occur if, for example, that spouse did not participate in the survey, or did not agree to
permit the attachment of earnings record data to his or her file. Social security wealth variables
imputed using the hot deck procedure described in Part II.

EBF Working Paper

A4itch ell/O1.so)l/Stei]lme
ier

versiol] ,sYIL96

are

14

A. Labor Market Attachment

Variables

The EBF dataset contains three groups of variables measuring

labor market attachment,

Variables

44 to 50 indicate the number of years by age decade that the individual

earnings.

These decades are the same decades used in calculating

and the same limitations
included.

apply.

Specifically,

years of non-zero

zero

the average earnings by decade,

only the years between

This means, for example, that an individual

reported

1951 and 1991, inclusive,

are

who is 56 years old in 1992 and who had four

earnings and two years of zero earnings in the 1986-1991 time period will have a

value of two assigned to variable 47. (Data in Table 1 correct for the fact that the number of potential
years of work varies by respondent

age.)

A second variable indicates the respondent’s

total quarters of coverage (or credits) as of year-

end 1991. This is needed to establish whether the individual
retirement

program,

respondent’s
attaining

is presently

insured under the old-age

or whether he or she may become insured on the basis of future work.

The

total quarters of coverage at the end of 1991 appear in variable 30. For workers

age 62 in 1991 or later, 40 quarters of coverage are required to be eligible for old age

benefits when they retire.~tl Researchers

can update the total quarters of coverage after 1991 using

the work status and earnings figures available in the HRS surveys in 1992 and later. An individual
receives one quarter of coverage for each $570 of earnings in 1992, an amount adjusted annually
according

to the average annual earnings index.

A third group of variables is useful for establishing
insured under the disability insurance program.

whether the individual

Whether the individual

the end of 1991 is given by variable 31, In most cases, the individual
and have 20 quarters of coverage (or credits) in the previous
Variables

is currently

was currently insured at

is required to be fully insured

10 years to be disability insured, ~l

32-36 can be used to update the disability insurance

status at two year intervals for the

~~A person is fully insured if he or she has at least 1 credit for each calendar year after 1950, or if
later, after the year in which he or she attained age 21, and prior to the year in which he or she
attains age 62 (see SSA, va~ious years).
21A person has disability insured status if he/she has at least 20 credits during a 40-quarter period
ending with the quarte] in which the individual is determined to be disabled; and is fully insured as
well (see SSA, various years).

KBF Working Paper - A4itchc[l/01.~())]/Stei]llneier

version 8/{L9(i

15

following ten years, again using work status and earnings figures from the household
in 1992 and later.

For example, if an individual

had 3 quarters of coverage in 1982-1983 and 18

quarters of coverage in the period 1982-1991, and if the household
individual

HRS surveys

survey indicates that the

had 8 quarters of coverage in 1992 and 1993, then we can infer that the individual

had 23

quarters during 1984-1993 (18 plus 8 minus 3), making him or her disability insured at the end of
1993.
A final entry in the labor market variable group indicates whether the individual
receiving

social security disability insurance benefits as of December

a value of 1 if the individual

was

1991. This is variable 4, taking

was receiving disability benefits as of December

1991 and a value of O if

he or she was not on disability at that time. Unlike most of the other variables in this file, this
variable comes not from the summary earnings record but from the benefits record.
was collecting

social security disability as of December

sections (average monthly earnings, primary insurance
set to -9. This is because the algorithms
appropriate

1991, all variables described in the next two
amount, social security wealth, etc.) are all

that are used to calculate these variables for the dataset are

only for old-age benefits for persons without prior entitlement

Spouses of workers receiving
eligible respondents
B. Earnings

If the individual

to disability benefits,

social security disability insurance benefits are included if they are age-

In their own right.

Aggregates

Variables

37 to 43 in the EBF file provide the average real taxable earnings by decade of life.

These decades are age decades, not calendar decades, and run from ages 20-29 to ages 80-89.
each decade, the average is calculated

using only the years in which the individual

earnings; years in which there were no earnings are excluded from the average.

For

had positive

Further, these are

real earnings, which means that each annual earnings amount is indexed to 1992 using the
consumer

price index (CP1-U).

no annual earnings

The indexing is done prior to averaging.

that

are available in the social security records before 1951 or after 1991. Further,

only taxable earnings up to the maximum

EBF Working Paper

The user is reminded

amount subject to social security taxes are available in

Mitch eJ1/O1.~ol]/Stcixlm
eier - version 8/1/96

these records, and zeros appear in the record for respondents

too young to have worked the full

decade.
C. Derived

Social Security

Retirement

Benefit Variables

Social security benefits for HRS respondents
Average Monthly Indexed Earnings
data are available,
respondent
years.

are calculated

using the number of years of earnings as specified in the social security law. If a

does not have enough positive years of earnings, zeros are filled in for the remaining

using a formula that depends on when the individual
early or late retirement

Variable

respondent

turns age 62. Finally, an adjustment

zeros are filled in for years between

called A~’PIA,

that incorporates

factor calculated
an unindexed
computation

1995).

earnings before the age of 60 are indexed upward to age 60 by a
Earnings after age 60 enter the average on

In general, for persons without current or prior disability,

the number of

years equals tile years after 1950 (or age 21 if later) to age 62, excluding

For HRS respondents

according

1991 and the year the

by a program created by the Social Security

from SSAS average annual wage series,

basis.

1991, rounded to the

the many changes that Congress has made in

social security law over the years (Office of the Actuary
For the AIME computation,

factor

the benefit amount, as required.

5 lists the calculated AIME amount based on earnings through

turns age 62. This AIME figure is calculated

Administration

from average monthly earnings

is applied to the PIA to determine

nearest $10; for this computation

years.

First, the

(AIME) amount is calculated for everyone for whom earnings

Next, the Primary Insurance Amount (PIA) is calculated

reflecting

in three stages.

5 ‘dropout’

who turned 60 in 1992 and before, earnings before age 60 are indexed

to the average annual wage series, and the high 35 years are averaged.

For respondents

who turn 60 after 1992, the indexing amount was not known in 1992. For these individuals,
earnings are indexed to 1992, and the high 35 years are averaged (including

zero earnings years, if

any).z2

~~The average earnings computation for workers who attained age 62 prior to 1978 is computed
slightly differently (see SSA, various years or the Social Security worldwide web page at
www.ssa. gov).

EBF Working Paper

bfitcheI1/O1.~ol]/Steinmeier

vcrsio]] ,9/1/’)6

17

The EBF also contains the variables necessary to update the AIME amount based on
earnings in 1992 and subsequent
individuals

years as reported in the household

surveys, at least for those

who attained age 62 in 1979 and after, and are thus governed by the indexed earnings

formula (SSA, Table 2.A8). Variables
computation,

51 to 70 contain the lowest 20 years of earnings in the AIME

arranged from the lowest year and in ascending order.

The amounts reported

are

indexed (and not nominal) amounts, meaning that they are indexed to age 60 if the earnings were
before age 60 and the individual

had reached 60 by 1992, or if the individual

was under age 60 in

1992, they are indexed to 1992. The indexing rules are the same as those that are applied in
computing

the average indexed monthly earnings figure itself.

Note that these variables

contain a number of zero amounts, which signifies that the individual
for fewer than the number of computation
zero if the individual
using unindexed

thus far had positive earnings

Also, this entire set of 20 variables is set equal to

reached age 62 before 1979, in which case the monthly earnings were figured

earnings rather than indexed earnings.

To illustrate
household

years.

the updating process, suppose that we obtain a 1992 earnings figure from the

survey, and we want to see how this affects the AIME,

indexed to age 60 or 1992, as appropriate.

First, the earnings amount is

Then the indexed amount is compared

to the low year in

the average (the figure in variable 51). If the new amount is less, then the 1992 earnings
affect the AIME.

If it is greater, then the difference,

low indexed amount in the average.

do not

divided by 35 (or the number of computation

years), is added to the AIME (variable 5). This is equivalent

repeated.

may

to substituting

the 1992 figure for the

For additional years of earnings after 1992, the process is

The fact that the 20 lowest indexed earnings years are reported implies that, based on

future observed

earnings in the household

survey, the AIME figure can be updated at least through

the year 2011,
Next comes estimated

primary insurance

amounts (PIA), reported in variables 6-8. The PIA

in variable 6 is based on earnings though 1991 and the AIME reported in variable 5. If the
Individual

was 62 or older in 1991, the amount in variable 7 is the same as in variable 6. Otherwise,

the PIA in variable

7 is based on projected earnings through age 61, with the projection

EBF LVorki]:g P:lper - M]tch(?ll/O1.sotl/Stc’itlIneier - ver.qion 8/Ik96

method

discussed later in this section,
through the year immediately
assumed that the individual
The PIA calculation
figure is determined

Variable 8 is similar to variable 7, except that earnings are projected
before the normal retirement

applies for benefits at the normal retirement
is done by the ANYPIA program.

by the year the individual

after 1978 have their PIA calculated
5), For instance,

variable 8, it is

age.

The formula applied to the AIME

attains 62.ZS Those individuals

who turn age 62 in or

using an AIME that depends on the year they turn 62 (variable

the formula for individuals

indexed monthly earnings,

age. In calculating

who turn 62 in 1986 is 90~0 of the first $297 of average

;32%,of the next $1493, and 15[fi of anything beyond that.

These “bend

points” are indexed to the national average annual wage level, but there are always just three
segments in the formula.
the individual

As before, this formula gives the primary insurance

amount for the year

turns 62, and the resulting amount is indexed upward every year by the cost of living

index.
For individuals

who attain 62 in or before 1992, the bend points are known (e.g. SSA 1995,

Table 2.A. 11), and the PIA indexed to 1992 is reported in variable 6. For individuals
after 1992, the AIME is indexed to age 60 (if necessary)

who attain 62

and the bend points are indexed to age 62,

both using the increases in the national average annual wage index projected by the Social Security
Administration.

The PIA is calculated

indexed earnings,
resulting

using the projected formula applied to the projected

giving a PIA value that would apply to the year the individual

turned 62. The

amount is then deflated to 1992 using the projected increases in the consumer

This gives the value of the primary insurance
amounts calculated

for individuals

average

price index.

amount in 1992 dollars and is thus comparable

who reach 62 in or before 1992. The assumptions

the national average annual wage and the consumer price index are the “intermediate”
offered by the Office of the Actuary of the Social Security Administration

to the

used to forecast
assumptions

and are reported in Table

424

~sSpecial rules apply if the individual turned 62 before 1979 (see SSA, various years). What is
reported in variable 6 is the primary insurance amount as of 1992, reflecting the cost of living
increases since the individual first became eligible.
~~The consumer price index is the CPI-W, or the index for urban wage earners and clerical workers.

L’BF Worki]]g Paper

hfitc:hell/O1.st])l/Stei]]I]]eier

versio)) ,Y/lL96

19

See Table 4- Wage and Infla tion Projections
As mentioned

before, the primary insurance

basis of the earnings in years up to and including
The amounts in variables
(early for variable

amount in variable 6 is calculated

1991 (with zeros filled in to age 62 as necessary).

7 and 8 project future earnings up to the year before the retirement

7 and normal for variable 8) in cases where the individual

1991, The method of projecting
for each HRS respondent

solely on the

age

was under that age in

these future earnings adopted for the present purposes is to compute

a weighted

average of his or her own recent earnings and to project these

earnings into future years.
More specifically,
the National Average
then averaged,
respectively.

earnings in the five-year period 1987-1991 are indexed to 1991 levels using

Wage Index of the Social Security Administration.

with the 1987 through
This procedure

1991 single-year

The indexed wages are

earnings given weights of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5,

thus places more weight on more recent earnings.

This weighted

average is then indexed upward to each year up to and including the year before the individual
reaches the early (for variable 7) or normal (for variable 8) retirement

age, using the National

Average Wage Index found in Table 4. The resulting wage series is then used to calculate a primary
insurance

amount in exactly the same way as before, and the resulting values appear as variables

7

and 8.
This procedure
planning

gives reasonable

results for individuals

to work at least until age 62. However,

several cases where it may not give good results.

with a steady work history who are

data users must be alert to the fact that there are
For instance, if a woman has an intermittent

history, her earnings in the last five years may give only a very noisy indication
intentions

for the future years.

will give accurate projections
is susceptible

as to her work

In such a case, it is probably difficult to produce an algorithm

of the course of her future earnings.

work

which

Another case where the algorithm

to error is if the individual has recently retired within the last year or two. The trouble

here is that it is difficult to know whether the fact that there are no earnings in the last year or two
signifies a permanent
cautioned

retirement

that particularly

EBF Working Paper

or a temporary

for respondents

flfltct~c~tl/Olso)
)/Stei]Imeier

interruption

with intermittent

- versio)l ,9/IL96

of employment.

Thus, users are

work histories and individuals

who

may have recently retired, the projected primary insurance
wealth variables
D. Computed

should be regarded as being subject to substantial

Social Security

As described
EBF dataset.

amount and the projected

social security

potential errors,

Wealth Variables

above, we have computed

social security wealth several different ways for the

Our intention was to make these variables as comparable

as possible, in conceptual

terms, to the other measures of wealth reported in the HRS.
Three versions of social security wealth appear in the EBF. The first (variable 9) is the
expected present value of benefits already accrued by the respondent,
up to and including
between

1!)91. (This computation

based on his covered earnings

assumes the person would have no covered earnings

1992 and the year he turns age 62; a zero is entered if the person would not be eligible for

benefits based on this work record).
represent

The second and third wealth variables @ositions

the expected present value of benefits based on a respondent’s

projected

16 and 23)

earnings if he/she

was younger than age 62 at the time of the survey, LIP to the year before attaining the early or
normal retirement
individuals

age. These projections,

described in the previous section, are carried out for all

and for both spouses of a married couple (with caveats to be explained

case of a married couple, if one spouse was at or over the retirement
the projection
through

below).

In the

age and the other was under it,

is done only for the spouse who was under the retirement

age, and the full earnings

1991 are used for the older spouse.
Social security wealth calculations

assumptions

has to do with mortality,

times the probability
specific mortality
are discounted
probability
assumptions

depend on a number of assumptions.

since the calculation

that the individual

One set of

multiplies the expected benefit each year

will live to collect it. In the next section we discuss the

tables used in creating the EBF file. In all cases, social security wealth calculations

back to the respondent’s

age in 1992, taking into account the conditional

survival

of the person living to that future age, given his/her current age. Another set of
has to do with the expected future paths of wages, prices and interest rates.

Needless

to say, there are differing opinions of the likely future course of these variables, but we have chosen
to evaluate the social security wealth on the basis of the “intermediate”

EBF Worki]lg Paper - Nlitc17{~11/01.v[)
l]/Stcillmcier - versio)l 8/ILI)6

assumptions

supplied by the

21

Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance
Funds (Board of Trustees

consider each year beginning

were handled as follows. For each nonmarried

1992, whichever

here we consider each year beginning

age a married individual

is 1ater. For married persons, two calculations

(as calculated

fl-om the mortality

partner is either living or not, respectively.

we
are

with either age 60

are undertaken,

depending

we weight each calcdation

tables) that the individual

on

by the

is still living and the

For every year in which the spouse is still living, the

approach was to first ask whether that spouse is age 62 or older.
that individual

respondent,

could collect surviving spouse benefits) or the year

whether the partner is or is not projected to be still living;
probabilities

Trust

with the year 1992. For each member of a married couple, benefits

for each spouse separately;

(which is the youngest

Insurance

1995, p. 56),Z5

The wealth calculations

computed

and Disability

If he or she was under 62 years old,

may only receive benefits based on his or her own earnings record.

years old or older, then we compared the benefits the retiring individual

If the spouse is 62

could receive on the basis of

his or her own earnings with the amount that he 01 she could receive as a spouse based on the
spouse’s earnings.

The individual

To determine

would then be assigned the higher benefit amount.Z6

the benefits that would be available on the basis of a respondent’s

own

earnings history, the PIA in nominal dollars is calculated by the ANYPIA program on the basis of the
earnings history.

For persons older than the retirement

age in 1992, we assume that they became

entitled (that is, they were eligible and applied to receive benefits) in the first year that at least some
benefits would have been received, but in no case later than the normal retirement
apply to their birth cohort. For individuals

younger than the retirement

will first become entitled at the early retirement
retirement

age that would

age, we assume that they

age of 62 (for variables 9 and 16), and at the normal

age (for variable 23), assuming they have sufficient quarters of coverage to be entitled to

~SThe 1995 report was the latest year available at the time that these wealth variables
calculated.
2Gln generatlng

varla~lles 16 and 23, the individual

is assumed to begin collecting

were

benefits when he

or she first applies for social security benefits. This is held to be the early retirement age for variable
16 and the normal retirement age for variable 23. In addition, the individual cannot collect spouse
benefits until the spouse has applied as well, in accordance with the rules (Myers 1993).

EBF Working Paper

Mitcl)eil/O1.s{)l]/Stci]l!neier

i~ersion 8/lL96

22

receive benefits. ~~ The benefit amount is then the product of the primary insurance
any reduction

or augmentation

factor that depends on the person’s age of retirement. ~s

In addition to benefits to which a respondent
married respondent

amount times

might be entitled on his or her own record, a

might also be entitled to benefits as a spouse of a retired worker.

possible, the EBF file reports these spouse benefits. calculated

Where

based on the other partner’s

earnings

record as of the previous year by the ANYPIA program for married couples. ~g The basic spouse
benefit is 50% of the husband’s
is determined
reduction

multiplied

by when the individual

factor, calculated

the individual

(or wife’s, as relevant) PIA. A reduction factor is then applied which
would have first started collecting

monthly, totals 8.33 percentage

The

points for each year before age 65 that

first collects spouse benefits; that is, the benefit is reduced by 25/36 of one percent

by the number of months preceding

modified when the nol.rnal retirement

therefore,

age 65. This reduction

factor is scheduled

to be

age increases from its present level of 65. The spouse benefit

is then 500/o of the partner’s PIA multiplied
respondents,

spouse benefits.

by the spouse reduction factor.30

the EBF reports a total benefit due the individual

For married

as eitfie~” the benefit based

on hislher own earnings record, or the spouse benefit based on the spouse’s earnings record,
whichever

is higher.

(As noted above, in dual entitlement

cases, benefits are classified in the EBF as

~~If a respondent was not entitled to social security benefits based on his own work record as of his
age in 1992 his social security wealth benefit variable 10 would be set to zero; similarly for benefits
based on work until age 62 (in which case variable 17 would be set to zero), and until the normal
retirement age (and variable 24 would be zero).
~aNormally, the benefit would be subject to the earnings test which may reduce benefits for those
continuing to earn after receipt of benefits. The potential benefit may also be increased because of
the delayed retirement credit if the individual has worked after the normal retirement age and lost
some benefits to the earnings test. The earnings test does not apply after 70 years of age. Here,
earnings are imputed only before 1992 or if the individual is under the retirement age; benefits are
calculated only on or after 1!)!)2 and if the individual is above the retirement age. As a result the
wealth program assumes no earnings in years after the individual becomes eligible for that benefit.
~~The data user should understand that there are some cases where spouse benefits for HRS
respondents married at the time of the 1992 survey could not be computed based on the married
parties’ earnings records; see Section F for hot deck and missing data cases.
so In realltY this benefit would be subject to earnings tests, both one based on the individual’s own
work and also one based on the work of the partner (since the individual cannot collect benefits in
any month the partner does not also collect benefits). However, the wealth program assumes no
work past the retirement age as indicated in the previous footnote.

EBF Working Paper

Mitcl~cll/Olsc)Il/Steitl~neier - versio)l ,Y/lL96
●

23

spouse benefits or survivor benefits as relevant; increasing

numbers of women are dually entitled

over time).
If the worker is deceased, a widow/er may be eligible both for survivor benefits based on the
earnings record of the deceased and for retired-worker

benefits based on his or her own record.

If the

widow (er) is entitled to both, he or she is dually entitled and receives a full benefit based on his or
her own record plus a partial benefit based on the deceased spouse’s record.
partial benefit is the difference

between the widow/er’s

which he or she is entitled as a widow/er.
to the higher, surviving
spouse benefit”,
the previous

own retired-worker

The amount of the
benefit and the amount to

Because the benefit amount received in this case is equal

spouse benefit, the variable is identified in Appendix

The calculations

,.
based on the individual’s

A as the “surviving

own benefits are exactly the same as in

situation.

Unlike other social security retirement
as age 60.31 For the surviving

benefits, surviving

spouse calculations

(variables

spouse benefits may begin as early

12, 19, and 25), there is an additional

problem: these benefits may depend on when the partner died. Hence, a separate calculation
made for each possible year of death between
which the benefits are being calculated,
to the partner’s

mortality probability

1992 and the year immediately

and the weights on the calculated

year immediately
calculations

before the year for

amounts are proportional

in the successive years.

For each possible year in which the retired-worker
require several steps.

is

partner could have died, the calculations

First, the worker’s PIA is calculated based on his/her earnings record up to the

prior to death.

Note that if the age at death was younger than 62, these

differ from the regular old-age calculations

because there are fewer years in the

calculation

of average indexed monthly earnings.

retirement

credits, these are added to the primary insurance

spouse turned 65, the PIA is subject to a reduction

Next, if the worker was eligible for any delayed
amount.

If the worker died before the

of 5.7°/0 (not 5.7 percentage

points) for each year

31Variable 9 assumes no projected earnings, and the widow/er applies for benefits at age 60 (or
immediately, if she/he is older than age 60). For variables 16 and 23 the widow/er is assumed to
continue his/her employment status until, respectively, the early or the normal retirement age,
before applying for these benefits.

24

the spouse collects survivor benefits before age 65. Again, the calculation
modified when the normal retirement

of this reduction

is

age rises above its current value of 65. Finally, if the spouse

had applied for benefits, the surviving spouse benefit would be subject to a limitation

that it should

not be any larger than the amount payable to the worker had he/she still been alive (as long as this
restriction

does not lower the benefit below 82. 5[% of the worker’s primary insurance

In overview,

then, for every year that a member of a married couple could collect benefits, the

person is modeled as receiving
benefits (conditional
record or surviving

either (a) benefits based on his or her own earnings record or spouse

on the partner being alive), or (b) benefits based on his or her own earnings
spouse benefits (conditional

on the partner being deceased).

modeled as dually entitled are shown as spouse or survivor beneficiaries.
computed

similarly.

will be individually
calculations
projected

amount).

Finally, the amounts are weighted by the probabilities

As noted, those

Data for the partner are
that the two partners

and/or jointly alive, and the amounts of the two partners are added.

are carried out in nominal terms of the year the benefits are to be collected,

using the “intermediate”

assumptions

These
and

regarding wage growth and consumer price index

growth.~~
To form a wealth measure, future benefits are discounted
set of “intermediate”

assumptions

(Table 4), and the discounted

that either member of’ the couple might collect benefits.
individuals
benefit.

according to the interest rate in the
amounts summed for all the years

The wealth measure for unmarried

is similar, except that there is no partner, no spouse benefit, and no surviving

The wealth is simply the discounted

own earnings history.
using conditional

value of the future benefits based on the individual’s

All values are reported as of’ the respondent’s

survival probabilities

spouse

based on the respondent’s

current age in 1992, discounted

current age.ss

32If an individual was not eligible for own retirement benefits, his/her own worker benefits would be
set to zero. In a married couple, if either spouse was receiving DI in 1991, the wealth variables for
both spouses are set to -9 and the AIME and PIA are set to zero. If either partner would be projected
to be eligible for benefits by the early or normal retirement age, the relevant wealth variables is
positive.
3:3.As noted, this will probably underestimate wealth for potentially three-quarters of the currently
widowed women, and some unknown fraction of divorced women, inasmuch as we do not have their
former spouse’s earnings records.

EBF Working Papel

Dfitcf16~11/01.sc]
:j/Stc’il]l~]eier - L,ersion 8/IL96

25

In the case of married couples, there are additional
security wealth variables
nonrnarried

respondents).

(variables

that the individual

for each of these social

10-15, 17-22, and 24-29; these variables are set to zero for

One set of variables represents

of social security wealth that the respondent
value of components

components

the expected present value of components

could collect, and others represent the expected present

that his or her spouse could collect.

Each set of three is comprised

of (a) benefits

could collect on his/her own earnings record, (b) spouse benefits that the

individual

could collect on the basis of the partner’s record, and (c) surviving spouse benefits that the

individual

could collect on the basis of the partner’s record if that partner died.

For example,

if the wife has a PIA substantially

greater than twice her husband’s,

is younger than her husband, then it is likely that variables
have positive amounts, and variables

10, 13, 14, and 15 in her record would

11 and 12 would contain zeros.

benefits on her own account but never on her husband’s

This is because she will collect

account, while the husband will be dually

entitled with the larger amounts received as spouse benefits and surviving
than benefits based on his own account.

However,

and if she

spouse benefits rather

since the older husband reaches retirement

age

before she does, he will collect benefits for a few years on his own account until she applies and he is
able to collect spouse benefits.
three variables will be reversed.
collect, and variables

The same figures will appear on the husband’s record, but the pairs of
That is, variables

13-15 will refer to variables she is expected to collect.

These component

quantities

can be combined in different ways for different purposes.

example, if the interest is in an individual’s
combination

10-12 will refer to benefits he is expected to

would be the sum of variables

lifetime retirement

benefits, then the appropriate

10-12 (or alternatively

variables

17-19 or 24-26).

will give the total expected value of the social security benefits that that individual
collect.

Alternatively,

EBF Worl{ing Paper

if a researcher

were instead interested in retirement

Mitcf)c~ll/O[>c)i
I/Stcitl:neier

- version 8/IL96

For

This

is expected to

incentives,

then variable

10 should be combined
individual’s

with variables

14 and 15 to give the total expected benefits based on the

own earnings history, assuming no change in spouse labor force behavior. s~

The EBF data user must be aware that in a minority of cases, the social security wealth
variables computed

for the EBF file are subject to potentially

instances involve individuals
married.

severe measurement

problems.

Two

who were single at the time of the HRS survey but who were previously

For such individuals,

the social security wealth just described is necessarily

own earnings records in the EBF. However, if’ the individual

based on their

is a widow or widower, his or her actual

social security benefits might in reality be higher if they are computed based on the deceased
spouse’s record,:~~ Alternatively,

if the individual

10 or more years, the individual

might be eligible for benefits based on the former spouse’s earnings

record.

had been divorced from a marriage that lasted for

In neither case were the relevant records for deceased or divorced spouses obtained from the

Social Security Administration.
Administration

In fact, until someone files for benefits, the Social Security

does not necessarily

A different measurement

know that any two people are linked.

problem arises for persons married in 1992 who might divorce, in

that spouse’s benefits are only payable to married persons who had been married at least 10 years by
the time of the divorce.

Our computations

for elements of social security wealth available to

members of a couple assuming that they remain married at least 10 years.
Eventually,
individuals

it will be possible to fine-tune these wealth measures for divorced and widowed

once they begin collecting benefits;

wealth based on the respondent’s
for widows or widowers
E. Mortality

for now the best that can be done is to calculate the

own record and to note there may be understatement

and for divorced women who previously

of benefits

were married for a decade or more.3G

Data

31
Depending
on whether the individual gives full weight to benefits that
the death of the individual, the researcher may want to alter the relative
perhaps variable 14 in the sum.
35As noted earlier, three-quarters of aged widows with benefits received
their deceased husbands’ earrungs records (unpublished SSA estimate).
:j~Widows age 60.6 I who Wele already receiving benefits in the HRS are
in the survey, namely their social security wealth was calculated
even if they are al~eady receiving benefits as widows.

the spouse will collect after
weights of variable 15 and
survivor benefits based on
handled like other widows

on the basis of their own earnings

27

The mortality

data used in calculating

Security Administration’s
estimated

probability

the wealth variables are taken from the Social

actuarial projections.~7

These projections

contain, among other things, the

of survival, by sex, for each year of age up to 120 and for each birth cohort from

1900 to 1980; this time span includes all cohorts of interest for purposes of the HRS.
Summary

statistics from these mortality data, reported in Table 5, indicate very strong

trends in increasing

life expectancy

over time. The most dramatic increases in life expectancy

are

those at birth, but a large part of this increase comes from reduced infant mortality,

which is clearly

not relevant for the HRS respondents.

increases

Even so, the~e are projected to be non-trivial

in life

expectancy

at age 25 >]nd, perhaps more importantly,

individuals

living to very old ages (age 85 or 100) is Koing to grow very rapidly in the coming years,

given recent mortality

at age 65, and it is clear that the percentage

of

trends.

See Table 5- Mortalitv

Rates by Cohort

The EBF user should be aware that these nlortality statistics, and the social security wealth
variables calculated

from them, are population

data are not available separately
which might make individuals

averages by sex and birth cohort.

by race, and they also do not reflect any individual

perceive their own nlortality probabilities

Vital Statistics mortality probabilities

are calculated

particularly

differences

to be either higher or lower,

separately by race, but they are not projected

into the future, and they are only available to age 85. Given the increasing
population,

These mortality

women, who survive past 85, this last limitation

percentage

of the

is a matter of concern.

Our decision to employ mortality statistics furnished by the Social Security Administration
therefore a compromise.
variables observable

Nei the~ these figures nor those supplied by Vital Statistics reflect all the

by lndividua]s

mortality probabilities.

is

that might plausibly affect individuals’

estimates

of their own

Among such factors are peoples’ current health status including

and severity of disease, family income levels, and whether they participate

the presence

in any activities or

37Felicitie Bell in the SSA’S Office of the Actuary kindly supplied these data. A comparison of the
SSA data with the 1990 Vital Statistics figures (Table 5) suggests that the lower survival rates in the
Vital Statistics tables would have resulted in lower social security wealth figures than those reported
here.

EBF Working Paper

]~ItCh

(Dl]/Oi.~c)!)/Stc?
iJl]l]eiel- ve]’.~iojl 8/lLc)6

28

occupations

which elevate the mortality risk. The construction

of such individual-specific

tables would be a research program in itself, not one which we undertake
understood

here.

mortality

Hence it should be

that the social security wealth variables reported in the EBF are approximations.
in social security wealth arising from mortality probabilities

Users

exploring

differences

that differ

according

to factors other than age and sex should derive their own social security wealth variables.

F. Hot Deck Procedures
The social security variables just described are calculated

for each 1992 HRS respondent

whom the HRS received an earnings record from the Social Security Administration.
is a one-to-one

correspondence

between respondents’

That is, there

records in the EBF, and the earnings

file supplied by the SSA to the Health and Retirement

Survey.

for

summary

All of the variables except the

couple’s social security wealth amounts can be calculated from the respondent’s

own earnings record,

and it does not matter whether the record for the spouse is present, or for that matter even whether
the individual

has a spouse.

The situation is different for a married couple’s social security wealth variables,
case it is necessary

since in this

to have a record for the spouse as well. For some 1356 out of 4077 married HRS

sample couples, the social security file contains a record for one spouse but not for the other. ss This
could have occurred either because the spouse did not grant permission

to access the earnings record,

or because a valid match to the earnings record could not be found at the Social Security
Administration,

In these cases, for the missing spouse record, we substituted

record from another respondent
attachment.~~

This procedure

an actual earnings

with the same sex and similar levels of earnings and labor force
is known as “hot-decking”

in the survey literature.

We emphasize

that

in such cases, there is only one record in the summary social security variables file; we did not create

~~Some of those without an earnings record had never worked for pay in covered employment. Of the
1356 spouses without social security records for instance, 614 were women.
j!) If there were no records which matched exactly the five categories, adjacent cells were searched
until a match was found, Adj scent earnings cells were searched first, followed by adjacent age cells
and adjacent experience cells. In no case was it necessary to vary earnings, age, and experience by
more than one categol’y to find a match. Also, in no case was male record substituted for a female or
vice versa, or a record for someone not working in 19!)2 substituted for someone working or vice
versa.

[{BI+’ Working Paper

AflitclleII/OJ.so]l/Stei]]lneier - ve~sio]j 8/1/9(1

29

a record for the “hot-decked”

or missing spouse’s earnings history.

Rather, this hot deck record was

used only to impute the family social security wealth variables for the respondent
receive a social security earnings record. (It will be recalled that respondents

for whom we did

surveyed by the HRS,

who were outside the HRS age range of 51-61 in 1992, appear in the HRS by virtue of being married
to age-eligible

spouses.

The EBF contains records only for age-eligible

though family social security wealth computations

respondents,

as noted above,

include benefit estimates for age-ineligible

spouses).
For the hot deck procedure,
Security Administration.
classification

we relied on all the earning records received from the Social

Each non-missing

record was assigned to a single cell in a five-way

table, based on the information

the respondent

gave in the household

survey.

The table

was chosen to reflect the five variables that we believed were closely associated with different levels
of average monthly eal’nin~s and, therefore.

potential benefit amounts,

(male or female), work status at the time of the 1992 interview
categories

of age in 1992, 26 categories

experience .40 For individuals

These five variables

(working or not working),

of annual earnings, and 6 categories

12

of observed work

who were working at the time of the 1992 interview,

annual earnings

are taken as the reported earnings for the calendar year 1991, while if the individual
working at the time of the 1:)92 interview,

are: sex

was not

annual earnings are calculated from the wage (which

could be given as an amount per hour, per week, per month, or annual) in the last job. Total
observed experience

is the sLnn of the tenures in the current job in 1992 (if employed

last job (if not employed

at the time), the

at the time), and up to three previous jobs that lasted for more than 5

years.41

age categories
used were five years in width for ages between 25 and 74. Individuals 2Ayears
old and younger were grouped into a single category. as were people 75 years and older. The

40 The

earnings categories are $2,000 wide between $0 and $24,000, $3,000 wide up to $42,000, $4,000 wide
LIp to $50,000, $5,000 wide LIpto !$60,000 and $10,000 wide up to $100,000.
Earnings over $100,000
were grouped into a single cell, since this is considerably above the social security taxable maximum.
The experience categories are O-5, 6-10, 11-20, 21-30, 31-40, and 41+ years.
~I The HRS did not ask respondents directly about the total number of years they had been employed
in all jobs, so experience must be proxied by the total experience in jobs reported in the survey,

30

The rationale

for the earnings and experience

variables is fairly clear: since the average

monthly earnings figure in the social security calculations
number of years the Individuals
information

experience

represents

when the individual

patterns vary considerably

Age is important in considering

a large or moderate percentage
retires.

it is important

and the

to take this

whether a given number

of the number of years of eventual

Also, sex is important if it is likely that participation

between men and women, even for those with similar earnings.

it probably makes a considerable
individual

have been in covered employment,

into account when matching.

of years of experience

depends on the average earnings

difference,

is or is not currently working.

especially for the projected

Finally,

wealth variable, whether the

The projected earnings of a married women who has

worked in the past but who is not currently working may well be quite different from those of a
married women with a same average earnings but who is continuing

to work,

Having grouped all available earnings records into this five-way table, the records were then
randomized

within each cell of the table.

Since there are 7,488 potential

cells in the table, and we

have 8,394 earnings records, each cell has on average a little more than one record.
have an individual

with a social security earnings record but no matched record for the spouse, we

select a “donor” HRS household

file to construct the gender, 1992 work status, wage, and experience

variables for the Spotlse. and use a randomly
wage-experience
experience,

chosen

record from the same age-gender-work

cell to represent the spouse’s missing record.

andlor age cells are broadened

only to construct

Then, when we

When necessary,

until a match is found.

status-

the wage,

Again, this matched record is used

measures of family social security wealth for those individuals

for whom we do have

an actual earnings record.

III. Conclusion
Researchers

using the Health and Retirement

labor market attachlnent,

on earnings,

and social security benefits, in order to better understand

affecting both the retirement
will find the aggregated

Survey require information

decision and well-being

in old age. It is anticipated

the factors

that analysts

variables in the restricted Earnings and Benefits File to be of substantial

31

use toward this end. It is expected that the average user will be able to use these created
variables as they are: other analysts will desire to combine these variables
algorithms

to derive alternate outcomes.

The Earnings
and Retirement
Survey Research

and Benefits File, along with full documentation

Survey, is a restricted file available from the University
under a series of limited data access conditions.

versions of the HRS that contain no geographic
regarding

along with their own

and datafiles from the Health
of Michigan’s

It can be merged only with

detail below the Census Division level.

the HRS and the EBF should be directed by e-mail to hrsquest@umich,

[<[lb” Working Paper

A{itcf]lll/Ot.>f,\]/S((iJl!]]eiel.

I,CrSI(III,9/1/’)6

Institute for

edu.

Queries

32

Bibliography
Ballantine, Harry C., “Present Policies and Methods Regarding
Benefits”, Social Securitv Bulletin, 47(10), October 1984.

the Long-Term

Adjustment

of

Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Disability Insurance
Funds: 1995 Annual Report, Washington, D. C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1995.

Trust

Bondar, Joseph, “Ho\v to Compute a Retired-Worker Benefit”, Social Securitv Bulletin, 58(l), Spring
1995. (See also pp. 48-51, Annual Statistical Supplement 1995.)
Fields, Gary S, and Mitchell,
Press, 1984.

Olivia S. Retirement,

Pensions and Social Securitv.

Cambridge:

MIT

Gustman, Alan L. and Mitchell, Olivia S. “Pensions and the Labor Market: Behavior and Data
Requirements”, in Pensions and the U.S. Economv: The Need for Good Data, Ed. Z. Bodie and A.
Munnell. Philadelphia, Pa: Pension Research CoLlncil and University of Pennsylvania Press, 1992,
pp. 39-87.
Gustman, Alan. L. and Stelnmeier,
May, 1986, 54(3), pp. 555-584.

Thomas L, “A Structural

Retirement

Gustman, Alan, Olivia S, Mitchell and Thomas Steinmeier. “Retirement
and Retirement Survey”. Journal of Human Resources (1995).

Model,” Econometrical

Research Using the Health

Hurd, Michael D. “The Joint Retirement Decision Of Husbands And Wives”, in Issues In The
Economics of A~in~, Ed. D. Wise. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1990, pp. 231-254.
Hurd, Michael D. “Research On The Elderly: Economic Status, Retirement,
Saving”, Journal of Economic Literature, June 1990, 28(2), pp. 565-637.
Leonesio,
1993.

Michael, “Social Security and Older Workers”,

and Consumption

Social Security Bulletin,

and

56(2), Summer

Lingg, Barbara A., “Wonlen Beneficiaries Aged 62 or Older, 1960-88, Social Security Bulletin, 53(7),
July 1990. (For updated data, see Tables 5.A14 and 5.A15 in the Annual Statistical Supplement.
~
to the Social Securitv Bulletin).
Mitchell, Olivia S. “Social Sccuyity Reforms and Poverty Among Dual-Earner
Population Economics 4, (19!) 1): 281-293.
Myers, Robert. Social Securitv. Pension Research Council and University
Philadelphia, 1993,
Nelson Jr., William J., “Disability Trends in the United States:
Perspective”, Social Securitv Bulletin, 57(3), Fall 1994.

Couples.”

of Pennsylvania

Journal of

Press:

A National and Regional

Office of the Actuary, Users Guide for PIA Calculation Program, Version 1995.1, Social Security
Administration,
US Department of Health and Human Services, Publication #l 1-11501, 1995.
Pozzebon, Silvana and Mitchell, Olivia S. “Married Women’s Retirement
Population Economics, 2(1), 1989. pp. 301-53.

Behavior, “Journal

of

Quinn, Joseph F., Burkhauser, Richard V,, and Myers, Daniel A. Passing The Torch: The Influence
of Economic Incentives on Work and Retirement. I{alamazoo: W.E. Upjohn Institute, 1990.
Social Security Administration (SSA), Annual Statistical Supp lement to the Social Security Bulletin,
US Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration, various years.
“Social Security Programs

in the United States”, Social Securitv Bulletin, 56(4), Winter 1993.

Steuerle, C. Eugene and JOII M. Bakija, Retooling Social Security for the 21st Century, The Urban
Institute, 1994,
Thompson, Lawrence H. “The Social Security Reform Debate”, Journal of Economic
December 1983, 21(4), pp. 1425-1467.
US Department of Health and Human Services, SSA’S Retirement
Reports, September 1987.

[<[IF Working Paper

Alitc!] cll/01.s(~))/St(!ilI]n
eier - ver.~)o)l S’/IL96

History Survey:

Literature,

Compilation

of

Table 1. Descriptive Statistics on EBF Covered Employment Variables
~
I. Fraction of years by decade with zero reported earnings (%)
Married Men
24.80
Age 20-29
15.43
24.84
10.16
Age 30-39
27.63
12.44
Age 40-49
25.66
Age 50-59
12.06
Married Women
33.12
Age 20-29
52.44
Age 30-39
37.61
52.96
39.85
Age 40-49
39.42
28.68
34.60
Age 50-59
Nonmarried men
24.99
Age 20-29
15.62
27.58
Age 30-39
13.91
Age 40-49
20.88
33.14
Age 50-59
20.53
32.14
Nonmarried women
Age 20-29
47.67
34.71
Age 30-39
37.41
39.95
Age 40-49
29.30
37.39
Age 50-59
20.33
31.29
II. Work in Covered Employment
Married Men
Total QC’S(#)
125.00
7.40
QC 1982-83(#)
QC 1984-85(#)
6.90
QC 1986-87(#)
6.71
6.69
QC 1988-89(#)
QC 1990-91(#)
6.60

Yrs. Cov, Emplo~ent
Age 20-50

34.90
2.73
2.78
2.78
2.79
32.85

26.20

6.37

71.65
4.50
4.62
4,78
4.81
4,72

41.88
3.78
3.71
3.70
3.70
3.73

15.52

8.48

114.71
5.83
5.90
5.90
5.79
5.75

38.42
3.32
3.36
3.29
3.37
3.38

24.96

6.95

Married Women

Total QC’S(#)
QC 1982-83(#)
QC 1984-85(#)
QC 1986-87(#)
QC 1988-89(#)
QC 1990-91(#)
Yrs. Cov. Employment
Age 20-50
Nonmarried Men
Total QC’S(#)
QC 1982-83(#)
QC 1984-85(#)
QC 1986-87(#)
QC 1988-89(#)
QC 1990-91(##)
Yrs. Cov. Employment
Age 20-50

Tabls630.doc- 7/31/96

2

Table 1 (cont.)
Std.

Nonmarried Women
Total QC’S(#)
QC 1982-83(#)
QC 1984-85(#)
QC 1986-87(#)
QC 1988-89(#)
QC 1990-91(#)
Yrs. Cov. Employment
Age 20-50

Dev.

85.11
5.40
5.48
5.64
5.76
5.74

44.43
3.55
3.49
3.46
3.38
3.41

18.31

8.67

C. Disability Insured as of 12/91 (%)
MarriedMen
84
MarriedWomen
59
NonmarriedMen
75
NonmarriedWomen
72
Note:Number of observationsreportedas Sample2 in Append&D, All tabtiationsweightedby HRS sampleweights

Tabls630.doc- 7131/96

Table 2. Descriptive Statistics on Earnings Variables in the EBF
h
~
I. Average Annual Real Taxable Earnings by Decade of Life ($)
Married Men
Age 20-29
14544
5974
Age 30-39
23929
9280
Age 40-49
28823
14095
Age 50-59
27692
18084
Married Women
Age 20-29
6566
5412
Age 30-39
7407
7625
Age 40-49
10484
10145
Age 50-59
10578
12170
Nonmarried Men
Age 20-29
12551
6334
Age 30-39
20538
10282
Age 40-49
22070
14755
Age 50-59
20476
17869
Nonmarried Women
Age 20-29
6450
5556
Age 30-39
9613
8532
Age 40-49
13511
11491
Age 50-59
14692
13639
II. Average Indexed Monthly Earnings ($)
MarriedMen
1992
858
MarriedWomen
641
585
NonmarriedMen
1567
895
NonmarriedWomen
703
838
Note: Number of observations reported se Sample 2 in Appendix D. In Panel I earnings are included ordy up to the Social
Security taxable maximum earnings and averages computed ordy over those with at least one nonzero earnings year using
years over which there were positive earnings. For the group age 50-59, average earnings are computed only over relevant
years. In Panel ~ zero years of earnings are included in AIME formula as relevant; see text.

Tabls630,doc

- 7/31/96

Table 3. Descriptive Statistics on Social Security Variables in the EBF

I. Respondent’s Average Prima%nsurance=nt
Married Men

(1992$)

Based on

Earnings through 1991
Earnings to early ret. age
Earnings to normal ret. age

808
866
882

277
295
304

337
396
423

268
298
316

677
732
754

306
335
347

419
487
518

291
320
337

Married Women
Based on

Earnings through 1991
Earnings to early ret. age
Earnings to normal ret. age
Nonmarried Men
Based on

Based on earnings through 1991
Earnings to early ret. age
Earnings to normal ret. age
Nonmarried Women
Based on

Based on earnings through 1991
Earnings to early ret. age
Earnings to normal ret. age

II. Social Security Wealth Forecasts (Presentvalue, 1992$)
Married Men (Couple’sbenefits)
h Of 1992
148198
47263
As of emly ret. age
161641
47559
h of normalret. age
175457
50818
Married Women (Couple’sbenefits)
As of 1992
161780
51001
As of early ret. age
170994
50003
As of normalret. age
187650
55284
Nonmarried Men*
Current
67777
31436
As of earlyret. age
72942
33383
As of normalret. age
75761
34643
Nonmarried Women*
As of 1992
50678
35826
As of earlyret. age
58474
38265
As of normalret. age
64644
41749

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

5

Table 3 (cont.)

Mean

Std. Dev.

B. Components of Social Security Wealth Forecasts for Married Couples
(Presentvalue, 1992$)
Married Men
Based on Earnings

Through

1991

Respondent’s own
Respondent’s spouse
Respondent’s SUI-V.sps.
Spouse’s own
Spouse’s spouse
Spouse’s sum. sps.
Based on Earnings

To Early Retirement

Respondent’s own
Respondent’s spouse
Respondent’s surv. sps.
Spouse’s own
Spouse’s spouse
Spouse’s surv. sps.
Based on Earnings

80804
486
902
19258
14709
32039

To Normal

Respondent’s own
Respondent’s spouse
Respondent’s sum, sps.
Spouse’s own
Spouse’s spouse
Spouse’s surv. sps.

30351
3268
3197
26207
15776
14602
Age

85832
646
1383
26507
14197
33077
Retirement

31275
3897
3936
31511
16696
16435
Age

88808
729
1852
27854
14923
41291

32346
4242
5144
34906
17419
21566

Married Women
Based on Earnings Through 1991
Respondent’s own
22535
Respondent’s spouse
16344
Respondent’s surv. sps.
34719
Spouse’s own
86565
Spouse’s spouse
682
Spouse’s sum, sps.
936
Based on Earnings To Early Retiremnt
Age
Respondent’s own
27373
Respondent’s spouse
15941
Respondent’s SUIV. sps.
35757
Spouse’s own
89923
Spouse’s spouse
778
Spouse’s surv. sps.
1220
Based on Earnings To Normal Retirement Age
Respondent’s own
28613
Respondent’s spouse
16931
Respondent’s surv. sps.
43451
Spouse’s own
96150
Spouse’s spouse
785
Spouse’s SUI-V.sps.
1721

28754
16803
17723
33902
3896
3033
32588
17513
18372
33693
4311
3626
35933
18194
22374
37963
4276
4914

Note: Number of observations reported as Sample 3 in Appendix D.
*Wealth values for nonmarried persons are based on respondent’s own earnings remrds, and underestimate benefits available
as survivors (for widows/ers) and divorced spouses (if tie marriage lasted 10 years prior to divorce); see text.

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

Table 4. Wage and Inflation Projections

&

1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004-2010
2011+

Source: Board of Trustees (1995), Table H. D1

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

Proiec ted Annual Chanqes in
Consumer
Average Annual
Price
Wage in Covered
Index
Emplovm ent
2.8
1.3%
2.5
3.5
4.0
3.1
4.1
3.2
4.3
3.3
4.1
3.4
4.2
3.5
4.5
3.7
4.7
3.9
4.8
4.0
4.9
4.0
4.0
5.1
4.0
5.0

7

Table 5. Longevity Patterns Over Time

w

m

M

72.3
79.4

73.4
80.4

74.8
81.7

76.2
82.9

75.8
81.6

76.6
82.5

77.1
83.2

77.8
83.8

78.4
84.4

81.4
85.4

81.9
85.8

82.3
86.2

82.8
86.7

83.2
87.1

83.6
87.5

60.2
72.7

66.8
77.7

72.2
81.5

75.6
84.6

77.1
85.9

79.0
87.2

80.7
88.4

25.5

14.1
31.3

18.6
36.7

22.3
40.5

25.6
43.8

28.3
47.0

30.3
49.1

32.5
51.2

34.6
53.1

0.2
1.3

0.3
1.8

0.5
2.5

0.7
3.2

1.0
4.1

1.3
5.1

1.7
6.0

2.0
7.1

2.5
8.2

Life Expectancies
At birth: Men
Women

52.0
58.8

56.7
64.4

62.3
70.2

66,6
73.9

69.7
76.8

At age 25: Men
Women

68.8
75.1

70.7
77.8

72.8
79.5

74.4
80.6

At age 65: Men
Women

79.0
83.5

79.8
84.4

80.8
84.9

46.7
57.8

52.4
65.3

11.0

Survival Rates
Birth to 65: Men
Women
Birth to 85: Men
Women
Birth to 100: Men
Women
Source:

Computed by authors using data supplied by the Office of the Actuary, Social Security Administration.

Tabls630,doc

- 7/31/96

8

Appendix A Variable List for the Earnings and Benefit File (EBF)
Se; ;ezt for till de-scription of all variables listed below.

Vm’iable

“ Be~nning
Lentih

-

~
1
2

1
7

5
5

3

13

5

4

19

1

5.
6.
7,
~a

30
31

21
27
33
39
45
52
59
66
73
80
87
94
101
108
115
122
129
136
143
150
157
164
171
178
185
192
196

5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
3
1

32
33
34
35
36
37 c
38 c
39 c
40 c
41’
42 c
43 c
44 c
45 ‘

198
200
202
204
206
208
215
222
229
236
243
250
257
260

1
1
1
1
1
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
2
2

gb
10 b
11 b
12 b

13 b
14 b
15 b
16

b

17 b
18 b

19

b

20

b

Zlb
22

b

23
24
25

b

26

b

b
b

27

b

28

b

29 b

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

Variable

Name

Case ID
Spouse ID (=0 if no spouse, =99999 if no HRS data
record for spouse)
Hot deck ID (=0 if not married or spouse has social
security record, 99999 if spouse was not interviewed)
Disability insurance benefits code (=1 if in benefit receipt,
O= else)
Average indexed monthly earnings ($)
Primary insurance amount, earnings to 1991($)
Projected primary insurance amount, earnings to age 62 ($)
Projected primary insurance amount, earnings to NRA ($)
Current individual or couple social security wealth ($)
Respondent’s own benefit ($)
Respondent’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Respondent’s surviving spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s own benefit ($)
Spouse’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s sufiving
spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Projected individual/couple
social security wealth; age 62 ($)
Respondent’s own benefit ($)
Respondent’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Respondent’s surviving spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s own benefit ($)
Spouse’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s sufiving
spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Projected individual/couple
social security wealth; NRA ($)
Respondent’s own benefit ($)
Respondent’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Respondent’s surviving spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s own benefit ($)
Spouse’s spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Spouse’s sufiving
spouse benefit ($ including dual)
Total quarters of coverage (through 1991)
Social security disability insurance status in 1991
(=1 disability insured, O = not)
Number of nonzero quarters of coverage 1982-83
Number of nonzero quarters of coverage 1984-85
Number of nonzero quarters of coverage 1986-87
Number of nonzero quarters of coverage 1988-89
Number of nonzero quarters of coverage 1990-91
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 20 through 29 ($)
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 30 through 39 ($)
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 40 through 49 ($)
Aver, taxable real earnings, age 50 through 59 ($)
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 60 through 69 ($)
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 70 through 79 ($)
Aver. taxable real earnings, age 80 through 89 ($)
Zero earnings years, age 20 through 29
Zero earnings years, age 30 through 39

46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53

c
‘
‘
c
‘
d
d

263
2
266
2
269
2
272
2
275
2
278
6
285
6
d
292
6
...
.,,
...
70 d
411
6
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Zero earnings years, age 40 through 49
Zero earnings years, age 50 through 59
Zero earnings years, age 60 through 69
Zero earnings years, age 70 through 79
Zero earnings years, age 80 through 89
Lowest earnings yem in -E
average
Next lowest earnings year in AIME average
Third lowest earnings year in AIME average
...
20th lowest earnings year in AIME average

Note: Respondents who declined permission to link HRS and administrative records have no EBF record; see text. Variables
5-8 rounded b nearest $10 and variables 37-43 are rounded to nearest $100. Variables 9-29 hotdecked as required cf Sect. 11.F.
aValues based on respondent’s own earnings remrd; equal to O if none, or .9 if worker (or spouse) receiving DI in 1991.
b Includes earnings ordy tIJmaximum social security taxable earnings. Equal to -9 if the respondent (or spouse) receiving DI in
1991, Equal to O if respondent not eligible for benefits or eligibility is urdmown (e ,g, for current widows). Equal to O for spouse
benefits where spouse cotid not be interviewed in the HRS.
c Excludes years before 1951 and afier 1991.
‘ Equal to -9 if respondent receiving DI.

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

10

Appendix B. Descriptive Linear Regression Models for Selected EBF Constructed
Employment and Earnings Variables
~B:

Variable &finitions

appear in note at end of table)

Merried Men (N=2186)
I. Deu, Var. AIME
COef
t
P>lt[
Std.
Err.
-----——— -------–-–––---- +-----------------------age I
162.0102
0.771
0.441
210.1328
agesq
I -1.266802
-0.675
0.500
1.876826
educ I
10.14772
1.696
0.090
5.984941
white I
514.0386
10.529
0.000
48.82037
numkids
I
0.023
0.982
.2008707
8.857105
walk2dv
I
70.86046
0.625
0.532
113.3773
carrydv
I
352.0026
3.981
0.000
88.42219
cancer
I -16.56807
96.95156
-0.171
0.864
stroknow
I -230.8241
-1.158
0.247
199.3255
heartevr
I -26.61319
-0.544
0.587
48.92647
workpay
I -201.4448
-1.233
0.218
163.3245
annearn
I
3.515241
7.875
.446399
0.000
hourswk
I
2.2085
1.402
0.161
1.575573
jobten I
4.004937
2.203
0.028
1.817856
ntwthOOO
I
3.566
0.000
1120795
0314269
numjobs5
/
31.04625
1.840
0.066
;6.87751
pension
I
256.1111
5.254
0.000
48.75037
selfemp
I
-2.158
0.031
-121.229
56.1719
annage2
I
3.731618
1.815
0.070
2.056246
weeksyr
I
0.708
2.14291
3.0287
0.479
_cOns I -4667.447
-0.795
0.426
5867.72
Adj R-squared
.
0.1914
...---.--------------------..............------------------

[95% Conf. Interval]
----———--.-———----———-574.0933
-250.073
2.413767
-4.947371
21.88455
-1.589108
609.7783
418.2989
-17.16845
17.57019
-151.4792
293.2002
178.6014
525.4038
-206.6959
173.5598
-621.7135
160.0653
-122.5609
69.33455
-521.734
118.8444
4.390657
2.639826
5.298293
-.881293
.4400129
7.569861
0504494
.1737096
64.14406
-2.051552
351.7135
160.5087
-231.3855
-11.07251
-.3008036
7.764041
-3.796552
8.082373
6839.505
-16174.4

~
Coef

Std.

Err.

––––-–---+----------–age I
agesq I
educ I
white I
numkids
I
walk2dv
I
carrydv
I
cancer I
stroknow
I
heartevr
I
workpay
I
annearn
I
hourswk
I
jobten
I
ntwthOOO
I
numjobs5
I
pension
(
selfemp
I
annage2
I
weeksyr
I
_cOns I
Adj R-squared

Tabls630.doc

-32.54948
.3083792
951867
169.7814
1.012055
25.30195
102.5761
-3.370763
-118.5516
-9.875619
-62.85508
.8888182
8501509
:7403838
0317684
i3 .63573
83.48613
-22.17276
1.993323
.7825226
1129.506
.
0.157 3

- 7/31/96

69.52398
6209616
1.980161
16.15258
2.930438
37.5117
29.25513
32.07713
65.94831
16.18768
54.0371
.1476944
.5212897
.6014508
.0103978
5.584046
16.12942
18.58488
6803239
1.002067
1941.378

.—

.----———
-0.468
0.497
0.481
10.511
0.345
0.675
3.506
-0.105
-1.798
-0.610
-1.163
6.018
1.631
1.231
3.055
2.442
5.176
-1.193
2.930
0.781
0.582

0.640
0.620
0.631
0.000
0.730
0.500
0.000
0.916
0.072
0.542
0.245
0.000
0.103
0.218
0.002
0.015
0.000
0.233
0.003
0.435
0.561

[95% Conf. Interval]
---———.-----———-----———
103.7912
-168.8902
-.9093639
1.526122
-2.931348
4.835082
201.4576
138.1052
6.75882
-4.734’709
98.86465
-48.26076
159.9471
45.20501
-66.27594
59.53442
-247.8802
10.77697
-41.62063
21.86939
-168.8251
43.11493
.5991807
1.178456
1.872431
-.1721296
1.919865
-.4390973
0113776
0521591
;.685079
24.58638
51.85538
115.1169
-58.61883
14.27331
6591665
3.327479
-;.182592
2.747637
-2677.653
4936.665

11

Marned Men (cont.)
DI. Deu Var PIAER
Coef

Std.

age
-103.3762
agesq
.8461478
educ
2.44439
white
158.6821
ntiids
-.2011117
walk2dv
26.50877
c arrydv
112.3873
cancer
-5.484903
stroknow
-110.0829
heartevr
-11.30081
workpay
-67.83552
annearn
1.091606
hourswk
1.186366
jobten
.7012654
ntwthOOO
.0316042
numjobs5
12.89811
pension
83.70923
selfemp
-35.3124
annage2
2.103849
weeksyr
.9452184
_c ons
3418.651
Adj R–squ~ red .
0.1800

Err.

73.13524
653216
2:083016
16.99158
3.082653
39.46016
30.77471
33.7433
69.37384
17.02851
56.84393
155366
.5483669
.6326917
0109379
5.874096
16.96722
19.55023
.7156618
1.054117
2042.218

t
-1.413
1.295
1.173
9.339
-0.065
0.672
3.652
-0.163
-1.587
-0.664
-1.193
7.026
2.163
1.108
2.889
2.196
4.934
-1.806
2.940
0.897
1.674

P>ltl
0.158
0.195
0.241
0.000
0.948
0.502
0.000
0.871
0.113
0.507
0.233
0.000
0.031
0.268
0.004
0.028
0.000
0.071
0.003
0.370
0.094

[95% Conf.

Interval]
---———

-246.7988
-.4348481
-1.64053
125.3606
-6.246379
-50.87498
52.03619
-71.65755
-246.1291
-44.69473
-179.3099
.7869243
.1109856
-.5394812
0101543
1.378649
50.43548
-73.65158
.7003935
-1.121969
-586.2617

40.04644
2.127144
6.529309
192.0037
5.844155
103.8925
172.7383
60.68774
25.9634
22.09312
43.63885
1.396288
2.261746
1.942012
0530541
24.41756
116.983
3.026781
3.507305
3.012406
7423.564

--------------........-------------------------...............
~.DeD.var.p~

---------

Coef.

Std.

age
-182.15
agesq
1.522968
educ
3.444232
white
147.6575
numkids
-.7899623
walk2dv
25.8542
carrydv
117.5303
cancer
-4.778592
s troknow
-106.468
heartevr
-12.74492
wo rkp ay
-81.75767
annearn
1.218338
hourswk
1.330471
jobten
.6737857
ntwthOOO
.0317527
numjobs5
12.54496
pension
84.91433
selfemp
-39.61422
annage2
2.10083
weeksyr
1.297082
_cOns
5709.484
Adj R-squared
=
0.1952

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

Err.

74.74326
6675783
2.128815
17.36518
3.150431
40.32777
31.45136
34.48522
70.89916
17.40291
58.09376
158782
.5604238
.6466027
.0111784
6.00325
17.34028
19.98008
.7313971
1.077294
2087.12

t
-2.437
2.281
1.618
8.503
-0.251
0.641
3.737
-0.139
-1.502
-0.732
-1.407
7.673
2.374
1.042
2.841
2.090
4.897
-1.983
2.872
1.204
2.736

P>ltl
0.015
0.023
0.106
0.000
0.802
0.522
0.000
0.890
0.133
0.464
0.159
0.000
0.018
0.298
0.005
0.037
0.000
0.048
0.004
0.229
0.006

[95% Conf.
-328.7261
.2138064
-.730503
113.6034
-6.968147
-53.23099
55.85232
-72.40617
-245.5055
-46.87308
-195.683
.906957
.2314464
-.5942412
.0098311
.7722257
50.909
-78.79636
.6665166
-.8155573
1616.515

Interval]

-----———

-35.57398
2.832129
7.618967
181.7117
5.388222
104.9394
179.2083
62.84899
32.5695
21.38324
32.1677
1.529719
2.429496
1.941813
0536742
;4.31769
118.9197
-.4320765
3.535144
3.409721
9802.453

12

Married Men (cont.)
V. Deu. Var. Worklt50
P>ltl
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
-––––––– –+----------age I
1.655217
1.629063
1.016
0.310
agesq
I -.0169917
.0145502
-1.168
0.243
educ I -.2043534
.0463985
-4.404
0.000
white
I
4.256968
.3784818
11.247
0.000
numkids
I
0674527
.068665
0.982
0.326
walk2dv
I -:0685121
.8789618
-0.078
0.938
carrydv
I
1.274463
6854964
1.859
0.063
cancer
I
0716281
:7516206
0.095
0.924
stroknow
I -;. 681668
1.545279
-1.088
0.277
heartevr
I
-.007997
.3793043
-0.021
0.983
workpay
I
.7027019
1.266179
0.555
0.579
annearn
I
.0024512
.0034607
0.708
0.479
hourswk
I
.0158606
.0122147
1.298
0.194
jobten
I
.0242441
.014093
1.720
0.086
ntwthOOO I
000394
.0002436
1.617
0.106
numjobs5
I
.4841964
3.701
.1308435
0.000
pension
I
.8633358
.3779391
2.284
0.022
selfemp
I -.3605491
.4354748
-0.828
0.408
annage2
I
0773521
.0159411
4.852
0.000
weeksyr
I -:0144786
.0234801
-0.617
0.538
cons
I -22.60566
45.48972
-0.497
0.619
Adj R-squared
.
0.105.9
***** **%******* ***** ***** ***** x****x******************%********
MarriedWomen
1. DeD.Var.-

(N.2089)

--------

Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>ltl
.——————-— ___________________________________

age
agesq
educ
white
numki ds
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
workpay
annearn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthOOO
numjobs5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cOns
Adj R–SW

124.0917
-.9777382
15.81753
-22.71313
-18.4554
83.65422
17.48063
38.1801
-158.4834
25.37603
-495.9378
13.70094
3.870961
9.307789
.0229028
119.277
123.3738
-78.26161
-4.525376
6.328893
-3458.492
.ed =
0.3448

Tabls630.doc

[95% Conf. Interval]
.----————----—————---——
4.849907
-1.539473
-.0455255
.011542
-.2953436
.1133631
3.514743
4.999194
-.0672036
.202109
-1.792209
1.655185
-.0698367
2.618763
-1.402345
1.545601
-4.712053
1.348717
-.7518355
.7358415
-1.780352
3.185756
.0092379
-.0043355
-.0080931
.0398143
-.0033931
.0518813
-.0000838
.0008718
.2276044
.7407884
.1221744
1.604497
.4934432
-1.214541
0460906
.1086136
-:0605245
0315673
-111.8137
66.60241

- 7/31/96

132.2124
1.180697
4.639884
32.21558
5.318291
62.20458
32.39892
41.08699
134.7127
36.04533
88.6042
.9093184
1.139838
1.612379
.0187185
12.52695
32.56853
43.25042
1.231398
1.740316
3691.62

0.939
-0.828
3.409
-0.705
-3.470
1.345
0.540
0.929
-1.176
0.704
-5.597
15.067
3.396
5.773
1.224
9.522
3.788
-1.809
-3.675
3.637
-0.937

0.348
0.408
0.001
0.481
0.001
0.179
0.590
0.353
0.240
0.482
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.000
0.221
0.000
0.000
0.071
0.000
0.000
0.349

[95% Conf. Interval]
-------———-—----—————--135.1916
-3.293218
6.718199
-85.89147
-28.88516
-38.33591
-46.05726
-42.39607
-422.6701
-45.31289
-669.7005
11.91767
1.635612
6.145734
-.0138062
94.71028
59.5033
-163.0805
-6.940286
2.915938
-10698.17

383.3749
1.337741
24.91686
40.46521
-8.025634
205.6444
81.01852
118.7563
105.7033
96.06494
-322.1751
15.48422
6.10631
12.46984
.0596117
143.8438
187.2443
6.557294
-2.110467
9.741847
3781.187

13

Married Women (cont.)
Lt. De~. Var. PIANOW
Coef.
Std. Err.
––––----- +------------------------age [ -20.79853
60.1877
agesq I
.2345335
.5374947
educ I
5.033498
2.112237
white I -5.316928
14.66565
numkids
I -8.820378
2.421071
walk2dv
I
40.64768
28.31769
carrydv
I
10.76333
14.74912
cancer
I
25.04407
18.70423
stroknow
I -58.86473
61.32594
heartevr
I -.8386026
16.40909
workpay
I -209.5453
40.33572
annearn
I
5.230994
.4139535
hourswk
[
1.612238
.5188938
jobten I
3.819965
.7340112
ntwthOOO
[
.0041014
.0085213
numjobs5
[
65.60049
5.702706
pension
I
56.67376
14.82633
selfemp
I -40.79684
19.6891
annage2
I -2.128649
5605754
weeksyr
I
3.756607
:7922526
cons
I
660.4077
1680.554
Adj–R-squared
=
0.3538

t
P>ltl
---—————------—
-0.346
0.436
2.383
-0.363
-3.643
1.435
0.730
1.339
-0.960
-0.051
-5.195
12.637
3.107
5.204
0.481
11.503
3.823
-2.072
-3.797
4.742
0.393

0.730
0.663
0.017
0.717
0.000
0.151
0.466
0.181
0.337
0.959
0.000
0.000
0.002
0.000
0.630
0.000
0.000
0.038
0.000
0.000
0.694

[95% Conf.
-138.8333
-.8195536
.8911651
-34.07791
-13.56837
-14.88649
-18.16133
-11.63701
-179.1317
-33.01866
-288.6482
4.419185
.5946292
2.380487
-.0126098
54.41684
27.59768
-79.40937
-3.228
2.202911
-2635.347

Interval]
97.23627
1.288621
9.17583
23.44406
-4.072386
96.18184
39.688
61.72516
61.40229
31.34146
-130.4425
6.042803
2.629847
5.259443
.0208126
76.78413
85.74985
-2.184316
-1.029298
5.310303
3956.162

----------------...................-------------------------..
111.De~.Var

PIAER
Coef.
std. Err.
-----––––+------------------------age 1 -47.25734
63.30749
agesq I
.3997041
5653554
educ I
5.438073
2.221723
white
I -11.46381
15.42584
numkids
I -8.571915
2.546566
walk2dv
I
45.00403
29.78553
carrydv
I
13.6341
15.51363
cancer
I
24.28951
19.67375
stroknow
I -75.69336
64.50473
heartevr
I
0919847
17.25965
workpay
I -;05.3396
42.4265
annearn
I
6.691108
.4354105
hourswk
I
1.973456
.5457904
jobten I
2.970664
.7720582
ntwthOOO
I
.0058141
.008963
numjobs5
I
61.13551
5.998302
pension
I
72.27498
15.59484
selfemp
I -54.99805
20.70967
annage2
I -2.082421
.5896325
weeksyr
I
4.257598
.8333186
_cOns I
1630.228
1767.665
Adj R–squared
.
0.4231

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

t
-0.746
0.707
2.448
-0.743
-3.366
1.511
0.879
1.235
-1.173
0.005
-4.840
15.367
3.616
3.848
0.649
10.192
4.635
-2.656
-3.532
5.109
0.922

P>ltl
0.455
0.480
0.014
0.457
0.001
0.131
0.380
0.217
0.241
0.996
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.517
0.000
0.000
0.008
0.000
0.000
0.357

[95% Conf.
_—-------___—
-171.4104
-.709021
1.081025
-41.7156
-13.56602
-13.40871
-16.78986
-14.29292
-202.1943
-33.75611
-288.5427
5.837219
.9031003
1.456571
-.0117633
49.37217
41.69175
-95.61203
-3.238756
2.623367
-1836.36

Interval]
---------76.89572
1.508429
9.79512
18.78798
-3.577814
103.4168
44.05806
62.87194
50.80762
33.94008
-122.1365
7.544997
3.043812
4.484756
0233916
;2.89886
102.8582
-14.38406
-.9260857
5.891829
5096.815

14

Married Women (cont.)
IV, DeD. Vsr PIANR
Coef
t
Std.
Err.
P>ltl
------ –––+–---------––––-------––
age ( -105.4333
66.13624
-1.594
0.111
agesq I
9042969
.5906169
1.531
0.126
educ I
5.437022
2.320996
2.343
0.019
white I -8.549698
16.11511
-0.531
0.596
numkids
I -6.389294
2.660353
0.016
-2.402
walk2dv
I
45.14891
31.11642
1.451
0.147
carrydv
I
17.01376
16.20682
1.050
0.294
cancer I
25.28588
20.55283
1.230
0.219
stroknow
I -82.29102
67.38697
-1.221
0.222
heartevr
I
0992364
18.03085
0.006
0.996
workpay
I -205.5064
44.32223
-4.637
0.000
annearn
I
7.404149
0.000
.4548658
16.278
hourswk
I
2.062817
.5701777
0.000
3.618
jobten I
.8065558
3.528
2.845281
0.000
ntwthOOO
I
0068933
0093635
0.736
0.462
numjobs5
I
59.75642
6.266322
9.536
0.000
pension
I
78.39916
16.29166
4.812
0.000
selfemp
I -62.57791
21.63504
-2.892
0.004
annage2
I -2.228476
.6159788
-3.618
0.000
weeksyr
I
4.497072
8705534
5.166
0.000
_cOns I
3305.271
;846.648
1.790
0.074
Adj R-squared
=
0.4405
------.....................--------...............---------V. DeD, Var. Worklt50
P>ltl
Coef.
Std. Err.
t

[95% Conf.
-235.1338
-.2539689
8852901
-40.15322
-11.60654
-15.87387
-14.76962
-15.02051
-214.4444
-35.26128
-292.4273
6.512107
.9446344
1.263535
-.0114695
47.46746
46.44939
-105.0066
-3.43648
2.789819
-316.2125

[95% Conf.

Interval]
24.26729
2.062563
9.988755
23.05383
-1.172044
106.1717
48.79714
65.59227
49.86236
35.45975
-118.5856
8.296192
3.180999
4.427027
.0252562
72.04538
110.3489
-20.14919
-1.020473
6.204324
6926.755

Interval]

---------+--------------------------------------------------------------------

age 1
agesq I
educ I
white (
nmkids
I
walk2dv
I
carrydv
I
cancer I
stroknow
I
heartevr
I
workpay
I
annearn
I
hourswk
I
jobten I
ntwthOOO
I
numjobs5
I
pension
I
selfemp
I
annage2
I
weeksyr
I
_cOns I
Adj R-squared

Tabls630.doc

-3.032411
.0245526
-.0588457
-.1199997
-.3536638
1.006885
-1.11974
1.576059
-.7423657
-.0063204
-3.905222
.0806679
.0473267
.1411983
-.0005397
2.701987
.7365246
-1.720914
-.048164
0689475
i08.8546
=
0.2442

- 7/31/96

2.055242
.0183539
072127
.;007912
.0826728
.9669703
.5036412
6386973
“2.09411
.5603247
1.377352
.0141354
.0177188
.0250644
.000291
.1947315
.5062778
.6723278
.0191421
0270532
57.38623

-1.475
1.338
-0.816
-0.240
-4.278
1.041
-2.223
2.468
-0.355
-0.011
-2.835
5.707
2.671
5.633
-1.855
13.875
1.455
-2.560
-2.516
2.549
1.897

0.140
0.181
0.415
0.811
0.000
0.298
0.026
0.014
0.723
0.991
0.005
0.000
0.008
0.000
0.064
0.000
0.146
0.011
0.012
0.011
0.058

-7.06297
-.0114415
-.2002948
-1.102107
-.5157945
-.8894517
-2.107437
3235027
-4.849149
-1.10518
-6.606364
.0529469
.0125782
0920441
-:0011104
2.320097
-.2563426
-3.039424
-.0857038
.0158932
-3.686229

.9981484
.0605468
.0826034
8621077
-:1915332
2.903222
-.1320433
2.828616
3.364417
1.092539
-1.20408
.108389
.0820752
.1903524
.0000309
3.083878
1.729392
-.4024044
-.0106242
.1220019
221.3954

15

Nonmarried Men m=405)
I. Dem. Var. AIME
P>ltl
[95% Conf. Interval]
COef .
L
Std. Err.
--------- 4--------------------------------------------------------------------784.9385
1121.749
age
0.729
168.4054
0.347
484.8759
7.127559
-9.916466
agesq
0.748
-1.394454
4.334342
-0.322
57.25774
educ
0.021
4.7466
31.00217
13.35372
2.322
291.6392
645.1528
white
468.396
89.89946
5.210
0.000
11.40338
89.98233
numkids
50.69285
0.012
19.98284
2.537
-422.0479
332.5675
walk2dv
0.816
-44.74019
191.9007
-0.233
604.6919
49.62629
carrydv
327.1591
0.021
141.1547
2.318
-533.3044
294.6413
cancer
0.571
-119.3315
210.5488
-0.567
-873.8914
141.2747
stroknow
-366.3083
0.157
258.1595
-1.419
209.1771
-210.2477
heartevr
-.5352844
106.6608
-0.005
0.996
44.36485
workpay
-1325.408
-640.5215
348.3369
0.067
-1.839
3.915436
12.01319
annearn
7.964314
0.000
2.059281
3.868
-9.326031
7.228055
hourswk
-1.048988
4.209749
-0.249
0.803
16.92654
jobten
8.243224
-.4400943
4.416382
1.867
0.063
.3138615
-.2515525
ntwthOOO
.0311545
0.829
.1437863
0.217
-3.815918
138.7917
numjobs5
67.48787
36.26549
0.064
1.861
pension
-140.9603
309.6477
84.34369
0.462
114.5908
0.736
selfemp
-330.8694
244.1165
-43.37646
-0.297
0.767
146.2204
-14.04138
5.812739
annage2
5.048956
-4.11432
-0.815
0.416
28.23664
weeksyr
4.793695
5.961603
16.51517
2.770
0.006
_c ons
-31332.52
21887.12
-4722.698
0.727
13533.9
-0.349
0.3251
Adj R-squ, ?ed =
-------------....
II. D eD,var,PIANow

Coef.
age I
-5.67612
agesq
I
0598992
educ I
9.375343
white I
143.219
numkids
I
18.60784
walk2dv
I -5.863805
carrydv
I
145.2386
cancer I -48.77866
stroknow
I
-180.02
heartevr
I
5.509219
workpay
I -167.3121
annearn
I
2.084716
hourswk
I -.8338089
jobten
I
2.727672
ntwthOOO
I
.004382
numjobs5
I
31.09945
pension
I
21.60543
selfemp
I -8.985088
annage2
( -1.078736
weeksyr
I
5.396527
_cOns [
339.7841
Adj R-squared
.
0.3084

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

Std.

Err.

168.1614
1.503207
4.631249
31.17833
6.930313
66.55372
48.95431
73.02112
89.53312
36.99139
120.8078
.714186
1.459997
1.53166
.049867
12.57735
39.74161
50.71119
1.751045
2.067563
4693.735

t
-0.034
0.040
2.024
4.594
2.685
-0.088
2.967
-0.668
-2.011
0.149
-1.385
2.919
-0.571
1.781
0.088
2.473
0.544
-0.177
-0.616
2.610
0.072

P>ltl
0.973
0.968
0.044
0.000
0.008
0.930
0.003
0.505
0.045
0.882
0.167
0.004
0.568
0.076
0.930
0.014
0.587
0.859
0.538
0.009
0.942

[95% Conf. Interval]
.--—————-----———— -----336.3084
324.9562
3.015446
-2.895648
.2695635
18.48112
81.91743
204.5206
32.23395
4.981732
-136.7191
124.9915
48.98655
241.4907
-192.3499
94.79261
-356.0566
-3.983506
-67.22181
78.24025
-404.8398
70.21554
.6805113
3.488921
-3.704397
2.036779
-.2838176
5.739162
-.0936646
1024285
6.370348
55.82854
-56.53298
99.74383
-108.6914
90.72127
-4.521572
2.3641
1.331366
9.461688
-8888.853
9568.422

16

Nonmarried Men (cont.)
III. Den Var PIAE~
Coef.
Std. Err.
––––––---+-------––-–age
-55.8618
178.5183
agesq
1.595789
.4333196
educ
4.916484
10.83414
whit e
33.09858
152.3382
7.357147
numkids
20.23022
walk2dv
-10.14478
70.65272
51.96937
c arrydv
143.8895
cancer
-64.73944
77.51844
stroknow
95.04741
-197.8792
39.26967
heartevr
-1.025444
workpay
-163.1097
128.2483
anne arn
.7581722
2.586468
hourswk
-.7407175
1.549917
jobten
2.414327
1.625994
ntwthO 00
0529383
-.0055963
numjobs5
30.38003
13.35198
pension
42.18927
45.04962
53.83446
selfemp
-24.08313
annage2
1.85889
-.4557673
5.488807
weeksyr
2.194903
1942.357
_c ons
4982.819
0.3470
Adj R-sw, red .

P>lt[
t
--------————---

[95% Conf.

-0.313
0.272
2.204
4.603
2.750
-0.144
2.769
-0.835
-2.082
-0.026
-1.272
3.411
-0.478
1.485
-0.106
2.275
1.068
-0.447
-0.245
2.501
0.390

-406.8575
-2.704257
1.167542
87.2611
5.764885
-149.0594
41.70933
-217.1532
-384.7577
-78.23593
-415.2665
1.09578
-3.788103
-.7826385
-.1096814
4.127882
-37.90128
-129.9303
-4.110645
1.173276
-7854.666

0.755
0.786
0.028
0.000
0.006
0.886
0.006
0.404
0.038
0.979
0.204
0.001
0.633
0.138
0.916
0.023
0.286
0.655
0.806
0.013
0.697

Interval]
--295.1339
3.570897
20.50074
217.4154
34.69555
128.7698
246.0696
87.67428
-11.00074
76.18504
89.04716
4.077157
2.306668
5.611292
0984889
;6.63217
128.0005
81.76407
3.19911
9.804339
11739.38

~.Den.Var.P~
Coef.

------—-—
age
agesq
educ
white
nuinkids
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
wo rkp ay
annearn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthOOO
numjobs5
pension
selfemp
ann age2
weeksyr
_cOns
Adj R-squared

Tabls630.doc

Std.

-137.0776
1.142869
11.61463
149.6319
21.7102
-10.91138
142.6288
-74.65942
-204.8773
-.1978544
-162.9904
2.814475
-.6325145
2.363908
-.0064935
30.40801
52.74275
-31.19088
-.3341824
5.570112
4250.428
=
0.3614

- 7/31/96

Err.

183.3214
1.638723
5.048762
33.9891
7.555091
72.55363
53.36761
79.60408
97.60466
40.32622
131.6988
.7785709
1.591617
1.669741
0543626
i3 .71122
43.32438
55.28288
1.908904
2.253957
5116.882

t
-0.748
0.697
2.300
4.402
2.874
-0.150
2.673
-0.938
-2.099
-0.005
-1.238
3.615
-0.397
1.416
-0.119
2.218
1.217
-0.564
-0.175
2.471
0.831

P>ltl
0.455
0.486
0.022
0.000
0.004
0.881
0.008
0.349
0.036
0.996
0.217
0.000
0.691
0.158
0.905
0.027
0.224
0.573
0.861
0.014
0.407

[95% Conf.
-497.5169
-2.079125
1.687949
82.80388
6.855672
-153.5635
37.69947
-231.1738
-396.7837
-79.48569
-421.9315
1.283679
-3.76189
-.9190718
-.113379
3.449547
-32.43995
-139.8859
-4.087395
1.138471
-5810.184

Interval]
223.3617
4.364863
21.54131
216.4599
36.56472
131.7407
247.5581
81.85501
-12.97078
79.08999
95.95075
4.345271
2.496861
5.646888
1003921
57.36647
137.9254
77.50414
3.41903
10.00175
14311.04

17

Nonmarried Men (cont.)
V, DeD, Var. Worklt50
Coef.
age
agesq
educ
white
numkids
walk2dv
c arrydv
cancer
stroknow
heartevr
workpay
annearn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthOOO
numjobs5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cons
Adj R-squ

Std.

3.85613
-.0365825
-.1472497
2.73422
.1845048
.2901705
3.464239
-1.148745
-5.640705
6793956
-;.494179
013858
~ .02192
0263977
-:0003774
6765597
-:2573915
-.2088744
-.0026483
.0775552
-81.87659
ced .
0.1376

***** ***** *****

Err.

4.252192
.0380107
.1171075
.7883869
1752425
;.682903
1.237877
1.84644
2.263968
.9353784
3.054793
.0180592
.036918
.0387301
.001261
.3180357
1.004921
1.282302
.0442776
0522812
;18. 6876

t

p>ltl

0.907
-0.962
-1.257
3.468
1.053
0.172
2.799
-0.622
-2.492
0.726
-0.489
0.767
-0.594
0.682
-0.299
2.127
-0.256
-0.163
-0.060
1.483
-0.690

0.365
0.336
0.209
0.001
0.293
0.863
0.005
0.534
0.013
0.468
0.625
0.443
0.553
0.496
0.765
0.034
0.798
0.871
0.952
0.139
0.491

-4.504364
-.1113176
-.3775019
1.184125
-.1600502
-3.018687
1.030373
-4.779143
-10.09203
-1.159709
-7.500393
-.0216492
-.0945068
-.049752
-.0028566
.0512504
-2.233229
-2.730087
-.0897052
-.025238
-315.2354

12.21662
.0381526
0830025
4.284316
.5290599
3.599028
5.898105
2.481652
-1.189379
2.5185
4.512035
.0493653
.0506668
.1025474
.0021019
1.301869
1.718446
2.312338
.0844085
.1803484
151.4822

*****************x************************%*****

NonmarriedWomen
(N=958)
I,DeD.Var.m
P>ltl
Coef .
Std. Err.
t
---------+-------------------------------------------age
-278.4633
227.6947
-1.223
0.222
agesq
2.687258
2.03406
0.187
1.321
educ
16.64521
7.719616
2.156
0.031
44.148
white
40.15906
0.272
1.099
-67.47443
numkids
9.35246
-7.215
0.000
73.91702
walk2dv
77.11661
0.338
0.959
carrydv
41.97459
50.93704
0.824
0.410
cancer
48.17743
66.47236
0.469
0.725
stroknow
-70.39489
174.9704
-0.402
0.688
heartevr
28.39225
59.29613
0.479
0.632
workpay
-482.9805
198.1334
0.015
-2.438
annearn
13.59088
1.534241
0.000
8.858
hourswk
1.095975
1.934929
0.566
0.571
jobten
13.62386
2.378519
5.728
0.000
ntwthOOO
-.033291
.0958874
-0.347
0.729
numjobs5
94.14978
18.8694
0.000
4.990
pension
141.6162
50.3888
0.005
2.810
selfemp
177.8137
87.07981
0.041
2.042
annage2
-3.113207
2.43192
0.201
-1.280
weeksyr
7.810638
3.888445
2.009
0.045
_cOns
7587.738
6366.699
0.234
1.192
Adj R-squ, red =
0.4039

Tabls630.doc

[95% Conf. Interval]
-----———------————
-----

- 7/31/96

[95% Conf.

Interval]

--————-—------————---725.314
-1.304581
1.495471
-34.66411
-85.82862
-77.42424
-57.98931
-82.2745
-413.7741
-87.97634
-871.8172
10.57994
-2.701321
8.956017
-.22147
57.11859
42.72823
6.919656
-7.885848
1795684
-4906.901

168.3874
6.679098
31.79495
122.9601
-49.12024
225.2583
141.9385
178.6294
272.9843
144.7608
-94.1439
16.60183
4.893271
18.2917
.1548879
131.181
240.5042
348.7077
1.659434
15.44171
20082.38

18

Nonmarried Women (cent.)
Lt. Deu. Var. PIANOW
Coef.
Std. Err.
----- ––––+----------------------age I
-168.465
95.13677
8498829
1.568706
agesq
I
~.225456
educ I
2.907842
16.7795
white \
24.29465
3.9077
numkids
I -24.27847
39.78969
32.22132
walk2dv
I
24.82156
21.28282
carrydv
I
42.92786
27.77388
cancer I
stroknow
I -21.97503
73.10718
heartevr
I -4.982906
24.77546
82.78529
workpay
I -161.9883
.6410456
4.255469
annearn
I
6781848
.8084636
hourswk
I
.9938069
jobten I
~.878727
ntwthOOO
I -.0202183
.0400642
numjobs5
I
50.79038
7.884127
68.90581
21.05375
pension
I
36.3842
selfemp
I
44.81618
annage2
I -1.386944
1.016119
weeksyr
I
3.765216
1.624693
I
4745.518
2660.172
cons
Adj–R-squared
.
0.3932

t
P>ltl
----———-------—
0.077
-1.771
0.065
1.846
0.368
0.902
0.148
1.448
-6.213
0.000
0.217
1.235
0.244
1.166
0.123
1.546
0.764
-0.301
-0.201
0.841
0.051
-1.957
0.000
6.638
0.839
0.402
0.000
4.909
0.614
-0.505
6.442
0.000
3.273
0.001
0.218
1.232
0.173
-1.365
2.317
0.021
0.075
1.784

[95% Conf. Interval]
-----————-----———
-----355.1708
18.24086
-.0991885
3.2366
-3.422112
9.237796
-8.635096
57.2244
-16.60962
-31.94733
-23.44462
103.024
-16.94596
66.58907
-11.57834
97.43406
-165.4478
121.4977
43.63891
-53.60472
-324.4544
.4777164
5.51352
2.997418
-.9084241
2.264794
2.928382
6.829072
-.0988443
0584077
35.31779
66.26297
27.58785
110.2238
-26.58778
116.2201
-3.381077
6071898
6.953675
.5767574
-475.0665
9966.103

ID,DeDVarPIAER
Coef.

Std.

Err.

t

P>ltl

[95% Conf.

Interval]

---------+-------------------------------------------------------------------age 1 -211.9344
agesq
I
1.871558
educ I
4.276669
white I
29.60138
numkids
I -21.27525
36.60671
walk2dv
I
carrydv
I
30.34336
cancer
I
38.34659
stroknow
I -8.673755
heartevr
I
6.016669
workpay
I -195.0824
6.035441
annearn
I
hourswk
I
8786783
jobten
I
4.026279
ntwthOOO
I -.0186262
numjobs5
I
45.5389
pension
I
66.03633
selfemp
I
35.83119
annage2
I -1.310017
weeksyr
I
5.10696
_cOns I
6210.485
Adj R-squared
=
0.4502

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

99.51045
.8889541
3.373738
17.55089
4.087347
33.70261
22.26124
29.05071
76.46809
25.91445
86.59113
670516
8456306
;.039495
0419061
;.246579
22.02164
38.05688
1.062833
1.699384
2782.467

-2.130
2.105
1.268
1.687
-5.205
1.086
1.363
1.320
-0.113
0.232
-2.253
9.001
1.039
3.873
-0.444
5.522
2.999
0.942
-1.233
3.005
2.232

0.033
0.036
0.205
0.092
0.000
0.278
0.173
0.187
0.910
0.816
0.024
0.000
0.299
0.000
0.657
0.000
0.003
0.347
0.218
0.003
0.026

-407.2236
.1269862
-2.344288
-4.842223
-29.29667
-29.53463
-13.34431
-18.6654
-158.7423
-44.84041
-365.0174
4.719554
-.7808709
1.986272
-.1008669
29.355
22.81889
-38.85539
-3.395825
1.77192
749.8971

-16.6453
3.616129
10.89763
64.04499
-13.25384
102.7481
74.03102
95.35857
141.3948
56.87375
-25.14742
7.351328
2.538228
6.066287
.0636144
61.72281
109.2538
110.5178
.775792
8.442
11671.07

19

Nonmarried Women (cont.)
IV, DeD.Var. PIANR
Coef.

--------—

age
-262.4847
agesq
2.310397
educ
4.445204
white
34.61761
numkids
-19.53077
wal k2 dv
38.04633
carrydv
32.41049
cancer
40.54162
s troknow
-3.234158
heartevr
7.760719
workpay
-206.4859
annearn
6.727449
hourswk
1.101369
job ten
3.816501
ntwthOOO
-.0195642
nuinjobs5
44.4077
pension
66.5087
selfemp
30.66268
ann age 2
-1.358204
weeksyr
5.566279
_cOns
7657.787
Adj R-squared
=
0.4663

Std.

Err.

103.3997
.923698
3.505598
18.23685
4.247097
35.01985
23.1313
30.18613
79.45678
26.92729
89.97546
.6967225
8786813
i.080122
043544
8:568889
22.88234
39.54429
1.104373
1.765803
2891.217

t
-2.539
2.501
1.268
1.898
-4.599
1.086
1.401
1.343
-0.041
0.288
-2.295
9.656
1.253
3.533
-0.449
5.182
2.907
0.775
-1.230
3.152
2.649

P>ltl
0.011
0.013
0.205
0.058
0.000
0.278
0.161
0.180
0.968
0.773
0.022
0.000
0.210
0.000
0.653
0.000
0.004
0.438
0.219
0.002
0.008

[95% Conf.
-465.4065
4976407
-2.434527
-1.172196
-27.8657
-30.68009
-12.98467
-18.69863
-159.168
-45.08406
-383.0627
5.360132
-.6230423
1.696762
-.1050192
27.59126
21.60214
-46.94295
-3.525534
2.100892
1983.777

Interval]
----—
-59.56284
4.123153
11.32494
70.40741
-11.19585
106.7727
77.80565
99.78186
152.6997
60.6055
-29.9092
8.094767
2.82578
5.93624
.0658908
61.22414
111.4153
108.2683
.8091265
9.031666
13331.8

...-------------------------...............----------...................---V. Deu. Var. Worklt5Q
Coef

std.

Err.

t

P>ltl

[95% Conf.

Interval]

---------+-----------------------------------------age I -6.031014
3.045411
-1.980
agesq I
.052739
.0272055
1.939
educ I -.0925275
.1032497
-0.896
white
I -.4833166
.5371264
-0.900
nuinkids I -.9167328
-7.329
.1250889
walk2dv
I
.6916657
1.031433
0.671
carrydv
I
.4661079
.6812816
0.684
cancer I
1.621621
889066
1.824
stroknow
I -.2281025
-0.097
2:340225
heartevr
I -1.138208
.7930841
-1.435
workpay
I -4.331395
2.650029
-1.634
annearn
I
0355501
.0205204
1.732
hourswk
I -:0112033
.0258796
-0.433
jobten I
.1737699
.0318126
5.462
ntwthOOO
I -.0032436
.0012825
-2.529
numjobs5
/
2.075933
.2523778
8.225
pension
I
2.088993
.6739489
3.100
selfemp
I
1.170685
1.16469
1.005
annage2
I -.0162678
.0325269
-0.500
weeksyr
I
1262099
0520079
2.427
cons I
;88.6944
85.15443
2.216
Adj–R-squared
=
0.2981
--------------...............---------------.......................------

0.048
0.053
0.370
0.368
0.000
0.503
0.494
0.068
0.922
0.152
0.102
0.084
0.665
0.000
0.012
0.000
0.002
0.315
0.617
0.015
0.027

-12.00763
-.0006517
-.2951548
-1.537427
-1.16222
-1.33252
-.8709066
-.1231696
-4.820791
-2.694634
-9.532074
-.0047212
-.0619921
1113376
-:0057605
1.580642
.7663686
-1.115018
-.0801017
.0241445
21.57894

-.0543974
.1061298
.1100999
.5707933
-.671246
2.715851
1.803122
3.366413
4.364586
.418219
.8692851
.0758214
.0395854
.2362021
-.0007267
2.571224
3.411617
3.456388
.0475662
.2282752
355.8099

Note: Nmberofobsewations
repotid tiAppendix
Das Sample 4,~malysis
conducted titi~S
sample weights; see text.
Dependent variables are Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME, var.5), current PIA (PIANOW, var 6), early and normal
retirement agePIA(PIAER
snd PIANR, vars,7and8),
sndyears worked toage50 (computed byauthorsusing
vars.44-46).
AUexplanatory variables aretaken hom HRSWavel:
Age: responden~s a~. Agesq:Square
ofage, Educ.:years of education.
White: l.ves. O=no. Numkids: number of own children. WW2dv: .1 can walk 2 blocks readily, .O,no. Carrvdv: =1 can carrv 10
lb. weigh~readily, =0 no. Cancer: =1 ever had, =0 no. Stroknow: =1 recent stroke, =0 no. Heartnow: =1 rem”nt heart troubl~, O
no, Workpay: .1 current have paid job, .O no. Annearn: annual earnings/1000. Hourswk: Hours ofwork per week. Jobten: yrs
on current job. NetWorth(OOO): Net worth/1000. NumJobsc50: No. ofjobsheld by age 50, Pension: =1 have pension, =0 no.
Selfemp:=l selfemployed, One. knage2:
ageeqects
toreceive pension (orsocial searity tinopension
age), WeeksWorWyr:
numberofweeks
worked/year.

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

20

Appendix C. Descriptive Linear Regression Models for Selected EBF Constructed Social
Security Wealth Variables
(iVB: Variable &finitions

appear in note at end of table)

Married Men (N. 2186)

1. D eD, Var, ResDond ent’s Own SSW at Normal R etirem@
Coef.

Std.

Err.

t

P>ltl

-- —-—-—-- -------------------------------------------------------------------age
agesq
educ
white
ntiids
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
workpay
paylf ive
paylast
ann earn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthO 00
numjobs5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cOns
Adj R–squared

-26475.3
250.1029
3.974589
15577.2
161.0844
2807.912
12617.61
-1446.567
-9713.965
-767.175
-240.2068
87.18764
222.8958
111.0773
147.6985
134.4027
3.229469
840.0105
9025.789
-4425.026
196.4277
100.6626
719272.7
.
0.1830

8008.824
71.53117
230.8065
1861.703
337.9194
4320.717
3370.174
3695.553
7600.556
1866.509
6504.127
23.90533
54.57015
17.30033
60.05867
71.73393
1.199471
660.4324
1860.606
2144.554
78.72237
115.43
223658

~

0.001
0.000
0.986
0.000
0.634
0.516
0.000
0.696
0.201
0.681
0.971
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.014
0.061
0.007
0.204
0.000
0.039
0.013
0.383
0.001

-42181.09
109.8258
-448.6511
11926.29
-501.5962
-5665.279
6008.496
-8693.773
-24619.12
-4427.514
-12995.2
40.30782
115.8804
77.15026
29.91975
-6.271937
.8772329
-455.1378
5377.027
-8630.627
42.04831
-125.7026
280665.7

Interval]
-10769.5
390.3799
456.6003
19228.11
823.765
11281.1
19226.73
5800.638
5191.191
2893.164
12514.78
134.0675
329.9112
145.0043
265.4772
275.0773
5.581705
2135.159
12674.55
-219.4251
350.8071
327.0279
1157880

ii ement

Coef
Std.
Err.
-+------------------------------------------age
-34476.43
12397.43
agesq
331.4868
110.7282
educ
1349.475
357.2819
whit e
22556.98
2881.863
numkids
-808.6741
523.0895
walk2dv
5152.611
6688.346
carrydv
20880.48
5216.933
cancer
4877.025
5720.61
stroknow
-10879.87
11765.44
heartevr
-4117.434
2889.303
workp ay
-10769.08
10068.2
paylast
337.9298
84.47302
anneam
145.4625
26.78042
hourswk
106.3313
92.96909
paylfive
104.859
37.00477
paylast
(dropped)
jobten
248.7416
111.0421
ntwthOOO
6.101021
1.856747
numjobs5
1828.506
1022.33
pension
15625.9
2880.165
selfemp
-5772.775
3319.708
annage2
28.51001
121.86
weeksyr
389.8052
178.6823
_cons
969124.6
346216.1
.ed =
Adj R-SW
0.2011

Tabls630,doc

-3.306
3.496
0.017
8.367
0.477
0.650
3.744
-0.391
-1.278
-0.411
-0.037
3.647
4.085
6.421
2.459
1.874
2.692
1.272
4.851
-2.063
2.495
0.872
3.216

[95% Conf

- 7/31/96

t
-2.781
2.994
3.777
7.827
-1.546
0.770
4.002
0.853
-0.925
-1.425
-1.070
4.000
5.432
1.144
2.834

0.005
0.003
0.000
0.000
0.122
0.441
0.000
0.394
0.355
0.154
0.285
0.000
0.000
0.253
0.005

2.240
3.286
1.789
5.425
-1.739
0.234
2.182
2.799

0.025
0.001
0.074
0.000
0.082
0.815
0.029
0.005

[95% Conf. Interval]
.-------—----———----——
-10164.31
-58788.55
114.342
548.6316
2050.127
648.8236
2820a.49
16905.47
217.1364
-1834.485
-7963.645
18268.87
31111.21
10649.76
-6341.441
16095.49
12192.88
-33952.62
-9783.534
1548.666
8975.281
-30513.44
503.5865
172.273
197.9806
92.94449
-75.98676
288.6494
32.29036
177.4276
30.98134
2.459828
-176.3463
9977.724
-12282.92
-210.4648
39.3983
290173.6

466.5019
9.742215
3833.358
21274.08
737.375
267.4849
740.2121
1648076

21

Married Women (N= 2089)
I. DeD. Var. Respondent’s Own SSW at Normal Retirement
P>ltl
Coef.
std.
Err.
t
--------+-----------------------------------------0.953
age
451.4093
7705.862
0.059
0.991
agesq
-.7629087
68.82291
-0.011
educ
60.13979
0.221
0.825
271.9399
white
0.063
-3484.689
1875.033
-1.858
0.017
numkids
-737.9624
309.4729
-2.385
0.315
walk2dv
3638.617
3618.495
1.006
0.472
carrydv
-1354.947
1884.832
-0.719
0.419
cancer
1930.906
2390.402
0.808
0.937
s troknow
-616.2124
7840.773
-0.079
0.491
heartevr
1445.578
2097.076
0.689
wo rkp ay
-17580.85
5194.305
-3.385
0.001
paylf ive
327.0529
0.000
54.10812
6.044
0.000
paylast
990.9454
83.2557
11.902
anne arn
853.8249
0.000
53.79409
15.872
0.000
hourswk
346.095
66.44474
5.209
0.000
jobten
419.237
95.01235
4.412
ntwthOOO
-.3757034
1.089255
-0.345
0.730
numjobs5
1811.575
787.8264
2.299
0.022
pension
8070.584
0.000
1898.69
4.251
selfemp
-7031.073
0.005
2517.949
-2.792
annage2
0.140
-106.605
72.19749
-1.477
0.001
weeksyr
338.8934
101.2434
3.347
_cons
-13001.21
0.952
215183.8
-0.060
0.4142
Adj R-squ red .
---------.--..............--------------.........-----.-............----~. DeD. Var. Cou~le’s SSWat Normal Ret irement
Coef.
Std.
Err.
t
age
agesq
educ
white
numkids
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
wo rkp ay
paylast
annearn
hourswk
paylfive
paylast
jobten
ntwthOOO
numj obs 5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cOns
Adj R-squ

-19142.99
201.3328
1626.678
20933.85
-30.6216
3550.126
6793.592
-4587.699
-23250.29
3572.643
-13326.38
304.0696
419.157
29.41773
289.99
(dropped)
509.2743
6.681046
1810.451
7277.839
-6163.664
-193.5618
69.76094
58119’9.1
0.1202
ed =

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

P>ltl

-—--

[95% Conf.
-14660.66
-135.7324
-473.165
-7161.841
-1344.874
-3457.659
-5051.316
-2756.942
-15992.85
-2667.024
-27767.47
220.9408
827.6715
748.3286
215.7894
232.907
-2.511856
266.5588
4347.038
-11969.06
-248.1924
140.3436
-435000.9

[95% Conf.

Interval]
15563.47
134.2066
593.4446
192.463
-131.0512
10734.89
2341.422
6618.754
14760.43
5558.18
-7394.236
433.1651
1154.219
959.3212
476.4006
605.5669
1.760449
3356.592
11794.13
-2093.09
34.98245
537.4432
408998.4

Interval]
----

14481.99
129.3421
511.0694
3523.838
581.6069
6800.407
3542.254
4492.395
14735.53
3941.133
9761.901
156.4664
101.0978
124.8727
101.6879

-1.322
1.557
3.183
5.941
-0.053
0.522
1.918
-1.021
-1.578
0.907
-1.365
1.943
4.146
0.236
2.852

0.186
0.120
0.001
0.000
0.958
0.602
0.055
0.307
0.115
0.365
0.172
0.052
0.000
0.814
0.004

-47543.81
-52.32169
624.4135
14023.21
-1171.218
-9786.24
-153.168
-13397.79
-52148.34
-4156.364
-32470.57
-2.778596
220.8929
-215.4718
90.56852

9257.82
454.9874
2628.943
27844.5
1109.975
16886.49
13740.35
4222.393
5647.75
11301.65
5817.813
610.9178
617.4211
274.3072
489.4115

178.5612
2.047089
1480.599
3568.298
4732.101
135.6841
190.2715
404405

2.852
3.264
1.223
2.040
-1.303
-1.427
0.367
1.437

0.004
0.001
0.222
0.042
0.193
0.154
0.714
0.151

159.0957
2.666474
-1093.171
280.0034
-15443.85
-459.6537
-303.383
-211884.7

859.453
10.69562
4714.073
14275.67
3116.519
72.53017
442.9049
1374283

22

Nonmarrid
Men (N= 405)
DeD. Var. Respondent’s 0~
SSW at Norm al Retirement
P>ltl
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
age
agesq
educ
white
numkids
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
workpay
paylf ive
paylast
annearn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthOOO
nmj obs5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cOns
R-squared

-23261.69
215.7932
587.856
11851.87
1926.633
-5744.29
12442.21
-10299.43
-14766.27
1443.942
-3845.317
290.2537
998.9454
192.893
-61.75424
415.0395
-1.020955
1716.783
7688.727
-905.6941
-33.25068
640.846
636990
0.4300

17819.2
159.282
500.7284
3328.768
740.4626
7055.083
5208.363
7743.982
9527.453
3926.156
13202.65
96..96878
177.3632
76.99281
154.3011
167.1194
5.26662
1481.799
4257.369
5368.825
185.7862
218.4704
497381.4

-1.305
1.355
1.174
3.560
2.602
-0.814
2.389
-1.330
-1.550
0.368
-0.291
2.996
5.632
2.505
-0.400
2.483
-0.194
1.159
1.806
-0.169
-0.179
2.933
1.281

0.193
0.176
0.241
0.000
0.010
0.416
0.017
0.184
0.122
0.713
0.771
0.003
0.000
0.013
0.689
0.013
0.846
0.247
0.072
0.866
0.858
0.004
0.201

NonmarriedWomen
(N.958)
Deu. Var. ~sDondent’s
Own SSW at Normal R etirement
P>ltl
Coef.
Std.
Err.
t
age
agesq
educ
whit e
numkids
walk2dv
carrydv
cancer
s troknow
heartevr
workpay
paylfive
paylast
annearn
hourswk
jobten
ntwthOOO
numjobs5
pension
selfemp
annage2
weeksyr
_cOns
Adj R-s~ared

-28057.83
261.2696
400.2489
4369.277
-2246.957
2721.851
4152.749
5445.667
-1614.946
289.8103
-14277.24
66.01287
892.7003
773.8802
132.6382
496.1386
-2.124435
4293.726
8738.329
3885.041
-144.357
654.2103
771592.2
. 0.4780

12682.69
113.3066
430.7319
2232.612
521.4404
4303.325
2832.103
3693.524
9782.834
3301.304
11092.27
45.83834
134.2245
85.39738
108.2617
133.3307
5.328161
1093.033
2801.99
4846.575
135.1136
216.0426
354616.8

-2.212
2.306
0.929
1.957
-4.309
0.632
1.466
1.474
-0.165
0.088
-1.287
1.440
6.651
9.062
1.225
3.721
-0.399
3.928
3.119
0.802
-1.068
3.028
2.176

0.027
0.021
0.353
0.051
0.000
0.527
0.143
0.141
0.869
0.930
0.198
0.150
0.000
0.000
0.221
0.000
0.690
0.000
0.002
0.423
0.286
0.003
0.030

95% Conf.
Interval]
------- .---- ———------— ——
11774.31
-58297.69
-97.38608
528.9725
-396.6728
1572.385
5306.869
18396.87
470.7402
3382.525
-19615.95
8127.368
2201.561
22682.86
-25525.59
4926.74
3966.548
-33499.08
-6275.641
9163.525
-29804.29
22113.66
99.79091
480.7164
650.2149
1347.676
344.2758
41.51028
-365.14
241.6315
86.45044
743.6285
-11.37615
9.334238
-1196.721
4630.286
-682.0843
16059.54
-11461.84
9650.455
-398.5424
332.041
211.291
1070.401
-340958.1
1614938

[95% Conf.
-52947.65
38.90496
-445.0642
-12.23346
-3270.287
-5723.443
-1405.265
-1802.89
-20813.8
-6189.013
-36045.87
-23.94507
629.284
606.2875
-79.82582
234.4765
-12.58097
2148.643
3239.41
-5626.384
-409.518
230.2257
75655.13

Interval]
-3167.997
483.6343
1245.562
8750.787
-1223.628
11167.14
9710.763
12694.22
17583.91
6768.633
7491.399
155.9708
1156.117
941.4729
345.1021
757.8006
8.332103
6438.809
14237.25
13396.47
120.8041
1078.195
1467529

Note: Number ofobservations
renorted in AuDendix Das SamDle4, Allanalvsis conducted with HRSsam~le wei~ts; see text.
Dependent variables are the resp~ndent’s so~~al security wealk as of the no~al
retirement age (var. 24) ~nd (for-mmried
persom) thecouple's social secuity wealth asofthe respondent' snomdretirement
age(vm,23),
Allexplanatory
variables
are as defined in Appendix B plus paylfive is pay on fist 5-year job (/1000), and paylast is pay on last job (/1000).

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

23

Appendix D. Sample Size in Analysis
a
8257

Sample1: EBF File
Sample 2: Sample 1 minus age ineligible
receipt of SSDI in 1991
Married
Men
Women
‘
Nonmarried
Men
Women

minus those in

Sample 3: Sample 2 minus mamied respondents
or spouse in current receipt of SSDI
Married
Men
Women
Nonmarried (same as sample 1)
Sample 4: Sample 2 minus those with missing
data on regressors of Appendix B or C
Married
Men
Women
Nonmarried
Men
Women

Tabls630.doc

- 7/31/96

5999
4606
2326
2280
1393
413
980
where spouse not interviewed
5728
4335
2217
2118

5638
4275
2186
2089
1363
405
958

in HRS

