                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            REAL EXCHANGE RATE LEVELS,
                         PRODUCTIVITY AND DEMAND SHOCKS:
                             EVIDENCE FROM A PANEL OF
                                    14 COUNTRIES




                                          Menzie Chinn
                                          Louis Johnston




                                   NBER Working Paper 5709




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1996



We thank Andy Levin for invaluable discussions of econometric issues. Helpful comments were
received from Bob Cumby, Richard Lyons, Jaewoo Lee, participants at the NBER conference on the
Determination of Real Exchange Rates, the Castor Workshop at the University of Washington, the
IMF Research Department and the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Research Division. This
paper was written while the first author was a visiting scholar at the IMF, and has benefitted from
financial support of faculty research funds from UC Santa Cruz (Chinn) and from Gustavus
Adolphus College (Johnston). All remaining errors remain the sole responsibility of the authors,
This paper is part of NBER’s research program in International Finance and Macroeconomics and
NBER’s project on International Capital Flows. It was presented at the NBER’s “Universities
Research Conference on the Determination of Exchange Rates. We are grateful to The Center for
International Political Economy for the support of this project. Any opinions expressed are those
of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Menzie Chinn and Louis Johnston. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source,
                                                                            NBER Working Paper 5709
                                                                                        August 1996

                                  REAL EXCHANGE RATE LEVELS,
                               PRODUCTIVITY AND DEMAND SHOCKS:
                                   EVIDENCE FROM A PANEL OF
                                          14 COUNTRIES

                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper investigates       the determinants     of the real exchange   rate using a panel of

disaggregated data for the OECD countries.       It also marries two literatures -- one which uses panel

data to measure relationships between changes in exchange rates to changes in the determinants, and

the other which uses cointegration techniques to measure the long-run relationship between the level

of the exchange rate and the level of the determining factors.        The previous panel studies cannot

account for deviations from long-run trend levels, while the extant literature using time series

cointegration     techniques    ‘can only intermittently    detect and measure    posited   relationships.
Estimating the relationships in levels is an interesting enterprise because it allows one, in principle,

to calculate trend real exchange rates.

        After surveying the previous literature, a dynamic model of the real exchange rate is used to

motivate the empirical exercise.      In examining this problem, we will exploit recent developments

in the econometric analysis of nonstationary variables in panel data. The results indicate that under

certain assumptions it is easier to detect cointegration in panel data than in the available time series;

moreover, the estimates of reversion to trend are also estimated with greater precision.        The most

empirically successful models include productivity measures, government spending ratios, and either

the terms of trade, or the real price of oil.       Using this latter model, we find that the implied

equilibrium     exchange rates indicate less overvaluation     of the dollar than that implied by a naive

version of purchasing power parity.



Menzie Chinn                                                       Louis Johnston
Department of Economics                                            Department of Economics
Social Sciences I                                                  Gustavus Adolphus College
University of California                                           St. Peter, MN 56082
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
chinn@cats.ucsc .edu
1. Introduction

      The real exchange rate is a key relative price in international finance. Thus it is not

surprising that so much attention has been lavished upon finding the determinants of this

variable in both the short and long run. It is surprising that the empirical success in

explaining movements in the real exchange rate has been so limited.

      This paper investigates the determinants of the real exchange rate using a panel of

disaggregate   data for the OECD countries. It does this by marrying two literatures -- one

using panel data to measure relationships between chnge.s in exchange rates to chnges in the

determinants, and the other using cointegration techniques to measure the long-run

relationship between the level of the exchange rate and the level of the determining factors.

      This enterprise is a useful one because previous cross-seetion analyses cannot speak to

the equilibrium level of the exchange rate. On the other hand, the extant literature using time-

series techniques is limited by the fact that it is difficult to extract rmonable   estimates of the

long-run cointegrating vectors from the short spans of data available, In examining this

problem, we will exploit recent developments in the econometric analysis of nonstationary

variables in panel data. 1

      The paper is organized in the following manner. Seetion 2 reviews the previous

literature. Seetion 3 deseribes the model used to motivate the analysis. Section 4 describes tie

time series techniques implemented and results. Section 5 discusses the panel regression




  1 Canzoneri, Cumby and Diba (1996) use similar panel regression techniques to identi~ long
run relationships between relative productivity levels and relative prices, as well as purchasing
power parity for traded goods.
techniques and estimation resul~. Section 6 compares the equilibrium exchange rates implied

by the productivity based model to those derived from a simple purchasing power parity

criterion, Section 7 concludes.



2. Previous Literature

      Previous analyses of productivity-based models of the real exchange rate can be broken

up into three, somewhat distinct groups. The first group adopts the Balassa (1964) and

SamuelSon (1964) approach straightforwardly, so that the relative price of nontradables is

determined exclusively by supply side factors, such as productivity. The second group

introduces some type of rigidity, such as adjustment costs to reallocating factors of production

between sectors, so that demand factors dso determine the real exchange rate. Both of these

two groups are static in nature; there are no intertemporal considerations. The third approach

adopts an explicitly intertemporal approach, and may or may not include a specific-factors

assumption. Each of these approaches are briefly described below.



2.1. Static Productivity-Based Models

      Suppose the price level can be expressed as a geometric average of the tradable and

nontradable goods price indices, where all variables are expressed in logs:


                                    pt =   QptN + (l-Q)ptT                                   (1)

Then deftig    the real exchange rate as the aggregate price index deflated exchange rate

yields the following expression, assuming purchasing power parity (PPP) holds for tradable

goods.



                                               2
                                    q, =   (s, + p,’ - p)                                    (2)
                                       = Q(st + ptN”- pt’”)



wheres is the nominal exchange rate, and an asterisk denotes the foreign country. The real

exchange rate is a fiction   of the relative price of nontradables. This point has been

incorporated in various models of the nominal exchange rate where the long-run real

exchange rate is allowed to vary over time .Z

      The Balassa-Samuelson model is well known, so that an explicit derivation will not be

presented (see Asea and Corden (1994)). Assuming perfect international integration of goods

and capital marketi, the price of tradables and the interest rate are set. The former then

deterties   the wage rate, which given intersectoral factor mobility means that relative prices

are set exclusively by the level of productivity in the two sectors. Since boti factors are fr-

to move between sectors costlessly, only supply side factors matter. Hence:


                                   6N      T                ~bT*
                                                                                             (3)
                        9* =   ‘Q[(~kt         - atN]+ Q[(—
                                                          ~T.      ‘   -   atN*l



where 9 is the labor coefficient in a Cobb-Douglas production finction and a is log-total

factor productivity.

      Typically, the regressions are implemented in the following form:


                                                                                             (4)
            A4*= P(J+         - ~tN)+ 132A(~?
                         PIA(atT          - a:) +otherregressors+ Ut


 2Wolff (1987) and Chinn and Meese (1995). See also the literature survey in Isard and
Symansky (1995).

                                                   3
      Table 1 summarizes me empirical estimates for the role of productivity in such

regressions. Hsieh (1982) estimates the determinants of the multilateral exchange rates for

Germany and Japan over the 1954-76 period, using labor productivity. He finds that the

coefficient 13,(L) is -0.362 (.516) for Germany, and -0.538 (0.538) for Japan (although he

allows for deviations from PPP for tradable goods). This coefficient is interpretable as the

share of nontiadables in the aggregate price index.

      Marston (1990) adopts a similar approach, examining five bilateral exchange rates over

the 1973-86 period. He obtains estimates considerably higher, ranging from -0.714 for the

Franc/Deutschemark rate, to -1.244 for the Dollar/Deutschemark (Bl is constrained to equal -

~). Micossi and Milesi-Ferretti (1994) estimate a similar relationship for mdtilateral real

exchange rates over the 1970-1990 period. They find that the estimates for fll (flz)range horn

-0.10 (-0.05) to -0.76 (1.10). All the coefficients are correctly-signed except for the

anomalous case of Denmark.

      These studies indicate that there is a statistically significant relationship between labor

productivity md tie real exchange rate. However, the results differ by specification, by

sample and data type. More importantly, it is not clear how good a proxy labor productivity

is for total factor productivity (TFP).

      It is important to observe that estimation in first difference is consistent with the view

that there is no meaningful concept of reversion to the productivity-determined equilibrium

exchange rate. Alternatively, there is no distinction between short and long run effects. To

illustrate that the adoption of this econometric specification is not without consequence, an

analogy to the consumption function may prove useful. A regression of changes in

consumption on changes in income will produce an estimated equation that may pass the

                                                4
usual diagnostic tests. However, such a regression implicitly rules out a permanent income

hypothesis view of consumption since there is no long-run tie between the level of

consumption and the level of income (boti integrated regressors) in such a regression.

      Similarly, it is possible that each of the series in this study individually contains a unit

root, but together form a linear combination that is stationary, i.e., the two series are

cointegrated.   Strauss (1995) addresses this issue using the Johansen (1988) and Johansen and

Juselius (1990) maximum likelihood procedure. He tests for a cointegrating relationship

betw~n the bilateral real exchange rate (versus Deutschemark) and relative productivity

variables, where toti factor productivity (TFP) is used instead of labor productivity. While

TFP is tie appropriate variable, it also limits the span of the data series for five of 14

countries to 21 years. Using the conventional asymptotic critical values from Osterwald-

Lenum (1992), he finds that eight cases are cointegrated at the 10% marginal significance

level. However, if one adjusts for small sample effects (Cheung and Lai, 1993a), then the

number of cases of cointegration drops to a mere two: UK and possibly France. Under no

conditions does Japan exhibit cointegration, which is odd, given the apparent fit of the

Japanese case. This oddity suggests that an important variable is (or variables are) omitted.’




  3 Strauss does not report the parameter estimates obtained from the Johansen procedure, so it
is difficult to evaluate the conformity of the results with any particular theoretical model. He
does report likelihood ratio tests for restrictions on the cointegrating vector. In general the
cointegrating vmtor linking productivity and relative prices, and the cointegrating vector Iinking
relative prices and the real exchange rate, reject the implied restrictions. However, two points
me relevant. First, the validity of such tests are conditional upon the existence of a cointegrating
vector, which is in doubt. Second, these tests may also be sensitive to finite sample size effects
(see Gagnon, Edison and Melick, 1994).

                                                 5
2.2. Static -ctivig--               Models with Rigidities

      DeGregorio, Giovannini and Wolf (1994) use the Balassa-Sarnuelson model to motivate

why nontradable inflation has been more rapid than that for tradables, They point out that

demand side factors will affect the real exchange rate only if the assumption of perfect

competition, PPP for traded goods, or perfect capital mobility are relaxed. DeGregotio and

Wolf (1994) pursue this last line of inquiry. They present a model that nests the productivity

model of Balassa-Samuelson, so that supply and demand shocks have an effect on the real

exchange rate.

      DeGregorio and Wolf estimate a number of first-differenced specifications which

include terms of trade effects, government spending shocks, and changes in preferences

regarding ti     consumption of nontradables, protied by the income level. They also utilize

total factor productivity as their productivity measure, and obtain panel regression estimates

of the productivity coefficient ranging from -0.10 to -0.26. Their results also indicate that the

coefficient on the preferences variable (where preferences are proxied by income per capita)

are not robust to the inclusion of terms-of-trade shocks. However, this outcome may be

partly a consequence of the choice of estimating in first differences, since the low-frequency

effect of changing tastes is unlikely to be manifested in year to year changes in income.



2.3. Dynamic Models

      Froot and Rogoff (1991) present an intertemporal model incorporating nontradables.

Consumption smoothing can only by mediated by exchange in tradables; since consumption of

nontradables must match production, government demand shocks that fall on tradables and

nontradables in different proportions than those of the private sector will have an affect on

                                                 6
exchange rates. Assuming endogenous output and fixed sectoral capital, the real exchange

rate is then a function of productivity differentials, although the intertemporal character of the

model means that the exchange rate ordy responds to unanticipated productivity shocks.

        Rogoff (1992) extends the intertemporal model, allowing for fixed factors, in order to

account for the stylized fact that there is high persistence in the real exchange rate, without

relying on unit root productivity shocks. The open capital account version of this model

implies that unanticipated productivity shocks cause highly persistent movements in the real

rate.

        Rogoff estimates the response of the exchange rate to a manufacturing labor

productivity shock of -0.6 to -0.7 using a fmt difference specification (no data on nontraded

productivity is available at the quarterly frequency analyzed in this paper). If the driving

variables actually follow unit root processes then a cointegration framework is the natural one

to adopt. Chinn (1995) found evidence of cointegration between the real exchange rate,

manufacturing productivity, and government spending, for the Canadian Dollar, the

Deutschemark, Yen and Pound. However ordy for the $N rate does there appear to be

plausibly estimated cointegrating vectors. For this rate, Chinn (1996) estimates the long run

response at -0.815, with standard errors of 0.13. This implies that the 95% confidence

bounds range from -0.555 to -1.075.

        Estimation of the cointegrating relationship using error correction models also allows

one to assess the strength of the relationship -- that is, how quickly are deviations from tie

implied equilibrium eliminated. Chinn finds the rate of reversion of the $/X rates to be very

rapid. A deviation half life is about 1.5 years. However, all these inferences are cast in doubt

by the lack of adequate nontradables sector productivity data.

                                                7
      In summing up the literature, one can conclude that there is substantial evidence for a

productivity based model of the real exchange rate. However, due to statistical and data-

related limitations, one cannot conclude that there is a robust relationship between the level of

the productivity differential and the level of the real exchange rate.



3. THEORETICAL MODEL

      The empirical portion of this paper is motivated by a variant of Rogoff’ s (1992) model,

alluded to above. The model specifies production and consumption in the context of

intertemporal optimization. The supply side is given by Cobb-Douglas production functions:



                                                                                            (5)




where YTand YNare output of the traded and nontraded goods. L, K and A represent labor,

capital and stochastic productivity shocks. The demand side is given by a representative agent

that maximizes a time-separable utility function:


                                                               l-’
                                v, =   Et~p’-t( ((CJN)”(C.T)l-”)
                                                       1-y
                                                                   )
                                                                                            (6)
                                         E=o


where is O is the subjective discount rate, CT and CNare the consumption of traded and

nontided    goods respectively, and y is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal

substitution.

      In this model, an intertemporal budget constraint holds; however, the only way to save

and borrow is through trade in tradables. Moreover, private and government consumption in

                                                  8
each sector must equal output period by period; hence the relative price of nontiacled goods

each period must depend upon the relative domestic consumption of the two goods:


                                                   ac,T
                                        F, =                                                  (7)
                                               (1 -a)C,N


where P, is the relative price of nontraded goods in terms of traded.

      The first order conditions imply that agents smooth expected marginal utility over time;

this is approximated by the following expression (in logs):


                                                                                              (8)


assuming that the productivity shocks are homoscedastic, and there is no consumption tilting.

      Combining equations (8) and (9), Rogoff shows that:


                                         -Ct!l)
                            P~+l- P~= (Cttl  - (crT
                                                  - ctN)                                      (9)

To obtain an empirically implementable model, assume that government spending (assumed to

fall solely on nontradables) follows a random walk, and further that productivity shocks are

lognormally distributed:



                                                                                             (lo)



Then one obtains the following expression for the f~st difference of the relative price of

nontradables:




                                               9
                    Pt+l-P*= (ar:i- atT)
                                       - CAl(at:l - ~tN)
                                                       + ((~-l)@t+l- g)                       (11)

where ~~ is the ratio of nontraded goods output to private nontraded goods consumption.4

      In order to re-write equation (11) in terms of a long-run cointegrating relationship,

~cursively substitute backwards to obtain:


                            P*+l= at:l- c#t:l + (c~-l)g,+~        + Po                        (12)

where pOis some initial condition.

      Thus far, the real exchange rate in this model is a relative price between tradables and

non-tradables in a single country. In order to convert this model into one that describes the

more familiar relative price of two cmencies,     assume that there is an identical foreign

country. Subtracting one from the other yields:




where the circumflexes (“’” ) denote relative differences. Assuming purchasing power parity

(PPP) for tradables implies:


                                                                                              (14)
                          +Pt::
                       (~t+l -Pt:l)   =~t:l -     <#t!l   +   (c~-l)~r+l+ 00

Then using the conventional (CPI deflated) definition of the real exchange rate described in

(2), one obtains:




  4 Note that this expression differs from Rogoff’s (1992) equation (21), in that here p, the
autoregressive coefficient on tradables productivity, is set to 1. If p < 1, then the implied time
series process for all variables wodd be trend stationary. We view this as an empirical issue, to
be addressed in Section 4.

                                                10
                                                                                            (15)

This equation provides us with a theoretically implied cointegrating relationship between the

real exchange rate, relative productivity levels in the tradables and nontradables sectors, and

government spending (expressed as a proportion of GDP).

      In the estimation portion of the paper, we are not dogmatic about the specification; the

importance of other candidate regressors is also evaluated. For instance, on the demand side,

terms of trade shocks and pr capita income are also included. Terms of trade shocks can

affect wealth, as well as intertemporal consumption patterns, thereby affecting the real

exchange rate (see Roldos, 1990), Income per capita is included as a proxy for non-

homotheticity of consumption preferences; that is, as income or wealth rises, consumer

preferences shifts toward nontraded goods, such as services.’ On the supply side, the

equation is augmented with the real price of oil, to account for possible shifts in the

production function.



4. TIME SERIES APPROACHES

4.1. Time Series fionometric      Methodologies

      The current standard in tetig   for cointegration in time series is the full-system

maximum likelihood estimation technique of Johansen (1988). Let A be a m x 1 vector of

I(1) variables. Then one can estimate the VAR@):




 5 Technically, this non-homotheticity is inconsistent with the intert.emporal model.

                                               11
                 Axt = p + rlAxl_l + r2Ax,_2 + ... rp_lAxt_p+l + mt_p + u,                  (16)


where J’1, rz, . . . r~,, II are m x m matrices of unknown parameters, and u is distributed

N(O,E). The matrix ~ is estimated by the Johansen maximum likelihood procedure subject to

the hypothesis that II has reduced rank (i.e., r < m). This hypothesis is written:


                                   H(r): II = a~’ ; Mm        =r                            (17)


where u and B Me m X r matrices. If r < m then under certain conditions the fl’~ is

stationary (i.e., the x are cointegrated).

      There are two tests proposed by Johansen, and described in greater detail in Johansen

and Juselius (1990). Typically, the asymptotic critical values are drawn from Osterwald-

Lenum (1992). Cheung and Lai (1993a) have shown that finite sample critical values may be

more appropriate given the relatively small samples which are generally under study.6

      Since results obtained using the Johansen technique appear to be sensitive to the

selection of lag length, especially in small samples, we also consider estimates derived by

alternative means. Phillips and Loretan (1991) argue on the basis of simulation evidence that

single-equation error correction models can be a useful method to estiating     long run

relationships. In particular, they assert that estimation of an error comection modeI using

nonlinew least squares regression, including leads of the fust difference of the right-hand side

variables provides asymptotictiy    superior estimates. The Phillips-bretan   (hereafter “PL-

NLS”) specification of equation (15) is:



  c The finite sample critical values are obtained by adjusting the asymptotic critical values for
the loss of degrms of freedom due to the estimation of the parameters describing the short term
dynamics. The adjustment factor is given by (N - (p x m))/N > 1. We thank Yin-Wong
Cheung for graciously allowing us to use his computer programs.

                                                12
                           Aq, = ~o +    ~,(q,., - Blat:, - B,a,: - B3g,_,)
                                 + t,4a,:l + c2Aa,: E3gr+l
                                                      +
                                                          A
                                                                                            (18)
                                 + hgged dlference tem         + u,

This ~cification    includes one lead of the difference   independent variables, which serves to

orthogonalize the error term in the presence of feedback horn the left-hand-side variable to

the right-hand-side variables.



4.2. Data

      The data are all annual, covering the 1970-91 period. Bilateral real exchange rates are

calculated using nominal exchange rates and consumer price indices (CPIS) taken from the

IMF’s Intetiional     Financial Statistics. The terms of trade and the price of oil are also from

IFS. The former is calculated as the log-ratio of export prices to import prices (in US

dollars). The latter is the log price in US dollars, deflated by the US CPI.

      The aggregate total factor productivity (TFP) data were constructed from the OECD’S

Intem.onal    Sedoral Dat&ase (ISDB), which contains TFP disaggregated by sector. The

tradable and nontradable categorization is the same as that used by DeGregorio, Giovannini

and Wolf (1994). TradabIe sectors include a~culture,          mining, manufacturing, and

transportation, while the nontradable sectors include all other services.

      The government spending variable is the ratio of real government consumption, divided

by real GDP. These data come from the OECD’S NahonfzlAccounts, The “preferences”

variable is GDP per capita, where GDP is measured in Summers and Heston “International”

dollars (the chain-weighted variable, RGDPCH). This variable is meant to proxy for the




                                                 13
rising preference for services as income rises. The data were drawn from the Pem World

Tables, Mark V.



4.3. Time Series Results

      Preliminary analysis of the data indicated that the relevant variables could not generally

reject the null hypothesis of difference stationarity at the 5% MSL, using an ADF test (1 lag,

w/trend). There were two exceptions: tradable productivity differentials for Great Britain and

Canada. For the German nontradable productivity differential, it was not possible to obtain an

adequate spectilcation, so it is not clear what the time series properties of this variable are.

      We attempted to apply the Johansen maximum likelihood technique to the time series

data. As we anticipated, so many parameters had to be estimated that no test statistics

exceeded the adjusted (finite sample) critical values. Hence we could not rely upon the

Johansen results to inform us regarding the cointegration properties of tie data.

      In Table 2, single-equation time-series estimates are reported for the reversion

parameter, and the tradables productivity coefficient from a basic regression of the real

exchange rate on productivity differentials and government spending ratios, 7 The fwst two

columns report the estimates from emor correction specifications, estimated using nonlinear

least squares (NLS), without and with a time trend, The third and fourth columns report the

results for the Phillips-Loretan NM (PL-NN) analogues. These estimates are also reported

in Figures 1 and 2.




  7 We also tried including terms of trade and oil price variables. The coefficients on these
variables failed to exhibit statistical significance in most cases.

                                                14
      In Panel A, the rate of reversion parameter estimates are reported. A statistically

significant negative coefficient indicates that the real exchange rate reverts to a conditional

mean defined by the cointegrating vector. Panel B reports the coefficient on tradable

productivity. A statistically negative coefficient estimate implies that more rapid productivity

growth in the tradable sector is associated with an appreciation of the real exchange rate.

      The estimates in Panel A indicate that there is substantial, and statistically significant,g

evidence of reversion to condition    mean, regardless of whether a time trend is included or

not. Moreover, the results are not very sensitive to inclusion of a lead of the dependent

variable, although there are definitely exceptions to both assertions.

      More surprising is the fact that the coefficient on tradable productivity, a key variable

in all these productivity-based model, is aImost always of the wrong sign, and significantly so

(in both economic and statistical terms). These results are ~      sensitive to the inclusion of a

time trend; the Japanese coefficient for instance switches sign from roughly -3 to +3.

      The lack of robust results here mirrors those obtained by other researchers. In Figures

3 and 4, the estimates for the nontradable productivity coefficients and the foreign

government spending coefficients are illustrated. (The US government spending coefficients

are not shown since they are all significant, and in the correct direction.) Once again, the PL-

NLS estimates are widely dispersed. More disconcetig,        the foreign government spending

coefficient is, more ofien than not, of the wrong sign.




  n The significance levels are based on asymptotic standard errors, which are appropriate if the
error terms are white noise (Banerjee, et al. 1993). In fact, all regressions equations fail to reject
a F-test for serial comelation of order 2 and 4, except for Norway.

                                                15
5. PANEL REGRESSION APPROACHES

5.1. Panel Re~ession      Methodology

      We consider a variant of equation (15) where the data are indexed by country:


                                                                                             (19)

If the series were individually taken to be stationary series, then conventional panel regression

techniques could be applied. If one wished to assume that the errors were correlated across

exchange rates, and further that tie right-hand side variables were exogenous with respect to

the regressand, then seemingly unrelated regression estimation (SURE) would be appropriate.

      The application of conventional panel regression techniques is complicated by the

possible nonstationarity of the series involved. It is no surprise that almost no variable rejects

the unit root null, using an ADF test (w/trend, 1 lag). As a consequence, one must proceed

with caution. Since we are concerned with long-run relationships in levels, we refrain from

frost differencing the data. Instead, we proceed in the following manner: we estimate the

cointegrating relationships, and then test whether the residuals from these cointegrating

vectors are stationary according to a unit root test.

      Since we are estimating the cointegrating relationship with individual-specific effects

only in the constant, and homogeneity imposed across the individual slope coefficients, the

panel estimator converges to a Normal, although quite slowly.’ We regress the difference

residual from the cointegrating vectors implied by the regressions in Table 3 on the lagged

residual, and country dummies.




 9 Assuming futier     that the right hand side variables are weakly exogenous.

                                                16
                      4ECqJ = + aECZJ.l + currency dummies + uiJ                               (20)


The t-statistic on the a coefficient is then compared against the tabulated critical values in

Table 5 of Levin and Lin (1992), If the test statistic is statistically significant, then the null of

no cointegration can be rejected.

      We applied this test to a composite variable where the following theoretical priors were

imposed: the share of nontradables in the CPI is set to .5, c~ is set to .4, the coefficient on

government spending is set to 5, and that on oil is set to 0.2. The resulting t-statistic on the

error correction term is -5.283, which exceeds the Levin-Lin 1% MSL critical value. 1°

Hence, there is evidence that real exchange rates are cointe~ated with productivity

differentials and government spending even when just using imposed coefficients.



5.2. Estimating the Cointe~ting        Relationships

      Estimation in levels, even with cointegrated variables, typically produces non-Normal

distribution for the estimators (unless one is willing to assume N converges to infinity). We

prmeed by estimating the relationship in a nonlinear error correction specification, so that the

distribution is asymptotically Normal. Consider (19) rewri~n       in nonlinear error correction

form:l’




  1° Note that the Levin and Lin procedure assumes independence of errors across individuals
(here currencies). 0’Connell (1996) has shown that allowing for cross-correlation increases the
nominal size of such tests.
  11 In principle lagged f~st difference terms should also enter in, but these coefficients were
seldom statistically significant in the single-cumency regressions, and so were not included.
Inclusion of the first difference lags of the real exchange rate, and government spending variables
does not change the qualitative results, but does reduce the statistical significance of the
coefficients besides that on traded sector productivity.

                                                 17
                     ‘9i,r = ai,ll + al(4i,r. ‘ilai~.l- ‘#i~.l- ‘Ji,r-1)+ ‘irr
                                          1    -
                                                                                             (24)


where the slope coefficient al is restrictd to be the same across all currencies.

Using SUR is more appropriate than using a fixed-effects panel regression since the latter

assumes that the contemporaneous shocks are random. The SUR estimator, on the other hand,

explicitly takes into account the cross-currency correlation,



5.3. Panel Re~ession     Results

      An error comection specification of (19) was estimated using SUR, allowing for

currency-specific constants. The results are reported in Table 3. The estimated coefficient of

reversion in the most basic formulation (Column 1) is statistically significant, as is the

coefficient on tradables productivity. I*The estimated rate of reversion is about 0.17,

implying that the half-life of a deviation from trend is about five years. This is somewhat

slower than the four to five years purchasing power parity deviation half-life reported by

Edison (1987), Frankel and Rose (lM)          and Wei and Parsley (1995), for instance.

      The estimates for the nontradable productivity and US government spending coefficients

are of correct sign, although ody the latter is of statistical significance. The negative estimate

for foreign government spending, manifested in the individud time series regressions, shows

up again. If the government spending coefficients on the US and foreign country are




  ‘2 These regression results are qualitatively unchanged if short run dynamics, including the
lagged differences of the real exchange rate and government spending ratios, are added.
However, the level of significance for the tiadable productivity coefficient drops to O.13;
moreover the implied cointegrating vector then only includes productivity and the real exchange
rate. This result is likely due to the fewer degrees of freedom, once additional lag coefficients
must be estimated,

                                                   18
constrained to be of equal and opposite magnitude, then the estimates of reversion and on

tradable productivity are basically unchanged, although the parameter estimates on the

government spending variables become insignificant.

      If the regression is augmented with a terms of trade variable, then the coefficient on

tradable productivity becomes even more substantial. Nontradable productivity and US

government spending are not statistically significant, while foreign government spending is.

The terms of trade variable itself is not statistically signflcant, which contrasts strongly with

the results obtained by DeGregorio and Wolf (1994). This suggests that terms of trade effects

may have their greatest impact on exchange rates at high frequencies.

      The regression incorporating the income per capita variable is very successful in some

respects. The estimated coefficient is highly significant. Yet, its inclusion causes both the

nontradables and the US government spending coefficients @ kome             economically and

statistically significant in the wrong direction; this result suggests the presence of

multicollinearity.

      Finally, inclusion of the price of oil yields in some re~ts       unsatisfactory results.

While the rate of reversion is still statistically significant, the other productivity coefficients

are not statistically significant. The price of oil itself is significant at the 5% MSL, suggesting

that the cointegrating vector should include this variable.

      One alternative interpretation of these findings is that they are due to a statistical

artifact. Total factor productivity is measured as a residual of output and factor inputs. It is

possible that exchange rate appreciation reduces the prices of imported goods which serve as

intermediate inputs in the production process. This may in turn cause measured TFP to look

larger, when in fact the calculated change is entirely due to mis-measurement. The correlation

                                                  19
is once again negative, but for a different reason than that posited in the theoretical section of

the paper. ‘q

      We attempt to address this concern by considering an empirical implication of this

reverse causation. If exchange rate movements induce the mis-measurement of TFP, one

might expect that the real exchange rate, or the cointegrating vector, should Granger cause

TFP. In fact, one does find that this is the case in the data. However, the level of

significance is about half of that for TFP causing the real exchange rate. Moreover, the

economic magnitude for this reverse causation effect is much smaller -- roughly a fifth of the

original channel. Hence, the buk of the correlation seems to be attributable 10 productivity

affecting the exchange rate.



5.4. Panel Cointegrat.ion Results

      Since the estimated rate of reversion is always statistically significant, we can be

reasonably confident that the regressions include the cointegrating vector. We calculated the

Levin and Lin (1992) statistic for the composite variable implied by each of these sets of

estimates. These statistics are reported at the bottom of Table 3. They indicate that all of the

series reject the unit root null. Hence, there appears to be substantial evidence for

cointegration. 14




  ‘3 We thank Rich Lyons for bringing this issue to our attention.
  ‘4 Note that since the cointegration vector coefficients are estima.zed,the Levin and Lin critical
values are not, strictly sp~ng,     appropriate. However, the test statistics far exceed the critical
values, so one may be reasonably confident about the findings. Pedroni (1995) provides
appropriate test statistics, but has not yet tabulated the critical values for cointegration tests for
cointegrating vectors with more than two variables.

                                                20
      The specification including the preferences variable garners the greatest support on the

basis of the t-statistic. However, given the difficulty in interpreting this particular

cointegrating vector, our prefemed model is that with the next highest t-statitic.        This is the

basic specification including only real exchange rates, productivity levels and government

spending.



6. Trend Exchange Rates: Productivity-Based Models vs. PPP

      One reason to estimate the relationships in levels is because one wishes to make

statements about the current level of the rd    exchange rate relative to some trend level. In

principle, when one has estimated the cointegrating relationship, one can undertake this

exercise. In Figures 5-17, the actual log real exchange rate (with the prefix LRX), and the

rate predicted by the model in Column 5 of Table 4 (with the suffix HAT) are depicted. 15

      Since the conception and estimation of equilibrium real exchange rates is a contentious

issue, it is useful to compare our estimates with more familiar measures. One common

measure of equilibrium real exchange rates provided by purchasing power parity. Boucher-

Breuer (1994) surveys this vast literature, as does Ronald MacDonald (1995). To provide

some perspective on the significance of the productivity factor, we present a PPP-based

measure of the real exchange rate. A strict interpretation of the PPP hypothesis would require

that the long run real exchange rate is a constant. Instead of adopting a this restrictive

interpretation, we allow the cointegrating vector coefficients to deviate from unity (although




 15 The error correction specifications do not provide the constant in the cointegrating vector.
We estimate this value by taking the average of the deviation from trend over the period.

                                                 21
symmetry is imposed). This approach can be justified by appeal to measurement error and/or

non-identical CPI baskets (see Cheung and Lai, 1993b).



      We regress the log nominal exchange rate on log relative CPIS, applying an Engle-

Granger regression to the 1960-94 data, exchange rate by exchange rate.


                                 ~~= Po + Pot    w- pt”) + u,
This equation is used to predict the nominal exchange rate, horn which the log relative prices

are subtracted in order to generate a PPP-predicted reai exchange rate. These PPP exchange

rates are also included in Figures 5-17.

      Clearly the productivity based measure is more variable than the PPP-based equilibrium

rate. In only one case ($/Norwegian Krone) does the variability of the two rates come close

to the same level. Another characteristic of the estimated equilibrium rates is that they

consistently miss the late- 1970s depreciation of the dolIar as well as the mid- 1980s

appreciation.

      The 1991 deviations from trend are reported in Table 4. A positive entry denotes a $

overvaluation. The two criteria do not predict substantially different 1991 trend exchange

rates for the $ bilateral rates for the UK, France, Germany, Italy, Denmark, Sweden, Finland

and Australia. The $/Belgian France, the Guilder and Japanese Yen are the cases in which the

PPP criterion implies greater Dollar undervaluation than the productivity-based model.

      We focus on the $/Yen case which has been closely scrutinized in the past.

In line with other studies using a PPP criterion, our PPP-based measure implies a substantial

undervaluation of the Dollar relative to the Yen in 1991 (49% in log terms). In contrast, the



                                               22
productivity based model indicates a much smaller ovenaluation of 15.5%. If the comparison

were to be extended to 1994, it is very likely that a similar pattern would persist. 16



7. Conclusions

      Our main conclusions are as follows:



1.    It is extremely difficult to fmd a cointegrating relationship between the real exchange

      rate, sectoral productivity levels, and government spending in 22 years of data, for an

      individual exchange rate.



2.    According to the Levi.n-Lin test, there is more evidence in favor of cointegration when

      analyzing panel data. The cointegrating vector definitely contains the real exchange rate

      and relative sectoral productivity levels, and government spending ratios. With less

      certainty, it includes the M   price of oil. The cointegrating vector may also include the

      terms-of-trade, income per capita, although the evidence here is more ambiguous.



3.    Estimates of rates of reversion and of the cointegrating vector are more reliably

      estimated when using panel data. The half-life of a deviation from trend is on the order

      of four to five years. A one percent innovation in tradable sector productivity induces

      betwen a .2 to .5 appreciation in the real exchange rate.




  ‘b Chinn (1996) estimates a single-equation error correction model that implies no misalignment
of the Dollar in 1991 and an 16% undervaluation in mid-1995. However, those estimates do not
incorporate estimates for the effect of nontradables productivity growth.

                                               23
4.    The productivity-based model usually implies smaller undervaluation       of the Dollar than

      a PPP-bmed model. The most pronounced case of this phenomenon is the $/X case.



      The extensions are fairly obvious. The small sample characteristics of the panel

cointegration test nd   to be investigated. Appropriate tests need to be applied to investigate

the validity of restrictions imposed (the same slope coefficients across currencies). Relatedly,

the sensitivity of likelihood ratio test to various types of mis-specification needs to be

investigated. In a related vein, alternative cointegration tests which rely upon less restrictive

assumptions, such as those developed by Pedroni (1995) could be applied to the data.




                                                24
                                        References

Asea, Patrick and W. Max Corden, 1994, “The Balassa-Samuelson Model: An Overview, ”
Review of International Economics 2:191-200.

Bdassa, Bela, 19W, “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal, ” Journal of
Political Economy 72:584-596.

Banerjee, Anindya, Juan Dolado, John W. Galbraith and David Hendry, 1993, Cointegration,
Error-Correction, and the Econometric Analysis of Non-S@tionary Data (Oxford Univ. Press:
Oxford).

Breuer, Janice Boucher, 1994, “An Assessment of the Evidence on Purchasing Power
Parity, ” in John Williamson (cd.), Estimating Equilibrium Exchange Rates (Washington, DC:
Institute for International Economics): 245-277.

Canzoneri, Matthew, Robert Cumby and Behzad Diba, 1996, “Relative Labor Productivity
and the Real Exchange Rate in the Long Run: Evidence for a Panel of OECD Countries, ”
Mimeo (Georgetown University, March).

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Ken. S. Lai, 1993a, “Finite-Sample Sizes of Johansen’s Likelihood
Ratio Tests for Cointegration, ” Oxford Bulleti of Economics and Statistics 55(3): 313-328

Cheung, Yin-Wong and Ken. S. Lai, 1993b, “Long-Run Purchasing Power Parity during the
Recent Float, ” Journal of International ~onomics 34:181-92.

Chim, Menzie, 1995, “Paper Pushers or Paper Money? Empirical Assessment of Fiscal and
Monetary Models of Real Exchange Rates, ” forthcoming, Joumd of Policy Modeling.

Chinn, Menzie, 1996, “Whither the Yen? Implications of an Intertemporal Model of the
Yen/Dollar Rate, ” Mimeo.

Chim, Menzie and Richard Meese, 1995, “Banking on Currency Forecasts: How Predictable
Is Change in Money?” Journal of International Economics 38(1-2) (February): 161-179.

DeGregorio, Jose and Holger Wolf, 1994, “Terms of Trade, Productivity, and the Real
Exchange Rate, ” NBER Working Paper #4807 (July).

DeGregorio, Jose, Alberto Giovannini, and Holger Wolf, 1994, “International Evidence on
Tradables and Nontradables Inflation, ” European Economic Review 38:1225-1244.

Edison, Hali, 1987, “Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run: A Test of the Dollar/Pound
Exchange Rate (1890-78)”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 19(3): 376-87.




                                             25
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew Rose, 1996, “A Panel Project on Purchasing Power Parity:
Mean Reversion within and between Countries, ” Journal of International Wonomics 40(1/2):
209-224.

Froot, Kemeth and Kemeth Rogoff, 1991, “The EMS, the EMU and the Transition to a
Common Currency, wNBER Macroeconomics Annual 1991 (MIT Press): 269-317,

Hsieh, David, 1982, “The Determination of the Real Exchange Rate: The Productivity
Approach, ” Journal of htemational Economics 12 (2) (May), 355-362.

Isard, Peter and Steven Symansky, 1995, “Long Run Movements in Real Exchange Rates, ”
Mimeo. (International Monetary Fund).

Johansen, Saren, 1988, “Statistical Analysis of Cointegrating Vectors, n Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 12:231-54.

Johansen, Men, and Katerina Juselius, 1990, “Maximum Likelfiood Estimation and
Inference on Cointegration - With Applications to the Demand for Money, ” Oxford Bulletin
of Economics and Statistics 52: 169-210.

Levin, Andrew and Chien-Fu Lin, 1992, “Unit Root Tests in Panel Data: Asymptotic and
Finite Sample Properties, ” Mimeo (UCSD: La Jolla, April).

MacDonald, Ronald, 1995, “Long Run Exchange Rate Modeling, ” IMF Staff Papers 42(3)
(September): 437-489.

Marston, Richard, 1990, “Systematic Movements in Real Exchange Rates in the G-5:
Evidence on the Integration of Internal and External Markets, ” Journal of Banking and
Finance 14(5) (November): 1023-1044.

Micossi, Stefano, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1994, Real Exchange Rates and the Prices
of Nontradable Goods, ” IMF Worbg Paper #94/19 (February).

O’Connell, Paul, 1996, “The Overvaluation of Purchasing Power Parity, ” Mimeo (Harvard
University, April).

Osterwald-bnum, M., 1992, “A Note with Quantiles of the Asymptotic Distribution of the
Maximum Likelihood Cointegration Rank Test Statistics, ” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
statistics 54:461-472.

Pedroni, Peter, 1995, “Panel Coinkgration: Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties of
Pooled Time Series Tests with an Application to the PPP Hypothesis, ” Working Paper 95-
013 (Department of Economics, Indiana University).




                                             26
Phillips, Peter C.B. and Mico bretan,   1991, “Estimating Long-run Equilibria, ” Review of
Economic Studies 58: W7-436.

Rogoff, Kemeth, 1992, “Traded Goods Consumption Smoothing and the Random Walk
Behavior of the R4 Exchange Rate, ” Bank of Japan Monetary and Economic Studies 10(2):
1-29. Also, NBER Working Paper #4119 (Jdy 1992).

Roldos, Jorge E., 1990, “The Terms of Trade and the Real Exchange Rate, ” Mimeo
(September).

Samuelson, Paul, 1964, “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems, ” Review of Economics and
statistics 46:145-154.

Strauss, Jack, 1995, “Real Exchange Rates, PPP and the Relative Price of Nontraded
Goods, ” Southern Economic Journal 61(4) (April): 991-1005.

Wei, Shang-Jin and David Parsley, 1995, “Purchasing Power ~Parity during the Floating
Rate Period: Exchange Rate Volatility, Trade Barriers and Other Culprits, ” NBER Working
Paper #5032 (February).

Wolff, Christian C.P, 1987, “Time-Varying Parameters and the Out-of-Sample Forecasting
Performance of Structural Exchange Rate Models, ” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics 5(1): 87-97.




                                             27
                                          Table 1
                Previous    Estifaates   of Productivity       Coefficients



                     Hsieh          Marston        Micossi &
                     (1982)         (1990)         Milesi-
                                                    Ferretti
                                                   (1994)


                     -0.36 to       -0.71 to       -0.10 to
                     -0.52          -1.24          -0.76

                     0.54          0.71 to         -0.29 to
                                   1.24            1.10

Exchange             multi-   bilateral multi-
rate var.             lateral            lateral

Currencies           Y, DM          $/Y,$/FFr BFr, DM
                                    $/DM, $/f FFr, DKr
                                    Ffr/DM    Lit, FL, f

Productivity         labor          labor       labor in
variable             in mfg.        in mfg.     mfg.,svcs
                     Svcs.          Svcs.


Sample               1954-76        1973-86        1960-90

Frequency            ahnual        annual          annual

Specification        cliffs.       cliffs.         cliffs.

Estimation           IV/AR         OLS             OLS
technique

Comments
                     Equation                   Equation
                     includes                   includes
                     relative                   relative
                     unit labor                 unit labor
                     costs                      costs




                                              28
                               Table 1 (continued)
                 Previous Estimates of Productivity      Coefficients



               DeGregorio      Rogoff         Chinn
               8 wolf          (1992)         (1995)
               (1994)


B,             -0.36 to        -0.6 to        2.21 to
                -0.52          -0.7           -0.82

132            0.54            0.6 to         -2.21 to
                               0.7            0.82

Exchange       multi-          bilateral bilateral
rate var.       lateral

Currencies     OECD 14         $/Y            $/C$, $/DM
                                              $/+, $/f


Productivity   TFP in mfg.     labor          labor in
variable       & services      in mfg.        mfg.

Sample         1970-85         81.1-90.3 1974.1-93.3

Frequency      annual          quarterly quarterly

Specification cliffs.          cliffs.        levels


Estimation     SUR            OLS             dynamic
technique                                     OLS

Comments
               Equation        Equation Equation
               includes        includes includes
               terms of        gov. exp. gov. expo
               trade, gov.
               exp., income




                                         29
                                             Table      2
              Single-E~ation           Estimates        of   Four Variable          Model
                                             1970-91

Panel    A:   Estimate     of   Rate    of   Reversion,         a,    < 0

Exch .             NLS ECM             NLS ECM                       Phillips-Loretan
Rate                                   w/trend               NLS ECM             w/trend


GBR                -().45***           -o.48***              -0.66**             -0.68**
FRA                -0*51***            -0.49**               -0.60**             -o.gg***
DEU                -0.37               -0.40**               -0.48**             -0.68
ITA                -0.15               -0.64**               -0.25               -0.62
CAN                -0.04               -0.07                 -0.28*              -0.29**
JPN                -0.14               -o.67***              -0.38               -o.87***
BEL                -0.24               -0.46**               -0.34               -0.67**
DNK                -0.36**             -0.42***              -om60***            -o.63***
NLD                -0.35**             -0,42**               -0.72***            -0.02
NOR                -0.16               -0.23*                -0.39*              -0.49***
SWE                -o-42***            -0.37**               -0.80**             -0.74**
FIN                -0*40***            -0.39***              -0.61**             -0.46*
AUS                -0.20               -0.17                 -0.12               -0.10


Panel    B: Coefficient         on Tradable         Productivity,            B. < 0

Exch .             NLS ECM             NLS ECM                   Phillips-Loretan
Rate                                   w/trend               NLS ECM           w/trend



GBR                1.80*               2.30                  3.38*               3.47*
FRA                2.55*               2.51                  1.78                0.94
DEU                3.68**              3.35*                 3.18                3.48
ITA                0.09                3.19                  1.43                4.15
CAN                -1.56               -2.09                 -0.55               -0.34
JPN                -2.97               3.56                  -1.50               2.27
BEL                0.46                4.00**                -1.39               2.38*
DNK                2.42                3.02*                 4.11***             4.09***
NLD                0.19                1.10                  0.73                -0.59
NOR                5.89                2.81                  3.05                1.82
SWE                3.43*               2.87                  3.48**              2.74
FIN                5.00***             4.98***               3.32                2.93
AUS                5.73                5.21                  10.23s’             28.22=/

Notes:     NLS ECM is nonlinear       least     squares       error            correction   model
(no lags of first       differences).        Phillips-Loretan                   NLS ECM
including     1 lead   of the independent           variables.               “w/trend”
indicates     a time trend      is included.        *(**) [***]              indicates
significance      at the 10%(5%)[1%]         level.
~ Includes     one lead of g*us# only.


                                                   30
                                          Table 3
                                SUR Estiination   Results:
                         Determinants    of Real Exchange    Rate


     Predicted (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)             (5)
     sign
Param.


ECT   (-)
      . .      -0.169*** -0.146*** -0.185*** -0.228*** -0.166***
               (0.028)   (0.028)   (0,028) (0.022)     (0.028)
‘1
a     (-)      “0.390** -0.502** -0.894*** -0,224** -0.180
               (0.155)  (0.182)  (0.164)   (0.094)  (0.160)
‘N
a     (+)      0.144        -0.013      0.233       -0.562*** 0.074
               (0.126)      (0.145)     (0,185)     (0.145)   (0.177)

9W    (-)      -10.O5*** 0.079          -4.871      13.358*** -8.016*
               (2.978)   (1.190)        (3.041)     (3.166)   (4.508)

9’    (+)      -3.169**     -0.079      -5.691*** 0,328         -3.359**
               (1.222)      (1.190)     (1.349)   (0.655)       (1.302)


tot   (-)                               0.031
                                        (O.lO1)

j-~   (-)                                           -1.474***
                                                    (0.133)

P0’1 (?)                                                            -0.201**
                                                                    (0.075)

—2
R              .35-,80      .40-.80     .27-.71     .24-.71         .40-.73

N              22           22          22          22          22

t              -6.555*** -5.926*** -6.184*** -7.393*** -4.755***

Notes: OLS standard errors in parentheses. ECT is the coefficient on the
cointegrating vector; the cointegrating vectors are normalized on the real
exchange rate. Ranges for adjusted-R2’sare for the 13 equations in the SUR
results. “t” is the t-statistic on a regression of the first difference of the
error correction term on the lagged error correction term and currency
specific dummies; critical values from Levin and Lin (1992). *(**)[***]
indicates significance at the 10%(5%)[1%] marginal significance level.




                                             31
                                    Table 4
                      Estimtes   of Deviation   from   Trend


Exch.              Model         PPP implied
Rate     Year      Deviation     Deviation

GBR       1991      0.066486     0.120598
FRA       1991      0.010672     0.071856
DEU       1991     -0.073526     0.014299
ITA       1990      0.164151     0.199658
CAN       1991      0.012299     0,125170
JPN       1991      0.155013     0.488702
BEL       1991     -0.088758     0,150956
DNK       1990      0.127467     0.120946
NLD       1990      0,031212     0.209298
NOR       1991      0.076252     0.002576
SWE       1991      0.115199     0.125528
FIN       1991      0.248024     0.168149
AUS       1991     -0.025220     0.037712

Notes: Year is the year the comparison is made. Actual real exchange rate
minus predicted, in log-levels. Exchange rates expressed in US$/foreign
currency unit.




                                       32
   0.0
                                                                    I                     ITA               DNK                      I
                                                               4                                                       SWE           I
  -0,2
                                                               3

  -0.4
                                                               2


  -0.6                                                         1

                                                               0
  -0.8
                                                              -1
           FR~               JPN
  -1.0
         12345678910                            111213
                                                              -z~
                                                                     12345678910                                           111213

                    ~~   REV.PL    B   REV.PLWT ~                                   l~TPRD_PL           gTPRDPLml


 i~e   1: Em and PL Estimates of                         Figure 2: Em and PL Estimates of
 he Rate of Reversion                                    the Tradables Sector Productivity
                                                         Coefficient




   10

                                                              80.

    0                                                         60_

                                                              40-

  -lo                                                         20_

                                                                o_
                                                                                                                           d
  -20                                                         -20-                                                               L

                                                              -40
                                                                     “’”m
  -30                                                         -60~
         12i4567i                        910    111213                  1       2    3     4    5   6   7    8    9   10111213

                 l~NPRD_PL         gNPRDPLwT]


                                                         ,.                 .        --     .       ------            .,
 ‘iqure3: Em and PL Estimates of
th~ Nontradables Sector Productivity
                                  .’                     th= Foreign Government Spending
Coefficient                                              Coefficient
                                                                                                                             -1.5


                                                                                                                             -1.6


                                                                                                                             -1,7


                                                                                                                             -16


                                                                                                                             -19


                                                                                                                             -2.D-


                                                                                                                             –2.1


      ol~
       70      72     74         76           78     HO       B2     Et        E6   E6         DO     D2        94
                                                                                                                             -2,2-
                                                                                                                                      72    74   76       7B     6D     B2   84     86      En         90     E!2


                                     —LRXGBR                    . . . .. QGBRHAT         . ..       PPPGBR                                            —        LRXFRA         QFRAHAT            ––-        PPPFRA


igure 5: United Kingdom                                                                                              igure 6: France




     -0,3                                                                                                                     -7.0


     -0.4                                                                                                                     -71


     -05-                                                                                                                     -7.2


     –0.6                                                                                                                     -7,3
                                                                                                                                     ,.,
     -0,7-                                                                                                                    -7,4


     –0,0                                                                                                                     -7.5


     -0.9-                                                                                                                    -7.6


     -1. O-                                                                                                                   -7.7
                72     74         76          70      00       02    04        86   80         9D     92                               72   74   76       78     BO     B2   B4     86   BE        90        92



                                      l—LRXDEU                             QDEUHAT        . ..      PPPDEUI                                           _LR!ilTA                    Q[TAHAT        -..        PPP[TA


‘igure         7: West Germany                                                                                       igure           8: Italy




      -02



      -03
         0.1



         D,0



      -0.1




               u ,,.
                  .,
                 ,,
                  ,..
                 ,,~,
                 .,
                 ,;
               ----
               +-.   ,,\



                           :
                           :
                           :
                            :,
                                  ‘--,:



                             .. ..,’
                               ,.,.,
                                      ...
                                     ,.
                                         ..
                                              ,“,,<..
                                                   -.,

                                                   ,,,
                                                    ,,
                                                     ,.,
                                                              . . .— ..:. .’



                                                           .,“..,
                                                       ,..,,.
                                                                    ,,,--

                                                                    “
                                                                     ,.”
                                                             ..., ,,.’
                                                                            /’
                                                                                    ,, .,,


                                                                                                           ..




                                                               ..
      -04
                72         74      76         70      00      82     04        06   EO         00    02         5



                                        —LRKCAN                         QCANHAT          ---        PPPCAN



‘igure         9: Canada                                                                                             ‘igure          10: Japan
                                                                                                  -24    ~
                                                                                                         70    72   74   76     78   80   B2   64   86     BE         90     92


                                  —      LRXBEL           QBELHAT      ___ PPPBEL                                         _LRMDNK              .QDNKHAT         ---        PPPDNK



‘igure11: Belgium                                                                         igure 12: Denmark




     -11~                                                                                         -z3~
            70    72   74   76     7tl    60   62    B4     66   BE         90    02                     70    72   74   76     76   00   82   04   66     BB         90    92



                                 _LRXNLD               QNLDHAT        ---        PPPNLD                                       —LflKNOR          QNORHAT         ---        PPPNOR



‘igure           13: Netherlands                                                          igure               14: Norway


     -1.6                                                                                         –1,3


     -1.7                                                                                         -1.4


     –1.2                                                                                         -1.5


     –1,9                                                                                         -1.6


     –2,0                                                                                         -1.7


     -2.1                                                                                         -1.0


     –2,2                                                                                         -i.e


     -2.3                                                                                         –2,0
            70    72   74   76     78     60   82    84    86    66         00    92                           72   74   76     76   60   82   B4   06     08         90    92



                                 —LRXSWE          . . . .. QSWEHAT    ---        PPPSWE                                         —LRXF[N         .QFINHAT         ---       PPPFIN



igure 15: Sweden                                                                          igure 16: Finland
              _LkXAUS   . . . .. QAUSHAT   ---   PPPAUS



?igure   17: Australia
