                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       COUNTRY FUND DISCOUNTS, ASYMMETRIC
                        INFORMATION AND THE MEXICAN CRISIS
                          OF 1994: DID LOCAL RESIDENTS TURN
                          PESSIMISTIC BEFORE INTERNATIONAL
                                       INVESTORS ?




                                       Jeffrey A, Frankel
                                      Sergio L. Schmukler




                                      Working Paper 5714


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1996

The authors would like to thank Bradford De brig, Carmen Reinhart, Richard Lyons, Maurice
Obstfeld, Thomas Rothenberg, and the participants of international finance seminars at the Federal
Reserve Board and the NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. We also
thank Charles Kramer and R, Todd Smith, of the IMF Research Department, and Donald Cassidy,
of Lipper Analytical, for the country fund data. Sergio Schmukler would like to acknowledge
support from the Consejo National de Investigaciones Cientificas y T&cnicas,Reptiblica Argentina,
This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Asset Pricing and International Finance and
Macroeconomics, Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper5714
                                                                                    August 1996


                       COUNTRY FUND DISCOUNTS, ASYMMETRIC
                        INFORMATION AND THE MEXICAN CRISIS
                          OF 1994: DID LOCAL RESIDENTS TURN
                          PESSIMISTIC BEFORE INTERNATIONAL
                                       INVESTORS?


                                           ABSTRACT



       It has been suggested that Mexican investors were the “front-mnners” in the peso crisis of

December 1994, turning pessimistic before international investors. Different expectations about

their own economy, perhaps due to asymmetric information, prompted Mexican investors to be the

first ones to leave the country. This paper uses data from three Mexican country funds to investigate

the hypothesis of “divergent expectations.” We find that, right before the devaluation, Mexican fund

Net Asset Values (mainly driven by Mexican investors) dropped faster than Mexican country fund

prices (mainly driven by foreign investors). Moreover, we find that Mexican NAVS tend to Granger-

cause the country fund prices, This suggests that causality, in some sense, flows from the Mexico

City investor community to the Wall Street investor community.           More generally, the paper

proposes an asymmetric information approach that differs from the existing explanations of country

fund discounts.


Jeffrey A, Frankel                                            Sergio L. Schmukler
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall                                                549 Evans Hall
University of California at Berkeley                          University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880                                       Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER                                                      sergio@econ.berkeley .edu
frankel @econ.berkeley.edu
I. Introduction




     “~e available data show that the pressure on Mexico’s foreign exchange

    reserves during 1994, and in particular j“ustprior to the devaluation, came not

    from the flight offoreign investors, butfiom Mexican residents. ”




                                                               kts,

                              International Moneta~ Fund 199.5.




    “You state that ‘the first to jlee were not fickle foreign investors but well-

    informed Mexicans.’ I have yet to see a serious methodolo~           that in eflect

    distinguishes between national andforeign porfolio investors. ”




                              —     Letter to the Editor, ~e Fcono mti    (11/11/95),

                              Jaime Serra, Former Mexican Finance Minister.




       The Mexican crisis in December             1994 posed a question regarding how

international financial markets work, among many others. It has been suggested that

domestic residents were “closer to information” and thus had better, or at least different,

expectations about local economic events in the pre-cnsis period. The International




                                             2-
Monetary Fund (IMF) in its annual Capital Markets Report (1995) expresses the view

that “..resident investors in emerging market countries tend to be front-runners in a

currency crisis.. .“ @age 7). Under this hypothesis, local investors led the stampede out of

Mexican assets in December 1994, much as they had done in the earlier crisis of 1982

(engaging in massive capital flight at a time when U.S. banks were still pouring money

into Latin America).




          Three Mexican closed-end country tids        have been established as vehicles to

hold Mexican equities. They are the Mexico Fund (MXF), Mexico Equity and Income

Fund (MXE), and Emerging Mexico Fund (MEF). The first one was established in 1981,

and the other two in 1990. They offer a valuable opportunity to study the dynamics of the

crisis.




          The Net Asset Values (NAVS) of the fids           are the aggregate value of the

constituency equities, evaluated at local market prices, though translated into U.S. dollars.

If markets were perfectly efficient and internationally integrated, then the price of the tid

would be equal to the NAV. However this is not the case. We argue that the price of the

country   tid,   which is traded on Wall Stree4 reflects relatively better the information and

expectations held by international investors, while the NAV, which is determined in Mexico

City, reflects relatively better the information and expectations held by local investors. In

other words, the country fid    discount, which is the percentage difference between the two

prices, reflects the relative optimism of domestic versus international. A large discount




                                          .    3-
indicates that domestic residents have relatively more favorable expectations. A premium

indicates that foreigners have relatively more favorable expectations. The present paper

focuses on what might variously be called the hypothesis of “divergent sentiments,”

                                                                                                           ,,1
“heterogeneous expectations,”” asymmetric tiormation,”                   and “closer to information.




         Anticipating the most interesting fact in this paper, Figures 1-3 plot Mexican fid

prices, NAVS and percentage discounts before the devaluation. They appear to support the

claim of the IMF (1995), that Mexican investors were the front-runrters in the crisis. The

NAVS in Mexico City fell sharply relative to prices in New York in December 1994. In

Figure 2, the decline began two weeks before the devaluation. This seems to constitute the

sort of evidence of which Jaime Serra questioned the existence in the quote at the head of

this paper.




         Country tids       are ideally suited to help investigate several questions. As a second

concern, the crisis also generated new interest in the contagion effects of crises. Although

relatively few studies of contagion have been undertaken, Burk.i and Edwards (1995),




] Ftiel   (1994b, p.254) contained a warning, based on premia in such wuntry fund prices, that a repeat of the
1982 crisis might be coming in Latin America
         “Fluctuations in the premim of the U.S. price of the fired over the net asset value could be a
         measure of fluctuations in the difference in expectations of U.S. versus local investors. For most of
         these funds this premium has been higher (or the discount has been lower) during the period 1990-
          1992 than during the preceding three years, suggesting bullish sentiment on the part of foreign
         investors.... Mexico and Btil show a clearly higher level of relative U.S. investor confidence in the
         three years from 1990... If our interpretation of the data is correct that they represent the confidence
         of U.S. investors relative to local investors, these four graphs suggest a possible replay of the period
         leading up to 1982, when Latin American residents turned pessimistic regarding their own counties
         while U.S. bti    were still bullish.”
me same point was made in Frankel (1994L p. 17).



                                                .      4-
Calvo and Reinhart (1995), Goldfajn and Vald6s (1995) and the IMF (1995) provide

empirical and theoretical support on how an exchange rate crisis may have spillover

effects on other sectors and on foreign markets. In the present paper we concentrate on

the “asymmetric information” hypothesis, while we study contagion in Schrnukler and

Frankel (1996).




       Section II looks at the long-run and short-run relationships between the Mexican

bd   prices in New York, on the one hand, and the NAVS of their portfolios in Mexico

City, on the other. Its purpose is to explain the behavior of discounts in the short run and

long run, given the barriers to arbitrage that must exist. Section III explains how the

“divergent expectations” hypothesis is a usefil complement to the “investor sentiments”

and the “loss-aversion” models of country funds suggested by earlier researchers. Beyond

the specifics of the Mexican crisis, the section discusses how this hypothesis may justi~

the existence of average discounts. Empirically, the section investigates whether the

evidence is consistent with the “divergent expectations” hypothesis.




II. Short-Run and Long-Run Behavior of Country Fund Discounts.




a) Country Fund Discounts, Existing Hypotheses.”




       A closed-end coun~      fi.md (hereinafter country fid)   consists of a fixed number

of shares that are invested in a set of stocks from a particular country. Unlike open-end




                                        .    5-
funds, once the fidis     established new shares cannot be issued, while existing shares

cannot be redeemed. Investors willing to buy or sell country-fid           shares need to trade

them on secondary security markets. Country funds are traded in New York at their U.S.

dollar price. As already noted, if markets were efficient, fiictionless, and perfectly

integrated internationally, the price of a fid        should be equal to its NAV - which is the

sum of the U.S. dollar market value of the individual equities at the home country. In

practice, however, this is seldom the case. The gaps between prices and NAVS are both

large and vtiable.




        It is well known that country tids,      as well as domestic closed-end tids,    trade at

an average discount. Discounts are equal to log(NAV/price~. Various papers, such as

Hardouvelis, La Ports andWizrnan(1994),          Diwan, Errunza and Senbet (1993, 1994) and

Lee, and Shleifer and Thaler (199 1), document that domestic and country fid            discounts

are large, and also different from zero on average.             Several hypotheses have been

suggested to explain this phenomenon. Any explanation must include the existence of

market frictions that prevent perfect arbitrage. Frictions may be caused by various factors

such as transaction costs, illiquidity of assets, capital gains tax liabilities, risks involved

in the arbitrage process, and barriers to capital movements.




        Lee, Shleifer and Thaler (1990, 1991) argue that these factors [while necessary]

are not sufficient to explain the “closed-end fund puzzle.” The puzzle consists of four

elements. First, closed-end fids     start out at a premium. Second, after some time the




                                                 6-
premim tends on average to turn into discount. Therefier, closed-end funds trade at an

average discount. ~rd,         discounts fluctuate over time. Fourth, discounts shrink when

closed-end funds are terminated through liquidations or open-ending.




         Lee, Shleifer and Thaler suggest tiat the presence of noise traders explains all the

elements of the puzzle.2 They assume that noise traders are more likely to hold closed-

end tids.     Small investors, with little knowledge, tend to invest through funds and to

trade based on sentiments. Therefore, tid                  prices and discounts vary with their

sentiments. Since noise traders make funds riskier, fund prices are on average below the

composite price of the underlying assets. NAVS tend to be less influenced by sentiments

because each of the constituent equities tends to be closer to its fidarnental                   value. In

summary, average discounts exist because of the risk generated in the markets by the

interaction between less-than-fully-rational investors (noise traders) and filly-rational

investors.




        Hardouvelis, La Porta and Wizrnan (1994) test the “investor sentiment”

hypothesis for the case of closed-end country fids,             They argue that country funds are a

better indicator of investor sentiments than domestic closed-end funds. “Sentiments” here

refer to generalized optimistic or pessimistic animal spirits, not based on fundamentals, In

the case of holdings of American equities, a change in U.S. investors’ sentiments is




2 De Long, Shleiffer, Summers and Waldmann (1990) show that noise traders or irrational investors impose
a risk in the price of the asset. Then, even in the absence of fundamental risks, prices can differ from the
fundamental values, because of the risk involved in holding the asset.


                                                     7-
reflected in both U.S. NAVS and U.S. fund prices. On the other hand, in the case of

holdings of emerging market equities, a change in U.S. investors’ sentiments is reflected

only in country tid   prices, and not in their local NAVS (the prices of their underlying

assets that are traded in each particdar country). In other words, the co-movements of

country tids   are more likely to reflect U.S. investors’ sentiments, since the underlying

assets of each of the tids     are located in different countries with less common factors.

The changes in country tid      NAVS more likely reflect changes in each particular market.




        Hardouvelis et al. find evidence that the noise trader model is consistent with the

existence of country fid     discounts. Once cross-border restrictions are taken into account,

they find that country funds trade at an average discount. U.S. investors, who mainly set

tids’   prices, tend to underestimate the tidamental         value of the fids.    While our

interpretation has something in common with Hardouvelis et al., we believe that the fund

prices capture U.S. investor sentiment wi[h respect 10 the coun~      in ques[ion, rather than

difise undifferentiated bullishness.




        Kramer and Smith (1995) challenge the investor sentiment hypothesis. Mexican

funds and other Latin American tids       turned from discounts to premia after the Mexican

devaluation in December 1994. They claim that the investor sentiment hypothesis can

only justi& these premia by suggesting that international investors were optimistic about

Latin America after the devaluation. Since optimism at that time seems implausible, they

propose an alternative explanation. They hypothesize that the observed premia are




                                               8-
evidence of loss-averse investors. When fid        prices fell tier the devaluation, investors

did not want to realize paper losses on their closed-end fid     shares. They were willing to

pay a premium for the country funds, even though they were pessimistic about these

tids.   They were not willing to sell when prices fell, because the marginal disutility of a

loss is relatively high for loss-averse investors. Our response to the Kramer-Smith

argument is that the post-crisis premia are consistent with pessimism by foreign investors,

provided that Mexican investors turned pessimistic fmter.




b) Reconciliation of Hypotheses Regarding Counb-y Fund Discounts:




        First, reasoning from the observed fact of wide disparities between prices and

NAVS, we infer that arbitrage is not automatic. It is important to realize that in practice it

is virtually impossible in this setting to engage in pure (nskless) arbitrage. The following

summary sheds some light on why one perhaps should not expect perfect arbitrage. It

describes a set of possible “arbitrage” strategies where each one has its own serious

limitation. In addition, there exist general limitations to all of the strategies. The chart

shows that arbitrage may be not ordy risky but also sometimes infeasible. Most of these

general limitations have been pointed out in previous studies, such as Diwan, E~          and

Senbet (1993), Errunza (1991), and Hardouvelis et al. (1994).




                                              9-
           19              . .                            . . . .
                Strate~.                      ParticularJ.lmltatlons.



1) Large outside investor could               1‘) Requires that investor has a lot
buy entire fid and liquidate.                 of capital, and that the local market
                                              is so liquid that large sales do not
                                              drive the prices down.




2) Fund manager codd convert                  2’) It maybe difficult to get all of
to an open-end fund, generating               the necessary parties to agree to
an immediate capital gain to                  open-end it. If the manager wanted
share-holders.                                to deal with fluctuating idows
                                              and redemptions, requiring new
                                              investments or liquidations, she
                                              would have started an open-end
                                              tid in the first place.




3) Individual investors could                 3‘) Short-selling is difficult (or
buy the fund and sell individual              even prohibited) in many of these
shares short.                                 markets, especially if it means
                                              trying simultaneously to sell short
                                              a large number of holdings.




4) Individual international        -          4’) This factor (like number 3)
investors will have a lower                   will indeed put downward pressure
demand for local shares                       on local share prices and upward
than they would otherwise,                    pressure on country fund prices;
and investors will have a                     but there is no reason to think the
higher demand for the                         influence should be great enough
country fund than they                        to eliminate the price disparity.
would otherwise.




                                   .   10 -
       a) Markets maybe illiquid. For example, Vanguard (1995) notes that a country’s
       entire market value, or capitalization, maybe less than that of a single large U.S.
       company. In many countries, the shares held by the country tids constitute a
       large fraction of the shares outstanding. Some shares turn over Mequently.

       b) Exchange rate risks are involved, since country tids are traded in U.S. dollars
       while the individual shares are traded in each country’s currency.

       c) Markets do not trade at the same time, making simultaneous transactions
       sometimes infeasible.

       d) Transaction costs are larger than in standard U.S. securities markets. For
       instance, Vanguard estimates that overall transaction costs for buying a basket
       of emerging market stocks are expected to be over 2°/0.

       e) In some countries there still exist barriers to capital movement.




       The series of obstacles to arbitrage imply that expected discounts are different

from zero. More properly, the observed fact of these disparities implies that the obstacles

must exist. Even though perfect arbitrage is not to be expected, a large enough NAV-

price difference should generate some kind of arbitrage. We suggest that discounts

fluctuate inside bands before prompting much arbitrage activity. If discounts move below

or above the band, rational investors will seek to profit from the NAV-price difference

because the expected gains are substantial.




                                       .      11 -
        Given that barriers to arbitrage exist, partially segmenting the markets, the price in

Mexico must reflect relatively more closely the asset demands of Mexican residents, and

that in New York thedemands of foreign residents. It follows that, to whatever extent

Mexican investors have different expectations from foreign investors, the country fid

discount will to a degree reflect the difference in expectations.




        Discounts appear to be mean-reverting. Therefore shocks have larger effects in the

short run than in the long run.3 Some of the limitations to arbitrage, such as market

illiquidity and exchange rate risk, explain the limited speed of mean reversion, Since it

takes time to find buyers in local markets for large blocks of stocks, without pushing

down the price, the short run may display large gaps. Over a longer horizon, buyers can

be found, and discounts shrink. Moreover returns are more uncertain in turbulent periods

than in periods of tranquility,        allowing discounts to deviate from their long-run

equilibrium level.




        The dynamics of discounts can be summed up in the following way. There exists

a stationary long-run relationship between each price and its NAV. Given a constant

average discount, an innovation in the fid’s        NAV is expected to be fily transmitted to

the tid’s   price in the long run. On the other hand, a change in a NAV is expected to be

only partially transmitted to its price, changing the average short-run discount. In other




3 Tests of stationarity in discounts are reported below, concluding that discounts are mean-reverting
processes, Hardouvelis et al, (1993) also fmd stationq discounts.


                                                 12 -
words, the short-run elasticity of price with respect to NAV is expected to be less than

one, while the long-run elasticity is expected to be close to one.




         The existing hypotheses (“investor sentiment” and “loss-aversion”) do not explain

the complete story. They partly explain the magnitude and persistence of the premia.

However, it remains to be understood why NAVS and prices reacted in different ways to

the Mexican crisis. These hypotheses do not predict why discounts turned into premia

around the time of the Mexican devaluation. ~s             paper argues that different expectations,

on the part of Mexican vs. American investors, may be present. The different

expectations hypothesis complements the existing explanations. If Mexican investors

foresaw the crisis, NAVS fell first and/or fell more rapidly than country fid                     prices.

Therefore, discounts turned into premia even though investors were pessimistic about

Mexico.




c) Empirical Testing:




        In this subsection we estimate the short-run and long-run relationships between

the three Mexican prices and their respective NAVS.4 We first determine the stationarity

of the series and the long-run relationships from the cointegrating vectors. Then we study

the short-run adjustment towards the long-run equilibrium by error-correction models.




4 The funds’ descriptions are detailed in Appendix 1, as well as the difference between prices and NAVS.


                                                    13 -
The relationship between prices and NAVS, as well as that between discounts and

exchange rates are analyzed.




       Unit root tests, displayed in Part a of Table 1, ftil to reject that all prices and

NAVS are non-stationary in levels. The null hypothesis tested is that the level of the

variables contain a unit root. We perform three unit root tests, Weighted Symmetric,

Dickey-Fuller, and Phillips-Perron, to check robustness of the tests. The Weighted

Symmetric test tends to have higher power than the Dickey-Fuller one. The Phillips-

Perron test calculates a residual variance “robust” to autocorrelation. The numbers of lags

used in each case have been determined by the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC). Only

the t-statistics for the optimal number of lags are tabulated. The critical values used take

into account the finite sample properties. First differences of all the variables yield

stationary results although they are not reported.




       Even though the levels of the series are non-stationary, there may exist stationary

linear combinations of them, called cointegrated vectors. Part b of Table 1 displays unit

root tests on discounts, testing whether discounts are stationary. In other words, we

restrict the cointegrating vectors to be (1, -1), and perform tests on their residuals. The

restrictions are not arbitrary; they are based in hypotheses of how prices are linked to

NAVS. Table 1 shows that two out of the three fids     reject non-stationarity, according to

the Phillips-Perron test. When we include the exogenous dummy variables dqmexdev and

dpolstab, most of the tests yield stationarity. These variables control for events that




                                        .     14 -
particularly drove the discounts away from their long-run relationships. In some cases

non-stationarity cannot be rejected, but these results may be due to not very powefil unit

root tests.




        The variable dpolstab takes the value 1 the week that NAFTA w= approved and

the week President Zedillo was elected. It takes the value -1 in the weeks that the markets

received bad political and economic news from Mexico, namely when the two political

(Colosio and Ruiz-Massieu) assassinations took place, the week of the Chiapas uprising,

and the week of the peso devaluation. Otherwise, it contains the value O. Therefore, this

variable controls for the good news and bad news shocks on the country tids.                         The

variable damexdev takes the value 1 for the six months following the devaluation,

otherwise it takes the value O.




        Table 2 reports the results from cointegration tests. In this case, we do not impose

any particular value for the cointegrating vector. (Even though we believe that the

constraints are justified on a priori grounds, we go through the cointegration tests because

some readers will expect to see them.) The table tabulates the Engle-Granger5 and the

Johansen-traceb (maximum likelihood) cointegration tests along with the estimated

normalized cointegrating vectors. The cointegrating vectors are interpreted as the long-




s me Engle-Granger cointegration tests is a Dickey-Fuller test on the residuals horn the cointegration
regression.
6 The Johansen-trace algorithm tests, in several steps, null hypotheses of n cointegrating vectors against
alternative hypotheses of n+ 1 cointegrating vectors.


                                             .      15 -
run relationships between the variables. When no other variables are taken into account,

the Johansen test finds one cointegrating relationship for the fund MXF.7




        We also test the hypothesis that the cointegrating vector between prices and

NAVS is (1, -l). We cannot tell that directly from the cointegrating vector, because of the

presence of nuisance parameters. Since the residuals are autocorrelated, the fact that there

is cointegration is not sufficient to imply that the emors are i.i.d. Normal. As a

consequence, we need to comect the statistics so that they are asymptotically Normal. We

per-form the correction, running two OLS regressions, according to the method of Stock

and Watson (1993), The usual t-statistic is multiplied by the first regression’s standard

error, and divided by the second regression standard error over 1 minus the

autocorrelation coefficients. Table 3 shows that two of the three tids             cannot reject the

hypothesis that the cointegrating vector is (1, -1). A normalized coefficient of 1 implies,

as expected, that a change in the NAV is filly transmitted to its price in the long run. A

change in fundamentals, which shifts the NAV, ultimately shifts its price by the same

magnitude.




        Once we have studied the cointegrating vectors, we calculate the speed of

adjustment towards the long-run relations. The speed of adjustment determines how

much time is necessary for the price to adjust to the long-run relationship with its NAV.

In other words, it expresses by how much prices adjust, in the short run, given a departure



7 When other variables are included, the Johansen tests fmd cointegration for the funds MEF and MXE. In
all of the cases it cannot be rejected that only one cointegrating vector exists.


                                                  16 -
from the long-run equilibrium. Since all the estimated speeds of adjustment are positive, a

discrepancy from the long-run equilibrium means an adjustment of the short-run values of

prices towards the long-run values.*




        Tables 4 and 5 display different error-correction models, estimating the speed of

adjustment. The adjustment factors have been calculated by a seemingly unrelated

regressions (SUR), using the Engle-Granger two-step estimator.9 The fmt step yields

super-consistent estimators of the cointegrating vector. Therefore, eficient estimates are

obtained in the second step. The lagged residuals from the first step stand for the

deviations from the long-run relationships.




        Table 4 assumes stationary long-run relationships between prices and NAVS.

However we allow the long-run relationships to differ across fids.              A SUR is run in the

second step, constraining the adjustment factor to be the same for each fund. Assuming

that the constraint is valid, the second step yields efficient ad unbiased estimators of the

error-comection model. The estimated adjustment coefficient is 0.15 per week, and is

statistically significant. However, notice that if indeed there is no cointegration, the

residuals are non-stationary, making the usual t-tests inappropriate.




EThe closer the speed of adjustment is to zero, the slower the convergence. When the speed of adjustment
is equal to 1, the convergence is instantaneous. Note that the speeds of adjustment are defined m the
negative of the coefficients that appear in the tables.
9 See Banerjee et al. (1994).


                                                   17 -
                                                                                             -.




        The above resdts show that adjusting to the long-run relationship may take some

time, especially in a period when successive shocks occur. These results can also be

looked at in a different light, Sudden gaps such as the one that in December 1994 opened

up in the Mexican funds may routinely and mechanically reflect the short-run impact of

changes in the exchange rate. After all, equities in Mexico City are priced in pesos and

the country funds in New York are priced in dollars. Hardouvelis et al. documented that

exchange rate changes have such effects on country tids     in general. We can isolate the

effect associated with the exchange rate per se by estimating the normal relationship

between changes in the exchange rate and country&d      discounts.




        Results from table 5 also show that the Mexican devaluation of 1994 may have

been different from other exchange rate changes. It shows that changes in discounts can

be only partially explained by changes in the exchange rate. The dummy variable

damexdev is negative and statistically significant, explaining the unusual premia observed

after the devaluation. In other words, the fdl in the discount in December 1994 was

greater than would be expected from the magnitude of the devaluation and the usual

pattern associated with exchange rate changes. We interpret this as a loss in confidence

by Mexican investors (relative to U.S. investors), But perhaps the most convincing piece

of evidence supporting this hypothesis was already evident in Figures 1-3: the change

came a few weeks before the devaluation. This supports the hypothesis that the change in

discounts was partly due to less optimistic Mexican investors, and not simply to the

devaluation itself.




                                            18 -
         In the second step, we do not constrain the adjustment coefficients to be the equal

to each other, in order to check how different they vary. The results displayed in Table 5

show that the short-run elasticities are not very different from the previous one. It takes

some time to go back to the long-run relationships. In this case, the coefficients vary from

13% to   22%,   implying a half life of around 3 to 5 weeks.




         In summary, the results show that it takes a few weeks for the short-run variables

to fully adjust to the long-run relationships, assuming that no new discrepancies arise.

Namely, shocks that drive prices and discounts away from their long-run relationships

have only a partial effect in the short run. If no new shocks occur, the prices and

discounts adjust at rates ranging from 13 to 22 percent of the gap each week. Since the

cointegrating coefficients for NAVS are close to one, a change in a NAV means that its

price will change by the same amount in the long run. Even after the initial devaluation,

on December 20, the discrepancy remained for several months, suggesting that Mexican

residents were more aware than foreigners of the negative implications of the crisis for

the Mexican economy.




III. Were NAVS and Prices Driven by Divergent Expectations?




a) Average Discounts and Asymmetric Expectations..




                                               19 -
        In the previous section we demonstrated mean-reversion                     in country fund

discounts. Wealsoargued        that the divergent expectations hypothesis helps explain the

premia observed after the devaluation of December 1994, As the IMF capital markets

report argued, Mexican investors reacted first to economic and political local events, i.e.,

the Mexican investors were the front-runners in the devaluation, In the present section we

test that divergent expectations drive country fid             NAVS and prices throughout the

sample period. Moreover, we argue that the asymmetric expectations hypothesis can help

to explain the sign of the average discount.




        The price of the country fid       is observed, on average, to lie below the NAV. Why

is this the normal long-run relationship? U.S. investors may be aware that they are less

well-informed about emerging market stocks than are the residents of those countries,

who are closer to the economies and companies. As a result, U.S. investors have a lower

demand for emerging market country assets than do local investors (other things equal).]o

Since, in our view, the country fid          is primarily held by U.S. investors and the local

stocks are held relatively more heavily by local investors, the price of the country fid

reflects the lower average demand. Furthermore, given the apparent partial segmentation

of the country fund market in New York and the corresponding equity markets in Mexico

City, movement in the ratio of price to NAV reflects movement in the ratio of U.S.




10This type of “lemons problem” was originally treated by Akerlof (1970). There is a large literature on
asymmetric information in financial markets. One classic reference showing that equity investors will
demand a premium to compensate for their informational disadvantage is Myers and Majluf (1984).


                                                  20   -
investor expectations to local investor expectations. The same discounts, positive on

average but variable over time, exist also for other countries.



       The ideas of market segmentation and asymmetric information are not new in the

country fmd literature. Diwan et al. (1993) show that the existence of discounts depends

on the nature of market segmentations. Second, Errunza (1991) mentions the existence of

different expectations between local and foreign investors. More generally, in reference

to the home-country bias that characterizes international investing throughout the securities

markets, French and Poterba (1991) say that “They [investors] may impute extra ‘risk’

to foreign investments because they know less about foreign markets, institutions, and

firms.” Although these ideas have been present in the literature, we think they became

more relevant with the Mexican crisis of 1994.



       Several factors may cause expectations to be heterogeneous. First, resident

investors may have more access to local news than international investors. If domestic

investors are better informed, their expectations will differ from the relatively uninformed

international investors. Second, different expectations may arise from the way resident

investors read the same information. The same news can be interpreted as different signals

by domestic and international investors. Unfortunately, it is not possible to determine what

causes expectations to diverge.     In particular, there is nothing here to indicate that

Mexican residents may have obtained “inside information” illegitimately. Nevertheless,

we are able to test for the presence of different expectations.
         First, the variables are plotted against time to observe the reactions of country

tids    before the devaluation. Second, two econometric approaches are followed.

Granger-causality tests are computed to search for causality in the variables. Then, a

regression is calctiated by SUR to obtain point estimates of how different prices and

NAVS are statistically related.




b) Plots, Granger-causality Tests, and SUR:




         The plots of the three stocks contain some information about expectations.

Figures 1-3 show that both NAVS and prices went up, reflecting more positive

expectations from local and foreign investors when markets received good news about

Mexico. The two clearest cases are the NAFTA approval in November 1993 and

President Zedillo’s victory in the presidential election of August 1994.11 Country tids

are sensitive to changes in sentiments and expectations.




         As noted, the figures also show that both prices and NAVS started falling before

the devaluation in December 1994. Finally and crucially, the figures provide evidence of

divergent expectations before the devaluation. The MXE discount turned into premia a

week before the devaluation. In the case of the two other fids,                    MXF and MEF, both




1]Such political events had a statistically significant effect on Mexican interest rates during the year and a
half preceding the crisis, as noted in Frankel and Okongwu (1996).


                                                     22   -
NAVS and prices fell before the devaluation, However, NAVS fell much more rapidly,

showing that discounts started falling sharply before the devaluation.




         As a f~st econometric approach, Granger-causality                      tests are estimated to

determine whether changes in NAVS preceded changes in prices, not just in December

1994, but in general. We run the VAR process in first difference form, since the typical

Granger-causality test does not have its standard distribution when the variables are

1(1).12 Four alternative hypotheses may be tested from these tests: prices Granger-cause

NAVS, NAVS Granger-cause prices, neither of them cause the other, or they are

simultaneously determined. Table 6 shows the restits. 13 The table and corresponding

figure ordy report the cases where one-direction Granger-causality was found. Figure 4

displays the results in a different way. It indicates the causality relationships with arrows.

All three Mexican NAVS Granger-cause one of the three prices in New York. Moreover,

both within Mexico and within New York, the biggest Mexican tid,                        MXF, affects the

other fids.




         The aITow sizes of Figure 4 have been chosen in an arbitrary but readily-perceived

way, The thick arrow indicates that both of two results hold. First, the probability of

accepting the null hypothesis of no Granger-causality is less than 5 percent. (More

properly, the probability of rejecting the null is higher than 95 percent.) At the same time,



12 Schmukler (1996) performs other erogeneity tests, which incorporate cointegrating vectors in the
estimation. Those results are very similar to the ones reported here.
13Since the Granger-causality test can be very sensitive to the choice of lag length, different specifications
have been tried, without substantially changing the results. Only one specification is displayed here.


                                                     23   -
the thick arrow means that the difference between the probabilities of accepting the null

hypothesis is at least of 50 percentage points. In other words, the difference in probability

values (P-values) is at least 0.50, so we are very cotildent that Granger-causality ordy

goes in one direction, because we accept and reject the null hypotheses stiongly. The thin

arrow means that the probability of accepting the ndl hypothesis is less than 5 percent,

and that tie difference between probabilities is greater than 10 and less than 50

percentage points.




       Having tested that causality goes from Mexico to New York, we estimate, as a

second econometric approach, a SUIUVAR. In this case, we are interested in how prices

are affected by other variables. We report only one representative SUR estimation in

Table 7. It shows the contemporaneous relationship between NAVS and prices. The

variables are in first differences, to avoid the spurious regression problem and to use

Normal limiting distributions. The estimates are calculated by nodinear least squares,

imposing constraints for equal coefficients, but allowing for different constants. The

dependent variables are the country fund prices. The independent variables are the fid

NAVS, the Mexican exchange rate, the international interest rate, and the dummy for

political stability. Under the assumption that the constraints are not too restrictive, the

SUR estimation enhances efficiency.



       The regression output shows that NAVS are significant in explaining changes in

prices, cofirrning the results obtained with the Granger-causality tests. We also include




                                             24   -
lagged prices, since we found Granger-causality within prices. In this sense the regression

displayed in Table 7 is a VAR, with other exogenous variables. The exchange rate is

statistically significant and of the right sign. A drop in the value of the peso is reflected as

a fall in the value of the underlying assets in terms of dollars. The dummy variable that

reflects political stability is also of the right sign, and significant.




        The international interest rate is expected to have a negative effect, since a drop in

the international interest rate results in an increase in demands and prices for many assets,

including Mexican country fids.          The regression yields the right sign, although the

variable does not turn out to be significant. A negative coefficient for the interest rate

agrees with other studies of foreign investor demand in emerging markets more generally,

such as Calve, Leiderman and Reinhart (1993), Chuhan, Claessens and Mamingi (1994),

Dooley et al. (1994), Femandez-Arias            (1994), Frankel and Okongwu (1996), and

Schadler et al. (1993).




                                                25   -
IV. Summa~        of Conclusions




           In the present paper we use the three Mexican country tids         to show evidence in

favor of divergent expectations held by local and foreign investors during the Mexican

crisis of December 1994. The asymmetic information hypothesis was suggested in the

aftermath of the crisis, implying that Mexican investors reacted before international

investors to news about the Mexican economy, This statement can be interpreted in two

ways: either domestic and international investors received two different sets of

information, or the local investors were more alert and sensitive to potential warning

signals.




           More generally, we take various elements existent in the literature and formulate a

new picture of how coun~           funds behave. Even though indirect arbitrage may exist, it

faces several obstacles. We suggest that the nature of these barriers may explain mean

reversion, or different reactions of country fid         discounts in the short run and in the long

run. In turbulent periods, discounts may be large due to market illiquidity or because of

increased obstacles to arbitrage. In the long run (in tranquil periods), they tend to be

nmwer.       This hypothesis complements existing models such as the investor-sentiments

and the loss-aversion interpretations. We also argue that the presence of heterogeneous

expectations explain the persistence of average discounts.




                                                26   -
       On the empirical side, Section 11showed that although a change in a NAV is filly

transmitted to the country fund’s price in the long run, it is only partially transmitted in

the short run. It also showed that the rates of adjustment towards the long-run

relationship, estimated by error-correction models, are around 0.15 per week, depending

on the case. They imply that 50°/0of the adjustment takes place in around 3 to 5 weeks. A

similar estimate was feud      for the adjustment of discounts, towards their long-run

relationship with the exchange rate. A slow rate of convergence plus the divergent

expectations hypothesis suggests a reconciliation        between the investor sentiment

hypothesis and the loss-aversion one.




       Section III, presented a new explanation of the observed positive discounts in

country funds. If investors indeed have asymmetric information, the presence of positive

discounts on average can be reinterpreted. International investors know that they are not

so close to information as local investors are. Because of asymmetric information, they

are willing to pay less for the same assets.




       The empirical part of Section III provided support for the asymmetric

expectations hypothesis. It gives as well empirical foundation to our explanation of

country tid     discounts. The most simple and immediate proof of heterogeneous

expectations is in Figures 1-3, which show that NAVS fell first or faster relative to prices

right before the devaluation.      Granger-causality    tests,   a   SWAR     confirm that

observation more generally.




                                         .     27   -
       Several extensions of this work are desirable. First, the results could be enriched

by a larger data   set covering   more countries, as   well as higher   frequency   data,   if the data

can be obtained. Second, there is a need for valid instrumental variables to cope with

potential endogeneity. Third, a theoretical model needs to be constructed to flesh out

some of the ideas expressed in this paper.




                                                28     -
References


Akerlof, George, 1970, “The Market for Lemons: Quality Uncertainty and the Market
       Mechanism,” Quarterly Journal o/Economics 89:488-500.


Banerjee, Anindya, Juan Dolado, John W. Galbraith, and David F. Hendry, 1994, ~
                      or-Correctlo~    the F.conometnc &vsls     of Non-Statl_
       m,    Oxford University Press.


Burki, Shahid Javed and Sebastian Edwards, 1995, “Latin America Afier Mexico:
       Quickening the Pace,” unpublished manuscript, me World Bank, August.


Calve, Guillermo, Leonardo Leiderman and Carmen Reinhart, 1993, “Capital Inflows
       and Real Exchange Rate Appreciation in Latin America: the Role of External
       Factors,” lMF SlaflPapers, 40 (l), 108-150.


Calve, Sara and Carmen Reinhart, 1995, “Capital Flows to Latin America: Is There
       Evidence of Contagion Effects?,” unpublished manuscript, The World Bank -
       International Monetary Fund.


Chuhan, Punam, Stijn Claessens, and Nlandu Marningi, 1994, “Equity and Bond Flows to
      Latin America and Asia: the Role of Global and Country,” unpublished
      manuscript, The World Bank.


De Long, J. Bradford, Andrei Shleiffer, Lawrence H. Summers, and Robert Waldmm,
      1990, “Noise Trader Risk in Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy,
      Vol. 98, no.4, pp. 703-738.


Diwan, Ishac, Vihang E~,     and Lemma Senbet, 1993, “Country Funds For Emerging
      Economies,” in Stijn Claenssens and Sudarshan Gooptu (eds.) Portfolio
                    DeveloDinp~          7 Washington: The World Bank.


Diwan, Ishac, Vihang E~       and Lemma Senbet, 1994, “Diversification benefits of
       country tids,” in ~~~s                        , Euromoney Books and The
       World Bank.




                                          29   -
Dooley, Michael, Eduardo Femandez-Arias and Kenneth Kletzer, 1994, “Recent Private
       Capital Inflows to Developing Countries: Is the Debt Crisis History?,” National
      Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4792, .Jtiy.


Errunza, Vihang R., 1991, “Pricing of National Index Funds”, Review of Quantitative
       Finance and Accounting, pp. 91-100.


Femandez-Arias, Eduardo, 1994, “The New Wave of Private Capital Inflows: Push or
      Pall?,” Poliq Research Working Paper 1312, Debt and International Finance
      Division, International Economics Department, me World Bank, June.


                                                          .    .
Frardcel, Jefiey A,, 1994a, “Introduction” to The Intematlonallyat ion of F,auitv Markets 9
       the University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1994.


Frankel, Jefiey A., 1994b, “Sterilization of Money Ifiows: Difficult (Calve) or Easy
       (Reisen)?” in ~         de CapUes y Rstabiliyacion en America J,atina, edited
       by Roberto Steiner, Fedesarrollo, Bogota, pp. 241-267.


French, Kenneth and James Poterba, 1991, “Investor Diversification and International
       Equity Markets,” American Economic Review. Papers and Proceedings, May.


Goldfajn, Ilan, and Rodrigo O. Vald4s, 1995, “Balance of Payment Crises and Capital
       Flows: The Role of Liquidity,” unpublished manuscript, Massachusetts Insti[ute
       of Technolo~.


Hardouvelis, Gikas A., Rafael La Po@ and Thierry A. Wiman, 1994, “What Moves the
      Discount on Country Equity Funds?,” National Bureau ofEconomic Research
                                                         .  . .
      Working Paper 4571, in J. Frankel, cd., ~tlon               of Ea@
      -,        the Universi@ of Chicago Press, Chicago.


International Monetary Fund, 1995, ~1              Capital Markets, Develonme&
                      Po~         , August.


Kramer, Charles, and R. Todd Smith, 1995, “Recent Turmoil in Emerging Markets and
      the Behavior of Country-Fred Discounts: Removing the Puzzle of the Pricing of


                                            30 -
       Closed-End Mutual Funds,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 95/68,
       July.


Lee, Charles, M.C., Andrei Slileiffer, and Richard Thaler, 1990, “Anomalies. Closed-End
       Mutual Funds,” Journal ofeconomic Perspectives, Vol. 4, No. 4, Fall, pp. 153-
       164.


                  , 1991, “Investor Sentiment and the Closed-end Fund Puzzle,”
       Journal ofFinance, Vol. 46, No.1, pp. 75-109.


Myers, S. And N. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When
       Fires Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal ofFinancial
       Economics, pp. 187-221.


Schadler, Susan, Maria Carkovic, Adarn Bennett and Robert Kahn, 1993, “Recent
       Experiences with Surges in Capital Inflows”, Occasional Paper 108, International
       Monetary Fund.


Schmukler, Sergio, 1996, “Country Funds and Asymmetric Information,” unpublished
      manuscript, University of Call~ornia at Berhley.


Schmukler, Sergio and Jeffrey Frankel, 1996, “Crisis, Contagion, and Country Funds,”
      unpublished manuscript, Universi& of Calz~orniaat Berkeley.


Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, 1993, “A Simple Estimator of Cointegrating.
        Vectors in Higher Order Integrated Systems,” Econometrics 61:783-820.


Vanguard Group, 1995, Plain Talk, “About Investing in Emerging Markets,” bulletin.




                                      .   31   -
Appendixl:       Closed-end      Country Funds

         The three closed-end funds used are:

                           Emerging Mexico Fund (MEF)
                           Mexico Equity & Income (MXE)
                           Mexican Fund (MXF)

        Net Asset Values (NAVS) are calculated at the local market close in U.S. dollars.
Prices are recorded on the day the NAVS were calculated, usually Fridays.




Appendix 2: Description          of Variables and Data14

Country-Funds data have been provided kindly by R. Todd Smith of the International
Monetary Fund, Research Department and by Don Cassidy of Lipper Analytical Services.
Exchange rate data and Treasury bill rates data have been obtained from Data Stream.
The data have weekly frequency and go from 1/5/90 to 3/8/96.

Variables:

- mefiavl, me@ricel, mefdisc, mxenavl, mxepricel, mxedisc, mxfiavl, mx~ricel, mxfdisc:
Correspond to the Mexican country funds described in Appendix 1. For each country
f.md, its NAV, price and discount are available. NAVS and prices are all expressed in
logarithms, while discounts are differences of logarithms.

- dpolstab: Qualitative variable that reflects political stability in Mexico. Contains 1s when
President Zedillo was elected and when the NAFTA agreement was approved. Contains -
1s when disturbing political events arose in Mexico, i.e. in Colosio and Ruiz-Massieu
assassinations, under the Chiapas uprising and when the peso devalued. Contains 0s
otherwise.

- damexdev: 1s a dummy variable, with 1 for the six months after the Mexican devaluation
and O otherwise.

- mexerl: Mexican exchange rate in logarithms. Equals the log of the amount of dollars
per peso.

- tbilllml: One-month Treasury bill rate in logarithms.



‘4 All the modelthave   been estimated   using the statistical   packages   Econometric   Views and TSP.
                       .-
                    .
                  .,
                     .
                      ,
                     .
                    ,

           ,,
            .
              .
              ,
          ,
         .




                           .
                               .




                          .
                      ‘.
                                   ,
                               .
                           .
                      ,
                  ,
           .“




    .’
,




                                                   n   m




                           .




                                       0   0   0       0
                                                       N
,   r
                                                                                    —




                                                                                    L




  -.##
I
,.
1.
     ,’


~    ;:

1

I



                                        .
                                       .
1,                                         .

                                                   .
                                       .

                          ,
                      .
                  ,

              ,


I                 ‘.
                              -.
I
                                   ,
1
                          -.                   .
1                                                                   ,
                                                       ,
                          ?                    ,




I         .



I




              .
                  .



                                                           ,


                                                            ,
                                                           ,
                                                       .
                                                                .
                                                                        .
                                                                            .

                                                                                .
                                                            .’

I                                              .,
                            Figure 4: Mexican prices and NAVS




                                                      New York CiV:




Mexicoci~:



drnxenav




   ~       Prob. of accepting < 5%, difference in probabilities of at least 50 percentage points.
   -b      Prob. of accepting< 5%, difference in probabilities between 10 and 50 percentage points.
                                                                      Table 1:
                                                           Unit Root los~ 0ssMoxlsan CossntsyFunds
                                                           sampleP-:     I/m - 3/6/e6

s) Unit Root Tesm for Mexlcsn NAVS snd Prices.                                   b) Unit Root 1ss8 for Mexlcsn Dlscoun3a.

MEFNAVL:                             T-Stat    P-value      Num,lag              MEFDISCL:                         T-Stat    P-value Num.lags
(3W*.)                VAd.Sym.         -1.97      0,67            3              (23a*,)              Wt(lsym.      -2.47        0.31       7
                      Dtiey-F          -2.07      0.57            3                                   Dicksy-F       -2.23       0.47       7
                      Phillips        -6.22       0,73            3                                   Phillips     -32.%       -0,00        7

WENA VL:                             T-Stat    P-value      Num.lag              ~EDISCL:                          T-Stat    P-value Num legs
(23sOhs)              Wd.Sym.         -1.97       0.67            3              (22s*.)              Md.Sym.       -2.50       0.29        3
                      Dickey-F        -2.07       0.57            3                                   Dickey-F      -2.27       0.45        3
                      Phillips        -6,22       0.73            3                                   Phillips     -18,46       0.10        3

h4XFNAVL:                            T-Stat    P-value                           MXFDISCL:                         T-Slat    P-value Num.lags
(31Sob )              Wtd.Sym.        -1,65       0.64            4              (313*.)              Md.Sym.        -2.62      0.23        6
                      Ditiev-F        -1.64       0.69            4                                   Dickey-F       -3.11      0.10        6
                                       -5.21      0.61            4                                   Phillips     49.6E       Woo          6

MEFPRICEL:                           T-W       P-value      Num.lag              The follAng   Usrw gmupe control for the
(22sok.)              WdS~.            -0.98      0.s6            2              ●xogenous vaflables DAM~C3EV and DPOLSTA13.
                      Dickey-F         -1.60      0,79            2
                      Phillips         4.24       0,87            2              MEFDISCL:                         T-stat    P-value Num,lags
                                                                                 (23soh.)            VsldS~.         -3.23      “0.04       7
WEPRJCEL:                            T-Stal    P-value      Num.lag                                  Dtiey-F         -3.15       0.09       7
(22sOh.)              Wd.Sym.          -1.33      0.93            2                                  PhilliDs      -67.18 .1 .45D-08        7
                      Dickey-F         -1.05      0.s4            2
                      Phillips        -3.33       0.92            2              WEDISCL:                          T-Slat    P-value Num.lags
                                                                                 m Ohs.)             W.ld.Sym.       -3,43      “0.02       3
WFPR/CEL:                            T-Slat    P-value      Num.lag                                  Dickev-F        -3,26       0.07       3
(313ohs.)             Md.S~.          -1,37       0.92            2                                  Phillips      43.57       -0.00        3
                      Dickey-F        -1.35       0.67            2
                      Phillips        4.89        0.s3            2              ~FD/SCL:                          T-Slat    P-value Num.lags
                                                                                 (313Ohs)             MdS~.          -3.09       0.07       6
                                                                                                      DMey-F        -3.60       “0.02       6
                                                                                                      Phillips     -77.57 .1 .45D-07        6

Unil Root Tssts Consist M Weightad SymMc,      Augmented Dickey-Fulksrand Phillip-Perron Tests

NAVS: U.S. dollar price of underlyingtintry fund assets.
Pdce: U.S.dollar priedof countryfund in Nsw York City.
Discounf: ln(NAVp*).

“(-) Denotes rajsctiis of tie hypothesisal 5% (l%) sign~nca      level
                               Table 2:


Cointegration   Tests Betien      Mexican    Fund Prices and NAVS
Semple Period: 115/90-318196
Dependent   variable:   MEFPRICEL


Eng/a-Granger   (tau)tests                Johansen (trace) tests
Num leg 0pt:8                             Num lag 0pt:2
alphs       0.91                          Eigvall     0.03
TestStst   -2.21                          Eigva12     0.00
P-value     0.42                          HO:r=O      8.12
Const       0.34                          P-val-      0.61
t(Const)    8.83                          HO:rc=l     0.59
Num ob 227.00                             P-val-      0.74
LogLike 360.53                            Num ob 233,00
AIC        -3.10                          LogLike 733,90
Var res     0.00                          AIC        -6.18

Coirrtegrating vecf MEFPRI MEFNAVL
                             1 -0.9477


Dependent   variable:   MXEPRICEL


Eng/e-Grarrger (tau) tests                Johansen (trace) tests
Num lag 0pt:5                             Num     Opl:l
alpha       0.97                          Eigvall     0,02
TestStat   -1.45                          Eigva12     0.01
P-value     0.78                          HO:I=O      7,37
Const       1.46                          P-val-      0.68
t(Const)  21.36                           HO:r<=l     1.89
Num ob 230.00                             P-val-      0.58
LogLike 390.41                            Num      234.00
AIC        -3.34                          LogLike 762.20
Var res     0.00                          AIC        -6.43

Cointegretingvect MXEPRI MXENAVL
                      1 -0.5868


Dependent   variable:   MXFPRICEL


Engle-Gmrrger (tau) tests                 Johansen (trace) tests
Num lag 0pt:6                             Num     opt2
alpha       0.91                          Eigvall     0.06
TestStat   -2.58                          Eigva12     0.01
P-value     0.25                          HO:-O      22.02
Const       0.16                          P-val-    -0.01
t(Const)    3.94                          HO:r<=l     3.90
Num ob 306.00                             P-val-      0.30
LogLike 527.15                            Num      310.00
AIC        -3.40                          LogLike 1054,7
Var res     0.00                          AIC        -6.71

Coinfegrating vect MXFPRI MXFNAVL
                             1 -0.9906

“(*) Denotes rejectionsof the hypothesisat 5% (1%) signitican~ level
.-




                                                   Table 3:
         Tests of HO: Cointegrsting               Vector between       Prices and NAVS = [1, -1]   ●


                                          Sample Pariod: 1/5[90 - 3/8/96


     Equation 1: MEFPRICEL

                                   Coefficient T-statistic                       Corrected T-statistic
     c                                0.28         6.85                          Ho: coeff, of MEFNAVL = 1
     MEFNAVL                          0.90        61.35                          T(Stock-Watson) =      -1.58
     DMEFNAVL(+2)                    -0.07        -0.55
     DMEFNAVL(+l)                     0.10         0.74
     DMEFNAVL                        -0.05        -0.36
     DMEFNAVL(-1 )                   -0.14        -1.07
     DMEFNAVL(-2)                    -0.07        -0.51

     Number of observations:            216
     Adjusted R-squared                0.95         Std. error of regressio          0.09



     Eauation 2: MXEPRICEL

                                   Coefficient T-statistic
     c                                1.43        19.03                          Corrected T-statistic
     MXENAVL                          0.48        17.73                          Ho: coeff. of MXENAVL = 1
     DMXENAVL(+2)                    -0.41        -1,68                          T(Stock-Watson) =      -2.27
     DMXENAVL(+l )                   -0.39        -1.52
     DMXENAVL                        -0.13        -0.52
     DMXENAVL(-1)                    -0.10        -0.42
     DMXENAVL(-2)                     0.04         0.15

     Number of observations:             216
     Adjusted R-squared                 0.95        Std. error of regressio          0.09



      Eauation 3: MXFPRICEL

                                   Coefficient T-statistic
     c                                0.11         2.55                          Corrected T-statistic
     MXFNAVL                          0.95        65.50                          Ho: coeff. of MXFNAVL = 1
     DMXFNAVL(+2)                    -0.10        -0.97                          T(Stock-Watson) =      -0.91
     DMXFNAVL(+l)                     0.17         1.65
     DMXFNAVL                        -0.09        -0.87
     DMXFNAVL(-1)                    -0.22        -2.23
     DMXFNAVL(-2)                    -0,23        -2.28

     Number of obsewations:              270
     Adjusted R-squared                 0.94        Std. error of regressio.         0.08

     “ The mrrected T-slatisti=   are alculatad   in a semnd stage, using the adjustment
     suggested, among othars, by Stock and Wataon(l 993).
     Tha corradad T-slatistic should be mmparad tih       the critiml values from a N(O,1).
                                                            Table 4:
                                               Error Corractlon Modol for Moxlcan Fund Prlcos
                                               Eaflmati by bmtlvo Soarnlngly Unmlatad Ragraaalon

                                                        E~la-mnger     Two SWp Estimator.
                                                        Sample Pariod: 1/5/60 - 3/6/S6

~                                                                 S-rid   Sien:

                     C-ficianl   T-Statistic                                                    Ctitciant   T-Statistic

c(1)                     0.23       7.17                          c(1)                             0.00       4.32
MEFNAVL                  0.s1      77.73                          RESID1(-1)                       4.15       4.66
C(n)                     0.21       3.66                          D(MEFPRICEL(-l))(EQ, 1)          -0.25      -4.04
MXENAVL                  0.92      44s6                           D(MEFPRICEL(-2))(EQ. 1)          4,17       -2.62
C(21)                    0.16       4.40                          D(MEFNAVL(-l))(EQ, 1)             0.33       4.21
MXFNAVL                  0.99      78.66                          D(MEFNAVL(-2))(EQ, 1)             0.22       2.77
                                                                  C(n)                              0.00       0.32
                                                                  D(MXEPRICEL(-l))(EQ.2)           -0.16      -2.62
Equatii   1: MEFPRICEL                                            D(MXEPRICEL(-2))(EQ.2)           -0.02      -0.30
ObSONatDnS:               237    S.E. of regression        0.10   D(MXENAVL(-l))(EQ.2)              0.36       3,e5
Adjusted R-squared       0.s41   Durbin-Wafeonalaf         0.29   O(MXENAVL(-2))(EQ.2)              0.05       0.59
                                                                  C(21)                             0.00       0,32
                                                                  D(MXFPRICEL(-l))( EQ.3)          -0.06      -1.22
Equation 2: MXEPRICEL                                             D(MXFPRICEL(-2)) (EQ.3)          -0,02      -0.32
Obsewations:          234        S.E. of regression        0.11   D(MXFNAVL(-I))( EQ.3)             0.07       0,97
Adjusted R-squared    0.34       Durbin-WaIeon ataf        0.18   D(MXFNAVL(-2))( EQ.3)             0.15       2,25

                                                                  Equatii 1: D(MEFPRICEL)
Equation 3: MXFPRICEL                                             Obaarvatiorss:        22B     SE, of ~ression           0.06
Obsewalions:          314        S.E. of regraasion        0.06   Adjusfad R-equarad    0.05    Durbin-WafsM stat         1.75
Adjuslad R-squared    0.s4       Dutiln-Watson stat        0.35
                                                                  Equatii 2: D(MXEPRICEL)
                                                                  Obsarvatiis:          221     S.E. of regression        0.06
                                                                  AdJuafadR-aquti       0,10    Durbin-Wafaonstat         2.02

                                                                  Equ*i    3: D(MXFPRICEL)
                                                                  Obaarvaliis:           264    S.E. of rauraeaion        0.06
                                                                  AdJuHadR-equalW        0,04   Durbln-Waiw m             1.B5
                                                      Table 5:
                                 Error Corractlon Mdel for Mexlcen Fund ~coun~
                                 Estimated by ltamUve Saamlngly UnralateU R~reeelon

                                            Engla.Gmnger Two Wp Estimator
                                            Sempla Pm:   l/6/co- 3/6/s6

                                                                         Wnd     Stan!

Esfimahn Mew:    Saamin@y Unrelated Ragrwssion                           Eaiimation Mew:   .saeminglyUnrelalad Ragm=ion

                       C~l       T-S~k                                                         CWtienl   T-StatisIic
c(1)                      2.55      5,16                                 c(1)                     0.40      1.30
DM=ERL(EQ.1)             39.06       1.91                                RESID1(-1)              4.21      -5.25
DAMEXDEV                -21.76     -18,46                                D(MEFDISCL(-1))         -0.20     4.4.9
C(n)                      3.64       7,52                                D(MEFDISCL(-2))         -0,19     -3.26
DMEXERL(EQ.2)           -23.77      -1.16                                D(MEXERL(-l))(EQ.1)    ~.2B       -5,26
C(21)                     7.79     21.13                                 D(MEXERL(-2))(EQ,1)    -12.67     4.64
DMEXERL(EQ.3)             1.59      0.06                                 C(n)                     0.11      0.36
                                                                         RESID2(-1 )             4.13      -3.35
                                                                         D(MXEDISCL(-1))         -0.26     -3.66
Equal-m 1: MEFDISCL                                                      D(MXEDISCL(-2))         -0.06     -o.ee
Observations:            237     S.E. d regression      7.74             D(MEXERL(-l))(EQ.2)    -16,51     -1,39
AdjuSad R-squarad        0,53    Durbin-WsrlsonSSSI     0.51             D(MEXERL(-2))(EQ.2)     -9.00     -0,77
                                                                         C(21)                    0.10      0.40
Equ~rn 2: MXEDISCL                                                       RESID3(-1)              4.22      -5.s3
Obsenrelions-            2U      S.E. d regression      7.s4             D(MXFDISCL(-1))         4.20      -3.s
Adjusted R-squared       0.51    Durbin-Welaon slel     0.42             D(MXFDISCL(-2))         -0.02     -0.35
                                                                         D(MUERL(-l))(EQ.3)     -19.57     -1.69
Equtiion 3: MXFDISCL                                                     D(MEXERL(-2))(EQ,3)     3.20      0.20
Obsetims:                314     SE. d ~rSSSiOll        6.59
Adju.sradR-squared       0.37    Durbin-W~son ~         0s6              Equmion 1: D(MEFDISCL)
                                                                         ObaawWlons:            225      SE. of ragreashn       4,67
                                                                         Adjuaied R-squared     0.23     DurbtiWataon atsi      1,69

                                                                         Equelion 2: D(MXEDISCL)
                                                                         ObseNtilons:            216     S.E. M regression      4,60
                                                                         Adjualad R-squared      0.11    DurbiwWatson slat      1.99

                                                                         Equetti 3: D(MXFDISCL)
                                                                         Obaawmions:            266      S.E. d regression    4.42717
                                                                         AdjusSadR-squared      0.16     Durbln-Welaon alal   2.027926
              Table 6: Pairwise Granger Causality Tests
Between First Difference of Mexican Fund Prices and NAVS (2 lags)
                         Sample Period: 1/5/90 - 3/8/96


Null Hypothesis                                           Obs   F-St.   Prob.


DMXEPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMEFNAVL         225   0.12    0.89
DMEFNAVL     does not Granger Cause DMXEPRICEL                  11,13   0.00


DMXEPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMEFPRICE        281   0.20    0.82
DMEFPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXEPRICEL             17.42   0.00


DMXFPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMEFPRICE        281   4.88    0.01
DMEFPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXFPRICEL             0.75    0.47


DMXEPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXENAVL         216   0.38    0.69
DMXENAVL     does not Granger Cause DMXEPRICEL                  11.71   0.00


DMXFNAVL     does not Granger Cause DMXENAVL              186   7.99    0.00
DMXENAVL     does not Granger Cause DMXFNAVL                    1.94    0,15


DMXFNAVL     does not Granger Cause DMXEPRICEL            254   14.52   0.00
DMXEPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXFNAVL               1.53    0.22


DMXFPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXEPRICE        288   17,70   0.00
DMXEPRICEL        does not Granger Cause DMXFPRICEL             1.85    0,16
                       Table 7:
Iterative Seemingly          Unrelated Regression
Convergence       achieved      after   6 iterations
Sample      Period: 1/5/90 - 3/8/96

                       Coefficient      T-Statistic


C(EQ.1)                      0.00           0.03
C(EQ.2)                      0.00           0.49
C(EQ.3)                      0.00           0.47
DMEFNAVL                     0.34           2.83
DMXENAVL                     0.19           1.64
DMXFNAVL                     0.35           3,83
DMEXERL                      0.32           2,35
DTBILLIML                    -0.04         -1.22
DPOLSTAB                     0.03           2,32
DMEFPRICEL(-1)               0.14           2.05
DMXEPRICEL(-1)               -0.17         -2.51
DMXFPRICEL(-1)               -0.14         -1.84
DMEFPRICEL(-2)               0,00           0.04
DMXEPRICEL(-2)               -0.06         -0.93
DMXFPRICEL(-2)               0,05           0.67


Equation 1:     DMEFPRICEL
Observations:                205        S.E, of regression       0.05
Adjusted R-squared           0.28       Durbin-Watson    stat    2,29



Equation 2: DMXEPRICEL
Observations:                205        S. E. of regression      0,04
Adjusted R-squared           0.49       Durbin-Watson    stat    1.95



Equation 3: DMXFNAVL
Obsemations:                 205        S.E. of regression       0.05
Adjusted   R-squared         0.37       Durbin-Watson     stat   2.16
