                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE RESPONSE OF WAGES AND
                            ACTUAL HOURS WORKED TO THE
                           REDUCTIONS OF STANDARD HOURS




                                          Jennifer Hunt




                                       Working Paper 5716



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1996


I thank Alison Booth, Michael Burda, Dan Hamerrnesh, Ed Lazear and Anne Beeson Royalty for
detailed comments, and seminar participants at the Deutsches Institut fur Wirtschaftsforschung, the
Hoover Institution at Stanford, the Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin and McMaster University
(Conference on Employment Protection) for suggestions. Reinhard Bispinck provided me with
essential information, and Tomas Rauberger was invaluable in setting up the data. This work was
carried out while I was a National Fellow at the Hoover Institution. This paper is part of NBER’s
research program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Jennifer Hunt. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including @ notice, is given to
the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5716
                                                                                    August 1996


                              THE RESPONSE OF WAGES AND
                             ACTUAL HOURS WORKED TO THE
                            REDUCTIONS OF STANDARD HOURS


                                            ABSTRACT


       A transformation of what had become a universal 40 hour standard work week in Germany

began in 1985 with reductions negotiated in the metal-working and printing sectors.            These

reductions have continued through 1995, and were followed by reductions in other sectors. The

union campaign aimed to increase employment through “work-sharing,” and is being emulated in

the United States with the launch of a reduced hours campaign by the AFL-CIO. Using data from

the German Socio-Economic Panel, I find that increased overtime or reduced short time was little

used to offset the reduction in standard hours: a one hour reduction in standard hours appears to have

translated into a reduction in actual hours worked of between 0.85 and 1 hour for workers in

manufacturing. One might expect this to have resulted in a loss of earnings for workers in affected

industries. However, I substantiate the union claim of “full wage compensation”: reductions in

standard hours were accompanied by a relative rise in the hourly straight-time wage of 2-3% for each

hour fall in standard hours, enough to keep monthly earnings the same as in unaffected industries.



Jennifer Hunt
Department of Economics
Yale University
PO Box 208264 Yale Station
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
hunt @econ.yale.edu
         From 1 April 1985 week~ working time was reduced to 38.5 hurs w“thfill wage
         compensation. ~..] In 1987 the metalworking and printing industries were paw to new
         agreemems which reduced working time in two stages to 37 hours a week, wi”thfill wage
         compens~-on. [...]

         In the event, ttid    to the economic upw”ng thut started in 1984, it was the wage
         restraints inco~orated in the agreements that proved to be the more important
         concession.
         Gerhard Bosch, German Confederation of Trade Unions (1990)


         Many pple     believe that a reduction in hours worked per person would lead (or has led)

to increased employment.      Whether “work-sharing” is effective at a given wage is, however,

thwretically ambiguous, and in addition to the scale eff=t, depends upon substitution eff~ts

betw=n      workers and other factors of production.    In the United States the AFL-CIO has

launched a campaign for a four-day 32-hour week, while reducd         standard hours are also the

preferred route to shorter actual hours in Europe. Yet with overtime a possibility, a reduction

in the standard work week may lead to a less than one for one reduction in actual hours per

week.    Hence, the link between standard and actual hours is a key one for work-sharing.

Furthermore, the response of wages to reductions in actual hours is critical. If the reduction in

hours brings workers closer to their optimal hours, theory suggests they maybe prepared to take

a cut in hourly wages. In the European setting, however, unions have typically demanded an

increase in hourly wages to compensate the lost hours, which would appear to make increases

in employment less likely.

         Standard hours were greatly reduced in (West) Germany beginning in 1985.           These

rductions    were initiated by trade unions, unlike in countries such as France, where reductions

were mandated by the government.        There appears to be a consensus that the reductions in

standard hours translated approximately one for one into reductions in actual hours, although this


                                                 1




                                                                                   !
                                                                                   .,
has not been examined using micro-data.      There is less consensus on the response of wages,

however.   On the one hand, unions claim to have achieved standard hours reduction with “full

wage compensation”, that is, no reduction in monthly pay, which suggests that hourly wages

may have risen in affwted industries relative to those with no standard hours reductions.       On

the other hand, observers including union observers suggest that standard hours reductions

caused “wage restraint”.    T’hese two possibilities may be reconciled if the hourly wage raises

workers in the affected industries would have received in the absence of standard hours

reductions were higher than the raise nded     merely to compensate the lost hours. In this case,

hourly wages could rise, but likely by less than in other industries.

       Using data from the German Socio-Economic Panel for the period 1984-1989, I establish

that for Arbeiter (workers paid hourly) in manufacturing, actual hours fell by 0.85-1 hour in

response to a one hour fall in standard hours. Evidence for services and Angestellten (salaried

employees) is more difficult to analyze. At least for one class of workers there is thus indeed

a large loss in hours to be compensated. I then examine wages, and find that workers in sectors

achieving reductions in standard hours bargtined sufficient increases in the straight-time hourly

wage that their monthly pay did not fall relative to other workers. These results are inconsistent

with the hypothesis that standard hours reductions caused wage restraint.



Hours Reductiom in Germany

       Unions in Germany bargain at the industry level, and conditions of union contracts apply

not only to members, but to almost all other workers as well, Annual hours may be rduced

either by increasing holiday time or by reducing standard w~kly hours. By 1975 the prevailing
conditions were 40 hours per week and 30 days annual leave, and by 1981 95% of workers had

a standard working week of 40 hours 1. The metal workers’ union, IG MeMl, which along with

the printing union IG Druck had spearheaded earlier reductions in w=kly             hours, struck

unsuccessfully in 1978-9 to reduce standard w=kly hours below 40. Other unions, such as IG

Chemie, the chemical union, focused on reducing life-time hours by reducing the retirement age.

IG Metall resumd its demands in 1982-3, and was su-sful          after a protracted strike in early

1984. The d~lared     aim of the hours reductions was a reduction in unemployment through

work-sharing. Hours in the metal-working =tor       (employing almost four million workers) were

reduced to 38.5 in 1985.

       A key element of the agreement, upon which agr=ments in many other sectors were

modelled, was the concession to employers of greater flexibility in the use of standard hours.

In particular, standard hours no longer had to be spread evenly over each day of the week, and

could in fact vary from week to week as long as they averaged to the agreed number over a

certain number of months. Also, standard hours could vary across employees as long as they

averaged to the agreed number. It is important to note that the implementation of flexibility is

a matter to be negotiated at the plant level between the management and the works muncil, and

surveys have found that the majority of plants, particularly small plants, have not taken

advantage of the flexibility provisions (Bosch et. al. 1988).

       A further issue to be resolved by management and works councils is the method of

implementation of the reduced standard w=k.         Some firms reduced hours on Thursdays and

Fridays, some reduced the hours of each w=kday by an equal amount, while others redud

hours by awarding workers days off.       Bosch (1990) reports that, initially, capital-intensive



                                                3
industries preferred days off, while labor intensive industries reduced weekly or daily hours.

As the standard work week fell further, however, the number of days off to be allocati   became

too great to be efficient, and the move to a reduction in daily hours (or a mixture of reduction

in hours and days off) became more generalized.

        Finally, certain union agreements recommended caps on overtime (or the compensation

of some overtime with days off) to prevent the substitution of overtime hours for standard hours.

This is again something to be implemented at the plant level by the works muncil and

management, and is obviously potentially important for work-sharing.

        The agreement in the metal-working =tor        and the simultanmus agreement in the

printing s=tor were followd by more and more manufacturing and servim industries over the

subsequent years.     IG Metall itself in two later agr=ments      negotiated further step-wise

reductions in standard hours, which have recently culminated (October 1995) in the 35-hour

week.     IG Metil   has announced that it seeks further reductions.    Average standard hours

worked fell from 40.0 in 1984 to 38.8 in 1989 to 37.7 in 1994 (IAB 1995). In 1990 actual

annual hours per worker were 10% lower in Germany than in the U.S. (Bell and Fr&man

1995).2

        The agreements reached concerning standard hours often extend over a period of several

years, involving step-wise falls in hours, while wages typically continue to be renegotiated each

year.   An important question is how the wages negotiated were influenced by standard hours

reductions and flexibility concessions.    In most cases the unions announcd       that hey had

achieved their aim of “full wage compensation”, meaning that w=kly or monthly earnings

(without overtime) were not reduced despite the hours rductions     (which implies a rise in the



                                                4
hourly straight-time wage).       It is not clear how to measure the success of “full wage

compensation”, however.     At a minimum it presumably means that nominal monthly earnings

did not fall (and inflation was low in the 1980s). Real wages were rising steadily, however, and

monthly earnings, and hence possibly hourly wages, might have fallen relative to those in ~tors

without falls in standard hours.     Lehment (1991) notes that the period of standard hours

reductions in the 1980s was a period of wage restraint (defined as the gap between nominal GDP

growth and nominal wage growth) at the aggregate level, and notes that the standard hours

reductions may have permitted this restraint. Stille and Zwiener (1988) believe basal on earlier

trends that monthly pay in industries reducing hours rose more slowly than would have othenvise

been the case, but do not make a pronouncement regarding hourly wages.



~eory

        Consider a firm taking standard hours (~, hourly wages (w) and the rental rate of capital

(r) as given, and choosing actual hours (h), employment ~      and capital (K) in the presen~ of

fixed costs of employment (f), and an overtime premium (p):


                           =hJJ     g(hfln   - wW-fl-~h-hJN-       rK                        (1)


Assume that this firm chooses non-zero overtime hours (h> ~.        Consider now an exogenous

reduction in standard hours, which due to the overtime premium increases labor costs. There

will be a scale effect, tending to reduce employment and hours per week, and a substitution

eff=t from labor senices to capital.    Substitution between hours and workers is made clwer

by considering the marginal cost of hiring an additional worker (MCN) and the marginal cost of

an additional hour’s work by existing workers (MCJ:


                                                5
                                      MCN - Wh+f+pw(h-h)                                       (7.)
                                                                                               \- ,
                                       MCh - (1+p)wN


Clmly      the marginal cost of additional overtime is unaffected by standard hours (and is

determined only by the wage and the overtime premium), while the marginal mst of an

additional worker is increased when standard hours are redud,        since more of this worker’s

wages must be paid at the overtime premium. Hence, the firm will substitute from workers to

hours, an effect which obviously tends to decrease employment.          Figure la shows the two

marginal cost schedules for original standard hours Lo and reducd standard hours ~1. This case

is that of a firm originally having optimal hours such as h.’. Employment will therefore fall,

and the effect on weekly hours depends upon whether the scale effect and substitution from labor

to capital dominates the substitution from workers to hours.

          Figure la makes clear, however, that the original optimal hours (and the magnitude of

the standard hours reduction) are critical for the response of the firm along the worker-hours

margin.     Consider a firm whose optimal hours are below even the new standard hours, at h!.

If we assume that the law constrains hours to be at least standard hours, this firm will move its

actual hours from the original kink point h: to the new kink point h,l.        MC~ has thus not

changed, while MCN has fallen, and the firm will substitute from hours to workers, the opposite

of the previous case.    The scale effect and the capital-labor substitution effect will work to

increase employment.     The overall effect is that hours will fall, while employment will rise.

        We could extend the analysis to cases permitting firms to work less than standard hours

(since this is possible in Germany, albeit not on a permanent basis). If a firm’s original hours

are below both the new and old standard, as in h.b in Figure la, the fall in standard hours will
not aff~t its behavior.   If its original hours are above the new standard hours, workers-hours

substitution will depend on all the magnitudes involved (while scale and capital-labor substitution

effects will tend to lower employment and hours).

        For the firm with original optimal hours hf, the response to a fall in standard hours is

different if we allow the overtime premium to be a positive function of the number of overtime

hours. Many German industry contracts specify a 25 % premium for the first ten overtime hours           ,

per week or two overtime hours per day, and a higher premium thereafter.               If the fall in

standard hours means the firm’s current hours are now in the higher premium mne, as in Figure

lb, the MC~ may rise more than the MCN, and the firm will substitute from hours to workers.

The net effmt on employment will be ambiguous, and hours will fall.3

        These cases make clear that if employment is to rise, there must be a large substitution

from hours to workers.     The finding that actual hours fall a lot is a nwessary condition for

work-sharing to be effective, but it is not a sufficient condition, since actual hours may be falling

due to the scale effect or substitution to capital. Substitution from hours to workers is more

likely the closer substitutes hours per week and workers are in production.4 It is also more

likely if many firms’ optimal hours are below standard hours and they cannot use short-time to

avoid being constined     to work standard hours.      This suggests that the timing of the hours

reduction in the business cycle could be important: standard hours rductions       at business cycle

troughs when optimal hours may be low compared to standard hours are more likely to lead to

increased employment (or possibly stable employment if there are hoarded workers) and reduced

actual hours.




                                                 7
        It is important to consider that other parameters might change in response to the reduction

in standard hours. The overt concession in exchange for shorter standard hours on the part of

German unions was the introduction of greater flexibility. Presumably flexibility has a positive

scale effect, but it may be complementary with capital, and its effect on the trade-off between

workers and hours must be examined in a more complex model.

        Another consideration important for Germany is that the hourly (straight-time) wage

bargained may have been influenced by the standard hours reductions.       Calmfors (1985), Heel

(1987) and Houpis (1993) endogenize the wage in a model of work-sharing with a monopoly

union. If the rduction   in hours brings hours closer to the workers’ optimum, the value of the

additional leisure may allow the wage to fall, although the result is ambiguous. (Forces working

to raise the hourly wage include the fact that lower monthly income reduces the disutility of

unemployment.)     A wage decrease would cause a substitution from workers to hours due to the

fixed cost of hiring a worker. 5      The net effect on hours is therefore positive, and on

employment is ambiguous, although we would usually ex~t          the scale effmt and substitution

from capital to predominate and raise employment. We have seen, however, that the German

union claim to have accomplished full wage compensation suggests a rise in the straight-time

hourly wage.

       Finally, it is possible that individuals are more productive when they work fewer hours.

bwer    actual hours thus induce capital-saving t~hnological progress.    This has an ambiguous

effect on the already ambiguous employment response, but should lead to a larger fall (or lower

rise) in actual hours.
       This section has considered ordy the effects of a rduction      in working hours, not the

causes - for a general analysis of union choice of hours, see Earle and Pencavel (1990). Bell

and Freeman (1995) examine the issue of why Germans want to work less than Americans.



Previom Empirical Work

       A number of papers use aggregate manufacturing times series data to look at the effect

of standard hours on actual hours and employment, including Franz and Konig (1986), who

examine Germany from 1964-84, an =lier       period of reduction in standard hours. They report

that a 1% reduction in standard hours both reduces a worker’s total hours by 0.99% and

increases a worker’s overtime by 0.4%.     Hart and Sharot (1978) and de Regt (1988) find that

a 1% reduction in standard hours rtiuces actual hours by 0.92 % for the UK in the period 1961-

72, and by 0.89 % for the Netherlands in the period 1954-82, respectively (see also Hamermesh

1993). Brunello (1989), examining Japan in the period 1973-86, finds a different result: that

reducing standard hours has essentially no effect on actual hours.      These papers, as well as

Wadhwani (1987) and Faini and Schiantarelli (1985), find that a 1% reduction in standard hours

raises employment by 0.2- 1.0 %.

       Hart (1987) uses pooled data for 25 German industries for 1969-81 and finds that a 1%

reduction in standard hours reduces actual hours (corrected for short time) by 1.2% (significantly

different from one), contrary to theory.      The variation in standard hours in this pooled

specification comes from both the cross-section and time-series.     The only paper to examine

these issues using micro-data is Hart and Wilson (1988), which uses British firm-level data

pooled for the period 1978-82. The drawback of this paper is that the variation in standard



                                                9
hours appears to come in the cross-swtion rather than time-series dimension. They find that a

one hour reduction in standard hours reduces actual hours by 0.77 hours.         Neither of these

papers finds a significant effect of standard hours on employment.

       Stille and Zwiener (1987) attempt to tease out the effects of the 1985 standard hours

reduction in the metal-working swtor by examining aggregate trends in actual hours, overtime,

short time and employment for that sector. They judge that weeldy overtime per person was

about one hour higher in the years following the standard hours reduction of 1.5 hours, and

guess that perhaps half of the increase in overtime was due to the cyclical upswing, and half due

to reductions in standard hours. They believe that the reduction in short time was unaffected

by reductions in standard hours, and influenced only by the business cycle. Their employment

figures imply an elasticity of employment with res~t     to standard hours of about -0.5, which

lies betw~n the elasticities found by the employers’ association and the union.

       Thr=    papers address numerically the question of wages and hours reductions in

Germany. Macro-simulations in Stille (1995) suggest unit labor costs were lower in the period

1982-92 than they would have been in the absence of standard hours reductions. Franz and

Smolny (1994) address this issue (amongst others) in a macro time-series model using quarterly

data for German manufacturing from 1970-1989. They find that in certain industries hourly

wages rose in response to falls in standard hours. Finally, Lehment (1991) finds that, when

wage restraint is controlled for, reductions in standard hours are insignificant in aggregate time

series modelling employment growth for 1973-90.         Manufacturing time series for Sweden

(Holmlund and Pencavel 1988) and Norway (Nymoen 1989) suggest that hourly wages rise when

standard hours fall.



                                               10
        In a paper closely related to mine, Trejo (1991) examines the effat of the mandated

overtime premium in the United States on hours workd and wages. Notice that the effwts of

incrasing   the overtime premium may be cancelled out by rducing      the straight-time wage, so

that the effmt of the overtime premium may appear exclusively in wages. (The quivalent        for

a rduction in standard hours is a reduction in the fwed wst of employ merit.) He finds evidence

that the wage does adjust partially to offset an increase in the overtime premium, but that the

offset is not complete, so that effats appear in other variables such as hours worked.



Data

       The data used are from the German Socio-Economic Panel for the years 1984-1989. The

variables of most interest here are the answers to the questions about hours on the cument job

(after the first survey, the questionnaire spuifies that if the respondent has more than one job,

that s/he should refer to the main job).   The questions asked every year are: “What are your

collwtively bargained weekly work hours without overtime?”, and “What is on average your

actual work time including any overtime ~ours per w~k]?”.6         Some information about the

worker’s firm is known: the industry (35 categories) and firm size (four categories).   Except in

1987, workers were asked about the compensation for overtime: whether they are paid, r~ive

days off, a mixture of the two, or whether they are not compensated (or do not work overtime).

       In 1986,1988 and 1989 the hours questions were followed by the question: “In the last

month: did you work overtime, and if so, how much [hours]?”. Notice that in addition to asking

about monthly rather than weekly hours, this question s~ifically       asks about the previous

month, rather than about what happens on average.



                                               11
       The survey does ask about short-time, and bad weather work interruptions               for

construction workers, but unfortunately only about the number of wwks of short-time or bad

weather compensation receivd     in the previous year. Some respondents rworded actual work

time below standard (agreed) work time, but only a minority of them reported having received

short-time or bad weather compensation in the following year’s survey. The rest may be due

either to measurement error in either the hours variables or in short-time, may refl=t redud

hours due to illness or other cause (despite the fact that the question asks about the average

week), or may indicate uncompensated hours lost due to short-time work.

       The fact that some workers receive their standard hours rduction             or overtime

compensation in the form of days off would not matter if tiey accurately repofied actual hours

from, for example, the survey w=k.      Those workers with their days off in that w=k would

average with those working more than standard hours in that week. Unfortunately, the question

about actual hours refers to an “average” w=k, while the question about “last month” specifies

overtime, rather than actual hours, and will obviously not elicit negative responses.      Since

workers may not think of a w=k with days off as an average week and sin= monthly overtime

cannot be negative, it is possible that both reported actual hours and actual hours calculated as

standard hours plus reported overtime are overestimates.        If the trend is towards more

compensation with days off for those with falling standard hours, my result will be biased

toward finding a shift to overtime and increased actual hours. If the use of days off follows a

more complicate   pattern over time, the effect is unclear. Many firms have introduced flexitime

for Angestellten, who in some cases may choose to work more for a period in order to bank

days off. Similar issues may apply in this case.7



                                               12
        It would be helpful if one could la     from the GSOEP about standard annual hours,

rather than w~kly hours. This would circumvent some of the ambiguity in the response to the

questions about w=kly hours, and is also in a sense more the variable of interest.     However,

there is no good measure of annual standard or actual hours.

        The wage variable usd is earnings on main job in the previous month, without bonuses

(common bonuses are thirteenth month salary, holiday money etc).          The only other wage

information available concerns total monthly earnings in the previous year.

        I wish to focus on full-time workers, and hence drop respondents who said they had less

than 35 standard hours. I also drop workers who said their standard hours were greater than

45, to remove the most obvious outliers (standard hours for all included industries were 40 or

less throughout the sample period).       I drop workers in fishing, agriculture,     or private

households, and the self-employed, for whom standard hours are not well-defined.          I drop

workers agd 55 or over, since during the period under consideration special agr~ments were

reached in some industries to reduce the hours of older workers below those of others in the

same industry or to allow early retirement.   I also drop those doing apprenticeships and those

under age 20, although they could arguably be included.      Finally, I drop those with missing

actual or standard (agrA)   hours, industry, firm size, job type (self-employed, salaried etc) or

ducation.

       Published standard hours by industry are obtained from tables supplied by the WSI

(Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Instituts des Deutschen Gewerkschaftbundes) (Hans-

Bockler-Stiftung   1995). Data on industry-level sales are obtained from the Statistisches

Bundesamt, and are deflated with the producer price index.



                                               13
Hours and Overtime Compensation in the GSOEP Data

       A first chak is made by comparing two measures of overtime from the GSOEP data with

published data for non-self-employed full-time workers (IAB 1994). For the purposes of this

comparison the sample differs from that used in the rest of the paper: only the self-employed,

and those with standard hours below 35 or above 45 are excluded. Figure 2 compares weekly

overtime from the IAB statistics, mean repoti         overtime last month divided by 4.33, and the

mean of actual hours minus standard hours (with negative values changed to zeros). The sample

weights are used in calculating the means. For the thr= years it is available, the measure based

on monthly overtime tallies remarkably well with the publishd data, while the measure basal

on actual hours is higher, and fluctuates differently. (Notice that the flat aggregate overtime plot

masks considerable fluctuations at the industry level.)      This figure suggests that the monthly

overtime figures should be preferred.    A similar exercise may be performed for the measure of

average “undertime” (standard minus actual hours, with negative values changed to zero), and

this average is considerably higher than the sum of published short-time and bad-weather time

(these results are not shown).

       Figure 3 shows the dramatic transformation in standard and actual hours for Arbeiter

(loosely: workers paid hourly) in manufacturing and construction in the sample, between 1984

and 1989. a In 1984 standard hours were almost universally 40 per week, while only about half

still had 40 hours in 1989. Actual hours also have a huge shift down from 40 hours. Figure

4 shows a similar pattern for Angestellten (salaried workers) in manufacturing and construction.

Figures 5 and 6 show that the transformation in semices was less advancd by 1989 than in

manufacturing.



                                                 14
        Figures 7 and 8 show how overtime is compensate        for Arbeiter and Angestellten in

manufacturing/construction    and in services in 1984 and 1989. A large but falling majority of

Arbeiter in manufacturing are (only) paid for overtime, while about only about half of Arbeiter

in services receive compensation exclusively in the form of monetary payment. Only a minority

of Angestellten are only paid, and the proportion fell between 1984 and 1989.

        Figures 9 and 10 show the distribution of overtime as mmured by the difference between

actual and standard weekly hours. 23% of Arbeiter in manufacturing worked overtime in 1984

and 33% in 1989, and slightly lower proportions in services. 4% of Arbeiter in manufacturing

report undertime in 1984, and 3 % in 1989. A very high proportion of Angestellten report

overtime. Figure 11 shows for 1989 overtime as measured by the response to the question about

overtime in the last month. For comparison purposes the variable is divided by 4.33 to obtain

wekly overtime. This measure suggests approximately the same proportions working overtime,

but indicates less overtime per w=k (it is not clear if this was to be expected, given that the

w=kly question asked about the “average” week).

       Such a large proportion of Angestellten get payment in days off that the overtime figures

are likely to be very unreliable, so I emphasize Arbeiter in my hours analysis. I retain Arbeiter

in services, even though almost half of those doing overtime rweive some compensation in the

form of days off. Notice that even though a small proportion of Arbeiter in manufacturing are

compensated for overtime with days off, the proportion is rising, which will introduce a bias

towards finding a shift to overtime if the rise is occurring principally in industries whose

standard hours were reducd.    Bamten (civil servants) are also excluded, although others in the

public sector are retained.



                                               15
Hours Results

       My interest is not in the relation between the level of standard hours and the level of

actual hours: I want to know how actual hours change when standard hours change.                 If

construction always has high standard hours and high overtime for technological reasons, I do

not want this cross-section component to lead me to conclude that raising standard hours will

raise overtime, and hence raise actual hours more than proportionately, for example. A common

way to look at the relation betw~n differences with panel data is to use individual fixed or

random effects. If I do this, with actual hours as the dependent variable and standard hours and

possibly industry dummies as an independent variables, I still allow the variation in standard

hours arising from a worker’s change of industry to influence the coefficient on standard hours.

To restrict the variation in standard hours to be within job variation, and hence primarily

variation induced by the union contracts, I use information on job changes to generate worker-

job fixed or random effects. That is, each employment spell with the same firm rmeives a fixed

or random effect. (Some workers will experience hours changes by changing jobs within a firm:

this variation will be allowed to influence the coefficient on standard hours.)

       Results were generally found to differ quite a bit betw~n               manufacturing   and

construction, on the one hand, and services on the other, so analysis is conducted separately for

the two ~tors.      The first set of results, for manufacturing and construction, is shown in Table

1, where the dependent variable is actual hours worked on average in a week, and the main

independent variable of interest is “agreed” or standard hours per week as reported by the

respondent.      A coefficient of 1 on standard hours implies no shifting to overtime, while a




                                                 16
coefficient of O implies full shifting to overtime. The regressions include year dummies, which

control partially for the business cycle and for other trends in overtime.

         The first two columns perform fixd and random effects, and the ufficient     on standard

hours in the preferred fixed effmts spwification is 0.85 and significantly different from 1. As

was discussed above, the use of days off as compensation for overtime when standard hours are

rduced    is likely to bias the coefficient towards zero.   Also, classical measurement error in

standard hours will bias the coefficient toward zero. This latter problem may be remedied by

instrumenting standard hours as reported by the respondent with standard hours for the industry

in the month of the interview as obtaind       from published sources.9      Because the GSOEP

aggregates industries, the published hours used to instrument are an average (weighted by

employment) of standard hours in the sub-industries. The third (FE IV) column in Table 1 does

this for fixd effects. The point estimate of the coefficient on standard hours rises to 1.16, but

the standard error is very large (although the coefficient is significantly different from uro). 10

Another possible instrument for reported standard hours is the average response of respondents

in the same industry and year. In the case of manufacturing this instrument s=ms to be

correlated with the error term, and is not used.

         The remaining mlumns of Table 2 analyze dir=tly the incidence and length of overtime

and undertime. The fourth column - P(OT > O)- uses a fixed effects conditional logit to examine

the probability of a respondent reporting actual hours greater than standard hours.           The

coefficient on standard hours is significant and negative, indicating a shift towards overtime use

when standard hours are reduced.     The magnitude of the coefficient implies that a 1% fall in

standard hours raises the probability of overtime by 7.1% .ll        The column headed “OT”



                                                17
indicates that standard hours do not significantly aff=t the length of overtime, conditional on

overtime being positive.    The coefficient of 0.28 in the P(UT > O) column implies that a 1%

rduction   in standard hours would rduce the incidence of probability of reported actual hours

being lower than standard hours by 11%. (In regressions not reported, the length of undertime

conditional on undertime being non-zero was not significantly affected by standard hours. Nor

did regressions including undertime as negative values of overtime yield significant coefficients.)

       The response of overtime and undertime to a one hour fall in standard hours may be

calculated from the logit elasticities.   A reduction in standard hours from 40 to 39 hours is a

2.5 % fall, which implies an increase in overtime of 0.3 hours (average overtime is 1.75 hours)

and a reduction in undertime of 0.2 hours (average undertime is 0.75 hours), mming       that actual

hours only fall by 0.5 hours. The lower response of actual hours implied here mmpared with

the regressions with actual hours as a dependent variable is puzzling. It may be due to imprecise

estimate of the effect of standard hours on the length of overtime and undertime.        Length of

overtime may have fallen, offsetting the impact of the incrased incidence, but this would require

quite a large coefficient compared to the standard error as currently estimated in the final

column.

       Table 2 repeats the regressions of Table 1 for the service sector.       The coefficient on

standard hours in the fixed effects specification is 0.62, lower than for manufacturing, and

possibly due to greater measurement error (as inspection of the data suggests). The third column

of Table 2 instruments standard hours with the average response of similar respondents in the

same year. The correlation is 0.3, and for services correlation of this instrument with the errors

may be rejected. Again the main effect of instrumenting is to increase the standard error. The



                                                 18
problem with this instrument may be that the large number of service categories means some

have very few workers in them in a given year, and hence averaging does not reduce

measurement error much. 12The coefficient on standard hours in the regressions examining

overtime and undertime dir~tly are insignificant, although in the overtime logit it is close to

significant.

         So far the only control for the business cycle ud       has b=n year dummies, which is

rather crude since different industries fluctuate differently.    It could be that industries which

rtiucd    hours experienced falls in demand and hence desired in any case to reduce overtime

hours. In the absence of information truly reflecting demand for the output of s=tors, the best

that can be done is to control for sales, while rdizing   that this to a large extent conditions out

the scale effect. However, sales in either the month or year of the interview was always

insignificant, whether entered directly or interacted with standard hours. Replacing sales with

month-to-month or year-to-year log difference in sales makes no difference.

         Table 3 investigates whether the effect of standard hours on actual hours varies by firm

size.    Many of the contracts reducing standard hours provided for increased flexibility in the

use of standard hours, which, although a concession by the unions, was thought likely to work

towards higher employment by reducing the scale eff~t and possibly the substitution from labor

to capital by making labor more attractive along another dimension. It was generally thought

that the flexibility clauses, implemented on a firm by firm basis, could only be taken advantage

of by large firms.    The results, while not always significant, suggest less shifting towards

overtime in the excluded category: firms with more than 2000 employees, although the

magnitudes are not large.



                                                19
       The results of these tables may be checked by using the responses to the direct question

about monthly overtime.     A second measure of actual w=kly hours is constructed by adding

standard hours and reported overtime hours in the previous month divided by 4.33. The bias

on the uninstrumented     coefficient on standard hours in this case is unclear - classical

measurement emor in this case biases the coefficient toward one, since the measurement error

is aJso added to the independent variable, However, the fact that the overtime variable has no

negative responses may introduce a bias toward zero as discussed above.          Table 4 presents

results for manufacturing of regressions run for the y-s     1986, 1988 and 1989, the years for

which monthly overtime is available. The top panel of the table reruns the regressions of Table

1 using reported actual hours for the subset of years, as a basis for comparison, while the lower

panel reports results for these regressions using the actual hours variable constructed from

monthly overtime.    The results of the top panel are similar to those found for all six years in

Table 1, although standard errors are larger.

       The uninstrumented     fixed and random effwts results in the lower panel indicate

coefficients very close to one, possibly due to the upward bias of the classical measurement error

(although these coefficients are not significantly different from those in the upper panel).

Instrumenting in the following column scarcely lowers the point estimate, and the large standard

error means it is still not significantly different from one. The fixd effect conditional logit for

the probability of reporting overtime yields an insignificant coefficient on standard hours, and

likewise for fixed or random effwts estimation of the length of overtime (conditional on

overtime being positive) in the final column. Thus the results of this panel do not point to any

shift to overtime, unlike the results of Table 1.



                                                20
        Table 5 repeats these regressions for services.     The number of observations is rather

small in these regressions (the fixed effwts regressions are in effect based on the 329 person-

jobs which have more than one observation), so the standard errors are large enough in both

panels so that little carI be inferrd.   The point estimates in the lower panel again point to no

shifting towards overtime.       Interacting standard hours with the firm six      dummies in the

regressions based on reported monthly overtime yield insignificant coefficients.

        The analysis has yielded qualitatively different results for manufacturing depending upon

whether it was based on reported actual hours, which indicated shifting to overtime and from

undertime, or reported overtime in the previous month, which showed no shifting, but

quantitatively the difference is not large: a one hour reduction in standard hours reduces actual

hours by betw~n 0.85 and 1 hour, There is one other set of variables to be appealed to, namely

the information on receipt of short-time or bad-weather compensation. Fixed effects conditional

logits have been run for the probability of reporting such compensation, and the coefficient on

standard hours in these regressions is insignificant (these results are not shown).

       The results for Angestellten are not reported, as the hours variables are considered too

unreliable, but the results are summarized here. For manufacturing the fixed and random effects

regressions suggest more shifting towuds overtime than for Arbeiter, when analysis is based on

reported actual hours.     Otherwise results are similar to those for Arbeiter, including that

instrumenting principally raises standard errors, that fixed and random effects regressions for

constructed actual hours yield coefficients on standard hours close to one, and that fixed effects

conditional logits for the probability of reported monthly overtime yield insignificant coefficients

on standard hours.



                                                21
Wage Results

       Were a measure of hourly straight-time wage available, the approach would simply be

to add standard hours as a regressor to freed and random effects @rson-job          effects) wage

regressions.   This approach does oversimplify the problem: while in some years standard hours

are predetermined and only wages are endogenous, in many years wages and hours are jointly

determined, and furthermore there may be timing issues involved, such as the wage bargaining

anticipating future reductions in standard hours. Nevertheless, such an approach will pickup

the broad correlation between changes in wages and changes in standard hours even if causality

is not implied and fine details of timing are overlooked.

       The difficulty addresd     here is therefore simply that the wage measure available is

monthly and includes possible overtime (OT~ and undertime (UT~.          Denote w as the straight-

time hourly wage, and w~ as the monthly wage including overtime and undertime. p is the

overtime premium, h, is the weekly standard hours. The straight-time hourly wage is modelled

as                                                                                            (3)
                                    log(w) - a+~X+yhJ+e


(with i,t subscripts and modelling of the error suppressed for simplicity), while the monthly

wage is defined as                                                                            (4)
                                WM- w (4.33h#+(l+p)oTM-uTM)


The log of the monthly wage may thus be written


                log(w~) - a + ~X+y h. +e + log(4.33h, +(l+p)OTM-~M)
                                                              (l+p)oTM UTM
                        - a+~x+yh~+e +log(4.33h~)+log 1+ 433h          -—
                                                                        4.33h8
                                                           [
                                                  1+P OT”      1 ~T:+e
                        - a’+~X+yh~+log(h)+—          —-——
                                                 4.33   h,   4.33   h,




                                               22
where the approximation log(l +x)=x for small x has b=n used, which assumes that monthly

overtime and undertime are small compared with monthly standard hours.

        The coefficient of interest is of course gamma.        We have not yet ftished      with data

difficulties, however.    We know monthly overtime for certain years, but we do not have a

corresponding measure of monthly undertime. One possibility is to estimate equation (5) without

the term for undertime, hoping that its omission does not bias gamma. A =ond             possibility is

to use the weekly measures of overtime and undertime (based on reported actual hours) and

assume that multiplying by 4.33 yields monthly overtime and undertime (which is likely to

overstate both).

        The coefficients on log(h,) and (where included) UT/h, are restricted to be 1 and -1

respectively.    Initially the coefficient on OT/h, was left unrestricti,      since p varies across

people: if overtime is compensated it is typically at 25% premium, but Sunday work, for

example, carries a higher premium, and for Angestellten some overtime is not compensated.

However, the unrestricted coefficient estimatd         implied an overtime premium of only about

12%, while respondents to the question asked in 1986 about their overtime premium gave a

median response of 25% (for both Arbeiter and Angestellten; the means were 24% and 21%

respectively).   In the results presented, therefore, p is restricted to be 0.25, but this restriction

hardly affects gamma.

        Table 6 presents results using the monthly measure of overtime, omitting any measure

of undertime.    There are fewer observations than in the corresponding regressions in the hours

swtion due to missing values in the wage variable. The results for fixed effects are presented -

random effects produced extremely similar coefficients on standard hours, and were rejwted



                                                  23
by the Hausman tests. The results show that a one hour fall in standard hours was associated

with a significant relative rise in the straight-time hourly wage of between 2% and 3%, except

for Angestellten in services, where the coefficient is negative but insignificant.

        Table 7, where overtime and undertime are based on reported actual hours, show

significant negative coefficients on standard hours only for Arbeiter in manufacturing and

Angestellten in services.   Imposing a coefficient of -1 on the undertime ratio variable has an

important effmt on the coefficient on standard hours: when the overtime and undertime ratio

variables are left unrestricted, the undertime ratio is insignificant, and the coefficients and

standard emors on standard hours are very similar to those in Table 6. Undertime therefore does

not seem to capture what was intended, and the results of Table 6 are prefemed.

       As usual, measurement error in standard hours will bias its coefficient toward zero. The

result of instrumenting with the instruments of the hours section is once again principally to

increase the standard errors of the coefficient, so these results are not reported.

       These results agree with those found by the time-series of Franz and Smolny (1994), and

accord with the claims of the unions. A one hour fall in standard hours from 39 or 38 hours

represents a 2.6% fall, while Table 6 suggests straight-time hourly wages rose 2-3%.         So

monthly pay for an individual not working overtime remained the same after a reduction in

hours, compared to individuals in industries with constant hours. Results not reported provide

further support: log monthly wages are regressed on standard hours and year dummies for 1984-

89, without attempting to adjust for hours and overtime.        As expected, the coefficients on

standard hours are small (between -0.001 and 0.003) and insignificant, indicating that monthly

pay was little affected by standard hours.



                                                24
        To square these wage results with Lehment (1991), it must be the case that wage rises

induce such a large substitution effect from workers to hours as to raise employment, and that

this was of more importance than the reduction in standard hours. Another possibility is that

the wage restraint he observed was not driven by standard hours reductions, but rather occurred

in all industries.   A final possibility, impossible to test without good data on capiti,   is that the

reductions in standard hours raised productivity, so that effative wages fell.



Concluiow

        Unions in cetin      German industries negotiated reductions in standard hours beginning

in 1985. Such reductions are likely to cause a negative scale effect and substitution towards

capital, but employment may rise if there is sufficient substitution from hours to workers.           I

have established that, at least for Arbeiter (hourly workers) in manufacturing, a one hour fall

in standard hours led to a fall in actual hours of between 0.85 and 1 hour. A large response

such as this is a necessary condition for substitution from hours to workers to be large. These

results are similar to results for other countries or time periods. The wording of the questions

on hours worked m&e conclusions on substitution between workers and hours for Arbeiter in

services and Angestellten (salaried workers) difficult.

        Given that actual hours fell a lot, one would expect workers to experience a fall in

earnings. I find in addition, however, that a one hour reduction in standard hours was associated

with a 2-3% increase in the straight-time hourly wage, relative to sectors with no standard hours

reduction.   This hourly increase is enough to offset the fall in hours worked, substantiating the

union claim that standard hours reductions were achieved with “full wage compensation”.



                                                  25
These results are incompatible with the notion that reductions in standard hours were

accompanied by “wage restraint”.

       Strictly speaking, the effect of a wage increase on employment is ambiguous, as the

presence of fixed costs of employment induces a substitution from hours to workers.        The

finding of higher wages is thus consistent with the finding of a large fall in actual hours. We

do generally expect the scale effect and substitution to capital to predominate and rduce

employment,   however.    Examination of wages and actual hours hence does not lead to

unambiguous prediction of the net effect on employment of reducing standard hours.




                                             26
References

Bell, Linda and Richard Freeman. 1995. “Why Do Americans and Germans Work Different
       Hours?”. In Friedrich Buttier et. al. ds. Imtitutio~l Frmeworb and Labor Market
       Pe@ormance: Comparative w“ewson the U.S. and German Economies Ruttledge, New
       York.

Booth, Alison and Martin Ravallion. 1993. “Employment and Length of the Working Week in
       a Unionized Economy in which Hours of Work Influence Productivity. ” Economic
       Record pp.428-436.

Booth, Alison and Fabio Schiantarelli. 1987. “The Employment Effects of a Shorter Working
       Week”. Economics pp. 237-248.

Bosch, Gerhard. 1990. “From 40 to 35 hours: Reduction and flexibilisation of the working week
       in the Federal Republic of Germany”. International Labour Review pp.61 1-627.

Bosch, Gerhard et. d. 1988. Arbeitszeitvertinung im Betrieb: Die Umsetzung der 38.5-Stunden-
       Woche in der Metall-, Druck- und Holzindustrie sowie im Einzelhandel Koln.

Bosch, Gerhard and Steffen Lehndorff. (n.d.) “Annual Working Hours in Germany”. Institut fur
       Arbeit und Technik mimm.

Brunello, Giorgio. 1989. “The Employment Eff~ts of Shorter Working Hours: An Application
       to Japanese Data. ” Economics pp. 473-86.

Calmfors, Lars. 1985. “Work Sharing, Employment and Wages. ” European Ecorwmic Review
      PP. 293-309.

deRegt, Erik. 1988. “hbor Demand and Standard Working Time in Dutch Manufacturing,
       1954- 1982.” In Robert Hart ed, Employment, Uwmployment and Labor Utilization
       Unwin Hyman, Boston.

Earle, John, and John Pencavel. 1990. “Hours of Work and Trade Unionism”. Jouml         of Labor
       Economics pp. S150-174.

European Industrial Relations Review various issues.

Faini, Riccardo and Fabio Schiantarelli. 1985. “A Unified Frame for Firms’ Decisions:
       Theoretical Analysis and Empirical Application to Italy, 1970- 1980.” In Daniel Weiserbs,
       ed., International Studies in Economics and Econometrics. Amsterdam: Martinus Nijhoff.




                                              27
Franz, Wolfgang and Heinz Konig. 1986. “The Nature and Causes of Unemployment in the
       Federal Republic of Germany since the 1970s: An Empirical Investigation, ” fionoinica
       Pp. S219-S244.

Franz, Wolfgang and Werner Smolny. 1994. “Swtoral Wage and Price Formation and Working
       Time in Germany: An Econometric Analysis. ” Zeitschn~ fir Wirtschafis- und
       Sozialwissenscha fien.

Freeman, Richard. 1995. “Work-Sharing to Full Employment: Serious Option or Populist
      Fallacy?”. Harvard University mimeo.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton University Press.

Hamermesh, Daniel. 1995. “The Demand for Workers, Hours and Days”. University of Texas
      mimeo.

Hans-B&kler-Stiftung des Deutschen Gewerkschaftbundes. 1995. WSI-Infonnationen          zur
      Tan&olitik: Arbeitszeitkalena!ar West und Ost 1995. Dusseldorf.

Hart, Robert. 1987. Working Time and Employment Allen and Unwin, Boston.

Hart, Robert and T Sharot. 1978. “The Short-Run Demand for Workers and Hours: A Recursive
       Model. ” Review of Economic Studies pp.299-309.

Hart, Robert and Nicholas Wilson. 1988. “The Demand for Workers and Hours: Micro
      Evidence from the UK Metal Working Industry. ” In Robert Hart ed, Employment,
       Unemployment and Labor Utilization Unwin Hyman, Boston.

Heel, Michael. 1987. “Can Shorter Working Time Reduw Unemployment?” In C.H. Siven, ed.
       Unemployment in Europe: Ana~sis and Policy Issues Timbre, Stockholm.

Holmlund, Bertil and John Pencavel. 1988. “The Determination of Wages, Employment, and
      Work Hours in an Economy with Centralised Wage-Setting: Sweden, 1950-83. ”
      Economic Jouml pp. 1105-1126.

Houpis, George. 1993. “The Effect of Lower Hours of Work on Wages and Employ merit.”
       Centre for Economic Performance, LSE mimm.

Institut fur Arbeitsmarkt- und Berufsforschung (IAB). Various tables.

Konig, Heinz and Winfried Pohlmeier. 1988. “A Dynamic Model of Labor Utilization. ” In
       Robert Hart ed, Employment, Unemployment and Labor Utilization Unwin Hyman,
       Boston,



                                             28
Lehment, Harrnen. 1991. "hhnzuficMdtung, Arbeitszeimertirzung undkschaftigung. Eine
      empirische Untersuching fur die Bundesrepublik Deutschland 1973-1990.” Die
      Weltwirtschafi pp.72-85.

Nymoen, Ragnar. 1989. “Wages and the Length of the Working Day. An Empirical Test Based
     on Norwegian Quarterly Manufacturing Data. ” Scandinavian Jouml of Economics
     pp.599-612.

Stille, Frank. 1995. “Wage Flexibility in Germany: The Case of Reducing and Flexibilising
        Hours of Work”. Deutsches Institut fir Wirtschaftsforschung mimeo.

Stille, Frank and Rudolf Zwiener. 1987. “Besch~ftigungswirkungen der Arbeitszeitvertirzung
        von 1985 in der Metallindustrie. ” Deutsches In.rtitut fir ~rtschafisforschung
         Wochenbericht pp. 273-279.

Stille,   Frank and Rudolf Zwiener. 1988. “Arbeitszeitverhrzung        als Instrument   der
          Beschaftigungspolitik. ” WS1-Mitteilungen pp,590-598.

Trejo, Stephen. 1991. “The Effects of Overtime Pay Regulation on Worker Compensation. ”
       American Economic Review pp.719-740.

Wadhwani, Sushil. 1987. “The Effects of Inflation and Real Wages on Employment, ”
     Economics pp.21-40.

WSZ-Mitteilungen Zeitschrift des Wirtschafts- und Sozialwissenschaftlichen Instituts des
     Deutschen Gewerkschaftbundes GmbH. Various issues, Bund Verlag, Kbln.




                                            29
Notes
1. European Industrial Relations Review November 1983.

2. A large literature documents the implementationof standard hours reductions. See, for example,
Bosch (1990), Bosch et. al. (1988), Bosch and Lehndorff (n.d,), European Industrial Relations Review
(various issum), Stille (1995), WSZ-Mitteilungen(various issuti).

3. For theoretical examinationsof work-sharing,see Booth and Ravallion (1993), Booth and Schiantarelli
(1987), Calmfors (1985), Freeman (1995), Hart (1987), and Konig and Pohlmeier (1988).

4. See Hamermwh (1993) and Hamermesh (1995) for discussionsof this,

5. To see this, write the ratio of the marginal costs, and take the derivative of this with respect to the
wage:
                  MCN
                a—
                —.MCh        1
                                  ([h +p(h-h)](l +p)wN- [Wh+j+pw(h-h)](l+p)q
                 *       (1+p)2w2N*
This is less than zero if f> O.

6. In the original: “Wie viele Wochenstundenbetragt Ihre vereinbarte Arbeitszeit ohne Uberstunden?”
“Und wieviel betragt im Durchschnitt Ihre tatsachliche Arbeitszeit einschlimslich eventueller
Uberstunden? [Stundenpro Woche]”

7. It is also unclear what workers who are on strike rwpond to the quwtions.

8. The sample weights are used to create the figur~. The GSOEP oversamplm foreigners, who work
less overtime than Germans.

9. For the minority of workers in industries where bargaining dow not take place at the national level,
a weighted average of the standard hours in different regions is used.

10. The correlation between the published and reportd standard hours is only 0.52. Reasons for
differences in addition to measurement error in the respondent variable include: the fact that in some
industries standard hours ordy have to average to the agreed standardhours across employ=, that I have
imputed some interview months, that the aggregationof industries in the GSOEP means published hours
is a weighted average of sometimes different standard hours, and that there is considerable noise in the
GSOEP industry variable.

11. The elasticity reprwenting the effect of ~ on P(OT> O)is calculated from

                                  alogP(om~
                                     ~logh,
                                                  -    P,#z[l-P(om;ml

12. The alternative obvious]y is to instrument as for manufacturingwith published standard hours. The
difficulty is that the bargainingunits in services are much smaller, ad ha~e a greater tendency to bargain
separately by region.


                                                      30
                      Table 1: Analysis Based on Reported Actual Hours:
                           Manufacturing and Construction 1984-1989
                                (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                        II     Reported actual hours             I P(OT > O)    P(UT>O)    I     OT
                                            FE      FE IV            FE logit   FE logit         RE

  Standard Hours h,

  Apprenticeship?


  University?
                              0.96
                             (0.06)
                              0.42
                             (o. 19)
                             -0.10
                             (1.02)
                                            0.85
                                           (0.09)
                                             --



                                             --
                                                    T T
                                                      1.16
                                                     (0.31)
                                                         --


                                                         --

                                                                 I
                                                                   --
                                                                       -0.25
                                                                       (0.04)
                                                                        --
                                                                                  0.28
                                                                                 (0.09)
                                                                                   -.


                                                                                   --
                                                                                                0.15
                                                                                               (o. 10)
                                                                                                0.20
                                                                                               (0.31)
                                                                                               -1.56
                                                                                               (1.39)
  Foreign?                   -0.65           --          --        --              --           0.63
                             (0.18)                              I                             (0.28)
  Female?                    -1.14                       --             --         --          -0.94
                             (0.23)                                                            (0.46)
 Age                          0.14                       --             --         --           0.25
                             (0.06)                              I                             (0.10)
  Age2/10                    -0.02           --          --      I      --         --          -0.03
                             (0.01)                                                            (O.O1)
  Year dummies?              yes            yes                                   yes            yes
 Industry and firm            yes           no                                    no             yes
 size dummies?
 Industry dummies            0.80            --          --             --         .-            --
  zero? (p-value)                                                                          1
 Hausman (p-value)                  0.00                 --      I      --
                       I
 N*T (toti ohs)        I                                  8560                             I    2413
 N (cross-section)     I                                  3001                             I    1307

Notes:
a. Workers paid hourly (Arbeiter).
b. Overtime OT =reported actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
c. Undertime UT= standard hours-reported actual hours if positive, zero otherwise.
d. RE refers to random effects, FE to fixed eff~ts: person-job effects.
e. Excluded instrument for IV is published standard hours in industry and month of interview.

                                                    31
                Table 2: Analysis Based on Reported Actual Hours: Services 1984-1989
                                   (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                ReDorted actual hours                P(OT > O)       P(-UT> o)   OT
                               RE            FE      FE IV           FE logit        FE logit    FE

     Standard Hours h,         0.76          0.62      0.58            -0.19            0.20     -0.39
                              (0.14)        (0.21)    (0.72)           (0.10)          (0.20)    (0.26)
     Apprenticeship?           0.36           --          --            -..             --
                              (0.54)
     University?              -1.35                                     --              --        --
                              (2.86)                                             I
                                                                                        --
                                                                                 1



     Foreign?                 -0.44                                     --                        --
                              (0.51)                                             I
                                                                                 1



     Female?                  -2.50                       --            --              --        --
                              (0.61)
                                                                                        --
                                                                                 1


                                              --          --            --
                                                                                 I                --
     Age                       0.03
                              (0.18)                                             I
                                                                                 ,
                                                                                 I
     Age2/10                  -0.01           --          --            -.       I      --        --
                              (0.02)
     Year dummies?             yes           yes          yes                                    yes
     Industry and firm         yes           no           no                                      no
     size dummies?
                                                                                        --
                                                                                 1



     Industry dummies         0.00                                      --
      zero? (p-value)                                                            I
                                                                                 1



     Hausman (p-value)               0.00                 --            --
                                                                                 I      --       0.04
     N*T (total ohs)                                                                             628
     N (cross-smtion)                                          855                               369


a.   Workers paid hourly (Arbeiter).
b.   Overtime OT =reported actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
c.   Undertime UT= standard hours-reported actual hours if positive, zero otherwise.
d.   RE refers to random effects, FE to fixed effats: person-job effects.
e.   Excluded instrument for IV is average response of Arbeiter in that industry and year.



                                                     32
        Table 3: Analysis Based on Reported Actual Hours: The Effect of Firm Si=
                             (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                          Manufacturing/Construction                               Services
                            Actual hours            P(OT > O)        Actual hours             I P(OT>O)
                           RE             FE            FE logit    RE        I     FE        I   FE logit

  Standard Hours h,        0.97            0.87          -0.23      0.89            0.68           -0.06
                          (0.12)          (0.09)         (0.04)    (0.36)          (0.21)          (0.10)
  h,*Firm <20              0.02        -0.030           -0,023     -0.10          -0.100           -1.26
                          (0.18)      (0.021)           (0.010)    (0.43)         (0.053)          (0,82)
  h,*Firm 20-199          -0.10        -0.029            -0.022     -0.12          -0.102          -0.030
                          (0.15)      (0.015)           (0.008)    (0.43)         (0.037)         (0.025)
 h,*Firm 200-1999          0.07        -0.023            -0.019     -0.31         -0.034          -0.041
                          (0.16)      (0.012)           (0.006)    (0.47)         (0.031)         (0.022)
 Year dummies?                            yes             ves       yes             yes             yes
 Industry, education,      yes             no             no        yes              no             no
 nationality, gender,
 firm size?
 Industry dummies         0.81             --              --      0.00              --              --
  zero? (p-value)
 Hausman (p-value)                 0.00                    --               0.00              I      --
 N*T (total ohs)                          8560                                      1893
 N (cross-section)                        3001                                       855

Notes:
a. Workers paid hourly (Arbeiter).
b. Overtime OT=reported actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
c. RE refers to random effects, FE to fixed effecti: person-job effects.




                                                   33
                     Table4: Manufacturing and Construction 1986, 1988-9
                              (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                          A. Analysis based on reported actual hours

                                    Reported actual hours                P(OT > O)      OT
                             RE               FE                FE IV     FE logit      RE

 Standard Hours h,            0.96            0.90               1.19      -0.22       0.16
                             (0.09)          (0.14)             (0.60)     (0.07)     (0.13)
 Industry dummies            0.51              --                --          .-         ..
  =ro? (p-value)
 Hausman (p-value)                    0.00                       --          --        0.66

                         B. Analysis based on monthly overtime (0~)

                                Constructed actual hours                 P(OTM> O)   OT”/4.33
                             RE               FE                FE IV     FE logit      RE

 Standard Hours h,            1.03            0.99               0.97        0.03      0.01
                             (0.04)          (0.05)             (0.28)      (0.06)    (0.09)
 Industry dummies            0.00              --                -.          --         --
  zero? @-value)
 Hausman (p-value)                    0.13                       --          --        0.73



 Year dummies?               yes              yes                yes        yes         yes
 Industry, education,        yes              no                 no          no         yes
 nationality ,gender,
 firm sin?
 N*T (total ohs)                                         3991                        1260/1265
 N (cross-section)                                       2080                         886/901

Notes:
a. Workers paid hourly (Arbeiter).
b. Overtime OT =reported actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
c. Constructed actual hours = standard hours + reported monthly overtime/4.33.
d. RE refers to random effwts, FE to fixed effats: person-iob
                                                           .    effects.
e. Excluded instrument for IV is published standard hours in industry and month of intetiew.


                                                    34
                                 Table 5: Services 1986, 1988-9
                                 (Standard Errors in Parentheses)
                            A. Analysis based on reported actual hours

                                      Reported actual hours                  P(OT > O)          OT
                               RE              FE               FE IV        FE logit           RE

 Standard Hours h,             0.68            0.83                            -0.16          -0.05
                              (0.22)          (0.39)            (;:%)          (0.24)         (0.26)
 Industry dummies              0.05             --               --             --              --
  zero? (p-value)
 Hausman (D-value)                     0.00                      --             --             0.21

                         B. Analysis based on monthly overtime (0~)
                        h,
                                Constructed actual hours         P(OT”> O)                   OT”/4.33
                               RE              FE               FE IV        FE logit          RE

 Standard Hours h,             1.21            1.22              0.99           0.07           0.18
                              (0.09)          (0.13)            (0.46)         (0.06)         (0.28)
 Industry dummies              0.02             --               --             --              --
  zero? (p-value)
 Hausman (p-value)      I              0.20               I      --      I      --       I     0.35



 Year dummies?                yes              yes               yes           yes             yes
 Industry, education,         yes              no                no             no             yes
 nationality, gender,
 firm size?
 N*T (total ohs)                                          849                                297/307
 N (cross-wtion)                                          522                                21 1/228

Notes:
a. Workers paid hourly (Arbeiter).
b. Overtime OT=reportd actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
   Constructed actual hours = standard hours + reported monthly overtime/4.33.
;: RE refers to random effects, FE to fixed effats: person-job effects.
e. Excluded instrument for IV is average response of Arbeiter in that industry and year.



                                                     35
          Table 6: Wage Regressions 1986, 1988-9; Reported Monthly Overtime (OT”)


                              Arbeiter @aid hourly)           Angeskllten (salaried)
                          Manufacturing      Services     Manufacturing      Services

 Standard Hours h,            -0.020           -0.026         -0.029          -0.010
                             (0.003)          (0.008)        (0.008)          (0.007)
 log(hJ                         1                 1             1                1
 0T”/(4.33*h~                 1.25               1.25          1.25             1.25
 UT”/(4,33*h,)                 --                 -.            --               --

 Year dummies?                 yes               yes           yes              yes
 Hausman (p-value)            0.00               0.00         0.00             0.00
 N*T (total ohs)              3711               788          1096             1938
 N (cross-section)            1972               487           607             1125

Notes:
a. The dependent variable is gross earnings in the previous month on main job.
b. Estimation is by fixed effects: person-job effwts.
c. Manufacturing includes instruction.
d. If no standard error is reported, the value of the coefficient has been imposed.
e. The Hausman test refers to a random effects s~ification including all those covariates
included in random effects regressions in earlier tables.




                                            36
      Table 7: Wage Regressions 1984-1989; Overtime Based on Reported Actual Hours
                              (Standard Errors in Parentheses)


                                Arbeiter (paid hourly)              Angestellten (salaried)
                           Manufacturing         Services      Manufacturing         Services

  Standard Hours h,            -0.018             -0.009            -0.011           -0.018
                              (0.003)            (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.005)
  log(hJ                          1                   1                1                 1
  OT/h,                         1.25                 1.25            1.25              1.25
  UT/h,                          -1                   -1              -1                -1
  Year dummies?                 yes                  yes             yes               yes
  Hausman (p-value)             0.00                 0.00            0.00              0.00
  N*T (total ohs)              7900                  1769           2210              3921
 N (cross-section)             2872                  811             833               1557

Notes:
a. The dependent variable is gross earnings in the previous month on main job.
b. Estimation is by fixed effects: person-job effects.
c. Manufacturing includes construction.
d. Overtime OT =reported actual hours-standard hours if positive, zero otherwise.
e. Undertime UT= standard hours-reported actual hours if positive, zero otherwise.
f. If no standard error is reported, the value of the coefficient has been imposed.
g. The Hausman test refers to a random effects s~ification          including all those covariates
included in random effects regressions in earlier tables.




                                                37
          MCN

                                                                                        0
                                                                                    /
                                                                                0

                                                                          ,/’
                                                                      /
                                                                 /’

                slope = w                            /“’”
                                               / 0
                                          #/
                   1
                                                                 slope = (l+p)w
          f
                        1            1                      ,I            1                 Ih
                        h!           h:                  h:               h!




(l+P)wN                                   ———
                                     r
                                     I
                                     I
                                     I
    WN




                        I            1                      I              I
                                                                                            Ih
                                                                          h:

                                t
                                                     hs.hso

                                    ‘–-–       -hs=h~l


                                      Figure la


                       Between Workers and Hours: Overtime Premium
                                                                                /-


                                                                 /
                                                                     0
                                                                         0’”’
                                                             /
                                                         0
                                                     0
                                                 0
               slope = w                     0                                       = (l+p’) w
                                         /
                                   /“-
                  4                                                      slope = (l+p) w




         MCh

(l+P’)wN

                                         I
(l+P)wN                        ——— ——-
                           r
                           1
                           I
                           I
    WN




                                             hs = hso

                                 ––––-k~=~l




                                    Figure lb


 Substitution Between Workers and Hours: Overtime Premium Increasing With Oertime
            o Based on actual hours       + Published (IAB)
            ❑ Based on monthly overtime




QJ
>
0




        I
                I       I           I          I              I     I
        1984          19B5        1986       1987        19HE     1909

     Figure 2: Weekly Overtime for Full Time Workers
                                                                     0
                                                                     m




                                                                U
                                                                I

                                                                I


                                                                     m                                                                      m
                                                                     m                                                                      m

                                                                     h                                                                      b
                                                                     m                                                                      m


al                                                                        O-I
m                                                                         m
m                                                                    mm                                                                 i   Ln
<                                                                    m.                                                                     m
     1       1       1       1       I       1   1      1   T                   I    I    I   1   I       I       I     1       1
     cnmr.
      .,.
                             mmv
                              .              .
                                                 mm-
                                                  .,,                           mmr.mm~
                                                                                                      .       .
                                                                                                                  mm.
                                                                                                                   .        .       .




                                                                                                                                            ,0
                                                                                                                                            II-l




                                                                H
                                                                 I
                                                                I

                                                                B
                                                                I

                                                                     mh
                                                                I    m

                                                                I    m                                                                  I          -1-J
                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                                   u-l
                                                                I    r.
                                                                     m
                                                                                                                                        I
T
                                                                I         v
                                                                                                                                        I          ti
m                                                                         al
m                                                               I    mm                                                                 I   u-l
                                                                     me                                                                     m
         I       1       1       1       1   1    I     1   1                   1    1    I   1   1       1       1     1       I
         mmr.amv                                 mru-
                                                        0
                                                        In




                                                    I


                                                             7
                                                    I




‘m
                                                    I        I
m
m                                                   I        I
     I   I     1         I   1   I   I      I   I

     mmr.am~       ,..               mcu-
                                                     I




                      .. .   ..

                                                          m
                                                          m
                                                 E        r.
                                                          m
                                                 8
m                                                               m
                                                                m
:                                                B        In    m
                                                          m
    1    1    1   1     I     I   1      1   1                      1    1   1   I          I        I       I      I   I

    mmr.am~                       mm.-                              mmbam~                                   mN.-
                                                                                     .          .        .    .




                                                                                         uotJ3eLlj

                                                          0
                                                          u-l                                                               w

                                                                                                                                    I
                                                          m
                                                          v                                                                     i




v
                                                     n
m
m                                                    11

    I    1    1   I     1     1   I      1   1
    0                                           0



                                            7
    m                                           m


t




                                                          al
                                                          o-l




                                                      .
                                                      m

                                                0:
                                                ~u
                                                      a
                                                m
                                                II




                                                          L
                                                          o
                                            1   u-l
                                                m
        I   1   1   1   [   1   1   1   1




                                                          I
                        n
                        E
                        0
                        u
                        +
                        0
                        c




m                             m
m                       D     al
m                       -ti   m
                        m
    1   I   1   1   1   n          I   1   1   1   [




T
m
m
                        m-
    I   I   I   I   I   n          1   I   I   1   r
                         n
                         E
                         0
                         u
                         -u
                         0
                         c




m
al
m
                 I   I         I   I   I   I   I




                         n
                         E
                         0
                          u
                         .
                         0
                         c




                         rO-
     1   I   I   I   1   n     I   1   I   1   1
                         1+
                          m




                             u
                          LnLn

                          -1




m
m
m

     I   1   1   1   I




                         .+
                         m



                         m




                                                 I
v
al
m
     1   1   [   1       b-      1   1   1   1   1
                             +
                             n
                             .

                             m
                             .




                                                                -1

                                                                           a

                                                                     .
                                                                       m
                                      m                                3
                                      al
                                      .:
                                                                “:
                                                                  1<
                                      >                         .1
:                                                                u-l
2
m                                     m
m                                     m                          U-I
m                                     o-l                       .1
        I   1   1   -1                      I   1   1   I   1    v
    1
    m           N    o                      m               0              c
                                                                           m




                             In




                             m:
                             -1




                                  .




                                                                           m
                                                                           d
    I   I   1   I        I
                          m
                          .
                           I
                          4



                          0
                          .V
                           ,\

                          ~:




al                              m
m                               m
m                               m
     I   1   1   1   1              I    I   1   1   1

                                    al   m   v   N   0




                         1+                              1+
                          In                              m


                          m
                           I

                          e




m
m
m
     I   1   1   1   I
