NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STRATEGIC RESPONSE BY
PHARMACEUTICAL FIRMS TO THE
MEDICAID MOST-FAVOREDCUSTOMER RULES

Fiona Scott Morton

Working Paper 5717

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

I would like to thank Jeremy Bulow, Sara Ellison, Peter Klibanoff, Jim Poterba, Nancy Rose, Andrea
Shepard, Dimitri Vayanos, Matt White, and two anonymous referees for helpful comments. IMS
America very generously provided the data for this project. I am grateful for financial support from
the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through the Program on the Pharmaceutical Industry, Sloan School,
MIT. This paper is part of NBERs research program in Industrial Organization. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Fiona Scott Morton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper5717
August 1996

THE STRATEGIC RESPONSE BY
PHARMACEUTICAL FMS
TO THE
MEDICAID MOST-FAVOREDCUSTOMER RULES
ABSTRACT
In 1990 the Federal Government included a Most Favored Customer (MFC) clause in the
contract (OBRA 90) which would govern the prices paid to firms for pharmaceutical

products

supplied to Medicaid recipients. The firms had to give Medicaid their “best” (lowest) price in some
cases, a percentage below average price in others. Many theoretical models have shown that an MFC
rule commits a firm to compete less aggressively in prices. We might expect prices to rise following
the implementation

of the MFC rule, yet the work done to date on OBRA 90 has found this result

somewhat difficult to show empirically.

I also conclude that the effects of the law are small and

relatively weak; however, the results are strongest where the product’s characteristics

match the

incentives in the law. I find that after the MFC rule was implemented the average price of branded
products facing generic competition rose - the median presentation’s price rose about 4Y0. Brands
protected by patents did not significantly increase price. Generics in concentrated markets should
display a strategic response to the brand’s adoption of the MFC.

I find support for the strategic

effect; generic firms raise their prices more as their markets become more concentrated.

I find little

change in hospital prices. The results suggest that the MFC rule resulted in higher prices to some
non-Medicaid

consumers of pharmaceuticals.

Fiona Scott Morton
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
fionasm@crown.stanford .edu

Introduction
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
that featured a Most-Favored-Customer
would pay manufacturers

Act of 1990 (OBRA 90) included a rebate program

(MFC) clause for Medicaid reimbursement:

the lowest price offered to any buyer of the product.

Medicaid

The rules also

provided for Medicaid to purchase at a given percentage below average price if the best price
was not low enough.

This paper examines the (perhaps-unforeseen)

average pharmaceutical

prices.

effects of the policy on

In particular, I examine how the Medicaid Rebate rules changed

prices charged by firms in different competitive positions.
Most
Organization

Favored
theoretical

Customer
literature;

clauses

have been

studied

extensively

in the Industrial

see, for example, papers by Cooper (1986 and 1991), Png

(1987 and 1991), and Salop (1986). The basic model of MFC clauses has the following features,
A firm announces and commits to offering the following scheme: the lowest price it offers to any
customer

within a specific time period will be the price charged to the group of customers

“covered” by the MFC. 1 This scheme has two main effects; the MFC will alter optimal price
dispersion for any one firm, and secondly, the firm will find that competing with other firms for
low-valuation

consumers on the basis of price becomes more costly.

Any price discount given

to a marginal customer to induce a sale must be applied to all customers covered by the MFC.
Theory tells us that firms that credibly
competition.

Although

adopt the MFC clause can commit

the literature contains many models explaining

MFC clauses, there has been relatively little empirical verification

to “soft” price

the strategic effect of

of the effectiveness

of the

policy.z
Although OBRA 90 is the sort of experiment that lends itself to analysis, there has been
little formal work on the effects of the rebate rules.
finding appropriate

This is partially due to the difficulty of

data and partially to the complexity

of the problem.

The law applied to

actual prices paid per unit, not the more commonly available invoice prices (that do not include
cash discounts),

The MFC rules varied by retail channel, which themselves had different ex ante

price distributions.

To perform a good experiment,

prices should be adjusted for long term

lThe firm chooses the applicable time period; it could extend the guarantee to past, future, or both
sets of customers.
2 Crocker and Lyon (1994) study the use of MFN clauses in natural gas contracts. They conclude
that the main use of the facilitating practice in that industry is to allow efficient adjustment of prices in
long term contracts.

contracts, and available before and after the law change from multiple retail channels.
rule has subsections that differ in their expected effects on market outcomes.

The rebate

Therefore, prices

respond to multiple forces and will not necessarily move strongly in one direction, which makes
the impact of the law difficult to detect.

In fact, the United States General Accounting

Office

(GAO) has examined the effects of the OBRA legislation on drug prices twice: once on prices
paid by the Veterans Administration
paid by hospitals

and HMOS.3

(VA) and Department of Defense (DOD) and once for prices

In both cases the report concluded

that the GAO could not

determine “the extent to which price increases were attributable to OBRA. ” The GAO states that
VA and DOD could not provide enough data to examine the question carefully.
the CBO published a report examining discounts received by pharmaceutical

More recently,

purchasers in the

wake of the rebate law.4 That report notes that the prevalence of large discounts fell in 1991
and 1992 and attributes the drop to the Medicaid rebate legislation.

However, the report does

not have data from before the law took effect, so before and after comparisons
The inability to pin down a causal link between the legislation

are not possible.

and pharmaceutical

prices is

frustrating in light of the economic importance of the regulations, the clear theoretical predictions
of the ~C

portion of the rebate rules, and the anecdotal evidence from market participants.5

3 “Changes in Drug Prices Paid by VA and DOD Since Enactment of Rebate Provisions” GAO/HRD91-139 and “Changes in Drug Prices Paid by HMOS and Hospitals Since Enactment of Rebate Provisions”
GAo/HRD-93-43.
4 Congressional Budget Office, (1996) “How the Medicaid Rebate on Prescription Drugs Affects
Pricing in the Pharmaceutical Industry, ” CBO, Washington, D.C..
5 “Congress recently passed a law requiring drug companies to give Medicaid the same deep discounts
they give other big customers. But instead of reducing Medicaid drug prices, many companies are now
raising the prices that those other big customers must pay.”
“Now drug companies are increasing prices to some of those other buyers, including the Department of
Veterans Affairs, prepaid health plans like the giant Kaiser Permanence group, hospitals, family planning
clinics and community health centers for migrant workers, homeless people and the indigent. Health care
experts say these added costs may soon trickle down to consumers in the form of higher medical costs,
and ultimately, insurance premiums.”
“Supporters of the 1990 legislation are furious about the drug companies’ move. The chief sponsor,
Senator David Pryor, Democrat of Arkansas, chairman of the Special Committee on Aging, said the price
increases appeared to be “an attempt to circumvent the new Medicaid law, ” shift costs and nullify the
savings envisioned by Congress.””
“...But a lobbyist for the drug industry, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity, said: “We
are surprised that Senator Pryor is surprised. I don’t know what else he would have expected. It’s logical
4

“But instead of reducing Medicaid drug prices, many companies
the prices that those other big customers must pay. ,..it’s logical
would re-examine their prices if Congress passes a law saying
which accounts for about 10 percent of our revenues, must get the
to any pharmaceutical customer in the country. ”
The New York Times, February 18, 1991 (remainder of quotation

are now raising
that companies
that Medicaid,
best price given
below)

I do not have all the information required to determine the effects of the law, but I have
enough to make some progress in our understanding

of its impact.

My data surround the time

the new rules took effect, so I can examine prices before and after the policy change.
section explains

that the market share of Medicaid,

competitive

structure

legislation.

I then demonstrate

legislation

The theory

the size of a drug’s package,

and the

of the market all affect the way a drug price should respond

to the

that these variables predict price changes around the time the

took effect in a manner consistent

with the Medicaid rebate rules, Therefore,

likely that the rules did affect the prices of some pharmaceuticals

it is

in the US market.

I find that after the Medicaid rebate rules took effect the average price of the median
presentation

of a brand facing generic competition increased by about 4%. The average price of

a patented drug did not respond to the legislation.

This suggests that the MFC clause encouraged

some branded producers to engage in softer price competition,

I also find evidence that the MFC

indirectly affected generic producers; generic prices rose more in concentrated

markets after the

legislation took effect. This suggests that generics competing against MFC-constrained
competitors

branded

reacted strategically to their rival’s constraint.

The estimates contained in this paper may not be representative
for several reasons.

of all industry outcomes

The data I have do not include prices to HMOS (or pharmaceutical

benefit

that companies would re-examine their prices if Congress passes a law saying that Medicaid, which
accounts for about 10 percent of our revenues, must get the best price given to any pharmaceutical
customer in the country. “’’LeslieRose, chief lobbyist for the Group Health Association of America, which
represents the organizations, said: “The reports we hear from H.M.0,’s across the country are really
disturbing. They are being told by drug companies that the days of discounts are over, that drug prices
will be raised. Clearly, this is an unintended effect of the new law.”
“Jose E. Carnacho, executive director of the Texas Association of Community Health Centers, said that
within weeks of passage of the Medicaid law 7 to 10 drug companies began trying to renegotiate the
discount-price contracts for his organization, which buys drugs for 31 clinics serving 250,000 patients a
year.”
The New York Times, February 18, 1991

managers like Medco), the types of institutions

likely have the pre-OBRA binding low price; it

is probable that the price charged these types of customers rose more than I estimate here. All
the adjustment

did not occur in the time period I analyze due to the presence of long term

contracts in the market.

The CBO finds that discounts are still declining in 1992. Also, the data

have a great deal of measurement

error due to the prevalence

of cash rebates that are not

included in recorded prices, so the results are not as precise as one might expect from a large
dataset.
Although

the Federal and state governments

Medicaid expenditure

saved 150 million dollars per quarter in

by the end of the first year of the program (and $1.8 billion in 1994), to

the extent that some market prices rose as a consequence
much savings occurred as might have been expected.

of the reimbursement

policy, not as

In addition, other government expenditure,

such as purchases made by the V. A,, increased due to these rising prices and partially offset the
initial gain. Finally, some non-Medicaid

consumers of pharmaceuticals

that had been receiving

substantial discounts paid higher prices.
The structure of this paper is as follows.
explained

in Section

I.

Section

II discusses

The exact rules of the rebate scheme are
the theory

behind

the rebate

rules,

The

pharmaceutical

industry, its rules of entry, and the available data are discussed in Section III.

The estimation

of the effects of the MFC rule on prices is reported in Sections IV and V.

Section VI concludes.

Throughout

the paper I use the term “price” to mean prices observed

before the Medicaid rebate is taken into account; prices here are always pre-rebate prices unless
explicitly described otherwise.

I. The Medicaid Rebate Rules
The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation

Act of October 1990 (OBRA 90) included legislation

intended to reduce government spending on pharmaceuticals
drug reimbursement

prices.

for Medicaid recipients by limiting

The Medicaid program was not receiving the low prices given to

other big buyers because it reimbursed individual hospitals and pharmacies rather than purchasing
in bulk. Medicaid is a large buyer whose purchases account for roughly thirteen percent of the
prescription

pharmaceutical

discrimination;

market.

Pharmaceutical

firms engage in a great deal of price

the fact that Medicaid could not use its bwgaining

6

power to secure the normal

advantages of a large buyer in a market with significant price dispersion was part of the impetus
for the legislation.
To secure better prices for Medicaid (and reduce the federal deficit) OBRA 90 provided
for a voluntary program in which manufacturers

could enroll their drugs.b The incentive for a

firm to enroll was that its drugs were then guaranteed access to all state Medicaid formularies
and reimbursement
by an institution.
scheme.

from the Federal program.7

A formulary is a list of drugs approved for use

All states were required to have Medicaid “cover” all drugs participating

In return the program required drug manufacturers

Medicaid programs.

to pay rebates to state and federal

A rebate would represent the total dollar amount by which Medicaid had

“overpaid” a firm in that calendar quarter, compared
required.

in this

Manufacturers

of Average Manufacturer

of branded pharmaceuticals

to the new low prices that were now

were required to sell to Medicaid at 87,5%

Price (AMP) or their “best price,” whichever

simply a quantity weighted average of a firm’s wholesale prices.

was lower.

AMP is

Thus if a firm sold one unit

of its product to a customer at 75% of AMP, it would effectively have to sell all its Medicaid
units at that price also (although the mechanism would be a rebate check).

The best price could

not fall below 75% of AMP in the first year of the scheme, but the floor was scheduled to drop
to 50% the following year and zero thereafter.

Additionally,

if an innovator increased AMP of

its drug by more than the increase in the Urban CPI from a baseline period (September
the rebate amount owed to the government

1990),

would increase by the amount the CPI change was

exceeded.
The important variations in the rule are twofold.

Generic products were not subject to

quite the same scheme as branded products; instead, a generic product’s price to Medicaid was
required to be 90% of its AMP.
irrelevant;
expiration.

if it is the innovator,
Additionally,

Notice that whether a drug has patent protection

or not is

or brand, it follows the brand rule before and after patent

only outpatient drugs were subject to the OBRA program.

Inpatient

6 Nearly every firm selling pharmaceuticals in the US enrolled in the program when it started.
7 A couple of loopholes were available in 1991 that allowed states to have a de facto formulary if
some effort was expended. Only 11 states had “restrictive formularies” in 1991 according to Soumerai
et al (1993).
7

drugs, given to a patient while staying in the hospital,

did not fall under the new rules.a

Inpatient drugs include, but are not limited to, injectable drugs.

A hospital can purchase oral

drugs (hereafter, pills) to dispense to inpatients or to sell to outpatients.

The inpatient sales are

exempt from the rebate rules, whereas the outpatient sales are subject to the rebate rules.

The

results for pills sold to hospitals will therefore be weaker than those for pills sold to drugstores
due to the mixture of inpatient and outpatient drugs in the hospital sample,
The rules required that the price used to calculate “best prices” and rebates be the [)rice
per unit of the drug; common units are the pill or the milliliter.

Separate packaging alone

would

not constitute a different product with a different “best price, ” Rather, the firm would have to
calculate

the price per pill on all its packages

Additionally,

OBRA 90 defined AMP to be the average wholesale price available to a member

of the “retail pharmaceutical

trade, ” Only prices of goods sold to drug stores, not hospitals or

HMOS, counted in the calculation
profit,

of a given drug to find the lowest price.9

were used to calculate

of AMP.

However, prices from all sectors, including non-

“best price.” 10 Thus, a firm would lose revenue

on all its

Medicaid sales each time it sold its drug to anyone at a price lower than 87.5% of its AMP,
while AMP itself was constructed from pharmacy prices only. The exact amount owed by each
firm was calculated every quarter, using sales data from that quarter provided by each firm and

g My dataset consists of prices and quantities of cardiovascular drugs onIy; these drags are
disproportionately consumed by older patients who are often eligible for Medicare. Medicare covers the
cost of hospital stays and associated inpatient drugs. I divide drugs into injectable and oral to proxy for
inpatient and outpatient; although this rough division is not ideal, the government studies referenced above
use it. If all the Medicaid consumers in my dataset were Medicare-eligible also, Medicaid would not pay
for any injectable sold to hospitals. Therefore, since injectable are not affected by the legislation, are
bought less often by Medicaid, and the dataset contains relatively few injectable observations, I eliminate
injectable drugs from the study entirely.
9 See the Appendix for a numerical example.
10The problem with including all sales in the calculation of best price is that other government
agencies such as VA and DOD, as well as non-profit organizations, had been receiving substantial
discounts. The law now required those discounts to be given to all Medicaid units, The story I heard
from industry participants wm that many manufacturers eliminated the discounts in the face of the MFN
law. The following year a law was passed to exempt VA and DOD prices from the calculation of best
price.
8

each state, by the Office of the Inspector General (OIG). 11 Notice that in the role of calculator
of rebates, the OIG acted as enforcer of the MFC agreement and monitored
cheating,

all firms to detect

The OIG had the ability to fine firms that violated the rules of the contract.

Thus

firms in the industry in 1991 could be confident their rivals were applying the MFC properly and
no cheating was going on.

II The Effect of a Most Favored Customer Clause in a Market with Price Discrimination
To illustrate the effects of the Medicaid legislation,

a very simple model follows where

a firm’s choice of optimal price is compared in regimes with and without best price or average
price provisions.

I initially allow Medicaid’s quantity demanded to respond to price changes and

in a second example assume Medicaid

demand is completely

inelastic.

produce somewhat different implications

for the change in prices.

The two cases will

Elastic Medicaid Demand
The market has distinct submarkets
across submarkets,

indexed by i.

A firm can charge different prices

but must charge the same price to all customers

(examples of submarkets are chain pharmacies, HMOS, hospitals).

within the submarket

I assume each submarket has

its own simple demand curve for the elastic portion of the market of the form: qj = ~ - bpj. Each
submarket sells some Medicaid units, a fraction y of quantity ~, although no one knows exactly
which units will be sold to Medicaid ahead of time. Therefore, the firm must choose one price
for the submarket.

(The underlying

demand, same slope across submarkets,

intuition

does not depend on the assumptions

or constant proportion sold to Medicaid.)

regulation the Medicaid and non-Medicaid

of linear

Without any

segments of the market are identical:

Where profit is n and the optimal price for the iti market is pi*. When best price legislation

is

11The data are highly confidential; only the Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA) sees the
figures.
9

introduced, the profit expression changes:

n bestpr&e

=

Y~O, - c)g,@j) +

ai

(P}- c)9j@j)

(l-Y):
i=l

i=l

+ bc

(2)

pi * pj

Pi” =

(1 ‘~)(aj + bc) + Y(cbN

+ ~ai)
i

Pj” =

(1 -y)2b

pi = pj

+ y2bN

Where N is the total number of markets and pj is the minimum price.
higher than (q+bc)/2b

The new optimal pj is

because ~ is less than all other ai. When the firm maximizes

the best

price profit function with respect to customer j‘s price and customer j has the minimum price,
the derivative has an additional positive term compared to the original case. The firm will earn
more profits if it can raise its minimum price.
A rule that mandates a discount to some customers based on average price will also alter
the firm’s profit function.

II uve~e

price =

(1 -

y)~qi@i)@i

- c,

1=1

(3)

N
+

YE

9i(F(1-a)) (F(l -

a) - c)

1=1

Where p is the average price and u is the percentage discount below AMP that Medicaid gets.
This problem turns out to be very complex and a general solution is beyond the scope of the
paper.

The intuition,

however,

is fairly straightforward.

Medicaid

consumers

across all

submarkets are paying a percentage below average price that is almost surely not optimal in any
of the submarkets.

The firm can change optimal prices slightly with only a second-order

from the non-Medicaid

consumers.

loss

The altered prices will change average price and have a first-

order effect on the amount of profits earned from Medicaid consumers.

10

Whether prices move

up or down depends on whether optimal prices are below or above the Medicaid price and the
relative size and elasticity of the different submarkets.

Since the OBRA legislation mandated a

price for Medicaid that was well below a quanti~-weighted
f~m’s optimal response would be to raise price:

average price, it is likely that a

the higher the firm sets its price to non-

Medicaid customers, the higher are its profits from Medicaid consumers.

Inelastic Medicaid Demand
The second framework

assumes that Medicaid demand is perfectly inelastic,

Medicaid final consumer does not pay for the drug he or she consumes,

Since the

we might think that

Medicaid consumers do not respond to price changes at all. Of course, states can change aspects
of their Medicaid programs, such as eligibility rules, in response to price.

However, states may

not have responded to the OBRA 90 legislation very quickly because of the speed of the bi 11’s
passage, uncertainty over how the program would work, and delays in collecting data. Therefore,
I briefly explore the results of assuming Medicaid demands a fixed quantity of pharmaceuticals
and is completely unaffected by price, while the rest of the market has a normal demand curve,
If Medicaid
Medicaid

demand is fixed (~,

consumers

(ai+bc+mi)/2b.12

for example)

due to political

and the firm is required

regulation

is

price increases with the size of the inelastic segment, and, in particular,

is

above the optimal price for non-Medicaid
higher prices will fall to (q+bc)/2b,

pressures,

consumers.

the optimal

price

to sell to the non-

without

If an MFC is imposed in this framework,

but again, the low prices will rise to (ai+bc+Z~)/2b.

13

Once again the average price rule is very complex and I do not present a general solution.
After the rules take effect, Medicaid prices depend entirely on prices charged to other consumers.
A firm can reduce its 1991 price to the optimal price for non-Medicaid

consumers (no inelastic

demanders in the market) which increases profits from that group, but causes the firm to receive
a very low price on its Medicaid sales.

In order to get the Medicaid price higher, the firm can

12I assume political pressure requires the firm to sell to both types of customers, Charging infinity
to Medicaid and not selling to any other buyer would not last very long.
13 Higher prices fall because the firm no longer sells at that price to the inelastic consumers.
Therefore, the firm prefers to price more optimally for the non-Medicaid segment and increase quantity
sold there.

contemplate increasing prices to non-Medicaid consumers.

The envelope theorem says it is worth

increasing prices slightly at least. The extent to which the firm is willing to raise prices further
will depend on the market share of Medicaid and the elasticity of demand of the other consumers,
These two effects, the jump down in price due to the reduction in importance

of the inelastic

customers, and the increase due to the externality, have opposite signs and it is not clear a priori
which effect will dominate in any given situation.
To summarize, this basic discussion predicts that OBRA will cause brands to alter their
prices in response to several incentives.
incentive to raise its lowest prices.
rise because Medicaid

The best price legislation

always gives a firm an

The average price legislation has opposing effects.

prices depend on other prices; however,

when Medicaid

Prices

demand

is

inelastic prices can fall, again because the inelastic consumers are not as important in the demand
curve, so the optimal price is lower.
Note that either best price or average price was binding at any one time for any one
branded presentation.

If a concentration’s

lowest price was below 87.5% of AMP, its Medicaid

sales were subject to the best price rule; if its lowest price was above that level, they were
subject to the average price rule. A firm would have calculated the profits for each concentration
of each brand under both alternatives

and chosen a price distribution

that maximized

profits.

After the legislation was passed each rule generated a significant share of rebate revenue; no one
rule was prefemed by all firms,

Half of single-source

and half of brands facing generic competition

brands gave discounts of more than 30%

gave discounts of more than 50% in 1991. 1“

Generics were exempt from the best price rule, but had to sell to Medicaid at 90% of their
average price.

Thus only the average price provision

affected generic firms directly, and it

should have had the effects described above. A zero-profit firm facing an average price provision
would be forced to raise its prices to keep profits non-negative,

To the extent that generic firms

were perfectly competitive and earning zero profits, this is another reason to expect prices to have
risen.

14CBO page 36. Health and Human Services has published a report (Sullivan (1992)) concluding that
the “best price” rule is not the dominant source of rebate revenue compared to the “average price”
provision. Their analysis, however, looks at prices after the MFC legislation had passed, when firms had
altered their price distributions. Thus we don’t know how much dispersion existed ex ante, but only that
the legislation did not completely deter fms from discounting below 12% of average price in 1991.
12

The OBRA incentives may also have created strategic effects.

Cooper shows in a model

with two firms but uniform prices, that even a firm that unilaterally institutes MFC pricing alters
its own best response function so that equilibrium

prices for both firms are higher.

Intuitive y,

the MFC causes price discounts to become more expensive, which discourages their use. Rivals
are aware of the altered incentives and that knowledge changes their own behavior.
fiis

Oligopolistic

that are competing for the same customers, as therapeutic substitutes do, will become less

aggressive in price competition under an MFC, giving market prices another opportunist y to rise.
The price responses of generic firms will also depend on the strategic aspect of the MFC and
how many generic firms are in the market with the competitive

brand.

When the brand is

constrained by an MFC, its best response function shifts and its rival(s) has an incentive to raise
its price. If the MFC firm has many generic rivals, all producing a fairly homogeneous

product,

each of the rivals has much less incentive to give a soft response; there are many firms in the
market whose best response functions haven ‘t moved.

Since on] y the brand has shifted its best

response function, there may be no (or very little) price rise by generic rivals. 1s On the other
hand, if there are few generic competitors,
softer competition

their price will shift noticeably

in response to the

caused by the MFC and generic prices will rise.

The cap on price increases imposed by the OBRA rules eliminates the gain from raising
prices too fast. In particular, a firm would not want its average price to increase at faster than
the rate of inflation
Medicaid.lb

or it would have to subtract more than the difference

off the price to

Therefore, a firm has no incentive to raise average price in order to increase the

price Medicaid pays for a drug -- once the rate of inflation has been reached.

This part of the

rule is very important as it limits the responses to the incentives created by OBRA.
Types of players
Manufacturers

of pharmaceuticals

fall into two main categories.

consists of “innovator” firms; they undertake research and development
and bring them to market.

under a

A second type of firm is a generic or im]tator firm.

15See Cooper (1986) for a theoretical treatment.
BOX

to discover new drugs

Once approved by the FDA, such drugs are marketed

proprietary, or brand, name by the innovator.

16See CBO

The first category

I, p,15,
13

After patent expiration, any firm may submit an Abbreviated New Drug Application,
to the FDA.17 The generic firm must show its product is bioequivalent
product.

or ANDA,

to the original branded

Once its ANDA is approved and the original patent has expired, a generic firm may

legally make and sell the product.

Thus, some drugs have two categories of manufacturers,

the

brand and one or more generics.
The variety of competitive conditions in the pharmaceutical

industry will prove useful in

predicting which prices will be most affected by the rebate rules, I classify all brand (also called
“pioneer” or “innovator”) drugs that have patent protection
a patented brand continually
protection.19

faces competition

The level of competition

when

as “patented brands. ”18 Note tha[

from therapeutic

substitutes,

a brand has lost patent

characterized by the number of generic firms also manufacturing

despite its patent
protection

can be

the drug at any given time,

I

refer to a brand in a market with one or more generic firms as a “competitive brand. ” The final
class includes all the generic manufacturers.

This class can be further broken down into ANDA

holders and labelers; the definition of labelers will be given below.
Table I lists the expected effects on pre-rebate average price by competitive
retail sector at the imposition of an MFC rules.

class and

The pre-rebate mean price is exactly what my

data record; the prices in the data should respond to the imposition of the MFC and average price
clauses according to the strength and prevalence of the MFC, average price, and strategic effects.

17I identify which fms are participating, or have permission to participate, in each market with the
~A’s Approved Drug Products and Therapeutic muivalents. This publication details which ANDAs have
been granted; it reports the exact concentration, form, date of approval, and firm receiving the ANDA.

1s Sometimes two firms discover a drug independently and share the patent or are both licensed to
manufacture and market a drug by the inventor. Although the market structure is a duopoly rather than
monopoly, I classify these observations with “patented brands. ”
19Some brands are still monopolies but have lost patent protection; no generic has entered that
particular market. I call these drugs “off-patent brands,” but end up excluding them from the analysis due
to lack of useable observations.

Table I: Expected Changes in Average Price
Due to Incentives in the MFC Rules
by Competitive Class and Distribution Channel
Outpatient Drugs Only

AP
I
I

Drugstore

Hospital

patented brand
(innovatoron patent)

most-favored-customer:
average: ?

+ I most-favored-customer:

competitive brand (innovator
w/genericcompetition)

most-favored-customer:
average: ?

+

generic

average: ?
to maintain zero profit: +
strategic m-f-c: +

+

I
most-favored-customer:

+

to maintain zero profit: +
strategic m-f-c: +

Usually when industry prices and profits rise we expect to see entry by firms wanting a
share of the profits.
manufacturers

Patented drugs are obviously protected from entry by their patent,

Generic

are, in general, not protected from entry. However, a generic entrant must receive

approval from the FDA before it can begin selling a generic drug.
eighteen months, on average, after the application is submitted.
several months preparing the application.
the new profitability

The approval process takes

The firm would normally spend

Thus, the earliest an entrant (encouraged to enter by

of the market) would normally appear would be towards the end of 1992,

well outside my sample period.
From a firm’s point of view, the most important question might be how much (and in
what direction)

post-rebate

revenues

change.20

researcher must know where in the distribution

the Medicaid purchases fall.

are already at the low end of the price distribution,
will not lower firm revenue by very much.

To find the post-rebate

mean

price,

the

If Medicaid sales

the direct payments required by the scheme

On the other hand, if Medicaid sales are often to

20“Is this a good bill or a bad bill? ...It also depends on who you are. If you market major producls
that had previously been denied forrnulary access and do not discount deeply, this is probably a pretty
good bill. If, on the other hand, your products are multi-source, your growth products are very expensive,
and/or you discount heavily, you have your work cut out for you. ”
Medical Marketing and Media, February 1991

15

small pharmacies without bargaining power, the rebate amount might be large.

In general, the

direct effect of the rebate and the expected strategic effect of reduced competition
prices oppose one another and their relative strengths cannot be precisely
individual invoice data from fm

and higher

evaluated

without

and Medicaid purchase data that is collected by HCFA,

III. Data Description
The observations

that make up the data for this study are fairly complex.

structure clear, Table II illustrates the fields that make up each observation,

To make the

The first elemen L

of an observation is the “drug,” or specific chemical entity, which may be called by i[S generic
or brand (proprietary)

name.

A drug can be manufactured

by the NDA holder and any ANDA

holders that exist. The drug comes in one or more forms; a form is solid (e.g. tablet), liquid, or
other (e.g. patch); most drugs come in only one form and some have two forms.
can be further divided into different concentrations,

for example, 250mg or 500mg.

forms in this dataset have an average of 3.67 concentrations
as seven different concentrations,

each.

in the dataset.

are the packaging and number of units.

come in bottles of many sizes, from 2 to 1,000, or in unit dose packages
definition, one unit.

Adding information

an observation.
concentration,

of drug, labeler, form, concentration,

which have, by

in a presentation

Each

number of units and

on revenue, quantity, month, and year turns a presentation

All the observations

The

Tablets can

Liquids can be packaged in bottles, bottles with droppers, or vials.

presentation is a unique combination
packaging.

The drug-

Several drugs have as many

one has twelve, which is the maximum

final choice variables for the manufacturer

The drug-form

into

have the same drug, labeler, form,

number of units, and packaging data, The previous pharmaceutical

literature has

largely worked with the most common (highest revenue) dosage form to avoid these complex
dimensions.

I hope to be able to add more depth to the analysis with the additional information.

16

II

Table II: The Structure of an Observation

in the Dataset

Examples
Drug

atenolol

methyldopa

Labeler

ICI

MSD

Form

tablet

oral liquid

Concentration

100mg

50mg/ml

Number of Units

1000

lornlxlo

Package

bottle

bottle

Month

01

12

Year

1990

1991

Revenue

111.11

111,11

Quantity

999

999

P
r
e
s
e
n
t
a
t
i
o
n

:

s
e
r
v
a
t
i
o
n

time
series
variation

Data
The data were collected
pharmaceutical

by IMS America,

sales in the US. IMS provided the Cardiovascular

and Hospital Audit from 1989 through
revenue

terms)

a firm that provides

classes

of prescription

innovation in the post-WWII

period.

1991.

Cardiovascular

pharmaceuticals

detailed

data about

subset of their Drugstore Audit
drugs is one of the largest (in

and has experienced

considerable

Therefore there are many drugs and competitive

represented in the dataset as well as about six billion dollars in annual revenue.

classes

The Audits are

created by monthly sampling of warehouse, chain pharmacy, and independent pharmacy invoices
for observations on the wholesale price, No sales to HMOS are included in these samples.
the individual invoices are combined,

transformed

from a sample into national-level

reported as an estimate of national revenue and quantity.

Then

data, and

The individual invoice information

is

never reported.
Hospital prices have more measurement
receive more cash discounts than phmacies

error than drugstore prices because hospitals
md, in addition, the number of observations

17

is

smaller.

Cash discounts are cash returned to the customer after buying a certain quantity of a

drug, a particular mix of drugs, or a specific dollar amount with one wholesaler,
appear on invoices.

that do not

Discounts are nearly impossible to trace, quantify, and assign to a particular

product, and yet are an important component of the market.

If invoice prices change and cash

discounts compensate, the data will show a change when none has occurred.

However, the rebate

rules explicitly instructed firms to include cash discounts in their calculation of best and average
prices; thus the rule did not provide any incentive for firms to alter their rebate (v, invoice)
policies.

However, some flexibility in assigning cash rebates will minimize observed change and

the existence of rebates adds considerably

to measurement

error in the data.21

IMS takes out a large fraction of all price dispersion before the data are seen by anyone,
I do observe one source of dispersion in my data: a type of quantity discounting,

For example,

tablets can come in bottles of 10 or 1,000. The latter size might not be very practical for a small
pharmacy although the cost per pill is usually lower.
packaging to take advantage of heterogeneous
like “accudose” packs that mark a patient’s
simpler presentations

but cost much more.

Manufacturers

consumers.

Proprietary

also use special types of
convenience

packaging

daily dose contain the same chemical entity as
IMS also reports

payment

sources,

including

Medicaid, for some drugs in the sample.
The IMS data have two important features,

The first is that what MS refers to as the

“manufacturer” is not always the actual manufacturer;
may label all or part of its own output,

instead it is the labeler,

A manufacturer

It may also sell all or part of its output to one or more

labelers who put their own firm name on the package.

The labeler, not the manufacturer,

responsible to HCFA for the Medicaid Rebate on all its products.

Thus each labeler has its own

AMP and rebate amount which could differ from other firms selling the identical product.
identify the true set of manufacturers

I can

allowed to make a given drug because each one must have

filed an NDA or an ANDA with the FDA.

However, some manufacturers

to labelers, in which case they will never show up as an IMS manufacturer.
and the labeler are synonymous

is

for brand observations,

sell all their output
The manufacturer

but many generic drugs have multiple

21 Additionally, pharmaceutical companies sometimes sell products as a bundled package; they
combine a sale item with a full price item and charge one price for the two. The prices imputed by the
Office of Inspector General average away the deep discount, thus concealing a potential “best price. ”
Bundling therefore also contributes to fins’ ability to conceal change.
18

labelers.

In this paper I focus on only one generic class, the distributors,

ANDA holder category.

ANDA holders have data that are unexpectedly

perhaps because they have a different set of customers
generic distributors.

ANDA data are significantly

and do not analyze the
difficult to work with,

and different types of contracts than

more problematic

to analyze and are omitted

from the analysis hereafter.
I drop any drug in the IMS dataset which is not listed in the FDA Orange Book22, my
main source of information
observations

on the state of competition

for which I cannot identify the competitive

market, those whose labeler is “Manufacturer
inconsistent

reported units.

in the market.

I also drop those

class due to some anomaly in the

Not Stated, ” and also those that have internally

The remaining data are described in Table IV.

IV. The Problem of Identifying

Price Changes Due to OBRA

The prices given by the data exhibit two main patterns. The first is a step-like pattern;
prices are flat for several months and then rise by a small amount,

The increases typically come

at irregular intervals and vary somewhat in size, The other pattern is really a lack of pattern, a
scatter of points perhaps sloping up or down.
visible to the casual observer.

A clear upward jump in January

A simple statistic that should be illuminating

1991 is not

is a comparison of

price growth before and after the law for drugs affected and unaffected by the legislation.
GAO tried this and finds that HMO outpatient
OBRA was implemented

drug prices increased

The

faster in the year after

than the year before, while hospital drug prices did the opposite, but

does not feel confident in attributing
with drugstore and hospital outpatient

that difference to 0BRA.23

I perform the same exercise

drugs and report the results in Table 111, Not only do

hospital growth rates increase more, which was not predicted, the standard deviations are very
large while the mean changes are quite small,
that one group had a significantly

This methodology

makes it difficult to conclude

larger price increase than another.

22See Note 17. About 10 chemicals are listed in the IMS dataset and not in the Orange Book,
23ibid 1993. p2. Their methodology compmes price growth between July 1989 and July 1990 to
growth between July 1990 and January 1992.

Table III. Oral Cardiov%cular
mean log difference and
standard deviation

Price Growth, Before and After Rebate Rules

Drugstore

Hospital
Ohs.

Ohs.

June 89- July 90

-.019
.290

1772

-.036
.368

964

Ott 90- Sept 91

.008
.322

1817

.012
.326

1024

Another approach that should be helpful is to look at whether price changes around the
time of OBRA’S implementation
to raise price.
Medicaid

are correlated with characteristics

that give the firm an incentive

The framework discussed above predicts that price changes in response to the

Rebate Rules will depend on several characteristics

dataset contains no invoice information;

of an invoice,

However,

my

the analysis will have to use averaged values for a

presentation.
Medicaid’s market share (Medicaid Share) in 1990 of a particular drug will determine the
strength of the incentive to raise prices for any given price distribution.
best price and the average price rules will depend on the importance

The effects of both the
of sales to Medicaid.

In

the extreme case of no Medicaid sales, the firm will have no direct reason to change its prices
(although it may respond to the incentives and choices of other firms), Unfortunately
Medicaid Share is available for only about half the observations

in the dataset.

the variable

The values this

variable takes depend on the formulary rules in different states in 1990 and Federal Medicaid
reimbursement
for competitive

rules. The Federal program limited reimbursement
brands to the price of available generics.

of state Medicaid expenditures

A state therefore had an incentive to

restrict use of competitive brands since it would not be fully reimbursed for them.24 The mean
value of Medicaid share is lower in the competitive brand class than among generics or patented
drugs.
The best price rule gives firms an incentive to increase their lowest prices.

Since the data

only report average prices, it seems as though we cannot make use of this incentive.

However,

large package sizes usually have a lower unit price than small packages, whether due to lower

u See Soumerai et al for a description of state Medicaid policies and their effects,
20

If the largest packages are sold at the lowest prices, large

per unit costs or price discrimination.

packages will be more likely to find the “best price” provision binding.
want to raise the price of larger package sizes more.

In such a case, firms w il1

Smaller packages with higher unit prices

will not see as large a rise. We should see package size predicting price increases under the best
price legislation and for competitors of firms subject to the best price rule. The variable Relative
Size is defined to be a package’s own size (e.g. 100 tablets) over the largest size available for
that drug and firm (e.g. if 1000 is the largest size, Relative Size= lOO/lOOO=.1). Relative Size
varies from 0.0017 to a maximum of one. Note that package size is fixed, although the quantity
sold of different package sizes may change over time,
More price dispersion

raises the probability

of a brand finding the MFC binding and

therefore increasing its lowest prices. In the case of competitive brands, the level of competition
Borenstein

may affect the level of price dispersion.
positively associated with price dispersion.
Hetilndahl

and Rose (1992) find that competition

A greater number of generic competitors

is

or a lower

Index would therefore imply a stronger price rise on the part of the brand to avoid

the negative impact of the legislation.
markets .25 The variables Drugstore

Similar reasoning
He~ and Hospital

Drugstore and Hospital markets respectively,
brands) selling a drug in December

1990,

He~ are Herfindahl

Number of ANDAs measures the number of firms
the product by the end of 1990, Notice

different measure of competition

by IMS, on which the Hetilndahl

indices for the

calculated over the number of labelers (including

which have been approved by the FDA to manufacture
that this is a fundamentally

extends to patented brand duopoly

than the number of labelers listed

variables are based.

To illustrate the difficulty of picking up the effects of the OBRA legislation, I regress the
log difference in drugstore price (over fifteen months) on concentration
share of Medicaid, and the relative size of the package.
main classes in Table IV.

in the market, the market

The results are reported for the three

The results are extremely inconclusive;

very little is significant,

alone of the predicted sign. However, this regression does not control for characteristics
drugs which may be affecting price movements.

let

of the

A drug’s prices have trends due to exogenous

factors such as changing technology, changing demand, and seasonal effects, although we expect

25A duopoly market is one where each fm has its own brand name, but the two firms are selling
the identical product. (Usually because a foreign firm has licensed the product to two US firms.)
21

to see presentation variation within the drug. Hence, it is very difficult to identify small changes
in prices with this method and the explained variation is very low. The problem with interpreting
Tables III and IV is that we are trying to explain any change due to the legislation and overall
trends in different drugs.

The effects of the legislation

will be small and are likely to be

swamped by important trends in technology and demand when aggregate changes are examined.
Exploiting

the time series available for each presentation

goes some way toward solving this

problem.

v.

Estimation

of Price Shifts at the Implementation

In this section
implementation

I estimate

the magnitude

of OBRA

and sign of any change

in prices at the

of OBRA 90. The dependent variable is one of two variables: Drugstore Price

or Hospital Price, for three competitive

classes.

Although quantity data are available, they are

extremely difficult to fit well because of the many outliers and differing buying patterns across
presentations.

The results are very unstable, so I do not discuss them in the paper, but focus on

prices.
Brands
I examine the behavior of price over the two years surrounding January 1, 1991, the first
effective date of the new policy.

The basic regression uses log price as the dependent variable,

The log form of the dependent variable allows shift and trend terms to be expressed in percent
changes and therefore be estimated as a constant across presentations

and drugs,

Since every

drug is experiencing different demand and supply conditions, it is important to allow for different
growth rates and seasonal patterns across drugs. Therefore, every presentation of every drug has
its own intercept and time trend.
price and quantity

Additional

are included.zb

variables accounting

These controls produce

for quarterly movements

in

adjusted R2’s of over 0.8 in all

regressions.
Each of the explanato~
Dummy,

variables described in section IV is interacted

with the Rule

Rule Dummy is zero until the legislation takes effect and one thereafter.

Each equation

also includes Rule Dummy on its own which will capture class-specific shocks to price not related

26For example, quantities sold are about 20% higher in Mar, June, Sept, and December than the other
months of the year. Prices are more likely to change in Jan, April, July, and Ott than other months.
22

to any of the variables discussed above.

For a branded class the equation is:

log pi = PIMedicaidShurei *RD + ~2RelutiveSizei *~
+ ~3DrugstoreHe#t *RD + ~4Number~ANDAsi
i + e,

+ ~5RD + CONmOU

where the controls are presentation

(4)

*RD

time trends, quarterly shifts, and presentation

intercepts.

I

analyze both hospital and drugstore markets separately; Pi is either drugstore price or hospital
price.

The results for brands are reported in Table VH.
The competitive brand class, as expected, has the results most consistent with the theory.

The coefficients
significant

on the first three explanatory

at conventional

indicates the legislation

levels.

variables

A larger Medicaid

have the predicted

Share increases

sign and are

average price, which

is creating an overall incentive to increase price.

The coefficient

on

Relative Size shows that larger packages experience a larger average price increase, evidence that
they may be disproportionately
Number ofANDAs

represented

among ‘best’ prices,

The positive coefficient

on

is consistent with the relationship found in Borenstein and Rose (1992); more

competitors increase price dispersion which in turn increases a firm’s incentive to raise its lowest
prices, increasing average price. The coefficients on Rule Dummy and Drugstore He~ are both
negative and insignificant.

The regression fits well, which we can see in the adjusted R2 of 0.96.

Although the first three coefficients are positive, not all presentations
same response when the law takes effect.
in Table VII (X6) for each presentation.

are predicted to have the

I construct the total effect of the variables reported
The median change is 4.3% while the mean change

across presentations is 4% with a standard error of .970. In total, the average price of competitive
brand pills rises after the law takes effect. This number can be contrasted to the average monthly
price increase in this class of 0.2% (although some presentation

prices grow much quicker or

slower).
Competitive

brand hospital price is predicted to rise less than drugstore price because

some of the hospital drugs are used for inpatients and are not subject to the regulation.

The on] y

significant coefficient is that of Relative Size which is larger than the drugstore coefficient; the
others are insignificant,

either because the incentives are too weak to move all hospital prices or
23

because of the additional measurement error created by cash rebates, The mean presentation time
trend in the hospital regression is negative, which is consistent with hospitals negotiating
prices for brands because of competition from generics.
is a just significant six percent increase on average.

low

The combined effect of all the variables
In sum, in the competitive

brand class it

looks as if the MFC and the average price provision combined are working to increase drugstore
prices of those presentations

with the strongest match to the incentives in the bill.

Patented brands face competition

from therapeutic substitutes,

subject to the same incentives as themselves,

and their competitors

are

To the extent brands compete against therapeutic

substitutes, the strategic effect of the MFC should apply to patented brand pricing,

However, if

the level of price dispersion is lower due to lack of generic alternatives, then the chance that the
MFC is binding in the drugstore

or hospital sector is lower,

affected by the average price provision than competitive brands.

Patented brands may be more
However, patented brands are

also likely to be bumping up against the inflation constraint already and therefore may have no
“room” to raise prices, regardless of the effectiveness

of the MFC or average price provisions,

The results

in Table VII show that the specific

predictors

of the increase

in prices

insignificant

for patented brands, although Rule Dummy is positive and significant

are

at the 670

level. Overall price levels may have moved up, but in the absence of correlation between prices
and the incentives in the legislation, it is unclear that OBRA had any effect on patented brands.
It is interesting to note that patented brand time trends are larger than competitive

brand trends,

which is consistent with stronger price growth in the class. Again, the hospital regression yields
no significant coefficients.

Generic fitimation
Measures of market concentration

are included in the generic regressions although many

researchers view generic competitors as zero-profit price-takers playing a Bertrand game. There
is a substantial

literature

that suggests the generic industry is not playing a Bertrand

game.

Wiggins and Maness (1995), Frank and Salkever (1995), and Caves et al. (1991) all document
that generic price decreases steadily with the number of generic suppliers.

Generic prices could

respond to the incentives of the average price provision if they face a downward-sloping
curve.

The hetilndahl

variables will have positive coefficients

24

demand

if prices increase more when

concentration

is high, for example.

The specification

for generic producers contains an additional variable,

Share is the share of the Medicaid market sold by the competitive

Brand Medicaid

brand in 1990. Competitive

brand and generic markets are matched so that the variable is the Medicaid share of the relevant
competitive brand for each generic.

The purpose of including this variable is to track when the

generic’s competitor is facing a large MFC or average price incentive due to a large amount of
Medicaid

sales.

Such a competitor

will respond

more strongly

to the legislation,

thereby

engendering

a stronger change in the generic’s optimal price.

presentations

in the generic clmses, each drug-form gets its own time trend that is forced to be

equal across presentations

Due to the large number of

The equation to be estimated for the generic class

in the drug-fom.27

is:
log ‘i

= PI MedicaidSharei*RD + ~2RelativeSizei *RD
+ P~(DrugstoreHe@t or Numkr~ANDAsJ
*RD
+ ~4BrandMedicaidSharei *RD + P~RuleDummy
+ comoui

(5)

+ ei

The variable Medicaid Share is not included in the specification

for hospital price.

There is no

reason why a generic product’s hospital price should be influenced by its Medicaid share, since
the rebate amount does not depend on generic hospital prices at all, However, generic hospital
prices could be affected by the brand’s behavior in the hospital market.
brand’s Medicaid share, the size of the package, and the concentration

This depends on the

in the market, so all these

variables are included.
The simple generic results are displayed in Table VIII.
different measures of concentration
ANDAs

extant

specifications.

in 1990.

The two sides of the table use

in the market, either a herfindahl index or the number of

A larger

relative

In column one, the herfindahl

size significantly

increases

index and the product’s

prices

Medicaid

across

all

share have

positive coefficients, which is consistent with the theory, but they are only significant at the nine
and twelve percent levels, respectively.

Since the average price provision

has an ambiguous

27Testing this restriction on brands reveals it cannot be rejected in about half the drugs.
25

effect on prices, the lack of significance of Medicaid Share could be expected.

In both drugstore

regressions the coefficient on Brand Medicaid Share is significant and negative.
unexpected, contrary to the incentives described above, and also very robust.
needed to ascertain

This result is

More research is

why a generic firm should lower prices for these presentations.

The

he~lndahl results on the lefthand side of the table are weak, with size the only variable behaving
as expected.
The specifications
somewhat

better.

using Number of NDAs

as the measure of market concentrate ion are

In column three, drugstore prices fall with the imposition

markets with a larger Number of ANDAs.

Again, the coefficient on Relative Size is positive and

significant and that of Medicaid Share is positive but insignificant.
Brand Medicaid Share persists in both drugstore regressions.
products facing a brand with considerable
(eleven percent significance).
MFC.

Perhaps

manufacturers

of the law for

The negative coefficient on

However, in the hospital sector

sales to Medicaid may raise prices more than others

The hospital results are consistent with the strategic effect of the

this is because hospitals

are likely to be getting low prices from branded

and these low prices trigger the MFC. Generic time trends are small and negative,

in contrast to the positive brand trends.
The presentations

which are most likely to display the strategic effect most strongly are

those where package size and Medicaid share are high, giving the brand an incentive to raise
price, and the number of generic players is few, giving the generic an incentive to respond to
softer brand pricing.
the interpretation

In principle one could include an interaction term of all three variables, but

of a triple interaction

term is awkward.

Instead, in Table VIII 1 restrict the

sample to larger values of one of the variables, and include an interaction term composed of the
other two.

The interaction terms should have positive coefficients.

I also report the results of

a regression restricting the sample to markets where there are fewer than ten outstanding ANDAs.
A perfectly clean test of the strategic effect would use hospital data, because the law
provides no direct incentive to change hospital prices. However, the hospital data is confounded
with inpatient drugs, so I use drugstore data where the average price provision does affect generic
drugstore pricing.

However, the average price provision creates no incentive for a generic firm

to increase prices of large presentations

more than others, or to increase prices on presentations

where the brand’s Medicaid share is higher, so the use of drugstore data should not be biasing

26

my results.
The results for generic drugstore prices (only) are displayed in Table IX. The coefficient
on Number of ANDAs increases in magnitude compared to the full sample result; the effect of
increased concentration

on price is stronger when the market is less competitive

Relative Size is again positive and significant,
unrestricted

sample.

insignificant,

and somewhat larger than the coefficient in the

Brand Medicaid Share is still negative, but declines in magnitude

This variable seems to have a stronger effect in more competitive

more ~DAs.

Medicaid Share is insignificantly

concentrated

markets Rule Dummy becomes

significantly

positive,

and is

markets with

different from zero in both regressions.

controlling for the effects of the average price provision.
approximately

to begin with.

but Rule Dummy

In the
is also

The total effect of all the variables is

zero on average, as in Table VIII.

The interaction results display further evidence for the existence of a strategic effect in
the generic segment of the market.

All the interaction terms have positive coefficients,

interacted variables on their own have negative signs; the interpretation

but the

of the overal 1 change in

a variable is reported in the last lines of the table, The net effect of increasing any of the three
variables of interest is to increase generic price when the law changes, although some increases
are close to zero. The most important result is that when the sample is restricted to concentrated
markets, increasing either package size or brand Medicaid share raises the generic price upon
imposition of the law. When the sample is limited and the interaction included, increasing Brand
Medicaid Share from .05 to .15 in a concentrated
the law by six percent.

Similarly, if Relative Size moves from 0.4 to 1, generic prices increase

by three percent more when the law takes effect.
competitive

market raises the price change in response to

environment

respond strategically

This suggests that generic producers in a less

to the actions of the brand in the market.

The

more incentive the brand has to raise the price of a particular product, the more likely the generic
equivalent of that product shows a price increase also. Columns three and four of Table IX are
symmetric regressions

that display similar, though somewhat weaker, results.

Other Variations
I tested the results reported above by running the same specifications
1990 rather than 1990-1991.

on data from 1989-

In these regressions the Rule Dummy turns to one in January, 1990.

27

If the results are due to a regularity of the pharmaceutical
the 1990 results will be similar to the 1991 results.
variables are at all similar.
appear in the regressions
hospital

Most coefficients
on hospital price.

None of the coefficients on the Rule Dummy

are not significant;

a few significant coefficients

For the reasons discussed

results in the paper to be less reliable.

functional forms of the price regressions.

market that I am not controlling for,

above, I consider the

To check robustness,

I investigate

One outlier drug affects the competitive

other

brand and

generic results quite strongly because its Medicaid share is more than twice that of the next
highest drug.

I do not have a good explanation

those observations

for why its Medicaid share is so high, I drop

from the sample and the results reported here.2a Otherwise,

the results are

quite robust.
Merck & Co already had a MFC scheme in place for Medicaid

sales in 1990.29 If

Merck is constrained

by its own MFC pre-OBRA,

its prices will not change in the expected

manner after OBRA.

I re-estimate the regressions above without including Merck observations.

The results are almost identical to those of the whole sample. A self-imposed
MFC might not have been very credible to competitors,

and self-monitored

hence Merck might not have been

different.

VI. Conclusions
The results presented here do not show textbook responses to the OBRA legislation
pharmaceutical

prices in either magnitude or significance.

by

As noted above, the rules are quite

complex,

In particular, they do not imply that we should see prices rise for all presentations

of

all drugs.

However, if we look for responses among groups of products most strongly affected

2s The drug nifedipine has a value for Medicaid share of .43. This is extraordinary considering that
the drug faces generic competition and the range for the rest of the competitive brand sample is Oto .18.
Additionally, the drug has two branded suppliers and only one has a high share, which is suspicious. (The
other firm has a Medicaid share of about .2.)
‘g “In 1990 the Company initiated its Equal Access to Medicines Program (EAMP) on its single
source products under which it offered its “best price” discount to state Medicaid programs that grant open
access to the Company’s products. The Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 largely reflects the
Company’s approach, subject to implementing regulations. ”
Annual Report, Merck & Co., 1991

28

by the legislation,

the expected responses are visible, though small.

generic competition
prices increased
legislation.

In particular, brands facing

raised some average prices after OBRA was implemented,

for those products

with characteristics

corresponding

and, crucial] y.

to incentives

The average drugstore price of a branded drug facing generic competition

by about four percent.

In particular,

reduced pharmaceutical

that much less in taxes, some non-Medicaid
some pharmaceutical
with MFC clauses:

increased

drugstore prices rose for large package sizes, for drugs

where Medicaid was a large purchaser, and in markets with many generic competitors.
Federal and state governments

in the

expenditure,

Although

and therefore had to collect

consumers paid higher prices for some products, and

firms may have become better off. These price changes illustrate the risk
MFCS have distributional

consequences

that may be unanticipated.
;.

I find little evidence that brands protected by a patent responded to the MFC.
the characteristics
price changes.

corresponding

to the incentives in the legislation are significant in predicting

This may be due to the inflation cap suppressing

average price provisions

None of

or less dispersion

in ex ante prices.

a response to the best and
Hospital

prices are poorly

measured; this fact combined with weaker incentives for the hospital market results in almost no
significant coefficients in the hospital regressions for either brands or generics.
Secondly,
competitive brands.

generic

pharmaceutical

prices

The average presentation

responded

to the price

increases

of the

did not experience a price increase, but those in

concentrated markets, with large package sizes and high sales to Medicaid, had significant price
increases.
response

The result that the number of generic manufacturers
to brand pricing

provides

empirical

postulated by Cooper (1986) and others.
fm

support

in the market affects generic

for the strategic

effect of the MFC

Generics in markets with few competitors

that could possibly have strictly benefitted from the legislation.

are the only

Although generics had to

rebate about one and one-half percent (ten percent of fifteen percent) of their sales to Medicaid,
price increases on some presentations

combined with likely quantity gain could have offset the

rebate payments for firms with the right product mix.
A remarked upon above, the estimates reported here may not apply to all segments of the
indust~.

The data I have do not include prices to HMOS (or pharmaceutical

29

benefit managers

like Medco), the types of institutions
cap restricting

likely have the pre-OBRA binding low price.30 The price

overall price growth to the rate of inflation

probably

increases we might have expected under the other incentives
surprising
competitive

to find that these data show the expected
classes and sales channels of drugs.

results

However,

restrained

in the law.

some price

It is therefore not

of the MFC for only a few
it is impotiant

to note that, in

principle, an MFC’S indirect effect on competition could completely counteract the desired, direct
effect on expenditure.

Because the data report average prices it is impossible

change in the distribution

of prices within and across channels.

to examine the

Such an examination

wou Id

reveal more subtle and interesting effects of the legislation and should be area of future research.

30“Federal officials and health care administrators say that for all but Medicaid patients, this year is
bringing another pile of higher drug bilIs. Congressional aides said that veterans hospitals face $150
million in higher drug expenses, up 21 percent. Kaiser Perrnanente, the country’s largest health
maintenance organization, said its drug costs would rise by $140 million, or 31 percent. ”
The New York Times, May 11, 1991

30

References

Borenstein, S, and Rose, N. L., (1992) “Competition and Price Dispersion
Industry,” Journal of Political Economy, August 1994
Borenstein, S., (1985) “Price Discrimination

in the U.S. Airline

in Free-entry Markets,” Rand Journal 16:3:380-97.

Cooper, Thomas E. (1986) “Most-favored-customer
of Economics 17:3:377-388.

pricing and tacit collusion,” RAND Journal

----, (1991) “Most-favored-nation pricing policy and negotiated prices,” International
Industrial 0rganization:9:2 :209-223.
Congressional Budget Office (1996), “How the Medicaid Rebate on Prescriptions
Pricing in the Pharmaceutical Industry,” CBO, Washington, DC.

Journal of

Drugs Affects

Crocker, Keith J., and Thomas P. Lyon (1994), “What do ‘Facilitating Practices’ Facilitate? An
Empirical Investigation of Most-Favored-Nation
clauses in Natural Gas Con tracts,”
Journal of tiw and Economics :37;29’7-322.
Health Care Financing Administration,
Programs. ”

(1994) “Summaries of [he Medicare and Medicaid

Holmes, Thomas, (1989), “The Effects of Third-Degree
American Economic Review 79;244-250.

Price Discrimination

in Oligopoly,”

Holt, Charles and Scheffman, David (1987) “Facilitating practices: the effects of advance notice
and best-price policies,” RAA!D Journal of Economics: 18:2:187-197.
Prig, I.P.L. (1991) “Most-Favored-Customer
Protection versus Price Discrimination
Journal of Political Economy:99:9: 1010-1028.
Prig, I.P.L. and D. Hirshleifer (1987) “Price Discrimination
Journal of Business:60:365 -383.

over Time,”

through Offers to Match Price,”

Salop, S. (1977) “The Noisy Monopolist: hperfect
Information, Price Dispersion,
Discrimination,” Review of Economic Studies:44:3:393 -406.

and Price

---, (1986) “Practices that (Credibly) Facilitate Oligopoly Coordination” in J, Stiglitz and F,
Mathewson eds., New Developments in the Analvsis of Market Structure, MIT Press,
Cambridge.
Salop, S. and Stiglitz, J., (1982) “The Theory of Sales: A Simple Model of Equilibrium
Dispersion with Identical Agents” American Economic Review 72:5:1121-1130,

Price

Soumerai, S,B., D. Ross-Degnan, E. Fortess, and J. Abelson, (1993) “A Critical Analysis of
Studies of State Drug Reimbursement Policies: Research in Need of Discipline,” The
Milbank Quarterly :71 :2:217-252.
Sullivan, Louis W., M.D. (1992), “Report to Congress: Medicaid Drug Rebate Program,” United
States Department of Health and Human Services.
United States General Accounting Office (1993), “Changes in Drug Prices Paid by HMOS and
Hospitals Since Enactment of Rebate Provisions,” GAO Report to Congressional
committees, GAo/HRD-93-43.
United States General Accounting Office (1993), “Changes in Drug Prices Paid by VA and DOD
Since Enactment of Rebate Provisions,” GAO Report to Congressional Committees,
GAo/HRD-91- 139.

32

Table IV: Changw in Drugstore Prices,
Oct. 1990- Dec. 199131
Dep Var: ln(P dec91) - ln(P oct go)

Patented
Brand

Competitive
Brand

Generic

Medicaid Share

-.373
(.213)

-.496
(.100)

-.267
(.382)

Relative Size

.008
(.017)

-.026
(.023)

.031
(.040)

Drugstore Herf

.116
(.038)

---

---

Number of ANDAs

---

-.003
(.001)

-.008
(.002)

Medicaid Share of the
Competitive Brand

---

---

-.150
(,198)

.052
135

.098
133

.021
478

Adjusted R2
Ohs.

31An observations in this regression is a presentation; the time series aspect of the data has been
collapsed into the dependent variable. The log difference of prices before and after the legislation are
regressed (OLS) on presentation characteristics.
33

Table V. Summary Statistics
for Presentations

N

Mean

Std Dev

Min

Max

Annual Revenue

2955

2.27E06

1.4E07

21

3.26E08

Number of ANDAs

3088

8.22

6,77

0

28

Share of Medicaid (% rev)

1602

.137

.061

0

.431

Hospital Hetilndahl

3071

.462

,280

.106

1

Drugstore Herfindahl

3052

.365

.270

.106

1

Duopoly Dummy Variable

3109

0.213

0.409

0

1

Relative Package Size

3109

0.396

0.387

0.0017

1

Number of Concentrations
per Drug-Fore

3109

3.67

1.84

1

12

Number of Presentations
3109

Pill

Liquid

Patch or
Spray

Extended Release Pill

Patented Brand

196

18

0

30

Competitive

233

55

5

54

ANDA Holder

670

53

1

66

Generic Distributor

1341

30

79

219

Off-Patent Brand

32

22

5

0

Number of Drug-Forms:

original
data

Patented Brand

42

37

25

Competitive

51

38

13

ANDA Holder

49

38

12

Generic Distributor

46

37

13

Off-Patent Brand

30

18

3

Total presentations:

3109

Brand

Brand

> outpatient >
only

Table continued on next page...

34

outpatient and
medicaid share known

Table VI. Summary Statistics Continued
Presentations

by Competitive

Class:

Patented Brands:
Annual Revenue ($)
Relative Package Size
Drugstore Herf
Hospital Herf
Medicaid Share (% rev)
Duopoly (% ohs)

244
225
244
228
230
165
244

2. 10EO7
0.580
0.864
0.863
0.077
0.340

4.58E07
0.412
0.211
0.190
0.040
0.475

291
0.006
0,500
0.506
0
0

3.26E08
1
1
1
0.299
1

Competitive Brands:
Annual Revenue
Relative Package Size
Drugstore Herf
Hospital Herf
Medicaid Share
Number of ANDAs
Number of Labelers

347
344
347
334
345
157
347
347

3.25E06
0.392
0.430
0.524
0.067
7.34
15.63

7.94E06
0.392
0,295
0.285
0.085
6,36
10.33

62
0.0017
0.106
0.106
0
1
1

1.09E08
1
1
1
.431
23
37

Generic Labelers:
Annual Revenue
Relative Package Size
Dmgstore Herf
Hospital Herf
Medicaid Share
Number of ANDAs
Number of Labelers
CB Medicaid Share

1669
1561
1669
1661
1660
825
1669
1669
852

2.88E05
0.381
0.301
0.411
0.157
8.68
21.13
0.084

2.34E06
0.376
0.199
0.236
0.047
6.14
8.75
0.102

21
0.005
0.106
0.106
0
1
1
0

5.40E07
1
1
1
0.283
28
37
0.431

35

Table VII:

Brand Average Price Changes
in January 199132

Competitive
Dep. Var.: Ln Price

Brand

Patented Brand

Drugstore

Hospital

Drugstore

Hospital

Medicaid Share*RD

.4154
(.1889)

-.5268
(.6962)

-.4432
(.2742)

-.0130
(,1417)

Relative Size*RD

.0464
(.0194)

,1413
(.0738)

-.0261
(.0217)

.0117
(.0111)

Number of ANDAs*RD

.0025
(.0010)

-,0041
(.0041)

‘--

-.0264
(.0350)

-.0825
(. 1225)

-.0402
(.0484)

-.0589
(,0319)

-.0140
(.0242)

.1243
(.0992)

.0972
(.0504)

.0506
(,0313)

Number of Observations
Number of Presentations

2991
131

2939
131

3246
147

3109
136

Adjusted R2

0.964

0,883

0.937

.980

Total effect of listed
variables: mean and se.

0.040
(.009)

0.066
(.034)

.009
(.012)

.001
(.006)

Monthly growth rates of
presentations

-.132 to .030;
mean= .002

-.083 to .060;
mean= -.009

-,144 to ,084;
mean=.008

-.016 to .032;
mean=.003

.003
(.007)

-.014
(.026)

.006
(.009)

.010
(.005)

Drugstore HeflRD
Hospital Her~RD

or

Rule Dummy

Quarterly changes

---

32@uation (4) is estimated, Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample for each column includes
all observations in the indicated competitive class. The dependent variable is the log of price in the
appropriate distribution channel. Intercepts for each presentation and presentation time trends are included
but not reported. Both brands’ drugstore prices have mostly small, positive time trend coefficients. After
-.132, the next lowest time trend is -.016 in the competitive brand drugstore regression. The competitive
brand hospital regression shows considerable variability across presentation time trends, unlike the patented
brand results.
36

Table VIII: Generic Price Changes
in January 199133

Dep. Var.: Ln Price

Drugstore

Hospital

Hetilndahl in Drugstore or
Hospital Market

Drugstore

Hospital

Number of ANDAs

Brand Medicaid
Share*RD

-.2433
(.1053)

.3184
(.1992)

-,3024
(.1058)

.3516
(.2054)

Relative Size*RD

.0430
(.01 12)

.0525
(.0227)

.0394
(,01 12)

.0527
(.0227)

Measure of Market
Concentration*RD

.0725
(.0426)

.0433
(.0728)

-.0031
(.0011)

.0017
(.0020)

Medicaid Share*RD

.2191
(.1421)

---

.1048
(.1390)

---

-.0705
(.0289)

-.0286
(.0301)

,0026
(.0282)

-.0388
(.0340)

Number of Observations
Number of Presentations

12875
740

6280
472

12875
740

6280
472

Adjusted R2

0.969

0.944

0.969

0.949

Total effect of listed
variables: mean and se.

-0.017
(.010)

.021
(.018)

-.017
(.010)

.018
(.018)

Monthly growth rates of
drugs

-.005 to .025;
mean=.003

-.004 to .019;
mean=.005

-.005 to .024;
mean=.003

-.004 to
.020;
mean==005

-.004
(.005)

-.029
(.009)

-4005
(.005)

-.027
(.009)

‘RD

Quarterly changes

33Equation (5) is estimated. Standard errors are in parentheses. The sample in each column includes
all observations in the indicated competitive class; the dependent variable is the log of price in the
appropriate distribution channel. Presentation intercepts are included in the regression but their
coefficients are not reported. Drug time trends are described but not reported,
37

Table IX: Strategic Effect in Generic Price Changes
with restricted sampl~ (drugstore only)~
Number of
ANDAs<10

Drugstore
He&.2

Relative
Size>.2

Brand Medicaid
Shtie>.04

Number of ANDAs*RD

-.0207
(.0033)

----

---

.-.

Brand Med%*Relative
s~*RD

---

2.489
(.4245)

-–

--

Drugstore HefiBrand
Med%*RD

---

---

8.152
(1.427)

---

Drugstore HeflRelative
Size*RD

---

---

---

,3935
(.1006)

Drugstore HefiRD

---

.0828
(.0555)

-.3203
{.1007)

-.0404
(.0587)

Relative Size*RD

.0624
(.0128)

-.0148
(,0256)

.1104
(.0206)

-.0222
(.0276)

Brand Medicaid
Share*RD

-.1725
(.1047)

-.6521
(.2797)

-1.547
(.2906)

-.0281
(.1672)

Medicaid Share*RD

-.1882
(. 1345)

.6904
(.2963)

-.0770
(.2043)

.4760
(.2737)

RD

.0981
(.0286)

-.1437
(.0515)

-.0166
(.0487)

-.1077
(.0587)

No. Ohs.

6057

5872

6094

6463

Adjusted R*
—

0.983

0.983

0.979

0.976

Total effect of listed
variables: mean and se.

-.011
(.012)

-.018
(.014)

-.010
(.013)

-.014
(.028)

If RelSize + .6
If Brand Meal% + .1

.034
.066

---

.-.

If DHerf+ .1
If Brand Meal% + .1

---

.009
.008

---

I.f DHetf+ .1
If RelSize + .6

---

---

.012
.034

Dep. Var.:
Drugstore Price

Marginal
Effects at:
BrMed=.05
Drugstore
Herf=O.2
RelSz==.4

M Equation (5) with an additional interaction term is estimated. Standard efiors are in parentheses.
Regressions include presentation intercepts which are not reported. The restricted samples are designed
to include approximately half of the dataset; the observations with the highest value for ANDAs, Medicaid
Share, and Relative Size, respectively, form the three samples. The exact cutoff for each variable is listed
at the head of each column.
38
;

