NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WAGE Inequality

AND SEGREGATION
BY SKILL

Michael Kremer
Eric Maskin

Working Paper 5718

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

We thank Daron Acemoglu, V.V. Chari, Benjamin Friedman, Lawrence Katz, Thomas Piketty,
Sherwin Rosen, Kenneth Troske, and Finis Welch for suggestions; Andrew Bernard, Eli Berman,
Steve Davis, Brad Jensen, Francis Kramarz, Steve Machin, and Ken Troske for suggestions and data;
and Sergei Severinov and Charles Morcom for exceptionally helpful research assistance, We are
grateful to the Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Bureau of the Census, for providing data. We
acknowledge research support from the National Science Foundation. All opinions, as well as
mistakes, are our own, and not those of the U.S. Bureau of the Census. This paper is part of NBERs
research programs in Labor Studies and Economic Fluctuations and Growth.
Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Michael Kremer and Eric Maskin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper5718
August 1996

WAGE lNEQUALITY AND SEGREGATION
BY SKILL

ABST RACT

Evidence from the United States, Britain, and France suggests that recent growth in wage
inequality has been accompanied by greater segregation of high- and low-skill workers into separate
firms.

A model

in which workers

of different

skill-levels

are imperfect

substitutes

can

simultaneously account for these increases in segregation and inequality either through technological
change, or, more parsimoniously,

through observed changes in the skill-distribution.

Michael Kremer
Department of Economics
E52-251c
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
kremer@mit.edu

Eric Maskin
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138

Introduction

One of the most disturbing economic trends of the last fifteen to twenty years has
been a growing wage gap between high- and low-skill workers in several industrialized
economies, including that of the United States.

This trend has been well documented.

Katz

and Murphy [1992], for example, find that, between 1979 and 1987, wages of men with a
high school education and 1-5 years of experience fell by twenty percent, while those of male
college graduates rose by ten percent.
This paper provides evidence that this increase in inequality has been accompanied
growing segregation of workers by skill.

by

That is, over time, it has become less common for

high- and low-skill workers to work in the same firm. Economic activity has shifted from
firms such as General Motors, which use both high- and low-skill workers, to firms such as
Microsoft and McDonald’s, whose workforces are much more homogeneous.

For example, in

France, between 1986 and 1992, the correlation of log wages among workers in the same
establishment

rose from 0.36 to 0.44, the correlation of experience rose from 0.11 to 0.16,

and the correlation of seniority grew from 0.24 to 0.31.
between the wages of manufacturing

In the United States, the correlation

production workers in the same plant rose from 0.76 in

1975 to 0.80 in 1986, and the correlation of a dummy variable for being a production worker
rose from 0.195 in 1976 to 0.228 in 1987,
We propose a simple model that can account for the simultaneous

increases in

inequality and in segregation, as well as for the absolute decline in wages of low-skill
workers.

In the model, workers of different skill-levels are imperfect substitutes,

and output

2
is more sensitive to skill in some tasks than in others.

What happens in such a model when,

as the evidence bears out (see below), the dispersion and mean of the skill-distribution
increase?

We show that a rise in skill-dispersion

causes firms that once hired both high- and

low-skill workers to specialize in one level or the other, thereby fostering segregation
(Proposition

3). Although, in this model, an increase in mean skill-level can enhance the

wages of the poor -- thus formalizing

the so-called “trickle-down” principle (Proposition

we demonstrate that this principle relies crucially on a “tight” distribution
skill-distribution

of skills.

1) --

Once the

becomes sufficiently dispersed -- as it is now likely to be in the United

States -- a further increase in mean skill-level raises the wages of high-skilled
causes those of poorly-skilled

workers but

workers to decline, thereby aggravating inequality (Proposition

2).
Note that this last implication contrasts with a widespread view of the labor market
articulated by Schmitt [1992]:

“Rising returns to skills in the face of large increases in the

supply of skilled labor suggest a substantial shift in labor demand in favor of skilled
workers. ” Whereas labor economists

such as Schmitt see rising mean-skill levels as

deepening the mystery of increasing inequality, our analysis suggests this rise in mean-skill
may have helped cause the increase in inequality.
The model’s implication

that increases in skill-dispersion

promote segregation of

workers by skill is consistent not only with the time-series data cited above, but also with
evidence that, among U.S. states, those with wider dispersion in educational attainment are
more segregated by education in employment.

Casual empiricism

suggests that developing

countries, with wide dispersion of skill, are particularly prone to dualism.

3
We noted above that there is evidence that both the mean and the dispersion of the
skill-distribution

have increased in the economies studied in this paper.

(see Kahn and Lim [1994]) that skill-biased

technological

It has been argued

change may have raised the

effective skill-level of high-skill workers, which would have had the posited effects on the
distribution

of skills.

Of course, such technological

there is also documentation

change is difficult to measure,

However,

of increases in the mean and dispersion of observable skills levels

(see Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce [1993]).

These shifts have been fairly modest, but our model

shows how they could have been magnified into significant changes in the income distribution
and degree of segregation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
model and the theoretical results.

Section II presents evidence that the United States, Britain,

and France have become more segregated in recent years.
propositions

in detail.

Section I offers a sketch of our

Section 111develops our theoretical

Section IV provides evidence that U.S. states with greater skill

dispersion are more segregated by skill, as the model predicts.
increases in inequality and segregation in light of the model.
implications

and speculates on the possibility

reducing opportunities

Section V interprets recent
The conclusion discusses policy

that segregation may spur inequality by

for low-skill workers to learn from higher-skill

co-workers, giving rise

to a vicious cycle of increasing inequality and segregation.

I. A Sketch of the Theory

A model consistent with the stylized facts about segregation and inequality discussed

above must incorporate three ingredients.

Specifically,

it should be the case that

(i)

workers of different skills are imperfect substitutes for one another;

(ii)

different tasks within a firm are complementary;

and
(iii) different tasks within a firm are differentially
To see why (i), imperfect substitutability,
perfect substitutability

obtains.

Specifically,

sensitive to skill.
is needed, let us examine a model in which

consider workers of two skill-levels q’ and q =

2q’. Then, in every firm, a worker of skill q can be replaced by two of skill q’, with no
other operational

change.

Clearly, q-workers will be paid exactly twice as much as q’-

workers regardless of the distribution

of skills in the economy.

Moreover, such a model

makes no prediction about what skill-levels we will see in a firm: there could as easily be one
worker of skill q as two of skill q’, To make any headway in explaining either inequality or
segregation, therefore, imperfect substitutability

of skill is required.

In fact, there is a body of work within the labor economics literature that assumes
such imperfect substitutability

(see Sattinger [1993] for a review).

evidence to justify the assumption;

There is also empirical

see Katz and Murphy [1992] and Murphy and Welch

[1992].
To understand the role of assumption

(ii), complementarily,

consider a firm in which

there are two tasks -- a “g” task and an “h” task -- but no complementarily

between them.

Specifically, take a production function in which, if a q-worker is hired for the g-task and a

q’-worker for the h-task, output is

(1)

f(~,9’) = g(q)+~(q’).

Different skills are imperfect substitutes in this formulation:
each task, and so the sort of two-for-one substitution

only one worker can be hired for

contemplated

means that relative wages may depend on the distribution

above is ruled out. This

of skills; if, for example, the

number of q-workers rises relative to that of q’-workers, the former workers’ wages are
likely to experience a relative decline.
something about inequality.
firms.

Thus, unlike the first model, this formulation

However, it still implies nothing about the skill-composition

In particular, because tasks are not complementary,

g-task is independent

may say
of

the optimal choice of skill for the

of that for the h-task.

Finally, to understand the need for (iii), differential skill-sensitivity,
production function in which different tasks are complementary

consider a

but identical in their

sensitivity to skill:

(2)

f(934’)

= 49’.

This is the production function used by Becker [1981] in his analysis of assortative marriage,
and also by Kremer [1993] in his study of labor markets and development.

It has the

implication that there is always comDlete segregation of skill within firms: q-workers are
matched only with other q-workers, etc. To see this, imagine that there are two q-workers
and two q’-workers.

Then either the q-workers can be matched with each other and the same

for the q’-workers (self-matching)

or else there can be two matches consisting of one q- and

one q’-workers each (cross-matching).

But self-matching

leads to total output of q2+q’2

6
which is greater than the output of 2qq’ resulting from cross-matching.
the distribution

Hence, regardless of

of skills, production function (2) implies that we should see only self-

matching, and so the evolution from General Motors to Microsoft/McDonald’s
above could not have taken place.

discussed

We shall therefore introduce an asymmetry between tasks

by working with a production function of the form,

(4)

where

f(939’)= qcq’d,
t)<c<~.

By redefining the unit of skill, we can rewrite this as

(3)
For ease of computation

~( 93q’) = 94”,

e>l.

(although none of the qualitative results depend on this), we shall, in

fact, take e=2, so that

(5)

flq,q’)

= 4q’2.

We can think of the q ‘-task (which is relatively sensitive to skill) as the “managerial”
and the q-task (which is relatively skill-insensitive)

as the “assistant’s” role.

task

Hence, let us

rewrite the production function as

(6)

fi9as~m)
= 9aq:.

Production function (6) has the implication

that if a firm employs workers of skills L and H

(L< H), it is more efficient for the H-worker to be the manager (since LH2 > HL2). This
production function is closely related to one used by Rosen [1981, 1982], Miller [1983], and
Lucas [1978]:

(7)

where qm is the skill of the manager, qi is the skill of subordinate
subordinates,

is a choice variable.

Under production function (7), there is no substitutability

of skill at the managerial level, but several low-skill subordinates
high-skill subordinate.

i, and r, the number of

Hence, in equilibrium,

high-skill workers become managers.

can be substituted for one

low-skill workers become subordinates,

and

The higher a manager’s skill, the more employees he

supervises.
By contrast, our production function (6) imposes imperfect substitutability
subordinates

on

as well as on managers. (In this sense, it combines the approaches inherent in (2)

and (7).) This has the implication that, in equilibrium,

a manager of one firm may be of the

same or lower skill than a subordinate in another firm (even though, as already noted,
managers are more highly skilled than subordinates

within the same firm).

For example, an

M.B.A. might choose either to accept an entry-level position with high-skill colleagues at an
investment bank, or a more senior position at a less prestigious firm.
We consider a one-good economy in which there is an exogenous distribution
workers of different skill. We take this distribution
too is endogenous,

of

as given because, although ultimately it

it is likely to change more slowly than the wage and matching patterns of

interest to us. We suppose that there is an indefinite supply of potential firms, all of which
have the production function (6). Hence, this is a competitive
to scale.

economy with constant returns

8
Our theoretical results (Propositions
equilibrium

wage distribution

1-3 in Section III) examine how the competitive

and the pattern of skill-levels within firms are affected by shifts

in the distribution of skills. Here we give a simplified account of these results.
Proposition

3 shows that, as the dispersion of skills increases in the economy, the

relative dispersion of skill within firms falls.

To get a feel for this, suppose that there are just

two skill-levels, L and H, where L < H. Now, given two workers of skill L and two workers
of skill H, it is more efficient for the workers to cross-match

(L-workers match with H-

workers) rather than self-match (workers of the same skill-level match) if and only if

(8)

L3 + H3 K 2LH2.

Thus because competitive

equilibrium

is efficient, we will have equilibrium

cross-matching

if

and only if (8) is satisfied, i.e.,

(9)
&

Imagine that the economy begins with a skill-distribution
close in value.

From (9), we will have cross-matching

in which L and H are fairly

in equilibrium,

i.e., each firm --

following the G.M. pattern -- will employ both low- and high-skill workers.

(This cannot be

literally true if there are different numbers of L- and H-workers in the economy.

If, say,

there are more H’s than L’s, all the L’s will be matched with Hs, and the remaining Hs will
be self-matched.)
Suppose now that the dispersion of skills increases. This can be modeled by supposing
that H increases and L decreases,

Eventually (9) will no longer hold, at which point the

economy will re-align so that there is @

self-matching.

That is, each firm will have only

H-workers (Microsoft) or only L-workers (McDonald’s).
To understand this result less formally, note that there are two forces at work in
determining

the equilibrium

matching pattern.

On the one hand, the asymmetry of the tasks

in the production function militates in favor of cross-matching

between workers of different

skills, in which the more highly skilled worker is assigned the managerial task.
hand, the complementarily

On the other

between tasks promotes self- (i.e., assortative) matching.

Now,

when tasks are perfectly symmetric, only the second effect is present, and we have perfect
assortative matching.

For any given degree of asymmetry between tasks, however, there will

be some deviation from self-matching.
hatched

That is, unequally skilled workers will be cross-

up to the point in which the difference in their skills is so great that the second

effect overwhelms the first.
switches to self-matching.

At that point, as in the above two-point example, the economy
Proposition

3 generalizes this logic to the case of many skill-

levels.
Let us turn to the issue of wages.

Proposition

1 demonstrates

that if the distribution

of skills has sufficiently low dispersion, then an increase in the mean skill-level reduces
inequality in the sense that the wages of low-skill workers rise, whereas those of high-skill
workers decline.

Proposition

2 establishes that the opposite is true if the distribution

is sufficiently highly dispersed.

That is, with a diffuse skill-distribution,

of skills

an increase in the

mean skill-level aggravates wage inequality.
To see why these propositions

hold in a simple case, consider an economy with three

skill-levels, L < M < H, and let us suppose that H and L satisfy (9). For easy computation,
assume that there are equal numbers (say, x each) of L- and H-workers and that the number

10
of M-workers is at least 2x. Because H and L satisfy (9), we know that it is inefficient for Land H-workers to be self-matched.
matched with M-workers.
with each other.

In fact, we claim that both L- and H-workers should be

The alternative would be for the L- and H-workers to be matched

But notice that, since L c M and M < H,

(lo)

LH2 + M3 c U2

+ MH2.

Condition (10) implies that total output would be raised by taking an L- and an H-worker
who are matched with each other and rematching both with M-workers (who were previously
self-matched).

Now, because there is perfect competition

make zero profit in equilibrium.

and constant returns to scale, firms

Hence workers must absorb all revenue.

more than ti M-workers, at least one pair must be self-matched

Since there are

in equilibrium,

in which case

their firm’s revenue is M3. Therefore, the equilibrium M-wage is

M3
w(M) = —.
2

(11)

Thus, the zero profit requirement

(12)

implies that the equilibrium

w(L) = LM2 -

W(M

=

L-wage is

M3
LM2- —.
2

Similarly,

(13)

M3
w(H) = MHZ - —.
2

To model the idea of an increase in the mean skill-level, let us examine a small
increase in M. The derivatives of w(L) and w(H) with respect to M are, respectively,

(14)

and

(15)

2LM - ;M2

12
The assumption of “low” dispersion of skill -- the assumption

treated by Proposition

1

-- corresponds in this three-skill model to the condition that H = L. In this case, (14) is
But this means that w(L) rises and w(~

positive, whereas (15) is negative.
increases, which is what Proposition

falls as M

1 asserts.

By contrast, it is readily shown that if

(16)

which corresponds
positive.

to the higher dispersion of Proposition

Hence w(L) falls while w(~

To understand Proposition

2, then (14) is negative and (15) is

rises when M increases, as required by Proposition

2,

1 at a more intuitive level, notice that when L = M the

share of the revenue going to the M-worker in an L-M match (i.e., M3/2 ) rises with M more
slowly than does the total product M2.

Hence an increase in M confers a positive benefit on

L: the net marginal revenue left over after the M-worker is paid for his higher product is
positive.

This can be viewed as a manifestation

of the “trickle-down”

principle, the theory

that propounds that some of the fruits generated by improving the productivity

of middle- and

upper-class workers will accrue to the poor.
In our model, however, the trickle-down principle pertains only to skill-distributions
with low dispersion.

If L and M are far enough apart, a further increase in M causes the

benefits from cross-matching
matching.

between L and M to deteriorate relative to those from self-

Therefore since w(M rises, w(L) must fall. At the same time, this increase in M

enhances the quality of a match between M and H (provided M and H were far enough apart

13
to begin with), raising w(~.

Hence, an increase in mean skill-level causes the wage gap

between H- and L- workers to increase, as Proposition

2 establishes.

Notice that our model has the feature that workers of median skill (M-workers in the
above example) can serve in equilibrium
they are matched with.

as either managers or assistants, depending on whom

This is a property that generalizes to the case of many skill-levels

(see Section III). We will speculate on its political and social implications

II. Rising Segregation

in the conclusion.

by Skill

We offer evidence that segregation of workers by skill has increased in the United
States, Britain, and France.

Subsection 11.A defines the index we use to measure segregation,

and Subsection 11.B shows that the index has increased in these three countries when skill is
measured by any of three proxies: wages, worker classification,

11.A. The Segregation
Sociologists

and experience.

Index

have used an index of correlation to measure segregation by dichotomous

variables, such as race [Bell, 1954; Robinson,

1950]. In this section, we propose an index of

segregation that generalizes this measure of correlation so that it can be applied to variables
taking on many values.

We also adjust it to take account of the concentration

workers that would have been expected purely from chance.
develop an index of geographic concentration

of high-skill

(Ellison and Glaeser [1994]

designed to address similar issues.)

discusses how confidence intervals can be constructed

Appendix I

around the estimated segregation index.

14
Suppose that there are J firms (or plants) in the sample indexed by j = 1, ....J. Let Zj
be the set of workers in firm ~ and zj the number of workers in this firm.
skill, q, such as wages, education, or worker classification,

sample by

q (i.e., g = ~
j4

Given a measure of

denote the mean skill-level in the

~ qi /N, where N is the total number of workers in the sample).
iEZ,

Define p as our index of correlation or segregation:

(17)

where workers are indexed by i and k (so that qi is the skill-level of worker i). A correlation
of zero indicates that all firms have the same skill-mix of workers, and a correlation of one
indicates complete segregation,

in which all workers within a firm have the same q. Note

15
that this index is invariant to affine transformations

of the units in which skill is measured.z

The index of correlation, p, is equivalent to one minus the variance of q within firms
divided by the overall variance of q, and thus to the R2 obtained by regressing q on a series

of firm dummies.

(18)

To see this, add and subtract the mean

Zj

q ~ within each firm j to obtain:

1,

21n the case of a dummy variable, the correlation specializes to the index used by Bell
[1954] and Robinson [1950],

where D denotes the dummy variable. Note that this index normalizes the variance across
plants of the proportion of workers for whom the dummy variable equals one by dividing by
the variance of the dummy variable in the total population. Without normalization,
segregation by production-worker status, for example, would appear higher in an economy
with five firms consisting only of non-production workers and ninety-five consisting only of
production workers than in an economy with one firm consisting of only non-production
workers and ninety-nine firms consisting of production workers. After normalizing, however,
we find that both economies have the maximum segregation index of one.

16
After deleting the terms which equal zero, we can simplify to

J

—sb2
7’
ST

(19)

where SW’and s~z represent the variance of g within and between firms, respective y, and ST’
represents the total variance of q in the economy.

For example,

(20)

One virtue of this index is that, since p depends only on the variance of q in the
population

and on the variance of mean q between firms, it can be calculated using separate

data sources for workers and firms.
are unavailable,

This is useful if data linking employees and their firms

as in the United States.

Note that if firms are of finite size, there will be some correlation between the skillIevels of workers in the same firm, even if workers are assigned to firms randomly.
some firms will happen to receive workers of above-average
workers of below-average

skill.

That is,

skill, and others will receive

If all firms consisted of K workers, then, with random

assignment, the variance of mean skill between firms would be 1/K times the over-all

17
variance of skill between workers, and the expected correlation would thus be l/K.
To compare the extent of segregation across economies with different average firm
sizes, or to determine whether an economy exhibits more segregation than would be expected
purely from chance, it may be helpful to use the adjusted R2 as a corrected index of
segregation:

s; /(N -J-)
(21)

pc=l-

[1

=1 -(l T)H

=R2,

N-J

s; /(N-l)

To see how this index corrects for finite firm size, suppose that a proportion y of the
population matches with other workers of exactly the same skill, and that a proportion
matches randomly.

l-y

Let o~2 denote the variance of the underlying stochastic process

generating workers’ skills,

As noted above, s~2for the set of firms whose workers are drawn

randomly will converge to o~2/K as N+=,

where K is the number of workers per firm.

Since

the variance of wages within firms plus the variance of mean wages between firms must
equal the total variance of wages, the variance of wages within the set of firms with randomly
drawn workers converges to (1- l/~o~2.
consisting of perfectly-matched

Since the variance of wages within the firms

workers is zero, SW2for the set of all firms converges to

(l-y)(l - l/m(sT2. Note that in a sample of N workers, the expectation ofs;
Substituting

is (N-1 )o~2/N.

these expressions for SW2and s~2 into (21) and using the fact that K = N/J, we see

that pC converges to y, which, as desired, is the proportion of the population that matches
with others of the same skill.

Simulations

suggest that the expectation of pC is y even when

N is small, and even when firms vary in size.

18
Two properties of pC are worth noting.

First, holding N and J constant, increases in p

correspond to increases in pC. In Section III, we demonstrate

how changes in the distribution

of skill affect p. Given that we hold the number of workers per firm constant, changes in pC
will always be of the same sign as changes in p. Second, the adjusted R-squared may be
negative if the correlation between the skills of workers in the same firm is less than that
expected from random assignment of workers to firms.

11.B. Trends in Segregation
Wages, experience, and worker classification

are all mperfect indicators of skill, but

together they paint a consistent picture of increasing segregation.

Positive correlation of

wages among workers in the same firm may be due to segregation by skill or to
compensating

differentials,

efficiency wages, or pressures for equity within the firm.

However, there is little reason to think these latter factors increased in importance over the
period, especially given the decline of unions in the United States and Britain.
classification

(for example, into production and non-production

somewhat problematic
as of the worker.

worker categories) is also

as a measure of skill, since it reflects characteristics

Nonetheless,

non-production

thus is presumably correlated with skill.
United States, non-production

Worker

of the job, as well

worker status is correlated with wages, and

Berman, Bound, and Machin [1994] show that in the

workers are more highly educated than production workers and

much more likely to be managers or professionals.
Where possible, we measure indicators of skill at plant level rather than firm level.
Plant data are likely to be more economically

meaningful than firm data, since it is not clear

19
that anything of economic importance changes if a holding company acquires both Microsoft
and McDonalds.

However, even the plant data may be misleading since they include only

workers employed by the firm owning the plant and therefore indicate increased segregation
when firms contract out work.3 The American and British data are at the plant level, whereas
the French data are at the level of the business unit, which is conceptually

closer to the

American firm than to the plant.
The best available data come from France.

The Wage Structure Surveys (ESS),

performed by INSEE in 1986 and 1992, examined a sample of 10,719 business units and
318,332 workers in 1986, and 3,803 business units and 42,783 workers in 1992.4 The sample
was drawn from all business units with at least ten employees, excluding agriculture,
transportation,

telecommunications,

and services to individuals.

Table I, drawn from

Kramarz, Lollivier, and Pele [1996], shows that between 1986 and 1992, the correlation of
log wages among workers in the same business unit rose from 0.36 to 0.44, the correlation of
experience rose from 0,11 to 0.16 and the correlation of seniority rose from 0.24 to 0.31.
Segregation according to each of the six categories of worker classification

rose as well. For

example, unskilled blue-collar workers were more likely to be grouped together in firms, as
were engineers, professionals,

and managers.

Worker classification

is likely to be a good

3 In the U. S., increases in the importance of pensions, combined with pension laws
requiring all workers to be treated equally, may have provided a small impetus toward such
contracting out over the period studied, but any increase in correlation from this source is
likely to have been more than counter-balanced by declines in wage correlation within plants
due to the weakening of unions.
4 The ratio of workers to business units is smaller in 1992 because fewer workers were
sampled per firm.

20
measure of skill in France, because it is governed by fairly precise rules.

We should also

mention that Kramarz, Lollivier, and Pele found that besides increasing segregation, the
period from 1986 to 1992 was also a period of rising inequality,

Table I: Segregation Indexes for Various Indicators of Skill in France
(95% confidence interval in brackets.)

I

1986

I

1992

Log Wages

0.36
[0.3554; 0,3663]

0.44
[0.4316; 0.451 8]

Experience (Age)

0.11
[0.1081; 0.1127]

0.16
[0.1554; 0.1665]

Seniority

0.24
[0.2364; 0.2450]

0.31
[0.3027; 0.3203]

0.31
[0.3058; 0.3159]

0.34
[0.3324; 0.3508]

Skilled Blue-Collar Worker dummy

0.23
[0.2265; 0.2349]

0.26
[0.2535; 0.2693]

Foreman dummy

0.08
[0,0785; 0.0820]

0.10
[0.0970; 0.1044]

Clerk dummy

0.08
[0.0785; 0.0820]

0.15
[0.1457; 0.1568]

Technician dummy

0.14
[0.1376; 0.1433]

0.17
[0.1652; 0.1768]

0.14
[0.1376; 0.1433]

0.21
[0.2044; 0.2180]

Unskilled Blue-Collar

Engineer, Professional,

Worker dummy

or Manager dummy

lource: Kramarz, Lollivier, and Pele [1996]

In the United States, data linking workers and their plants are hard to come by,
However, segregation of workers by wage can be calculated using the Davis and Haltiwanger
[1991] estimates of the variance of wages among all workers from the CPS and of the
variance of average wages between plants from the Census of Manufactures.

Unfortunate y,

taking the ratio of estimates from two different data sources makes the measure of segregation

21
noisier.

Moreover, data are available only for manufacturing

for production workers within manufacturing.

workers and reliable data only

However, since services are a growing share of

the economy, and services such as finance, restaurants, and law are highly segregated by skill,
their exclusion is likely to lead to underestimation
Table II reports between- and within-plant
manufacturing,5 taken from Davis and Haltiwanger

of any increase in sorting,
variances of production worker wages in
[1991].

The final line reports the

correlation between wages of production workers within the same plant.c Both within-plant
and between-plant

variances of wages have increased, reflecting the widely documented rise

in inequality in recent years.

However, if there had been no realignment

of the way relative

skills were grouped within firms, both variances would have increased in the same ratio.
fact, the between-plant

variance increased proportionately

more than the within-plant

Thus, although the data are imperfect, and estimates for 1984 seem particularly

In

variance.

suspect, the

correlation between wages of production workers within the same firm increased from 1975
to 1986, as shown in the final row.’

51t is not possible to obtain reliable data on non-production workers because of
differences in the sampling frames between the two surveys used by Davis and Haltiwanger.
However, the available data show no trend in segregation among non-production workers.
The segregation index was .447 in 1975 and .443 in 1986.
c Note that these correlations are higher than those reported in France, because these data
include only production workers, whereas the French data include all workers. The variance
of production workers’ wages within plants is much smaller than that of all workers.
‘Given the large sample sizes, sampling error is likely to be small, and noise in these
estimates is probably due to other factors, such as business-cycle effects,

22
Table II: Sorting of Manufacturing

Production

Workers by Wages:

U.S. Plants

1975

1977

1979

1982

1984

1986

s;

9.00

9.77

10.78

11.81

11.96

13.84

s;

2.13

2.37

2.19

1.82

1.00

2.76

s:

6.86

7.40

8.58

9.99

11.0

11.19

0.92

0.80

0.85
0.76
0.76
0.80
P
]urce: Davis and Haltiwanger [1991], p calculated as sbZ/s~l.
Sorting by production worker/non-production

worker status also increased.

shows that the correlation of a dummy variable for non-production
American manufacturing

Table III

worker status among

workers in the same plant increased from 0.195 to 0.228 between

1976 and 1987.s

Table III: Sorting by Production

Worker/Non-Production

Worker Status: U.S. Plants

Year

1976

1977

1980

1981

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

NPW/Emp

0.261

0.260

0.282

0.287

0.302

0.291

0.304

0.314

0.310

0.195
0.192
P
Source: Census of Manufactures

0.196

0.199

0.215

0.218

0.225

0.231

0.228

British evidence also shows increased segregation by worker classification.9
and 1990 Workplace Industrial Relations Surveys (WIRS) divide employment
British establishments

into manual and non-manual components.

further subdivided into unskilled, semi-skilled,

The 1984

in each of 402

Manual employment

and skilled; and non-manual employment

is then
is

‘We thank Andrew Bernard, Brad Jensen, and the U.S. Bureau of the Census for
supplying the information in Tables 11 and III. Data for 1976 and 1977 may not be strictly
comparable with that from other years, since a different sampling methodology was used by
the census in those years.
we

thank Stephen Machin for providing the information

in Table IV.

23
subdivided into (i) clerical, secretarial, and administrative
(iii) junior technical/professional;
management.

staffi (ii) supervisors and foremen;

(iv) senior technical/professional,

and (v) middle/senior

Table IV shows that sorting increased in most worker classifications.

example, the correlation of a dummy variable for middle/senior

For

managers between workers in

the same firm increased from 0,058 in 1984 to 0.077 in 1990. Sorting of senior
professional/technical

staff also increased, contributing

upper-grade, non-manual workers.

to an increase in sorting among all

There was a rise in segregation among clerical workers,

and among all non-manual workers taken as a whole.

Within the category of manual

workers, sorting declined among skilled and semi-skilled
among unskilled manual workers.

manual workers, but increased

Note that the British evidence, unlike that from the United

States and France, indicates that segregation increased among a fixed sample of plants rather
than just in the economy as a whole.
Section 111explores how segregation and wages are jointly determined given the
technology and the distribution

of skill.

24
Table IV: Sorting in 402 British Establishments, 1984-1990

Mean
1984

Mean
1990

P

1984

P
1990

Managers

0.074

0.080

0.058

0.077

Senior. ProflTech

0.072

0.083

0.230

0.276

Junior Prof/Tech

0.095

0.090

0.294.

0.301

Ttl.UpperGr. Non-Manual

0.241

0.253

0,299

0.323

Clerical

0.233

0.222

0.273

0.322

Total Non-Manual

0,511

0.525

0.446

0.469

Skilled Manual

0.162

0.163

0.341

0.323

Semi-skilledManual

0.143

0.132

0.391

0.367

UnskilledManual

0,185

0.180

0.415

0.444

0.475

0.446

0.469

II Total Manual

1 0.489

25
III. Theory

Let us extend the analysis of Section I -- which was conducted for two- and threepoint skill-distributions
competitive

-- to more general distributions.

We maintain the hypotheses of

markets and production function (6).

We consider a pair of distributions

parametrized by 6

●

of types on the integers between

~ and
—

~ ,

(O,1 ). For given e, let p(n;9) be the number of workers of skill-level n.

The values 13= O and e = 1 correspond to the “pre-shift” and “post-shift” distributions,

respectively.

Let p(e) be the mean of p(. ;e). That is,

p(e)

= ~np(n;O) / ~P(n;e)
n=

. We

n=

assume that p(e) also equals n“(e), the mode of the distribution.
Recall from Section I that, if the ratio of two workers’ skill-levels was greater than A
= 2/(1+51’2), then it was more efficient for each of them to match with another of his or her
own skill-level (self-matching),

rather than match with one another (cross-matching).

Let n,

be the smallest integer no less than An*(l); let nz be the smallest integer no less than

(3/2) 1’2n*(l); and let n] be the smallest integer no less than

@n

●
(1) . We assume that, for

e = O, 1, p(n;e) is “sufficiently peaked” near the mode n“(e), More precisely, “sufficiently

26
peaked” means

n●
(0)/A

n *(B)-1

(22)

p(n’(e);

e) >

~

p(?z’; e) +

n’=An *(0)

P(~’;e),

~
nr=n

“(0)+1

An ●
(O)

(23)

~

p(~’;e)

<

p(~;e),

~f=An

for all n E[nl,n ”(e)] ,

and

(24)

p(n; e) >

p(n’;6),

~
n’ =@n

foralln

E[n*(0),n3].

*(6)

As will become clear below, condition (22), which is imposed mainly to simplify the
computations,10 ensures that at least some workers of modal skill will have to self-match, i.e.,
match with others of the same skill in competitive

equilibrium.

Given the zero-profit

condition, this will serve to tie down their wage (which is why (22) is so convenient to
impose).

Conditions

(23) and (24) imply that in equilibrium,

some workers of every skill

level between nl and n“(e) and between n+(e) and nj will also match with modal workers,
Both the mean level and the dispersion of skill have increased in recent decades.
We consider a shift in the distribution

of skill in which, as 6 increases from O to 1, (i) the

‘°Condition (22) can be relaxed considerably.
correspondingly more complicated.

However, the argument becomes

27
mean rises, i.e.,

(25)

n*(1) = n“(o)+l;

and (ii) the lower and upper tails get fatter symmetrical y but retain their “relative shapes, ”
i.e., there exists q > 1 such thatll

P (n; 1) = a, foralln<nlandn>nz.
p (n;O)

(26)

lH.A.

Wages

We first show that if the distributions p(. ; . ) are “tight” enough -- i.e., if

sufficiently close to

is

~
— -- then an increase in 9 promotes equality in the sense that wages in

the lower tail of the distribution

Proposition

~

1 (The Trickle-Down

rise and wages in the upper tail of the distribution

Principle):

Suppose that p(. ;.) satisfies (22)-(25),

fall,

Given

llWe adopt (26) not because it is necessarily realistic, but because it facilitates the
presentation of our results. In particular, we wish to argue that, if the skill-distribution is
sufficiently dispersed, then a typical worker in the lower end of the distribution will see his
wage fall and one in the upper end of the distribution will experience a wage increase when
the mean skill-level rises. We demonstrate this (Proposition 2) by showing that the average
wages in the lower and upper tails, respective y, fall and increase. But a change in the
average wage would not be a good measure of what happens to a given worker if the relative
distribution of skills also changed. Hence, (26) makes comparisons easier, although our
qualitative results do not depend on it.

28
~,if

fi

is near enough

(27)

~ so that
—

~ > (2/3)1/2 n , then

w(n; O) < w(n; l), for all fz<n*(0),

and

(28)

w(n; O) > w(n; l), for all n > n“(l).
We establish Proposition

1 through a series of Lemmas.

Lemma 1: For any n’, if n is such that

(29)

n<

An’,

then workers of skills n and n’ cannot be matched in equilibrium.

Proof

As demonstrated

in Section I, total output for two workers of skill n and two workers

of skill n’ when they are cross-matched

(i.e., 2nn’2 ) is be less than that when they are self-

matched (i.e., n3+n’3) if n/n’cA,

Lemma z:

Proof

w(n “(6);0)

Q.E.D,

= (n “((3))3/ 2.

From (22), even if all workers of all skills n’#n*(e) between An*(9) and n*(e)/A were

matched with workers of skill n*((3), there would still be some n*(f3)-workers left over.

29
Moreover, from Lemma 1, no skill outside the interval [An”(e), n*(9)/A] can be matched with
Therefore, at least some n*(6) -workers must be self-matched

n*(6) in equilibrium.
equilibrium.

in

But this means that they earn 1/2 the output of a firm with two workers of skill
Q.E.D.

n“(e).

Lemma a: If n < n*(6) and n’ > n“(e), then workers of type n and n‘ cannot be matched in
equilibrium,

Proof]z
—.

Total output with one (n,n’) firm and one (n”,n”) firm is Y =

n*=n*((3). Total output with the assignments

n’2n

(n,n”) and (n”,n’) is Y* = n

+ n*3,

where

**n + n’2n*.

To

prove the lemma, we need to show that Y’ > Y. Note that

(30)

Y“-Y=

n“=n

● n’=n

’ -

n’=n

- n“3.

Defining z = nln”, and z’ = n’in”, we obtain

~=

(31)

Y*-Y=z+z,2
n

Since

n’ > n*, Z’ >1,

Lemma ~: If

Proof

n, n’ G

-

~’=~

-

1

=

(Z’ =-1)(1-z).

●3

and since n < n*, z

<1.

Thus the result follows.

Q.E.D.

(An*(6), n“(e)), then n and n’ cannot be matched in equilibrium.

Assume without loss of generality that

n’ 2 n.

As in the proof of Lemma 3, we

12We thank Charles Morcom for the proofs of Lemmas 3, 4, and 6, which are simpler
than the ones we originally developed.

30
show that total production by the firms (n,n’) and (n”,n”) (i.e., Y) is less than that by the
firms (n ,n”) and (n’,n”)(i.e., Y ‘). Here, Y =

n’2n + n*3 ,

and Y’ = n*2n + n’zn’. This

implies that

(32)

Y’-Y =

n“zn

+ n“zn’

- n’zn

- n*3.

Dividing the right-hand side of (32) by n*3, we obtain

(33)

z+

z’-

~’ 2Z - 1 = 2(1 -2’2) + 2’-1

Now, l-z’ is positive, since

n’<n”.

As for

need only check that it is non-negative

z(1 +Z

= (1 -2’)(2(1

‘)-l, it is increasing in both z and

z‘, so we

at the bottom of the range: z = z’ = A. But at this

point it vanishes.

Lemma i:

+2’)- 1).

Q.E.D.

If n G (An”(e), n*(f3)), then some n-workers are matched with n*((3) in equilibrium

and so w(n;6) = n(n”(e))z - (n*(e) )3/2,

Proof:

If n

●

(An”(e), n“(6)), then from (23) and Lemma 1, the n-workers cannot be matched

exclusively with skills no greater than An”(e).

But from Lemma 3, they cannot be matched

with skills greater than n“(e) and, from Lemma 4, they cannot be matched with skills greater
than An”(e) and less than n*(0). Thus by process of elimination,
matched with n*(e) -workers in equilibrium.
n(n*(6))2 - (n*((3))3/2.

some n-workers must be

From Lemma 2, we conclude that
Q.E.D.

w(n;e)

=

31

Lemma b: If

●
(g)),

~, ~’= (n*(0), @n

then n and n’ cannot be matched in equilibrium.

Proof: Assume without loss of generality that n’ 2 n. Let Y’ denote total production with the
assignments

(n”,n) and (n*,n’), where n“=n”(e). Then Y’ = nzn” + n’zn”. Let Y denote

production with the assignments
n*3 we

(n,n’) and (n”,n”). Then Y =

n’2n+n*3.

Dividing Y’ - Y by

obtain

(34)

z=+ z’=- Z’= z-l

Now, z-l is positive.

As for z+l -

attains a minimum when

Lemma 1: If

n

●

z =

1 and

(n* (e), fin

= Z’2 (1-z)+
z ‘2, it

Z=-1 = (Z-l) (z+l-z’=).

is increasing in z and decreasing in z’. Hence it

z‘= ~,

at which point it vanishes.

Q.E.D.

●
(e)), some n-workers are matched with n“(e) in equilibrium

and so

(35)

Proof If n

W(n; e) = n“(e)?z=-

●

(n”(e), fin

matched exclusively

(n “(0))3

2“

*(e)), then from (24) and Lemma 1, the n-workers cannot be

with skills greater than @n

●
(e).

From Lemma 3, they cannot be

matched with skills less than n“(e). And, from Lemma 6, they cannot be matched with skills

32
greater than n“(e) and less than or equal to @n

matched with n*(9)-workers in equilibrium.

●
(g).

Thus some n-workers must be

From Lemma 2, we deduce (35).
Q.E.D.

We can now establish Proposition

1. Given a sufficiently tight distribution

of skills,

all workers will have skill greater than An*(0). Lemma 5 implies, therefore, that, for each
skill level below the mean, at least some workers will have managers of mean skill in
equilibrium.

Hence, an increase in the mean skill implies that low-skill workers will have

better managers and therefore that their firms will produce more output.
that their managers can obtain from self-matching

Because the wage

increases by less than this increase in

output, the assistants will receive part of the increased value of their matches.
wages of the low-skilled will rise. A tight distribution

greater than

fin

“(e).

That is, the

also means that no worker has skill

Lemma 7 implies, therefore, that for each skill level above the

mean, at least some workers will have assistants of mean skill in equilibrium.
mean skill produces an increase in output for such matches.

An increase in

However, the wage from self-

matching for those of mean skill will increase by more than output, and hence wages for
high-skill workers will fall in response to this shift in mean skill.

Proof of Proposition

1: Suppose

~

is near enough

~

so that

More formally, we have:

E 2 (2/3) 1’2fi. Because

33

(2/3)ln >314>

A, we have

u 2 (2/3) 1’2fi> 3n”(0)/4 > An”(e).

Hence, if n e n*(0),

Lemma 5 implies that w(n;e) = n(n*(e))2 - (n*(9))3/2. Thus dw(n;8)/dn*(6) = n*(e)(2n 3n*(9)/2).

Since n > 3n*(9)/4, this derivative is positive, and so w(n;e) is increasing in e.

Because

?2●
(e) > U

and

(3/2)112< @,

(36)

And so, if n > n*(8), Lemma 7 implies that w(n;e) = n*(e)n2 - (n*(e) )3/2.

(37)

Hence

dw(n;6) /dn ‘(0) = n2 - ~ (n “(6))2 .

From (36), this derivative is negative, and so w(n;f3) is decreasing in e.
Q.E.D.

We now turn to the case in which the distributions p(. ;.) are more diffuse.
case, an increase e works against equality.
greater than An”(O) (recall that nl =nl(l)),
greater than nl(l).

In that

To see this, let nl(e) be the smallest integer
and let S[ consist of all workers with skills no

Lemma 8 below will show that any worker in S1, except possibly for an

nl(0)- or nl(l)-worker,

is matched in equilibrium

with another worker in S1. Moreover, from

Lemmas 3, 4, and 8, any nl(0)- or nl(l )- worker not matched with another worker in S1 is
matched with an n*(9)-worker.

Hence, the average wage of workers in SI equals the sum of

34
(i) the total output of matches between workers in S, and (ii) the wages of n,(0)- and n,(l)workers matched with n“(e)-workers, all divided by the number of workers in S1. But
W(nl(l );(3) falls as (3 increases because the wage of an n“(e)-worker from self-matching
increases faster than the output from an nl( 1)-n”(e) match.
in equilibrium

Moreover, Lemma 1 implies that

there are no matches between nl(0)- and n“(1)-workers, and so, for the purpose

of calculating (ii), we can assume that w(n1(0);(3) also falls as e increases.
(26), the relative distribution

of skills in S1 does not change as (3 increases.

Furthermore,

from

Hence, the

decrease in (ii) cannot be made up for by an increase in (i). We conclude that the average
wage of workers in S1 must fall.
Next consider the set Sz consisting of workers of skill no less than nz (the smallest
integer no less than (3/2) 1’2n*(
1)). The average wage of workers in Sz equals the sum of (i)
the total output from matches between workers in Sz, and (ii) the wages of workers in Sz
matched with workers with skills in the interval [n”(e), nz-1], all divided by the number of
workers in Sz. Now, nz is big enough so that, for n 2 nz, the wage of an n“(e)-worker from
self-matching

increases more slowly than the output from an n*(0)-n match.

Hence, the wage

of an n-worker matched with an n“(e)-worker increases with e. Moreover, the argument of
Proposition
worker

1 implies that, for n’= (n*(9),n1), w(n’;(3) falls with e. Hence, the wage of an n-

(n > n2)

matched with an n’-worker must rise. We conclude that (ii) must rise with (3

and, so from (26), the average wage in Sz also rises.
Formally, we can state:

Proposition z: Suppose that the distributions p(. ;.) satisfy (22)-(26) and are sufficiently

35

diffuse so that

~ < ~1 and ~2 < ~. Then the average wage in the tail below n, falls as 8
—

increases from O to 1. More precisely, we have

Similarly, the average wage inthetail

above nz increases with (3:

~ W(n; l)p(n;l)
~.?
K

(39)

The formal proof of Proposition

Lemmas:

Letnl(e)

>

~ W(n;o)p(n;o)
~.~
ii

.

2 is given in Appendix 2.

be the smallest integer no less than An*(6) (sothatn1(l)=n1).

An”(e) and an n-worker is matched with a worker of skill n’ 2 An”(e) in equilibrium,

Ifn<
then

n’ = n,(e).

The proof, which is in Appendix II, calculates the profit for a firm hiring an assistant
of skill n < An”(e).
one of greater skill.

It shows

that profit will be higher with a manager of skill nl(f3) than with

36
Segregation
We now turn to the issue of segregation.

We will show that an increase in skill

dispersion accompanied by a rise in the mean skill-level leads to an increase in the index of
segregation, provided that the shift in the mean is not too large relative to that of dispersion.
To make this last proviso formal, we will no longer work with distributions
integers alone.

r=

Instead fix (rational) numbers

b— and

~ with

on the

o < —
b < ~. For each integer

n’ and fi r, such that -—
b = ~ ‘/r and ~ = ~ ‘. For each r, we
1, 2, .... choose integers —

consider a pair of distributions

(p,(.;O), pr(.; l)), where for all integers

n

●

[u’, ~ q, p, (n; e)

is the number of workers of skill n/r. From (25), notice that, if r is big, the shift in the mean
is small when 6 increases from O to 1.
Let us suppose that there exist a >1 and ~ c 1 such that, for all r, (p,(.;O), p,(.; l))
satisfies (22)-(26) and

(40)

pr(n; 1) < ~pr(n; O), for all n~(nl,nz).

Condition (40) says that the shift from e = O to e = 1 reduces probability
uniformly in the middle of the distribution,

more-or-less

Henceforth, we will drop the subscript r when

this does not create ambiguity.
For

n, n’

n’-workers.

Let

and e, let
p(n,

z(n, n’; (3) be

n’) = (n +

n’)/2.

the equilibrium

number of matches between n- and

Then, from (19), the index of segregation can be

37
expressed as

Pro~osition2:

Suppose that, foreachr=

1,2,..., the pair @,(. ;0), p,(.; 1))satisfies (23)-(26)

and (40). Then, for r sufficiently big, p(l )>p(0).

To understand Proposition

3, consider a shift in the skill-distribution

satisfying (26)

and (40). The effect of such a shift is to move probability weight to the tails.

To simplify

matters, let us assume for the moment that this shift does not affect the mean.

Now, because

of the complementarily
skill-level.

between tasks, a firm will not hire workers that are too different in

Thus, if the shift pushes more workers into the tails of the distribution,

it will

push more firms’ means p(n,n’) into the tails. This means that the dispersion of firms’ means
.- the numerator and also the first term of the denominator

of (41) -- rises with the shift,

(This argument assumes that the overall mean p(9) does not change too much.)

In contrast,

the dispersion of skill within a firm, (n-p(n,n’))2 + (n ‘-p(n,n’))2 does not depend very much
on whether the skill-levels are in the tails or the middle of the distribution

-- and thus is not

affected very much by the shift -- since it is determined mainly by the trade-off between taskcomplementarity

(promoting matching of similar skill-levels)

and differential sensitivity to

38
skill (enhancing matching of different skill-levels).
denominator

of (41) remains about the same.

Hence the second term in the

The over-all effect of the shift, therefore, is an

increase in p. The formal proof can be found in Appendix II.
Several limitations of our model are worth noting.
can be reduced to a single dimension.
skill, as in Roy [1951].

First, we treat all skills as if they

A fuller model would allow for multi-dimensional

Second, the model assumes that all workers are producing a single

good, so that there is no interaction between workers through the product market.

To the

extent that high- and low-skill workers specialize in production of different goods, increases
in mean-skill will tend to reduce the price of skill-intensive
likely to increase relative wages of low-skill workers.
described in Proposition

goods, and thus will be more

This would partially offset the effect

2.

Second, the production function allows no substitutability
of workers.
variable.
equilibrium

between quantity and quality

The number of workers in a firm is taken as fixed, rather than as a choice

However, many of the results of this model would presumably

hold as partial

results in models that allowed for choice of quantity of workers, as long as

quality and quantity were not perfect substitutes.

To the extent that high and low-skill

workers specialize in producing different goods, it becomes more likely that an increase in the
mean-skill level of the economy will increase relative wages of low-skill workers.
There is some gap between the theoretical finding that increased skill-dispersion
to increased segregation of workers by W

leads

and the empirical finding of increased segregation

of workers by wages.

Under the model, the relationship

linear and endogenous

to the skill-distribution.

between wages and skill is non-

For a high dispersion of skill, there will be a

39
strong correlation between the wages of workers in the same firm, and, for a low dispersion
of skill, there will be a weak correlation.

Thus, on average, the correlation between the

wages of workers in the same firm will increase with skill-dispersion.
correlation need not increase monotonically,

However, the

because over some ranges, small increases in

dispersion may not change the pattern of matching by skill, but may change the wage
schedule so as to reduce the correlation of wages.

Thus there may be special cases in which

segregation by wages could increase without a concomitant
contrasts with conventional

rise in segregation by skill.

This

efficiency unit models in which an increase in correlation of

wages within firms will always correspond to an increase in the correlation of skills within
firms.

IV. Skill Dispersion

and Segregation

across U.S. States

We next argue that, as proposition

3 implies, U.S. states with greater variance of

education are more segregated by education.

Casual empiricism

suggests the same is true for

countries.
Kremer and Troske [1995] create segregation indices by state based on several
indicators of skill using the Worker-Establishment
WECD matches 199,557 manufacturing

Characteristics

Database (WECD),

workers to 16,144 manufacturing

The

establishments

[Troske, 1994]. It was created by linking individual data from the 1990 census with
establishment

data from the Longitudinal

industry information.

Research Database, using detailed location and

It should not be taken as representative

of American firms, since the

40
match rate varies by industry, portion of the country, and plant size. The segregation indices
are computed as the adjusted R* from regressing worker characteristics
dummies in a state.

on a set of firm

The sample was restricted to firms for which data on more than two

workers were available, which led to the exclusion of four states.
States with greater variance of education13 tend to be more highly segregated by
education, as shown in Table V. A regression of the correlation index on the variance of
education, with observations

heteroscedasticity

size, yielded a t-statistic of 5.47.

weighted by the square root of the sample

Although the model may be a good description of how

workers sort into firms by education, it is not a good description of how they sort by age. A
regression of segregation by age within plants on the variance of age among workers in the
state yielded a t-statistic of -1.69.
relationship

There was a positive, but not statistically

significant,

between segregation and the variance of skill when the skill indicator was either

the log wages or the predicted wage given age, education, sex, marital status, and race.14

13The variance of worker characteristics in each state was calculated using the Sample
Detail File from the l-in-6 census sample, so it is based on a large number of observations
and should be representative of manufacturing workers in the state as a whole.
14The predicted wage is calculated from a country-wide regression of log wages on age,
agez, and dummies for female, married, black, female* married, female* black, and various
education levels.

41
Table V: Effect of Variance of Skill on Segregation by Skill: U.S. States
Regression of pCfor skill indicator on the variance of the indicator in the state.
Heteroscedasticity -weighted using the number of firms per state. (t-statistics in parentheses)
Dependent
Variable

Education

Age

Predicted
Wage

Log Wage

Constant

0.0014
(0.056)

0.3037
(2.51)

0,117
(1.36)

0.218
(1.802)

Variance of
Variable

0.0257
(5,471)

-0.0017
(-1.687)

0.444
(0.591)

0.431
(0.948)

N

46

46

46

R2

0.3995

0.0077

0.0196

ource: Kreme

I

I

46
0.0595

and Troske [1995]

Although comparable data are not available for rigorous comparisons

across countries,

the model is consistent with the widespread view that developing countries, with wide skilldispersion, are prone to “dualism.”
comparatively

The model suggests that if skill-differentials

are

small, as in highly traditional societies15 or modern societies, workers of high-

and low-skill will mix together within firms.

However, in developing economies with a wide

range of skills, such as India or Brazil, low- and high-skill people will work in separate firms,
and relatively low-paid workers in the advanced sector will earn more than relatively highpaid workers in the traditional sector.

In fact, even the less skill-intensive

tasks in the formal

sectors of developing countries’ economies are often performed by workers who are highly
skilled and highly paid in comparison to workers in the informal sector,
clerks in international

For example, jobs as

hotels are highly prized by college graduates in China, and jobs as

flight attendants on Thai Air are sought after by the educated in Thailand.

15 It seems likely that in pre-modern agricultural societies, such as medieval Europe,
Russia under serfdom, or colonial India, many of the better-educated workers helped landlords
manage their estates, and thus worked in the same “firms” with serfs or peasants.

42
V. Interpreting

Recent Changes in Wages and Segregation

Under our model, the recent simultaneous
could be due either to skill-biased technological

increases in inequality and segregation
change or a shift in the observable skill-

distribution.

Both hypotheses are consistent with the data, although the latter provides a more

parsimonious

explanation.

On the technological

front, the model predicts that both segregation and inequality

should increase following change in which the effective skill of high-skill workers improves.
There is some evidence that recent technological

progress has been of this type.

Kahn and Lim [1994] argue that total factor productivity
has been proportional

growth across American industries

to the fraction of skilled workers in the industry.

Moreover, Berman,

Bound, and Griliches [1994] find evidence that adoption of new technologies
placed a premium on high-skill workers.

For example,

may have

This means that although the old technologies

which high- and low-skill workers mix are still available,

in

high-skill workers now find it

more attractive to leave the firms and form firms with other high-skill workers.

This reduces

the relative wage of low-skill workers because firms hiring them must pay more to attract
complementary

high-skill workers,

Our model, however, does not require appeal to largely unobserved
technological

change to account for changes in wages and segregation;

explained through observed changes in the distribution

skill-biased

the data can be

of skill in the United States and the

United Kingdom.
There has been a substantial increase in mean-skill in the U.S. over recent decades.

43
From 1960-1 to 1987-88, the flow of bachelor’s degrees as a percentage of the labor force
increased 1.58 times.

The flow of professional

degrees increased 1.65 times, masters’ degrees

2,14 times, and doctorates 1.87 times. [U.S. Department of Education,
in Ehrenberg,

1990, Table 220, cited

1992; Bureau of the Census, 1992]. Most of the increase in the flow took place

during the earlier part of the period, but the stock increased throughout the period, as less
educated people left the labor force.
Evidence that the increase in the average skill in the United States has been
accompanied by a moderate rise in dispersion of skill is provided by .Juhn, Murphy, and
Pierce [1993].

They partition increased wage inequality from 1964 to 1988 into increases in

the dispersion of observable indicators of skill (education and experience),

increases in returns

to those observable skills, and increases in inequality due to unobservable

factors. 16

Somewhat more than 20% of the growth in inequality due to observable factors can be
attributed directly to increased dispersion of skill, holding the wage schedule constant .17
We do not have data on the skill-distribution
an increased mean and dispersion of skill.

in France, but British data also indicate

Schmitt [1992] reports the distribution

of the

lbThey measure wage inequality by the gap between log wages of workers at the 10th and
90th percentiles of the wage distribution.
17The single biggest source of increased inequality is the increase in dispersion of wages
within education-experience groups, This could be due to increased variance in skills that are
unobservable to the econometrician or to increased returns to these unobservable skills. If
one assumes that the decomposition into quantity and price changes is the same for
unobserved as for observed variables, then slightly more than 20 percent of the total increase
in inequality is accounted for by the direct impact of widening of the skill-distribution.
Under the assumption that the entire change in the residual is due to changes in prices, rather
than quantities, of unobserved skill, widening of the skill-distribution explains just under 10
percent of the increased inequality.

44
British workforce by educational qualifications
the General Household Survey.
primary education.

in 1978-80 and 1986-88, based on data from

In 1974-76 the median worker had no qualifications

beyond

By 1986-88, the median worker had some O-levels or lower-middle

vocational education.

We calculated the variance of expected log wages conditional on

education in both periods, holding constant the wage schedule, as a measure of the variance
of the observable skill distribution. lE The variance of skill, as measured by the variance of
expected log wages conditional

on education, increased 20% from 0.0410 in 1978-80 to

0,0488 in 1986-88.
Thus, at least in the U.S and Britain, there have been significant changes in the mean
and dispersion of the skill-distribution.
in the wage-distribution,
proposition

These changes have not been as profound as the shift

but such a discrepancy

is to be expected from our theory (see

2 and 3). Of course, to assess the predictions of our model quantitatively

require a more detailed and richer formulation

would

of the production function than that of section

III.
One issue that arises in interpreting the empirical results is the timing of the
relationship

between changes in the skill-distribution

and changes in worker-matching.

there are search costs, changes in the skill-distribution
entrants to the labor force and of the unemployed,
already matched to switch jobs.
changes in the skill-distribution

If

may primarily affect matching of new

rather than causing workers who were

Matching patterns among workers may thus respond to
only with a lag. Juhn, Murphy, and Pierce [1993] find the

1sThe wage schedule is based on Schmitt’s estimates of differences in wages by education
group for male workers with twenty years of experience in 1986-88.

45
greatest increase in dispersion of skill in the U.S. occurred from 1964 to 1979, There was a
smaller increase in skill dispersion from 1979 to 1988, with about ten percent of the total
increase in the wage differential between workers at the 10th and 90th percentiles of the wage
distribution

accounted for by increasing dispersion of observable skills.

Overall, only three

percent of the increase in wage dispersion between 1979 and 1988 can be attributed directly
to measured increases in skill dispersion.

The data on segregation of workers by skill cover

the period 1975-86, with the increase in segregation coming between 1977 and 1984. It is
possible that changes in sorting during the later period reflect either the small
contemporaneous

widening of the skill-distribution,

or the larger earlier widening of this

distribution.
In sum, the data are consistent either with the hypothesis that technological
raised the effective skill of high-skill workers, or with the more parsimonious
were simply observed increases the mean and dispersion of skill.
can explain the simultaneous

change

story that there

In either case, the model

rise in segregation and inequality.

Our model is also consistent with the absolute decline in wages for low-skill workers
found by Katz and Murphy [1992].
do not generate such a decline.

The simplest models of skill-biased

Technological

technological

change that opens up new opportunities

change
for

high-skill workers does not necessarily make low-skill workers worse off, since the older
technologies

remain available,

Technological

change that increases the productivity

of low-

skill workers could reduce their wages by reducing the prices of products they produce.
There is, however, mixed evidence about whether there has been a fall in prices of goods
produced by low-skill workers and, if so, sufficient to explain the reduction in wages for low-

46
skill workers [Lawrence and Slaughter,

1993; Krugman and Lawrence, 1993; Sachs and

Shatz, 1994; Krueger, 1996].

VI. Policy Implications

and Directions for Future Research

To conclude, let us consider two prominent social policy issues that have rather
different implications

in our model than in more standard frameworks,

and speculate on the

dynamic interaction between inequality and segregation.
In many countries, there are strong social norms promoting equality across workers
within a firm.

Freeman [1980], for example, provides evidence that unions typically reduce

intra-firm wage differentials,

Our model implies that social norms for equality within the

firm may have perverse effects on the distribution

of income in the economy as a whole, 19 If

low- and high-skill workers were perfect substitutes, pressures for equality within the firm
would lead to increased segregation by skill, but would not affect wages or output,
in our model, pressures for equality within the firm will reduce output.

However,

Moreover, they may

perversely reduce wages for low-skill workers by causing high-skill workers to sort into
separate firms, thus depriving low-skill workers of the benefit of cross-matching.20

‘we

are grateful to Daron Acemoglu for suggestions

on this point.

20Forexample, suppose that some workers had skill 1, and that slightly more workers had
skill 1.5, so that rents from cooperation would accrue to the scarce low-skill workers. Some
firms would match together the two types of worker, and produce output 2.25. Firms with
only high-skill workers would produce output 3.375, so high-skill workers would earn half of
this, or 1.6875. Low-skill workers would earn 2.25 - 1.6875, or .5625. If pressures for
intra-firm equity made it impossible to have a wage gap this great, then .11 high-skill workers
would self-match together, and earn a wage of 1.6875 -- exactly what they earned otherwise.

47
The model also bears on tax policies, such as those in the Clinton health care
proposal, that encourage increased segregation of high-wage workers [Cutler, 1994;
Elmendorf and Hamilton,
workplace composition
calculations
revenue.

1994; Sheiner, 1994]. Under standard efficiency unit models,

would be perfectly elastic to such incentives, and so revenue

based on the current workplace composition

would seriously overestimate

However, such policies would have no harmful effect on efficiency.

model, by contrast, workforce composition

would be only imperfectly elastic to incentives for

segregation (and so naive revenue estimates might not perform badly).
workforce composition

Under our

Still, changes in

would create deadweight losses,

We have taken the distribution
endogenize the distribution
patterns on skill acquisition.

of skill as exogenous.

Future researchers may wish to

of skill, and in particular to examine the effect of matching
In industries in which people learn from high-skill colleagues, a

worker often serves as assistant to a high-skill manager when young, and as the manager of
low-skill assistants when old.21 For example, young lawyers and doctors start out assisting
more senior colleagues, performing tasks that are only moderately sensitive to skill.
process, they profit from the wisdom of their elders.

In the

Later, when human capital accumulation

is less important, most take positions of higher rank and supervise less-skilled

subordinates.

It is relatively cheap to provide training in this way if there are tasks that are suited to

Low-skill workers would also self-match and earn a wage of .5-- less than what they would
have earned in the absence of pressures for equity within the firm.

21This is not to deny that there are also learning environments in which people maximize
learning by performing a high-skill job, even if their co-workers are of lower skill.

48
workers of medium skill, as in law or medicine.22
These examples suggest that increases in segregation will spur future inequality of
skill by reducing opportunities
This raises the possibility

for low-skill workers to learn from high-skill co-workers.

that exogenous increases in either segregation or skill inequality

may spur a vicious cycle of ever-rising inequality and segregation,
Besides its implications
distribution,

for income distribution

and the evolution of the skill

the pattern of matching may have political and social implications.

A society in

which high- and low-skill workers match together in firms is likely to have a more
homogeneous culture than one in which people match with others of their own skill.
Language, customs, and fashions are likely to be more similar if there is more interaction
between groups.

Societies with wide distributions

of skill, such as the contemporary

United

States, Brwil, and India, are more likely to develop separate subcultures and perhaps to
experience political and social conflict between these subcultures.

On the other hand, a

pattern of matching in which groups of people always play the same role (manager or
assistant) may develop into a caste-like system, in which participants
rigid hierarchy.

work together, but in a

There may be advantages to matching patterns in which over wide ranges

people are indifferent between being the assistant to a higher level manager or the manager of
a lower level assistant, so that they play different roles in different situations.

22Of course, this condition does not always obtain. For example, young baseball players
would presumably learn a great deal from playing in the major leagues, but the production
function makes it important to match the best players together, and so young players train in
the minor leagues, probably less effectively.

49
Appendix

I

It is possible to construct a confidence interval for the segregation index under the
assumption that the sampling errors in the estimates of the variances of q within and between
firms are independent.

This will be the case if the variance of q within the firm is

independent of the average q within a firm or is a linear function of the average q within the
firm.
Given that s2#/02W and s2~J/02~are distributed as independent ~2 variables with N-Y
and J-1 degrees of freedom respectively,

1

1
S2W -

(Al)

l+—

1 + bf’

O’w
Szb

Ozb
where b~ is an F-distributed

random variable with (N-J, J- 1) degrees of freedom.

Thus a 95-percent-confidence

interval for the index of segregation is

F(N-J, J- 1)0.W5
2

(A.2)
F(N-J,

F(N-J,

<p<

2

F(N-J,

J-1 )o.m5 + :

s~

where F(N-J, J-I)

0.975J and

F(N-JJ

distribution function F(N-JJ-1)

J- l)o.m~

‘-1)0.025 are ‘Umbers

J- 1)OW5+ :
s~

at ‘hich

‘he cumulative

Probability

takes the values 0,975 and 0.025 respectively.

This derivation assumed that the variance of q within a firm was independent

of, or

linear in, the firm’s average q. If the variance of q within firms is convex in the average q in
a firm, then when a sample of firms is picked that has a high variance of average q, it will
also tend to have a high variance of q within firms, which will make the estimate more
precise than the calculations

below would indicate.

The variance of q within firms will be

convex in average q, for example, if the standard deviation of q within the firm is
proportional

to the average q within the firm.

On the other hand, if the variance of q within

firms is concave in average q, then the formulas above will understate the width of the
confidence interval.

Note that this will be the case for dichotomous

production worker status, because the variance of the characteristic
- p), where p is the share of people with the characteristic.

within the firm equals p(l

However, when this share is

close to one or zero, the variance within firms will be approximately
the estimated confidence intervals should not be that far off.

variables, such as race or

linear in average q, and

51
Appendix

II

Proof of Lemma&:
n’ >

Consider n< An*(0). Suppose arm-worker

ismatched

with some skill

An”(e). From Lemma 1, an n worker cannot be matched with n’ 2 n*(0). Hence

consider n’

●

[n1(6), n*(0)). Given that, from Lemma 5, w(n’;e) = n’(n*(f3))2 - (n*(e) )3/2,

we have

(A.3)

v(n,n’;e)

= n(n’)2

- w(n’ ;6) = n(n’)2

- n’ (n *(0))z +

(~“(6))3_
~

~(n,).

It suffices to show that, on the interval [n,(e), n“(e)], H(n’) is maximized at n’ = nl(e).

To

establish this, note that the derivative of H(”) is 2nn’ - (n*(f3))2. Now at n’ = n1((3), 2nn’ <
2A2(n*(6))2 < (n*(0))z, and so the derivative is negative at this point.
n1((3) (not necessarily an integer] such that H(p) =
such number.

Then dH(p)/dn’ 20.

H(nl(0)).

Suppose there exists p >

In fact, let p be the smallest

Moreover, because 2nn’ - (n*(9))2 is increasing in

n’,

dH(n’)/dn’ >0, for all n’ > p. Since H(p) = H(n1(f3)),

H(n ●
(O)) > H(n’ ) for all n’ ● [nl(t3), n ●
(O)) ,

(A.4)
But if

n

is matched with n’ in equilibrium,

then Zf(n’) 2 H(n’(e)), a contradiction

of (A.4).

We conclude that there is no p such that H@) = H(n1(9)), and so H(n’) is maximized at n’
= n,(e) as claimed.
Q.E.D.

Proof of Proposition

z: Let S1= {n In < n,).

Competitive

equilibrium

maximizes total

52
product, and, for any match, the sum of the equilibrium

wages equals the match’s product.

Moreover, for any n < nl(0), Lemma 8 implies that an n-worker is matched with another
worker in S,. Finally from Lemmas 1, 3, and 4, an nl(0)- or nl-worker is matched either with
another worker in S1 or with an n*(0)-worker.

Hence, the sum of wages of workers in S1

n,

~

w(n;e)p(n;o)(+,(e))

equals

,

(A.5)

max ~

~

2(”, “) n’=~

n=~

z(n,

?z’)n(n’)2+ ~

Z(?z,n”(e)) v(n, n”(e); e)

n=n,(0)

subject to

(A.6)

~

Z(n,n’)

<p(n;e),

?z=n,...,nl(o)-

1

ns=~

and

(A.7)

;
Z(n,n’)
~a=~

+ Z(?z,n”(e)) < p(n;e),

n = n,(o), n,,

where, for all n, n’, z(n,n’) is the number of matches between an n-worker and an n’worker, and v(n, n’ ;0) is the wage for an n-worker if matched with an n’-worker (which
may or may not occur in equilibrium),
W(n’;e).

assuming the latter is paid his equilibrium

wage

53
Let PI’ be the variant of program (A.5)-(A.7) in which 6 = 1 in (A.5) but 6 = O in
(A.6)-(A,7).

Denote by RI’ the maximized value of the objective in P,’.

n*(t3)(2n-3n*(9)/2) is negative when n = n,(i) for i=O,l.
l/2(n*(6))3

is

But from (26), the constraints in

to (A.6)-(A,7) with 6 = 1. Hence,

RI ‘

(A.8)
nl

and so from

Hence, v(n1(i),n*(6);9)= nl(i)(n*(f3))2-

decreasing in 0. We conclude that R,’ < RI(0).

program P,’ are proportional

Because A < %,

=

~ W(n; l)p(n;
n.~

l)
Y

nl

(A.8) and the fact that RI’ c RI(0) we conclude that (38) holds.

From Lemma 3, a worker in the set consisting of Sz of workers of skill no less than nz
must be matched either with another worker in Sz or with a worker of type

n’~ [n*((3),n2-1].

E

Hence the sum of wages in of workers in Sz, i.e., R2(e) = ~
n’ ml

(A.9)

w(n’;e)p(n’;9),

equals

54
subject to

S Z(n’,?z)

(A.1O)

?z=n,,
.....i.

s p(?z;e),

n’ =n “(0)

From Lemma 2,

(All)

V(?z,?z”(e);

e)

= n“(e)nz -

From Lemma 7, (35), and the fact that

nz < &n

(~“(0))3,fm n 2 n2m
2

●
(o),

(n “(0))3

(A.12)

v(n,

n’; e)

= n’n2

– n*((3)(n’)2

+

2’
if n’e(n*(6), n2) and n

For n 2 nz, the fact that

n2

>n2

.

2(3/2 )1’2n*(l) definition of nz implies that the right-hand side of

(A. 11) is increasing in 0. Similarly, because n’ < nz, the right-hand side of (A. 12) is also
increasing in 8. We conclude that if Pz’ is the program in which (3 = 1 in (A.9) but (3 = O in
(A. 10), the maximized value Rz’ of the corresponding

objective satisfies RZ’>RZ(0). But from

55
(26), the constraints (A. 10) when e=O are proportional

~P(n;
— ~.y

%’

(A.13)

to (A. 10) when (3 = 1. Hence

l)w(n;

~p(n;
n.?

i P(~,o)
n=%

l)

l)

“

This yields (39).
Q.E.D.

Proof of Pror)osition s: We can decompose (41) as follows.

Let Be and WObe the

dispersions of wages between and within firms, respectively,

for those firms that hire only

workers from the interval [n,+ 1,nz-1]. Then

(A.14)

Be =

~

(v(~s~’)

n,n’E[nl+l,

- ~“(e))’z(~!~’;e)

q-l]

and

(A.15)

W. =

~
n,n’c[nl+l,

(?2- p(n,n’))’z(n,n’;e)

.

~-l]

Similarly, let Be’ and W~’ be the dispersions,

respectively,

between and within all other

56
firms.

We have:

~,’ = ~
(A.16)

~

(P(~,~’) - ~*(e))2z(~,~’;e) +

n’=n n$[n, +lp%-ll
E

~

n’@[nl+l, q-l]

nE[nl+l, q-l]

(P(~,~’)

-~”(e))’z(~>~’;e)

and

w,’ =
(A.17)

S ~
n’=n

x
n’ c[nl+l, ~-l]

(?z-p(n,n’))’z(n,n’ ;(3)+

nc[nl+l,~-l]
~

(n-p(n,n’))’z(?z, n’;e).

ne[nl+l, q-n

We can rewrite (41) as

(A.18)

Now, the proofs of Lemmas 5 and 6 imply that if n, n’ c (n1,n2), then z(n,n’;e) >0

if and

57
only if either n = n“(e) or

(A.19)

n’ = n*(6).

But then

]p(n,n’) - n“(e)l

= In - p(n,n’)1,

and so

BO = We.

(A.20)

Moreover, from Lemma 3, if z(n, n’;e) >0 and n s nl, or n 2 nz, then

(A.21)

In - p(n,n’) I s] p(n,n’) - n“(e) 1,

with strict inequality unless n’ = n*(9). Hence,

(A.22)

We’ < Be’

From (A.20) and (A.22) we can re-express (A. 18) as

Be +B6’
(A.23)

where A >0.

p(e) =

2Be+2B0’ -A

Now, below, we will show that, for r sufficiently big, (40) implies that

B1 < ~BO

(A.24)
and (26) implies that

(A.25)

B1‘ = aBO’ and WI’ = aWO’.

Now, the fact that A>O and (A.23)-(A.25)

(A.26)

imply

~Bo+aBo’
P(l) > ypBo+z~Bo’
-aA

58
But because a>

1 >~and

9=0, establishing

that p(l) > p(0). It remains to establish (A.24) and (A.25).

Toderive(A.24),

~,=

A> O,theright-hand

side of(A,26)

exceeds that of(A.23)

with

note that,

(l-l(?z,n’)-n”( l))’z(n,n’;l)

~
n,n’~[nl+l,q-l]

=!

~

(A.27)

<~
2
=

establishing

from Lemmas 3-7

~

andsofrom

(n-n”(0))2z(n,n*(0);O)

fiom(39)

forrbig

enough

nc[n,-l,q-1]

~BO,

(A.24).

To demonstrate

(A.28)

(n-n*(l))2z(n,n*(l);l)

2nE[n,+l*-1]

(A.5)to

(A.25), note that, for r sufficiently big, v(n, n*(0);O) = v(n, n*(l); 1)
(A.6)and(A.8)

to(A.8).

Z(?z,n’;l) = az(n,n’;O), for n < n’ s nl or n2 s n s n’,

which implies (A.25).

Q.E.D.

59

References
Banerjee, Abhijit and Andrew Newman, “Occupational Choice and the Process of
Development”, Journal of Political Economy, Volume 101, April 1993, pp. 274-298.
Barmack, Matthew, “Sorting and the Growth in Inequality,”
Becker, Gary, Treatise on the Family, Cambridge:

1994, MIT.

Harvard University Press, 1981.

Bell, Wendell, “A Probability Model for the Measurement
Forces, 32, May, 1954, pp. 357-364.
Berman, Eli, J. Bound, and S. Machin, “Implications
International Evidence,” Mimeo, 1994.

of Ecological Segregation,”

of Skill Biased Technological

Social

Change:

Berman, Eli, John Bound, and Zvi Griliches, “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labor
Within U.S. Manufacturing Industries: Evidence From the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4255, January 1993, pp. 1-54.
Cutler, David, “A Guide to Health Care Reform,” Journal of Economic Perspectives,
1994, Volume 8, No. 3 pp. 13-29.

Summer

Davis, Steve and John Haltiwanger, “Wage Dispersion Between and Within U.S.
Manufacturing Plants, 1963 -86,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Macroeconomics,
1991, pp. 115-180.
Dooms, M., T. Dunne and K. Troske, “Workers, Wages, and Technology,”

Mimeo, 1994.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. “The Flow of New Doctorates” Journal of Economic Literature,
Volume 30, no. 2, June 1992, pp. 830-875.
Ellis on, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser, “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
Industries: A Dartboard Approach,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
No. 4840, August 1994, pp. 1-49.
Elmendorf, Douglas W. and Douglas R. Hamilton. “Labor Market Effects of the
Administration’s Health Proposal,” Congressional Budget Office, 1994.
Freeman, Richard D., “Unionism and the Dispersion of Wages,” Industrial and Lubor
Relations Review, Volume 34, No. 1, 1980, October, pp. 3-24.

60
Jovanovic, Boyan. “Firm Formation with Heterogeneous
Joumalof Business Economics 6:185-191, 1994.

Management

and Labor Skills,”

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin Murphy, and Brooks Pierce, “Wage Inequality and the Rise in Returns
to Skill,” Journal of Political Economy, 101, 3, June 1993, pp.410-442.
Kahn, James and Jong-Soo Lim, “On the Contribution
University of Rochester, working paper, 1994.

of Human Capital to Growth,”

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply
and Demand Factors,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1992, 428, pp. 35-78.
Kramarz, Francis, Stephen Lollivier and Louis-Paul Pele, “Wage Inequalities and FirmSpecific Compensation Policies In France,” Annales D’Economic et de Statistique, Institute
National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques, No. 41/42, January-June 1996, pp. 36986.
Kremer, Michael, “The O-Ring Theory of Economic Development,”
Economics, August 1993, pp. 551-575.

The Quarterly Journal of

Kremer, Michael and Ken Troske, “Notes on Segregation by Skill,” unpublished,

1995.

Krueger, Alan, “Labor Market Shifts and the Price Puzzle Revisited,” May 1995, mimeo,
Krugman, Paul and Robert Lawrence, “Trades, Jobs and Wages,” NBER Working Paper
#4478, 1993.
Krusell, Per, Lee Ohanian, Jose-Victor Rios-Rull and Giovanni L. Violante, “Capital-Skill
Complementarity and Inequality,” Center for Economic Policy Research European Summer
Symposium in Macroeconomics, March 1996.
Lawrence, Robert Z. and Matthew Slaughter, “International Trade and American Wages in the
1980s: Giant Sucking Sound or Small Hiccup?” Brookings Papers: Macroeconomics 2(1993):
pp. 161-210.
Lucas, Robert, “On the Size Distribution
1978, pp. 508-23.

of Business Firms,” Bell Journal of Economics,

IX,

Machin, Stephen, “Changes in the Relative Demand for Skills,” in A. Booth and D. Snower
(eds.), Acquiring Skills: Market Failures, Their Symptoms and Policy Responses, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Miller, Frederick, “The Distribution
Hopkins, 1983.

of Ability and Earnings Once Again,” mimeograph,

Johns

61
Murphy, Kevin and Finis Welch, “The Structure of Wages,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
February 1992, 428, pp. 285-326.
Robinson, W.S. “Ecological Correlations and the Behavior of Individuals, ” American
Sociological Review 15, June, 1950, pp. 351-357.
Rosen, Sherwin, “The Economics of Superstars,” American Economic Review, LXXI, 1981,
pp. 845-58.
Rosen, Sherwin, “Authority, Control, and the Distribution
Economics, XIII, Autumn, 1982, pp. 311-23.
Roy, Andrew D., “The Distribution
Sept, 1950, 60, pp. 489-505.

of Earnings,” Bell Journal of

of Earnings and Individual Output,” Economic Journal,

Roy, Andrew D. ,“Some Thoughts on the Distribution
Oxford Economic Papers, June 1951, 3, pp. 135-46.

of Earnings and of Individual Output,”

Sachs, Jeffrey and Howard Shatz, “Trade and Jobs in U.S. Manufacturing, ” Brookings Papers
on Economics Activity #l-84, 1994.
Sattinger, Michael, “Assignment Models of the Distribution
Economic Literature, June 1993, 31(2), pp. 831-880.

of Earnings, ” The Journal of

Sattinger, Michael, “Comparative Advantage and the Distributions
Econometrics, May 1975, 43(3), pp. 455-68.

of Earnings and Abilities, ”

Schmitt, John, “The Changing Structure of Male Earnings in Britain, 1974-88,” Working
Paper No. 223, London School of Economics, 1992.
Sheiner, Louise. “Mandates with Subsidies: Efficiency and Distributional
Federal Reserve Board Working Paper, June 1994.
Troske, Kenneth R. “The Worker Establishment Characteristic
Bureau: Center for Economic Studies, December 1994,
U.S. Department of Education,
1989.

Digest of Educational

Statistics,

Database,”

Consequences,”

U.S. Census

Washington,

DC: US GPO,

