                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               THE YEN AND lTS EAST ASIAN
                            NEIGHBORS, 1980-95: COOPERATION
                                    OR COMPETITION?




                                           Shinji Takagi




                                       Working Paper 5720




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    August 1996



This paper was presented at the NBER East Asian Seminar on Economics. This work is part of the
NBER’s project on International Capital Flows which receives support from The Center for
International Political Economy. It was also presented at the NBER conference “Universities
Research Conference on the Determination of Exchange Rates.” We are grateful to The Center for
International Political Economy for the support of this project. The author thanks Takatoshi Ito,
K.C. Fung, Tetsuji Okazaki, Andrew Rose and other seminar participants for useful comments.
Needless to say, the author alone is responsible for any remaining errors. Any opinions expressed
are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Shinji Takagi. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to
the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5720
                                                                                    August 1996



                                 THE YEN AND lTS EAST ASIAN
                              NEIGHBORS, 1980-95: COOPERATION
                                      OR COMPETITION?



                                              ABSTRACT



        By looking at how an East Asian currency moves when the yen fluctuates sharply against the

US dollar, we sometimes find that the reaction has been much more significant than would be

suggested   by the econometric    estimates   of the weight of the yen in nominal     exchange   rate

determination,   Moreover, the Korean won and the Malaysian ringgit have tended to move more

closely with a depreciating   yen, suggesting the countries’ emphasis on export promotion.       The

Singapore   dollar, on the other hand, has tended to move more closely with an appreciating yen,

underscoring the importance attached to price stability.   The paper concludes that, given the trend

appreciation of the yen during the recent past, emphasis on price stability has contributed more to

monetary cooperation in Asia than emphasis on export promotion.




Shinji Takagi
Faculty of Economics
Osaka University
1-7 Machikaneyama
Toyonaka, Osaka 560
JAPAN
                                                               Shinji Takagi




I. Introduction

     There has recently been a marked increase in real economic integration

among the Asian countries.     For example, the share of intra-regional trade

in the total exports of Asia (which excludes Japan) rose from 30.9 percent

in 1986 to 45.7 percent in 1994, while the share of exports to the United

States (US) declined from 34.0 to 24.5 percent during the same period (Kwan

1995) .   In the rapidly industrializing economies of Asia, the share of Japan

is now considerably larger than that of the US in imports, although not in

exports (Table 1).    Japan is at least equal in importance to the US as a

trading partner of most Asian countries.

     Despite the increasing pace of intra-regional integration, the

declining share of the US in international trade, and the significant status

of Japan as a trading partner, the exchange rate policies of most East Asian

countries remain that of limiting fluctuations in the nominal values of

their currencies relative to the US dollar in one form or another.     Most

empirical studies as well as casual observation seem to suggest that the US

dollar remains strong, and the Japanese yen remains marginal, as the anchor

of the exchange rate policies in the region.

     Against this background,    the paper will examine the role of the

Japanese yen in the exchange rate policies of selected Asian countries,l

namely, Korea, Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, the Philippines and Thailand.

This is not a new topic.     The well-cited study of Frankel and Wei (1994),

for example, has examined this very issue by econometrically estimating the

implicit weights of the US dollar and the Japanese yen in the determination

of the nominal values of major Asian currencies.    The present study is meant
                                           2

to complement the empirical findings obtained from the econometric approach

by taking the alternative approach of observing the currency movements when

the Japanese yen fluctuates sharply in one direction against the US dollar.

       To be sure, the monetary authorities of Asian countries must assign

different weights to variables which may enter the objective functions of

their exchange rate policies, such as price stability, stability of nominal

effective exchange rate indices, stability of real effective exchange rate

indices, encouragement or discouragement         of capital flows, accumulation of

foreign exchange resemes,       or export promotion.    Then, the role of the yen

in the exchange rate policy of a given country cannot be independent of the

domestic and international environments within which the authorities are

forced to operate.       In this context, it is important to bear in mind that,

during the past 15 years or so, the yen significantly appreciated against

the US dollar in both nominal and real terms (Table 2).         Under this

environment,      the decision to minimize its fluctuations against the yen would

have meant that the authorities must accept some appreciation of their

currency against the US dollar and the other Asian currencies.

       If a large weight is given to export promotion in the objective

function of the authorities, they may have been reluctant to tie their

currency too closely with the appreciating yen, to the extent that nominal

currency appreciation may work to reduce the growth of exports in the short

run.    Then, ex Dost, the currency in question must have moved closely with

the US dollar and depreciated against the yen, such that its relationship

with the yen may be characterized as “competitive” in that, relative to the

yen,   exchange   rate stability was willingly sacrificed in favor of

depreciation      to preserve competitiveness.
                                         3

     On the other hand, if a large weight is given to price stability, the

authorities may have been less willing to tolerate accepting nominal

depreciation and hence higher domestic inflation, by tying the currency too

closely to the US dollar.     This may be a particularly pertinent

consideration,    given the significant share of Japanese goods in total

imports .    In this case, ex Post, the currency in question must have moved

with the yen and appreciated against the US dollar to a greater extent, and

its relationship with the yen may be regarded as “cooperative”, in that such

behavior has tended to contribute to monetary cooperation in Asia by

promoting greater exchange rate stability in the environment of secular yen

appreciation.

     Occasionally,    however, the yen did depreciate against the US dollar on

a sustained basis.     On such occasions, the considerations of export

promotion and price stability would have created exactly the opposite kind

of reaction to the yen’s fluctuation on the part of the monetary

authorities .    With greater emphasis on export promotion, the authorities

would have been more willing to allow the currency concerned to depreciate

along with the yen against the US dollar.     With more emphasis on price

stability,    they would have been more unwilling to allow the currency to

depreciate along with the yen.     Thus , in the case of yen depreciation,

export promotion would have encouraged greater exchange rate stability

within Asia.     However, throughout this paper, emphasis on price stability is

regarded as “cooperative” behavior because, for the period taken as a whole,

it has contributed more to promoting exchange rate stability within Asia.

     The rest of the paper is organized as follows.     Section II reviews the

exchange rate arrangements of the six Asian countries, with some comments on

the nominal and real exchange rate movements.     Section 111 summarizes the
                                           4

econometric estimates of the implicit weights of the US dollar and the

Japanese yen in the determination of the nominal values of the currencies of

the six Asian countries, as reported by Frankel and Wei (1994) and the more

recent study of Kwan (1995).        Section IV provides an additional insight into

the relative weights of the US dollar and the Japanese yen in the

determination    of the values of the six Asian currencies by looking at how

they move when the yen fluctuates sharply against the dollar.       Sections V

and VI take a look at the daily movements of the six Asian currencies during

the periods of sharp yen appreciation or depreciation in the late 1980s and

in 1995, respectively,    in order to assess the response of the monetary

authorities when the yen fluctuates sharply against the US dollar.          Section

VII presents concluding remarks.




II. An Overview of the Exchange Rate Arrangements and Movements of Selected

Asian Countries

     At the outset, it may be useful to review briefly the exchange rate

arrangements    of the six individual countries.    According to official

statements    (IMF 1994), Korea, Singapore, Malaysia and Indonesia are

classified as maintaining    “other managed floating”, while Thailand maintains

a peg to a currency composite, or a currency basket.       Of the six countries,

only the Philippines    is classified as maintaining a floating exchange rate

system.   In practice, however, Indonesia and the Philippines are similar in

that the rupiah and the peso are both managed tightly in terms of their US

dollar exchange rates over a short time horizon, while they have shown

significant    trend depreciation   over a longer horizon (Table 2); their

exchange rate system may more appropriately be classified as a crawling peg

to the dollar.
                                        5

     Consistent with the crawling peg arrangement, both the Indonesian

rupiah and the Philippine peso depreciated significantly against the US

dollar in nominal terms over the period from 1980 to 1995:     the rupiah

depreciated from 627 to 2249 units per US dollar, and the peso moved from

7.51 to 25.71 units per US dollar, both on an annual average basis.        In

contrast, the other currencies showed relative stability against the US

dollar’over this period.    The Korean won first depreciated from 607.43 to

881.45 units per US dollar between 1980 and 1986, but then appreciated to

671.46 units per US dollar in 1989.     The Singapore dollar showed a fairly

steady appreciation against the US dollar, rising from 2.14 to 1.42 units

per US dollar between 1980 and 1995.     The Malaysian ringgit and the Thai

baht depreciated at a modest pace against the US dollar, with the ringgit

falling from 2.18 to 2.50 units per US dollar and the baht from 20.4S to

24.80 units per US dollar over the period.

     In real bilateral terms (on a wholesale price basis), the Korean won,

the Singapore dollar, the Malaysian ringgit and the Indonesian rupiah

generally depreciated against both the US dollar and the Japanese yen over

the period, although they became much more stable during the latter part of

the period (Table 2).   The Philippine peso, in contrast, appreciated in real

terms against the US dollar, although it depreciated against the Japanese

yen over the period.    Reflecting the higher rate of inflation, it even

appreciated against the Japanese yen from 1988 to 1990 despite the

significant nominal depreciation.     Finally, the Thai baht appreciated

against both the US dollar and the Japanese yen over the period.

     (1) Korea

     From February 1980 to March 1990, the won was officially linked to a

basket of currencies, although it was effectively pegged to the US dollar,
                                       6

On March 2, 1990, however, the Korean authorities adopted the so-called

market average rate (MAR) system, by which the dollar exchange rate is in

principle determined by supply and demand conditions in the market, subject

to a type of daily price limit.    The Bank of Korea sets the won/dollar rate

on the basis of a weighted average of interbank rates for spot transactions

of the previous day.    On each business day, the won\dollar exchange rate in

the interbank market is allowed to fluctuate within fixed margins

(currently, one percent on either side) against the MAR of the previous day.

     The real exchange rates of the Korean won against the US dollar and the

Japanese yen closely followed the nominal exchange rates because the rate of

inflation only slightly exceeded those in the US and Japan.    Over the period

1980-95, the Korean won depreciated against both the US dollar and the

Japanese yen, naturally with the extent of depreciation against the yen

being much more significant.    From 1990 to 1994, although the won remained

relatively stable against the dollar, it depreciated by as much as 34

percent against the yen.    From 1994 to 1995, however, it marginally

appreciated against the yen.

     (2) Singapore

     The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) “monitors the external value

of the Singapore dollar against a trade-weighted basket of currencies, with

the objective of promoting noninflationary   sustainable economic growth” (IMF

1994) .   In Singapore, the central bank functions are performed by the Board

of Commissioners   of Currency (Currency Board) and the MS.   The Currency

Board issues and redeems currency notes and coins, as demanded and backed by

foreign assets.    The MAS intervenes in the foreign exchange market whenever

the exchange rate is out of line with the undisclosed target, which may well

be changed from time to time.   Given the openness and the small size of the
                                        7

economy, price stability is paramount as an objective of exchange rate

policy (Toh 1996).2

     In real terms, the Singapore dollar depreciated against both the US

dollar and the Japanese yen over the entire period of 1980-95.       From 1986 to

1990, however,   the Singapore dollar appreciated against both currencies.

From 1990 to 1994, it depreciated against the yen by almost 30 percent,

while it remained stable against the US dollar; from 1994 to 1995, it

marginally   appreciated against the yen.     Judging from the behavior of the

real exchange rate, it appears that, from about 1986, price stability became

a particularly   important objective of Singapore’s exchange rate policy.

     (3) Malaysia

     From September 1975, the value of the ringgit has been determined by

supply and demand conditions in the foreign exchange market by Bank Nagara

Malaysia with a reference to the value determined by a basket of the

currencies of the country’s major trading partners.      According to the IMF

(1994), the central bank is said to intervene “only to maintain orderly

market conditions and to avoid excessive fluctuations in the value of the

ringgit”.

     In real terms, the ringgit depreciated against both the US dollar and

the Japanese yen over the entire sample period.      The depreciation was

particularly   substantial against the yen.    From 1990, however, the ringgit

began to appreciate moderately against the US dollar, in line with its

nominal appreciation.   However, it continued to depreciate against the yen

until 1994, when it began to appreciate somewhat.

     (4) Indonesia

     With the devaluation of the rupiah in November 1978, the link with the

US dollar was discontinued, and the middle rate of the rupiah began to be
                                         8

determined by the value of a basket of currencies and other considerations,

subject to periodic devaluations.     Following the 45-percent devaluation of

September 1986, however, Bank Indonesia launched the exchange rate policy of

maintaining    the real effective exchange rate at a stable level in order to

maintain Indonesia’s competitiveness    in the light of higher domestic

inflation relative to its major trading partners (Goelton 1996).      From 1986

to 1994, the rupiah thus depreciated at a rate of roughly 5 percent against

the US dollar per year in nominal terms.

     Bank Indonesia continues to set the middle or reference rate of the

rupiah in terms of the US dollar by taking into account the behavior of a

basket of currencies of Indonesia’s major trading partners.      In September

1994, however, Bank Indonesia ceased to announce the middle rate and at the

same time began to widen the intervention band around the middle rate in

order to increase the risk of speculation in the rupiah.      Currently, the

intervention bank is approximately 3 percent on either side of the now

undisclosed reference rate against the US dollar.

     Although    the Indonesian rupiah depreciated against both the US dollar

and the Japanese yen over the entire period in real terms, it remained much

more stable after 1986 in line with the stated objective of the exchange

rate policy.     In fact, it appreciated in real terms against the US dollar by

about 20 percent from 1990 to 1995, while it depreciated against the yen by

about 13 percent,    indicating that the Indonesian authorities are concerned

about the stability of the real effective exchange rate of the rupiah, in

which the yen must have significant weight.

     (5) Philippines

     Prior to October 1984, the Central Bank had intervened to keep the

peso/dollar    exchange rate within a certain target range.   Since then, the
                                       9

value of the peso has in principle been determined freely in the foreign

exchange market, though it is apparent that the central bank controls short-

run fluctuations in the exchange rate.     With the major liberalization of the

foreign exchange market in 1992, there is presumably a greater role of

market forces in the determination of the exchange rate.

     Reflecting the much higher and variable rate of inflation in the

Philippines as well as the frequency of changes in the target dollar

exchange rate, the real exchange rate of the Philippine peso fluctuated

greatly against the US dollar and the Japanese yen.     From 1990 to 1995, the

peso depreciated against the yen by over 14 percent, while it appreciated

against the US dollar by nearly 18 percent in real terms.     It is possible

that, to the extent that the Philippine authorities have allowed the peso to

appreciate substantially against the US dollar in real terms, they are

paying some attention to the real effective exchange rate, in which the yen

has significant weight.

     (6) Thailand

     The Thai baht was de facto pegged to the US dollar from 1981 to

November 1984, when it was devalued by 14.7 percent.    The baht was

subsequently pegged to a weighted basket of currencies of Thailand’s major

trading partners.   The basket is not disclosed, nor is the frequency with

which the basket is changed.   It is believed, however, that the weight of

the US dollar was raised from about 50 percent to over 80 percent when the

US dollar began to depreciate sharply against major currencies from late

1985 (Leeahtam 1991).

     In the morning of every business day, the Bank of Thailand announces

the central rates of major currencies against the baht.    For the US dollar,

the buying and selling rates are two satang below and above the central
                                       10
rate .   In a recent meeting of the Exchange Equalization Fund, however, the

Governor of the Bank of Thailand is reported to have announced the

possibility of widening the band from current two satang to four satang on

either side of the central rate, in order to discourage short-term

speculative capital inflows by increasing the cost of investing in the baht

(Phatra Research Institute 1996).

     In real terms, the Thai baht remained fairly stable against the US

dollar from 1980 to 1985, but it began to appreciate sharply from 1985, when

the yen began to appreciate against the US dollar.    In contrast, while the

baht appreciated against the yen during the earlier period in real terms

(reflective of the fact that it was pegged to the appreciating dollar), it

remained fairly stable against the yen in real terms from 1986 to 1995.     As

a result, from 1990 to 1995, the baht appreciated against the US dollar by

nearly 30 percent.



III. The Implicit Weights of the US Dollar and the Japanese Yen: A Review of

Frankel and Wei (1994) and Kwan (1995)

     The well-cited study of Frankel and Wei (1994) was the first to

estimate econometrically   the implicit weights of the US dollar and the

Japanese yen in the determination of the nominal values of ❑ajor Asian

currencies during the period of 1979-92.    This study was replicated by Kwan

(1995) on the basis of more recent data.    Their major findings are

summarized in Table 3, which seem to show that dominant weight is given to

the US dollar in the determination of all of the six Asian currencies. 3

     According to Frankel and Wei (1994), however, the weight of the yen,

although small, was significant in the Singapore dollar and became larger in

the Malaysian ringgit and the Thai baht during the latest subperiod of 1991-
                                         11

92 (not reported in the table).     The recently increased weight of the yen is

reported by Kwan (1995) for the Korean won, the Singapore dollar, the

Malaysian ringgit and the Thai baht.

     (1) Korea

     According   to the estimates of Frankel and Wei (1994) based on weekly

data for the period of January 1979-May 1992, the share of the US dollar in

the determination    of the Korean won was 0.96 while the share of the Japanese

yen was practically    zero.   In fact, they show that the Korean won remained

linked more or less to the US dollar even after the introduction of the MAR

system in March 1990.     This finding is confirmed for the later period of

January 1991-May 1995 by Kwan (1995) on the basis of monthly data.      However,

Kwan reports that, for the most recent subperiod of January-August     1995, the

weight of the dollar declined to 0.8374, while that of the yen increased to

0.1737.

     (2) Singapore

     According   to Frankel and Wei (1994), the Singapore dollar was the only

Asian currency that consistently assigned weight to the yen throughout the

entire period of 1979-92.      The weight of the dollar was 0.75, while that of

the yen was 0.13, when the weights were calculated for the entire sample.

They also show that the weight of the yen doubled in the 1980s from around 5

percent to 10 percent, or from 10 percent to 20 percent, depending on the

method of estimation    (not reported in the table).   For the most recent

period, Kwan (1995) reports that the weight of the US dollar was 0.7459,

while that of the yen was 0.1835.

     (3) Malaysia

     According   to Frankel and Wei (1994), the weight of the yen in the

Malaysian ringgit was extremely small in the early 1980s, and even
                                         12

disappeared during the rest of the 1980s, but increased to about 14 percent

in the early 1990s (not reported in the table).     For the entire period, the

weight of the yen was 0.07, while that of the dollar was 0.78.      For the

later subperiod of January 1991-May 1995, however, Kwan (1995) assigns

virtually    zero weight to the yen (0.0431), while greater weight is given to

the US dollar (0.8411).     For the most recent subperiod of January-August

1995, the yen’s weight rose to 0.1561, while the share of the US dollar was

0.8728.

     (4) Indonesia

     Frankel and Wei (1994) report that, although the Indonesian rupiah

remained tightly pegged to the US dollar until 1982, the dollar peg became

looser in 1983.     In 1985, the yen received significant weight, so much so

that the weight exceeded that of the US dollar for the period 1985-86 (not

reported in the table).     Subsequently, however, the weight of the yen

declined, disappearing altogether during the latest subperiod of 1991-92

(not reported    in the table).   For the entire sample period, the weights of

the US dollar and the Japanese yen were estimated to be 0.95 and 0.16,

respectively.     The insignificant weight of the yen in more recent years is

confirmed by Kwan (1995) for the subperiod of January 1991-May 1995 as well

as for the subperiod of January-August     1995.

     (5) Philippines

     Although    the peso depreciated significantly against the US dollar

throughout the period in nominal terms, the estimated weight of the US

dollar (about unity) indicates that the peso was closely linked to the US

dollar.     This suggests that, although the peso was devalued from time to

time, its fluctuations against the US dollar were strictly managed over

shorter intenals.
                                        13

     (6) Thailand

     Until 1984, the Thai baht was de facto linked to the US dollar, so that

the yen received no weight prior to that year.    When the baht was delinked

from the dollar, however, the yen began to receive some weight which,

according to Frankel and Wei (1994), was in the neighborhood of 10 percent

during 1985-86 when the nominal value of the US dollar was at its peak (not

reported in the table).   The weight of the yen became smaller during 1987-

90, but rose again to 12 percent during the latest subperiod of 1991-92 (not

reported in the table).    For the entire sample, the weights of the US dollar

and the Japanese yen were 0.91 and 0.05, respectively.    For the more recent

subperiod of January 1991-May 1995, Kwan (1995) reports 0.8202 and 0.1051 as

the weights of the US dollar and the yen, respectively.




IV. Movements of Asian Currencies When the Yen Fluctuates Sharply against

the US Dollar

     While econometric estimation of the implicit weights of the US dollar

and the Japanese yen is useful in revealing the relative covariances of the

currency in question with the US dollar and the Japanese yen during a

particular   sample period, it can yield misleading interpretations unless

proper caution is exercised.    Most importantly, it must be borne in mind

that the econometric approach stresses the covariances between the currency

in question and the currencies included in the currency basket without much

regard to the magnitude of the underlying changes in currency values.     This

point is important even if the currency in question is strictly pegged to a

currency basket   (i.e. , Thailand) and the composition of the basket remains

unchanged, as long as a fluctuation margin is provided around the central

rate (Takagi 1988).   Naturally,   the problem becomes greater in the case of a
                                         14

managed float of more discretionary nature (i.e. , Korea, Singapore and

Malaysia).

        To understand this point, assume, for example, that the authorities of

a country care deeply about the nominal stability of the currency against

the Japanese yen and hence assigns a weight of 10 percent to the yen in the

currency basket.     If the yen is relatively stable against the US dollar,

however, stability against the yen can be secured by simply pegging the

currency to the US dollar, presumably the intervention currency, as long as

the market rate remains within the prescribed margins around the theoretical

rate.     Then, the estimated weight of the yen may turn out to be zero.

        On the other hand, if the yen sharply fluctuates against the US dollar

in one direction, the policy of pegging the currency to the dollar will

result in a sharp movement of the currency against the Japanese yen and may

lead to a situation where the market rate goes out of the prescribed margins

unless the market rate is changed in line with the weight of the yen in the

country’s exchange rate policy.     The authorities will likely change the

dollar rate so as to offset part of the fluctuations of the currency against

the yen,     In this case, the estimated weight of the yen may approach the

theoretical value of 10 percent, or even higher if the ❑aximum margin on

both sides is utilized.

        Thus , in order to assess the role of the Japanese yen in the exchange

rate policies of the Asian countries, it is important not only to look at

the econometric estimates of the weights of the dollar and the yen over some

sample period but also to examine how the currencies move vis-a-vis the

dollar and the yen, when the yen fluctuates sharply in one direction against

the US dollar.     For this purpose, we will next consider 12 episodes of large

yen appreciation or depreciation    (of at least 5 percent) against the US
                                       15

dollar.    There were 8 episodes of yen appreciation and 4 episodes of yen

depreciation,    Table 4 shows how much the Japanese yen and the other Asian

currencies appreciated (when the figures are positive) or depreciated (when

negative) against the US dollar during each of these 12 episodes.

     The figures in parentheses indicate the direction of change of each

Asian currency as a percent of the movement of the Japanese yen, which can

be roughly interpreted as the weight of the yen during that episode.4        For

example, a negative figure in a parenthesis means that the movement of the

yen and the movement of the currency in question are opposite of each other

relative to the US dollar; a figure of 20, for example, means that the

magnitude of the movement of the currency in question is 20 percent of the

movement of the yen against the US dollar.

     (1) Korea

     When the episodes of yen appreciation or depreciation during 1982-95

are individually examined, we find that, when the yen depreciated, the won

always depreciated against the US dollar three out of four times.      The

weight of the yen during the yen’s depreciation ranged between 6 and 43

percent.   On the other hand, when the yen appreciated against the US dollar,

there were times when the won even depreciated against the US dollar.

During the appreciation of the yen during December 1993-May 1995, however,

the won also appreciated against the US dollar, with the implicit weight of

the yen in the determination of the won corresponding   to 20 percent.

     (2) Singapore

     When the currency value of the yen changed sharply against the US

dollar, the weight of the yen in the determination of the Singapore dollar

was consistently significant throughout the period, with the weight ranging

between 10 and 55 percent.   However, there were two exceptions: the
                                       16

Singapore dollar appreciated against the US dollar by 4 percent during

September 1989-April 1990, when the yen depreciated by 13 percent; and it

remained stable against the US dollar during May 1995-September 1995, when

the yen depreciated by almost 17 percent.

     (3) Malaysia

     In terms of individual episodes, the weight of the yen in the

determination of the ringgit became consistently significant after the

episode of November 1986-April 1987.    The weight ranged between 8 and 32

percent.

     (4) Indonesia

     The yen even had a negative weight during August 1985-September 1986,

meaning that the rupiah depreciated against the US dollar when the yen

significantly   appreciated against the US dollar.   The rupiah generally

depreciated against the US dollar whenever the yen depreciated against the

US dollar.    The weight of the yen for the most recent episode (May-September

1995) was about 10 percent, but this may simply reflect the fact that the

yen depreciated against the US dollar when there was a trend depreciation of

the rupiah.

     (5) Philippines

     Consistent with the fact that the peso depreciated against the US

dollar in nominal terms during this period, the yen and the peso generally

moved in the same direction only when the yen depreciated against the US

dollar.    The implicit weight of the yen becomes larger when the magnitude of

the yen’s movement against the US dollar is small.     On the other hand, the

implicit weight becomes small (or negative) when the yen’s movement against

the dollar is large, indicating that the yen plays little role in the peso’s

nominal exchange rate determination.
                                       17

     (6) Thailand

     When the individual episodes are considered, it becomes clear that the

weight of the yen in the determination of the baht was between 7 and 19

percent during 1985-95.    The order of magnitude of these implied weights    is

similar to the econometrically estimated weights.    Together with the fact

that the weight of the yen was apparently symmetrical with respect to

appreciation and depreciation, this seems to suggest that the Thai baht is

pegged fairly strictly to a basket of currencies, in which the weight of the

yen is stable.



V. The Daily Movements of Asian Currencies during the Periods of Sharp Yen

Appreciation   and Depreciation in the 1980s5

     In the first half of the 1980s, the yen/dollar exchange rate fluctuated

in the range of 200-270 yen per dollar, with the yen showing general

weakening against the dollar from the middle of 1984 through the early part

of 1985.   Following the Plaza Agreement of September 22, 1985, however, the

yen began to appreciate sharply from the pre-Plaza level of around 240 to

reach the level of almost 200 yen per dollar in two months.    The

appreciation of the yen, from September 19 to November 25, amounted to

almost 20 percent.    The yen continued its trend appreciation throughout the

rest of the 1980s, except for one notable period of substantial reversal

from the latter part of 1988 through the first part of 1989.    Somewhat more

gradually than on other occasions, the yen depreciated from the high of

120.9 yen per dollar on November 24, 1988 to the low of 149.6 yen per dollar

on June 15, 1989, a depreciation of almost 20 percent.

     This section will take a detailed look at the daily movements of the

Japanese yen and the Asian currencies against the US dollar during the
                                        18

period immediately following the Plaza Agreement of 1985 (Figure I-A and

Figure l-B) and a portion of the latter period of yen depreciation, namely,

from January 3 to June 14, 1989 (Figure 2-A and Figure 2-B).

     (1) Korea

     During the first period when the yen was appreciating against the US

dollar, the Korean won remained virtually pegged to the dollar.       During the

second period of sharp yen depreciation, the won moderately appreciated

against the dollar.     In either period, there is no evidence to suggest that

the Korean authorities were paying much attention to the movement of the won

against the yen.

     (2) Singapore

     During the first period of sharp yen appreciation, the Singaporean

authorities allowed the Singapore dollar to appreciate along with the yen

against the US dollar.     The cumulative appreciation of the Singapore dollar

over this period was almost 5 percent, as opposed to almost 20 percent for

the yen.     In contrast, when the yen depreciated in the early part of 1989,

the Singapore dollar remained stable against the US dollar, underscoring the

importance the Singaporean authorities attach to price stability.

     (3) Malaysia

     During the period of yen appreciation, the Malaysian authorities

allowed the ringgit to appreciate moderately along with the yen against the

US dollar.     In contrast, during the time of yen depreciation,   the ringgit

initially depreciated somewhat, but subsequently appreciated marginally.         On

both occasions, the movement of the ringgit was similar to that of the

Singapore dollar.

     (4) Indonesia
                                        19

     On the first occasion of yen appreciation, the Indonesian rupiah

remained stable against the US dollar, indicating that the rupiah was

effectively pegged to the US dollar over this interval.     When the yen

depreciated    in 1989, however, the rupiah moderately depreciated.

     (5) The Philippines

     On both occasions, the Philippine peso was virtually pegged to the US

dollar.

     (6) Thailand

     When the yen appreciated, the Thai authorities allowed the baht to

appreciate moderately along with the yen against the US dollar; when the yen

depreciated,    they depreciated the baht slightly along with the yen against

the US dollar.     From these two episodes, it appears that the Thai

authorities strictly adhered to a basket peg and that the weight of the yen

in the currency basket was reduced somewhat somewhere between 1985 and 1987

presumably    in the light of the appreciating trend of the yen.




VI. The Daily Movements of Asian Currencies during the Periods of Sharp Yen

Appreciation    and Depreciation in 19956

     In 1995, the Japanese yen moved sharply against the US dollar on two

occasions .    On the first of these occasions, from March 1 to April 19, the

yen appreciated against the US dollar by over 15 percent, rising from 96.75

to 81.08 yen per US dollar (Figure 3-A and Figure 3-B).     On the second

occasion, from August 1 to September 19, the yen reversed its position

against the US dollar by depreciating by more than 15 percent, declining

from 88.29 to 104.20 yen per US dollar (Figure 4-A and Figure 4-B).     These

two periods may be instructive in revealing not only the reaction of the

monetary authorities but also how it might have changed since the 1980s.
                                       20

     (1) Korea

     When the yen fluctuated sharply against the US dollar in either

direction, the Korean authorities initially maintained   the won/dollar

exchange rate stable.    It appears that a substantial adjustment of the

won/dollar exchange rate takes place only after it is determined that the

movement of the yen against the dollar is significant and more or less of

permanent nature.    It is interesting to note that when the yen sharply

depreciated against the dollar from August 14 to August 17 (by as much as 5

percent in 3 days), the Korean authorities inunediately reacted by

depreciating   the won (from 761.75 won per US dollar on August 15 to 787.65

won on August 18), indicating the greater weight they assign to a

depreciating yen.    It is clear that the depreciation of the Korean won in

August 1995 was deliberate as the balance of foreign exchange reserves were

increasing during this period.

     (2) Singapore

     When the yen appreciated, the Singaporean authorities allowed the

Singapore dollar to appreciate moderately along with the yen against the US

dollar.   When the yen depreciated, however, the authorities kept the nominal

value of the Singapore dollar virtually constant against the US dollar for

two full business weeks before allowing the Singapore dollar to depreciate

moderately   in response to a further depreciation of the yen.   This may

reflect the importance of price stability in Singapore’s exchange rate

policy, hence the greater resistance to exchange rate depreciation and the

greater propensity to accommodate the yen’s exchange rate appreciation.

     (3) Malaysia

     On a dally basis, Malaysia’s policy response was quite asyrmnetric with

respect to the yen’s depreciation and appreciation.    When the yen
                                        21

appreciated in March 1995, the nominal value of the ringgit remained

extremely stable for most of “the period, although it began to appreciate

moderately against the US dollar during the very last part of the yen’s

appreciation phase.    When the yen depreciated in August, however, the

ringgit depreciated    immediately against the US dollar so as to offset a

portion of its appreciation against the yen.

      (4) Indonesia

     The nominal value of the Indonesian rupiah remained fairly constant

against the US dollar on both occasions.     In fact, it continued to

depreciate against the US dollar at a moderate pace regardless of the

movement of the yen against the dollar.

     (5) Philippines

     The behavior of the Philippine peso was similar to that of the

Indonesian rupiah.     Regardless of how the yen moved against the US dollar,

the peso remained on a moderately depreciating trend against the dollar.

     (6) Thailand

     The Thai baht’s movement, was symmetrical with respect to the yen’s

appreciation and depreciation.     In both cases, the baht moved so as to

offset a portion of its movement against the yen, indicative of the policy

of the Thai authorities to peg the baht fairly strictly to a currency

basket, of which the yen is a component.     Judging from the movement of

foreign exchange reserves (not reported here), it is most likely that the

Thai authorities sold foreign exchange in the market during the period of

yen appreciation    (so as to appreciate the baht), while they purchase foreign

exchange during the period of yen depreciation    (so as to depreciate the

baht) .
                                           22

VII. Conclusion

     By looking at how six East Asian currencies moved when the yen

fluctuated sharply against the US dollar during 1580-95, we have found ~hac

the reaction was sometimes much more significant than would be suggested by

the econometric    estimates of the yen’s weight in the determination of their

nominal values.     When the individual episodes of sharp yen fluctuation were

examined, the “weight” of the yen often appeared larger than most of the

econometric    estimates taken from a longer sample period.        The exceptions,

however, were the Indonesian rupiah and the Philippine peso, both of which

showed secular depreciation against the US dollar over the period.              Clearly,

the paramount objective of the Indonesian and Filipino exchange rate

policies was to prevent a real appreciation of their currencies in the light

of higher domestic inflation by consistently depreciating their currencies

in nominal terms.     In these countries, little attention was paid to the

movement of the yen, although it is evident that the yen is prominently

included in the real effective exchange rate indices.

     Except for Thailand, which strictly adheres to a basket peg, the other

countries have more recently shown asymmetric responses to the yen’s

depreciation    and appreciation.     The Korean won and the Malaysian ringgit

have tended to move more closely with a depreciating yen, suggesting the

emphasis placed on export promotion.        In this sense, the yen is perceived in

Korea and Malaysia    as the currency of a competitor country in the export

market. ‘   On the other hand, the Singapore dollar has tended to move more

closely with an appreciating yen, underscoring the importance the

authorities attach to price stability in the exchange rate policy.

     Emphasis on export promotion produces a       ❑ ore   convergent   ❑ ovement   with a

depreciating yen and a    ❑ ore   divergent movement with an appreciating yen.
                                      23

Conversely, emphasis on price stability produces a more convergent movement

with an appreciating yen and a more divergent movement with a depreciating

yen.   As things have turned out, because the yen showed sustained and

significant appreciation against the US dollar for the sample period as a

whole , an exchange rate policy targeted at price stability has contributed

more to monetary cooperation in Asia by promoting intra-regional exchange

rate stability, than a more competitive exchange rate policy targeted at

export promotion.
                                                                  Shinji Takagi

                                 Footnotes

1.   In discussing the role of the yen in Asia, there is also the separate

question of how widely the yen is used in intra-regional transactions.        The

emphasis of the paper, however, is strictly on the importance of the yen in

the determination    of the nominal values of the East Asian currencies.

2.   The term “low and stable domestic inflation” appeared as the official

objective of Singapore’s exchange rate policy for the first time in the 1989

issue of IMF’s annual report on Exchan~e Arrangements and Exchan~e

Restrictions .

3.   The reported weights do not necessarily add up to unity because there

may be other currencies or variables included in the estimation equations,

sometimes with a negative weight.

4.   Admittedly,   this is a crude measure of the weight of the yen because

there can be other currencies whose    ❑ ovements   are being considered by the

authorities .    This measure is simply to be taken as a rough indication of

how closely the currency in question moved with the yen ex uost, relative to

the US dollar.     As another qualification, it should also be noted that this

measure may underestimate    the “weight” of the yen if the currency in

question moves with the yen with a longer lag.

5.   The daily exchange rate data were obtained from the Asian Wall Street

Journal.     The exchange rates for 1985 are mid rates at 5 p.m. in Hong Kong,

while those for 1989 are selling rates at 3 p.m. in New York.

6.   The daily exchange rate data, except for the Indonesian rupiah, were

obtained from the Financial Times.     The exchange rates are closing mid rates

in London.     The daily data for the rupiah were obtained from the Wall Street

Journal.     The exchange rates are selling rates at 3 p.m. in New York.
7.   Although   it is likely that the industrial composition of Korean exports

is similar to that of Japanese exports, it is not clear to what extent

Malaysian exports compete with Japanese exports.     The characterization   of

the bel-,aviorof the Malaysian   ~-inggit as “cGmpetiti~-e” relative to tt,eyen

remains only tentative.
                                                             Shinji Takagi

                                 References

Chor Dongchul, 1996, “Korea’s Exchange Rate Movements in the 1990s:

     Evaluation and Policy Implications”, Korea Development Institute,

     Seoul, March.

Cororaton, Caesar B., 1996, “Exchange Rate Movements in the Philippines”,

     Philippine Institute for Development Studies, March.

Frankel, Jeffrey A. and Shag-Jin Wei, 1994, “Yen Bloc or Dollar Bloc?:

     Exchange Rate Policies of the East Asian Economies” in Takatoshi Ito

     and Anne Krueger (eds.), Macroeconomic Linka~e: Savinrs, Exchan~e

     Rates , and Capital Flows, Chicago, University of Chicago Press.

Glick, Reuven, Michael Hutchison, and Ramon Moreno, 1995, “Is Pegging the

     Exchange Rate a Cure for Inflation?: East Asian Experiences”, Working

     Paper No. PB95-08, Economic Research Department, Federal Reserve Bank

     of San Francisco, August.

Goelton, Miranda S., 1996, “Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Macroeconomic

     Management: The Case of Indonesia, 1980-1996”, University of Indonesia,

     March.

International Monetary Fund (IMF), ExchanRe Arrangements and Exchan~e

     Restrictions , Annual Report, annual issues.

Kwan, C. H. ,1995, Enken no Keizai~aku (The Economics of the Yen Block), in

     Japanese, Tokyo: Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha.

Leeahtam, Pisit, 1991, From Crisis to Double DiRit Growth, Bangkok: Dokya

     Publishing House.

Ong, Hong Cheong, 1996, “Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Macroeconomic

    Management,   1980-1994: Malaysia’s Experience”, ISIS Malaysia, March.

Phatra Research Institute, 1995, “Trade Weighted Value of Thai Currency”,

     Bangkok, July.
Phatra Research Institute, 1996, “Commentary”, Bangkok, April 25.

Takagi, Shinji, 1988, “A Basket Peg Policy: Operational Issues for

     Developing Countries”, World Development 16, 271-279.

Toh Mun-Heng, 1996, “Exchange Rate Policy in Singapore”, National University

     of Singapore, March.
        -.
        m




        m




    m




&
                               $,
                               J
                               m




                               -1
                               m
                               m




    ----
    00-N
    WONVl
    .    .
    oak>




    ----
    0000
    WOW-
    .    .       .         .
    UO-*




    ----
    0000
    Ulouw
    .    .       .         .
    WO           .0*




--A-

0000
Wowm
.            .         .

-“OWN
Oyooa
            0
                .   .   .
                            0
                            .   Ill




                0
                0
                0
                w




                0




        “0
        N
        N
    m




                0
                    —
                    “m
                    -1




        0   0




0
3




    N
+
$
nl
-.
0-
W
D-
     I
    o    o
             n
             c


             i“

             :
             -1
t            -,

             8



                   0




                   n
                   0
             <     -1
                   m
             m     m
             J     3



             :
             u
             -1
             m
             l-l
             -,
             m
             “
             -,
             0
             3

                   m




             w




                   m
                   J




                   g
                   -.
         I
              I
        0         0        WI




                      .
                      .
                      ..
                      b
                      ,
                      .
                      .
                      .



  d
‘u-.
 m
 D-




                      P
                      L

                      k
       --R-
                      b


                      .
                      .


                      .
                      .
I




1
1




1
[1




[1
[1
[1
r1
I       I
w           I
0       0       0
I   I   I   I
