NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TECHNOLOGY, EMPLOYMENT, AND
THE BUSINESS CYCLE: DO TECHNOLOGY
SHOCKS EXPLAIN AGGREGATE
FLUCTUATIONS ?

Jordi Gali

WorkingPaper5721

NATIONALBUREAU OFECONOMICRESEARCH
1050Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA02 138
August 1996

I am gratefulto SusantoBasu, Bill Brainard,MartinEichenbaum,Mark Gertler,Lutz Killian, Franck
Portier,Xavier Sala-i-Martin,Julio Rotemberg, Chris Sims, and workshop participantsat the New
York Fed, NYU, Yale University,and the NBER 1996 SummerInstitutefor helpful comments and
suggestions. Tommaso Monacelli provided excellent research assistance. I thank Universitat
Pompeu Fabra for its hospitality. Financial support from the C.V. Starr Center for Applied
Economics and a DGICYT grant(PB93-0388) are gratefullyacknowledged. This paper is partof
NBER’s researchprogramin Economic Fluctuationsand Growth. Any opinions expressedarethose
of the authorand not those of the National Bureauof Economic Research.
@ 1996 by Jordi Gali. All rightsreserved. Shortsections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,may
be quoted without explicit permission provided thatfull credit, including@ notice, is given to the
source.

NBER Working Paper 5721
August 1996

TECHNOLOGY, EMPLOYMENT, AND
THE BUSINESS CYCLE: DO TECHNOLOGY
SHOCKS EXPLAIN AGGREGATE
FLUCTUATIONS ?

ABSTRACT

Using data for the G7 countries, Iestimate conditional correlations of employment and
productivity, based on a decomposition of the two series into technology and non-technology
components. The picturethatemerges is hardto reconcile with the predictions of the standardReal
Business Cycle model. For a majority of countries the following resultsstand out: (a) technology
shockt appear to induce a negative comovement between productivity and employment,
counterbalancedby apositive comovement generatedby demandshocks, (b) the impulse responses
show a persistent decline of employment in response to a positive technology shock, and (c)
measured productivity increases temporarily in response to a positive demand shock.

More

generally,the patternof economic fluctuationsattributedto technology shocks seems to be argely
unrelatedto major postwarcyclical episodes. A simple model with monopolistic competition sticky
prices, and variable effort is shown to be able to account for the empirical findings.

Jordi Gali
Departmentof Economics
New York University
269 Mercer Street
New York, NY 10003
and NBER
galij@fasecon.econ.nyu. edu

1

Introduction

Real Business Cycle (RBC) theory, exemplified by the work of Kydland and
Prescott (1982) and its subsequent extensions, interprets the bulk of aggre
gate fluctuations observed in the postwar US economy as being consistent
with the competitive equilibrium of a neoclassical growth model augmented
with a labor-leisure choice and exogenous technology shocks. In addition to
its theoretical appeal, proponents of the RBC paradigm point to its successful empirical performance w a reason for taking seriously its account of the
mechanisms though which shocks impact the economy and are propagated
over time.
In the present project I question the usefulness of the type of evidence
generally provided in support of RBC models, and which stresses their apparent ability to match the patterns of unconditional second moments of key
macroeconomic time series.1 The main argument builds upon a well known
property of calibrated RBC models driven by technology shocks: a high
positive correlation between labor productivity and employment (or hours).
The source of that correlation lies at the root of the mechanism underlying
macro fluctuations in those models: it reflects the shift in the labor demand
schedule caused by technology shocks (and, to a less extent, the induced
capital accumtiation), combined with an upward sloping (and less variable)
labor supply. As is well known, the above prediction stands in stark contrast with the zero or slightly negative correlation detected in the data, an
observation which has led a number of researchers to augment the model
with non-technology shocks, i.e., with shocks that would act predominantly
as labor supply shifters (see, e.g., Christian and Eichenbaum (1992)). Under that view, the observed near-zero correlation between employment and
productivity is the restit of the coexistence of technology shocks with other
shocks, so that the positive correlation induced by the former is roughly offset
1SeeKYdlmdandpr~cott (1996) for a description of the approachto modelevaluation
found in much of the RBC literature, and Sims (1989, 1996) for a critical appraisal of that
approach. Examples of attempts to evaluate RBC models by focusing on other dimensions
of their predictions include Watson (1993), Gali (1994), and Rotemberg and Woodford
(1996).

2

by the negative correlation resulting from the latter.z
In section 2 of the present paper I show how a stylized model with monopolistic competition, sticky prices and variable effort can potentially explain
the near-zero unconditional correlation between productivity and employment while reversing its sources: under plausible assumptions, the model
predicts that technology shocks generate a negative comovement between
those two variables, offset by the positive comovement arising from demand
shocks. The intuition for the results is straightforward. In equilibrium, aggregate demand (and, consequently, the demand faced by each individual
producer) is determined by the level of aggregate real balances. With sluggish price adjustment and limited monetary accommodation, the short-run
response to a positive technology shock is associated with little or no change
in the real money supply. Accordingly, the increase in aggregate demand
(and desired output) will fall short of the increase in multifactor productivity, inducing firms to decrease the quantity of labor employed. Hence,
technolo~ shock will generate a negative correlation between employment
and productivityy. On the other hand, an increase in aggregate demand and
output arising horn a monetary expansion will be partly met by higher unob
served effort, in addition to higher “measured” employment. If the response
of effort is large enough, an increase in labor productivity will ensue. In that
case monetary shocks will generate a positive comovement between employment and productivity.3
An empirical evaluation of the two clmses of models can exploit their different implications regarding the responses of employment and productivity
to each type of shock and, m a result, the wnditional correlations between
employment and productivity. With that goal in mind, I attempt to identi~
and -timate the components of productivity and employment variations Wsociated with technology shocks on the one hand, and non-technology shocks
(demand shocks, for short) on the other. That decomposition is carried out
using a structural VAR model, identified by means of a long-run restriction
which is satisfied by a broad range of models, including RBC models, “newKeynesian” models (as exemplified by the model in Section 2), and even
models displaying long-run effects of demand or monetary shocks. Section
3 contains a description of the empirical methodology proposed, and of its
2See Hansen and Wright (1992) for a discussion of the employment-productivity puzzle,
as well as other anomalies regarding the labor market predictions of RBC models.
3See Blanchard, Solow, and Wilson (1995) for an extensive discussion of the interdependence between productivity growth and employment, in the short-run and the long-run.

3

connection with theoretical models of the business cycle.
Section 4 presents results based on postwar U.S. data. The evidence r%
ported includes estimates of conditional correlations, as well as estimated
impulse responses of output, employment, and productivityy to technology
and demand shocks. Three results stand out: (a) the estimated conditional correlations of employment and productivity are negative for technology shocks, positive for demand shocks, (b) the impulse responses show a
persistent decline of employment in response to a positive technology shock,
and (c) measured productivity increases tempormily in response to a positive demand shock, Those results, and many others, are shown to be robust
to the labor input measure used (employment or hours), the dimension of
the underlying structural VAR (a just-identified bivariate model for employment and productivity vs. a partially-identified five variable model including data on interest rates, money and prices), and the data transformation
(first-differenced or HP-filtered data) on which the conditional correlation
estimatm are computed.
Section 5 provides some international evidence, using employment and
productivity data for Canada, U.K., Germany, l?rance, Italy, and Japan. In
most cases, the results using international data largely mirror those obtained
for the U.S., though a few significant differences are apparent, In particular,
the three main results listed above appear to hold for every country in our
sample but Japan,
Overall the evidence reported in Sections 4 and 5 seems to be clearly
at odds with the predictions of standard RBC models, while being consistent with new-Keynesian models characterized by monopolistic competition,
sticky prices, and variable effort.
Section 6 discusses the implications of some of the previous results for
estimates of memures of short run increasing returns to labor (SRIRL) in
production function regressions, and proposw an alternative approach that
uses one of the series generated by the structural VAR decomposition as an
instrument in one such regression. With few exceptions, the results from
implementing that approach on both U.S. and international data point to
the presence of significmt SRIRL.
In Section 7 I plot the technology and demand components of the U.S.
time series for output and employment, in order to msess their relative ability to account for the strong positive comovement of those variables that
chmacterizes the business cycle. The verdict is clear: the fluctuations in employment and output attributed to demand shocks are (a) strongly positively
4

correlated, and (b) clearly related to the main postwar cyclical episodes; neither is true for the fluctuations attributed to technology shocks.
Section 8 summarizes the main results of the paper and concludw.

2

Labor Market Dynmics

with Sticky Prices

In this section I develop a general equilibrium monetary model with sticky
prices and unobserved variations in labor effort.4 The model is deliberately
stylized, in order to convey the basic point in the simplest possible way. Thus,
capital accumulation is ignored, and nominal price rigidities are introduced
by assuming that firms have to set their prices before shocks are realized.
2.1

Households

The reprwentative household seeks to mmimize

H(N,, Ut)}

(1)

t=o
subject to the budget constraint
1

/

o

Pit Cit di + Mt = Wt Nt+Vt

Ut+Mt-l+Tt+Ht

for t = 0,1,2, ... . C~ is a composite consumption index defined by

where Cit is the quantity of good z consumed in period t. The unit price of
good z is given by Pit, and

4Recent examples of dynamic general equilibrium models of the business cycle \vith
nominal rigidities include Hairault and Portier (1993), B6nassy (1995), Cho and Cooley
(1995), Rotemberg (1994), King and Watson (1995), and Kim (1996). An example of
business cycle models tith tim~varying effort ican be found in Burnside, Eichenbaum,
and Rebelo (1993) for an exampl. Gordon (1990), Basu (1995), and Sbordone (1995),
among others, focus on the implications of unobservable changes in labor-effort on the
cyclical behavior of productivity measures.

5

is the aggregate price index. M denotes (nominal) money holdings. H is
disutility from work, which is a function of hours (N), and effort (U), and
specialized to be

‘Y’ represents monetary transfers to households, and H denotes profits. W
and V respectively denote the prices of an hour of work and a unit of effort.
~ c (O, 1) is the discount factor. ~~, ~~, AU,a~, ati, are positive constants.
e > 1 is the elasticity of substitution across consumption goods. Total labor
income is given by W N + V U. Accordingly, the “measured” hourly wage
isW+V
($).
We can write the first order conditions associated with the household’s
problem as
(2)

(3)

Wt
— = An Ct N;n
P~

(4)

(5)

2.2

Firm

There is a continuum of fires distributed uniformly on the unit interval.
Each firm is indexed by i E [0, 1], and produces a differentiated good with a
technology

Li maybe interpreted w the quantity of eflective labor input used by the
firm, which is function of hours and effort:

6

where 13E (O, 1). Z is an aggregate technology index, whose growth rate is
assumed to follow an i.i.d. process {q~}, with q~ w N(O, s;). Formally,
Zt = z~-l exp(qt)
At the end of period t – 1 (i.e., before the period t’s realization of the
money supply and technology is observed) &m i sets the price Pit at which it
will be selling good i during period t, taking as given the prices set by other
firms (and thus the aggregate price level Pt). Once uncertainty is realized,
each firm chooses Nit and Uit optimally, given Wt and Vt.5 Given an output
level yt, cost minimization requires

ua~

—=
Nit

1–0
—
() e

w~
K

(6)

As long as the (predetermined) price Pit is above marginal costG, each
firm will find it optimal to meet all the demand for its product and thus
choose an output level
Kt=

P~~ “
~
()

c~

(7)

Thus, when setting the price the firm will seek to maximize
mP~xEt-l{ (l/C~) (Pit ~t – Wt Nit – Vt Uit)}
*
subject to (6) and (7). The corresponding first order condition is given by
Et_l{(l/C’~)
where p ~ ~

(~0 Pit ~t – ~ Wt Nit)} = O

(8)

.7

5Even though the level of effort is unobservable to the econometrician (and thus a
potential source of productivity mismeasurement) it is assumed to be observable (and
enforceable) by firms.
6As usual, that condition will hold if (a) the (ex-ante) markup is high enough and/or
the size of the shocks is not too large.
,which
7Notice that in the absence of uncertainty (8) simplifies to Pit = p ~~ ~~f
is just the familiar optimal price condition for a monopolist facing an isoelastic demand
schedule.

7

2.3

Money Supply

The quantity of money Msin the economy is assumed to evolve according to

where {(t } is a white noise process orthogonal to {qt } (the sequence of technology shocks) at all leads and lags, and with ~~N iV(O, s~). Notice that we
are allowing the monetary authority to respond in a systematic fashion to
technology shocks. As discussed below, such a policy may be motivated by
the aim of stabilizing prices, output, or employment.

2.4

Equilibrium

In a symmetric equilibrium all firms will set the same price Pt and choose
identical output, hours, and effort levels Yt, Nt, Ut . Goods market clearing
requires Ct = C’it = Yi~= Y~,for all i c [0, 1], and all t. Equilibrium in the
money market implies &
= exp(~t + y qt) ,all t. Using both market clearing
conditions, we can remite (3) (after some algebraic manipulation) as
(lo)
where @ ~ A;L[l – ~exp{~(s~

+ ~zs~)}].g

Furthermore, (4), (5), and (6) imply Ut = A*

—
N~l~u, where A =

(A.J;*))*

That allows us to obtain the following reduced form equihbrium relationship between output and employment:

where p = aO + a(l – 19) (~).
Finally, evaluating (4) and (8) at the symmetric equilibrium and combining them with (11) and (10) we can obtain a set of expression for the
equilibrium levels of pricm, output, employment, and productivityy, in terms
8We assume ~ exp{ ~(s: + ~zs~)} < 1. The constant velocity associated with (10)
is a consequence of our assumption of i.i. d money growth rates, which in turn implies
a constant nominal rate. Though that specification simplifies the algebra considerably
(leading to a simple exact solution for the equilibrium processes), most of the qualitative
results emphasized below would not be Mected by a more general specification.

8

of the exogenous driving variables. Letting lower cme letters denote the natural logarithm of each variable, and dropping uninteresting constants, we
have:
Apt = Et-l – (1 – ~) qt-1

(12)

(14)

“’=(1-$)
“+(%+7)
‘t+(’-’”)
(1-:)
’-1‘“)
where x R y – n denotes the log of (measured) labor productivity.
The equilibrium dynamic responses of p, y, n, and z to each shock embodied in (12)- (15) are discussed next. We see that a moneta~ shock has
a transitory impact on output, employment and productivityy, and a permanent effect on the price level. More specifically, and in response to an
unanticipated monetary expansion (i.e., a positive realization of f), output
and employment unambiguously go up, reverting back to their original level
after one period. The sign of the (also transitory) response of labor productivity z depends on the size of p, being positive if and only if p > 1.
Given (11), the latter condition is easily seen to correspond to the notion of
“short-run increasing returns to labor” (SRIRL) emphasized in the literature
on the cyclical behavior of productivity (see, e.g., Gordon (1990)). For that
condition to be satisfied in our model we require (a) sficiently “productive”
effort (low 13), (b) a sufficiently low elasticity of effort’s marginal disutility
(oU) relative to that of employment (a.), and (c)a sticiently high elasticity
of output with respect to (effective) labor input (a). As discussed below, the
possibility of a positive response of productivity to a monetary expansion
plays a key role in one of the interpretations of the evidence regarding the
correlation between productivity and employment. Finally, note that the
only vmiable that will be permanently tiected by the exogenous increase in
the money supply will be the price level, which will adjust proportionally
(though with a one period lag).

9

Let us now turn to the effects of a (positive) technology shock (q > O).
Such a shock has a permanent, one-for-one effect on output and productivity,
as can be seen in (13) and (15). The same shock will have a (permanent)
negative effect on the price level as long as ~ < 1, i..e., if the degree of
monetary accommodation is not too strong. Most interestingly, if the same
condition is satisfied, a positive technology shock will have a negative, though
transitory, effect on the level of employment. The intuition for that result
is straightforward. Consider, for the sake of exposition, the ~ = O cme (exogenous money). In that ewe, the combination of a constant money supply
and predetermined prices implies that real balances (and, thus, agg-regate
demand) remain unchanged in the period when the technology shock occurs.
Each firm will thus meet its demand by producing the same level of output.
If the technology shock is positive, producing the same output will require
less labor input, and a decline in employment will be observed. On the other
hand, unchanged output and lower employment will lead to an unambiguous increase in labor productivity in response to the same shock. In the
following period, fires adjust their prices downward (since marginal cost is
lower), aggregate demand and output will go up, and employment returns
to its original level. The sign of the associated change in labor productivity
depends again on whether p is greater or less than one (i.e., on whether the
change in output is more or less than proportional to the change in hours),
which, in turn, determines whether the immediate response of productivity
to a technology shock overshoots or not its long run level.
Needless to say, the sign of the short run employment rwponse to a technology shock stands in stark contrast with the predictions of standard calibrated RBC models, which imply a response of employment of the same sign
as the underlying technology shock g.
By looking at (12)- (15) it should be clear that the qualitative effects of a
technology shock described above will remain unchanged in the presence of
an endogenous monetary response, so long as ~ < [0, 1), a parameter range
gNOn~kandard
specifications
of calibrated RBC models characterized by

S1OWtechnology

diffusion often predict a negative response of employment to a positive technology shock
(see, e,g., Hairault, Langot, and Portier (1995), Cooley and Dwyer (1995)). In those models
a positive technology shock induces a small rightward shift in labor demand, which is more
than offset by a relatively larger leftward shift in labor supply (resulting from the wealth
effect), thus leading to a short-run decline in employment. That mechanism is unrelated
to the mechanism at work in the present model and, at least in this author’s view, little
plausible.

10

which includes both exogenous monetary policy as well as monetary rule
aimed at smoothing price and output changes. More generally, the choice of
the policy rule will only have a permanent effect on prices, but it will affect
the size and/or the dynamic pattern of the responses of output, employment
and productivity. In particular, the monetary authority will face a trade off
between employment and price volatility on the one hand, and the magnitude
of unanticipated output changw on the other. 10
The unconditional covariances among the growth rates of output, labor
productivity, employment implied by the above stylized model are given by
(16)
.

cow(Agt, Azt) = ;

cov(Ant,

Azt) =

(2(9 – 1) s:+

()(
:

2 2(p-l)s:

–(1-7)

(T+ v – 1) s;)

[(2-P)

(17)

+27(9 –l)l s:)

(18)
Whenever ~ E [0, ~) and/or exogenous monetary shocks are a sufficiently
important source of fluctuations (relative to technology) the model predicts
that employment growth should be procyclical–a property which is a robust feature of the data. Furthermore, p > 1 is a sticient condition for
measured labor productivityy to be procyclicd–another feature of the dat a–
independently of the relative importmce of the two shocks.
The sign of the comovement between employment and productivity growththe focus of our attention–depends on the size of p, the policy parameter ~,
and the relative importance of shocks. It is useful to look first at the sign of
the conditional covariances, Covz(Ant, Azt) and cov~(An~, Azt). Thus, and
conditional on technology being the only source of fluctuations, we have
covZ(An~, AZt) = – (1-~)
P2

[(z-p)

+27(P-l)IS:

Under the resumptions ~ E [0,1) and p E (1,2) it is easy to check that
COWZ
(Ant, Axt) <0, i.e., technology shocks generate a negative comovement
1°Notice that, in particular, the central bank could set y = 1 and s: = O, in which
case the equilibrium response of output and employment would correspond to that in the
equilibrium with fully flexible prices.

11

between employment and productivityy growth. As argued above those assumptions are indeed quite plausible empirically. Section 5 below provides
further evidence supporting a value for p in the assumed range.
On the other hand,

covm(Ant,

Azt) =

2(

P–1)~2

P2

m

whose sign is determined by the sign of ~ – 1. If SRIRL are present, monetary shocks will generate a positive comovement between employment and
productivity growth,
The case of most interest-and a plausible one, in our view<orresponds
to p E (1, 2), and ~ E [0, 1), i.e., it combines some SRIRL with a not-toostrong endogenous money response. In that case the model’s predictions
regarding the signs of the unconditional comovements among output, employment, and productivity are consistent with the evidence, and not unlike
the predictions of the standard RBC model. Yet, under the same assumptions, the two models imply conditional comovements between employment
and productivity growth of opposite signs: conditional on monetary (nontechnology) shocks being the source of fluctuations, the sticky price model
predicts a positive correlation between employment and productivity growth,
whereas the corresponding comovement conditional on technology shocks is
negative. That prediction is in stark contrast with the prediction of standard
RBC models with multiple shocks where, for the reasons described in the
introduction, technology shocks are a source of a positive comovement between employment and productivity, while non-technology shocks generate a
negative comovement (see, e.g., Christian and Eichenbaum (1992)).

3

An Empirical

Model

In the previous section I analyzed a stylized model of an economy with imperfect competition, short-run nominal rigidities, and variable effort, subject
to both tethnology and non-technology (monetary) disturbances. Under certain assumptions, that model was shown to be consistent with the observed
lack of correlation between employment and productivity growth. As is well
known, a standard RBC model driven by multiple shocks can also potentially account for that near-zero correlation. The two classes of models have,
however, very different implication regarding the responses of employment
12

and productivity to each type of shock and, as a result, on the conditional
correlations between employment and productivity growth.
In this section I attempt to identify and estimate the components of productivity and employment variations associated with technology on the one
hand, and non-technology shocks (demand shocks, for short) on the other.
That decomposition is carried out using a structural VAR model, identified
by means of a long-run restriction which is satisfied by a broad range of
models, including RBC models and models with nominal rigidities. Given
estimates of each component of employment and productivityy variations we
can compute the corresponding conditional correlations (and other second
moments) which can be contrmt ed with the different models’ predictions.

3.1

A General Framework

Next I discuss the assumptions underlying my identification strategy. Those
resumptions implicitly determine the range of models which the empirical
framework below can embrace. First, I assume an aggregate production
function
Y~= F(Kt,

z~Lt)

(19)

where Y is output, K and L denote the eflective capital and labor input
services employed (thus allowing for possible unobservable variations in the
utilization rate of both inputs), and Z is an exogenous technology parameter.
F is assumed to be homogeneous of degree one. Technology evolves according
to Z~ = Z~_l exp(6+q,), where A(L) qt = E: , with A(0) = 1, and A(z) # O,
for all lxI s 1 . In words, the growth rate of Z is assumed to follow a
stationary autoregessive process with mean 6.
Let ratdenote the one-period return on an ~set i held between t – 1 and t.
I assume that the sequence of returns {ri~} is a stationary stochastic process,
for all i. That assumption is backed by the observed time series properties of
returns on financial assets and, in particular, by the evidence of stationarity
in real interest rates presented below. 11 This must also be true for physical
1lThe evidenceon stockretmnspoints to small departures

fiOm

white

noise

(see,

e.g.,

Singleton (1990)). The evidence on real interest rates is less robust, but generally tends
to reject the presence of a unit root (see, e.g., Mishkin (1992)). Under the maintained
assumption of a constant time discount rate, the evidence suggests that the possible variations in the wedge between consumers’ intertemporal marginal rates of substitution and

13

capital, whose return (say, ~~)is given by the first order condition associated
with profit mtimization

‘rt

=

F~(Kt,

Zt L~)+ v~

—
—

—
“ (2:;)

t

(20)

+v~

(21)

where j’ (.) - FK ( ., 1) denotes the marginal product of capital, and Vt
accounts for the possible existence of (possibly stochastic) depreciation, adjustment costs, departures from perfect competition, etc. {vt } is resumed to
follow a stationary stochastic process (possibly with a nonzero mean) 12.
Effective labor input L~is assumed to be a function of employment and
unobserved effort. Formally,
(22)

Lt = g(Nt, Ut)

where g is homogeneous of degree one. I assume that effort per worker (or
per worker-hour) {~}
is a stationary stochastic process. In addition to its
plausibility, the latter property is consistent with most business cycle models
that allow for effort variation (e.g., Burnside et al. (1995), Sbordone (1995)).
By combining (19), (20), and (22) we can derive the following expression
for mmsured labor productivity Xt = ~ = fi~ = 2, F(ut, 1) g(l, ~),
where wt = f ‘ ‘l(rt – v,). Letting ~, - log(~(wt: 1) g(l, ~)),
the previous equation w

we can rewrite

Xt=zt+(t

(23)

where, given the assumptions of stationarity of rt, vt, and ~ made above,
{(t}

is stationary.
Equation (23) holds the key to identification of technology shocks in our
framework, for it implies that only permanent changes in the stochastic component of the technology parameter z can be the source of a unit root in productivity. Put it differently, while all types of exogenous shocks impinging on
asset returns (e. g., a capital income tax rate) are not m-encharacterized by a unit root
process, for such a unit root would in that case be inherited by the proces for before-tax
asset returns.
12 Notice
that
the
standard
case
with
no
adjustment Costs, and perfect competition
corresponds to a constant Vt = v, equal to (minus) the depreciation rate.

14

the economy can tiect labor productivity temporarily–through their effects
on effort per worker and the effective capital/labor ratio –only technology
shocks can have a permanent effect on the level of labor productivity.
Notice that the above framework allows for non-technology shocks that
may have permanent effects on the levels of employment and output. Examples of models where those effects could be found include RBC models
with non-stat ionary government spending, models which combine monetary
non-neutralities with labor market features that generate hysteresis in employment, and models with permanent labor supply shocks. Thus, my identifying restriction is weaker than the one originally proposed by Blanchard
and Quah (1989), and which restricted demand shocks not to have permanent
effects on the levels of output (and, at least implicitly, employment). 13

3.2

Specification and Identification

In a general aggregative framework, the assumptions of constant returns and
stationarity of asset returns and effort have been shown to imply that the unit
root in measured labor productivity must be associated with the presence of
permanent technology shocks. The ability of the empirical model developed
below to sort out the effects of technology and non-technology shocks hinges
critically on the presence of such a unit root, so we need to check whether it
can be found in the data. By contrast, the same framework is silent regarding
the order of integration of employment, which in a fu~y specified model wotid
be affected by agents’ preferences, labor market structure, and the nature of
shocks impinging on the economy, as discussed above. Yet, and in order to
specify the empirical model correctly, we need to take a stand on the order of
integration of employment, The results of a battery of unit root tests on data
for the G7 countries, reported and discussed below, strongly suggest that the
three time series we are mostly concerned with here (output, employment
and productivity) are reasonably characterized as being generated by I(1)
processes.
13Notice that in contrast with Shapiro and Watson (1988), my identifying assumption
allows one to di;entagle technology shocks horn (permanent) labor supply shocks without
having to impose the assumption that technology shocks have no long run effect on labor
supply. Though with a different motivation and objectivw, the identification strategy
adopted here is closer to that in Gamber and Joutz (1993), who restrict labor supply
shocks not to have a permanent effect on real wages, while allowing technology shocks to
have such a permanent effect.

15

Motivated by that evidence, the empirical analysis below proceeds under
the assumption that { (z~, n~)} - {qL} is a bivariate 1(1) process, with a
stationary VAR representation in first differences. The observed variations
in measures of productivity and employment (and thus in qt) are interpreted
as originating in two types of exogenous disturbances-technology and demand shocks-, which are orthogonal to each other, and whose impact is
propagated over time to employment and output through various unspecified mechanisms. We represent that idea formally by assuming that {Aq,}
can be expressed as a (possibly ifinite) distributed lag of both types of
disturbances:

‘q’= [

C1l(L) ClZ(L)
C2’(L) C22(L)1 “ =

C(L)
“

(24)

where Et = [E:,Ey]’ is a vector whose elements are period t’s technology (c:)
and demand shocks (E~). The orthogonality resumption (combined with
a scale normalization) implies EEtEj = I . Furthermore, the restriction–
implied by the general framework discussed abov~that the unit root in
productivity originates exclmively in technology shocks corresponds to C12(1) =
O. In other words, the matrix of long-run multipliers C(1) is constrained to
be lower triangulm.
Let the reduced form VAR representation for {Aqt } be given by
B(L) Aq~ = Vt

(25)

where B(O) - 1 , E v~v~ = Z, and E vt Ax~–j = O, for j = 1,2, 3,... .
We further require that each reduced form innovation is an (independent)
linear combination of the structural shocks, i.e., Vt = S c~ for some nonsingular matrix S, a condition that guarantees that the structural shocks are
fundamental.
Under the previous assumptions one can show C(1) is the Choleski factor
of E(l) Z E(l)’, where E(L) a B(L)-l. Given consistent estimates for E(L)
and Z, the matrix of impulse responses C’(L) can be estimated using

C(L)

=

E(L)

s

=

E(L) E(l) -’c(l)

The components of productivity growth wsociated with technolo~
demand shocks ae respectively given by
16

and

Az;

=

ClI(L) HI(L) Aqt

Azy

=

C12(L) f12(L) Aqt

where ~(L) ~ ej E(l)–lC(l)B(L),
for i = 1,2 , with ei denoting the ith
column of a (2x2) identity matrix.
The corresponding components of (log) employment are

An;

=

C21(L) HI(L) Aq~

Any

=

C22(L) H2(L) Aq~

Given a time series for each component of employment and productivity
growth, their conditional correlations-pZ (Ant, Az~) and p~(An~, Az~)– can
be consistently estimated using the sample correlations P(An~, Az~) ~ P= ,
and ~(An~, Az~) ~ ~~.
In addition to the two previous comovement wtimates, the empirical section below also reports the sample correlations between the time series obtained as the residual after applying an Hodrick-Prescott flter to nj and
z;, for i = z, m, i.e., to the (log) levels of each component of employment
and productivity. We denote the resulting detrended series by {i:, fi~} for
i=z, m.

4
4.1
4.1.1

Evidence

for the U.S. Economy

Benchmark Results
Data and Unit Root

Tests

Our benchmark results rely on estimates of a structural VAR for labor input and productivity measures, using U.S. quarterly data covering the pe
riod 48:1-94:4. Two alternative labor input series, drawn from Citibase, are
used: the (log) employed civilian labor force, denoted by n., and (log) total employee-hours in non-agricultural establishments, denoted by nh. Two
alternative time series for (log) productivity, denoted by z~ and xh, are constructed as the difference between (log) GDP (y) and the corresponding labor
input measure.
17

The first panel of Table 1 reports the results of Augmented Dickey Fuller
(ADF) unit root tests applied to the levels and first differences of the time
series just introduced. The test fails to reject the null of a unit root in
the levels of all the series, but it does reject the same null when applied to
their first differences. Those results suggest that we characterize {[z, n]’} as
an 1(1) process (regardless of whether hours or employment is used), thus
motivating the VAR specification introduced above.
4.1.2

Estimates

of Condition

Correlations

The main results of this section are reported in the fist two panels of Table
2. For each combination of labor input measures and detrending filter, the
fist panel (“Data”) reports the estimate of the unconditional correlation of
employment and productivity (~), while the second panel ( “Bivatiate” ) r~
ports the estimated correlations of their technology-driven components (~Z),
and their demand-driven components (~~). That evidence is supplemented
with Figures 2a and 2b, which display scatterplots of the original labor input
and productivity series, as well as scatterplots of their components.
Estimates the unconditional correlation of employment and productivity
is are small and, with one exception, negative, its values ranging from -0.29
to 0.28, and an average of -0.14. As argued in the introduction, the absence of a large positive correlation between employment and productivityy
is in cofiict with a key prediction of standard calibrated RBC models in
which equilibrium fluctuations are driven by technology shocks, but can in
principle be reconciled with multiple-shock versions of those models, since
non-technology shocks lead to a negative correlation between employment
and productivity that may offset the positive comovement induced by technology shocks. Our benchmark estimates of the conditional correlations are,
however, inconsistent with that hypothesis: in all cases, the estimates point
to a large, negative correlation between the technolo~-driven components of
employment and productivity growth (average estimate = –0.78), whereas
the corresponding demand-driven components display a positive correlation
(average estimate = 0.38 ), w reported in the second and third columns of
Table 2.
The previous results are, on the other hand, consistent with the predictions of models with imperfect competition, sticky prices, and variable effort,
as exemplified by the stylized model developed in Section 2. As shown there,
the short term rigidity in aggregate demand resulting horn the stickinws of
18

the price level (and the lack of a sticiently accommodating monetary policy)
leads technology shocks to generate a negative comovement between employment and productivity, while unobserved effort variations are responsible for
the positive comovement between the same variables generated by demand
shocks .
4.1.3

Impulse

Responses

In order to understand the source of the previous results it is useful to look at
the estimated dynamic responses of productivity, output, and employment to
each type of shock. Those responses are respectively given by the coefficients
of the polynomials C1i(L), C’ii(L) + C2i(L), and C2Z(L), with i = 1 for a
technology shock, and z = 2 in the case of a demand shock. Figures 3a.
and 3.b. report the estimated impulse responses (darker bars), when hours
(Figure 3a.)
or employment (Figure 3.b.) The lighter bars represent a
+ two standard deviation confidence interval for the null hypothesis that the
impulse response is flat at zero.
Regardless of whether hours or employment are used as a labor input measure, the qualitative patterns observed in the estimated impulse responses ae
very similar. In response to a positive one standard deviation-sized technology shock, labor productivity experiences an increase of about O.6%, eventually stabilizing at a level somewhat higher. Output also experiences a
permanent increase, but the initial rise appears to be more gradual than in
the productivity case. The gap between the initial increase in labor productivity and the (smaller) increase in output is reflected in a short-lived,
though persistent, decline in employment. The fact that the bulk of the joint
variation in employment and productivi~ arising from a technology shock,
takes place at impact, with both variables moving in opposite directions, is
responsible for the overall negative conditional correlation between the two
variables reported above.l~
14A decline in employment (or, alternatively, an increase in unemployment) resulting
from a positive technology shock can also be detected in the a number of structural VARs
(characterized by different identification schemes) in the recent literature. Since the purpose of those exercises is generally unrelated to the issue at stake here, the presence of such
a result often appears to go unnoticed or, at most, is briefly mentioned in the text. Among
the papers where that result can be found we have: Blanchard and Quah (1989, Figure
6), Gamber and Joutz (1993, figure 1), Cooley and Dwyer (1995, Figure 1), and Forni and
Reichlin (1995, Figure 3) and Blanchard (1989, Figure lb.), and Blanchard, Solow and
Wilson (1995, Figures C and D). The latter two papers provide a longer discussion of the

19

Figures 3.a.and 3.b. also display the estimated dynamic responses to a
demand shock, as identified by the empirical framework above. A positive
one standard deviation shock to demand is shown to have a large, and persistent effect on output, employment, and productivity. Interestingly, while
the effect on productivity vanishes over time (by construction) the shock has
a sizable permanent impact on both employment and output, thus emerging
as the main source of the unit root detected in the labor input measurw.
As in the case of the technology shock, the positive comovement of employment and productivity in the period the shock hits the economy dominates
the estimated conditional correlation, accounting for the positive sign of the
estimated conditional correlation reported in Table 2.

4.2

Results from a Five Vmiable VAR Model

The evidence just discussed relies on an empirical model which assumes that
all observed variations in labor input and productivity are the result of two
types of shocks, which I have labeled as technology and demand. If, in fact,
there are more than two independent sources of fluctuations with “sficiently
different” dynamic effect son the variables considered the above model will be
misspecified, and the associated decomposition and impulse responses of little
use.15 Without meaning to take a stand here on what the relevant number
of shocks is, and purely as a check on the robustness of the results presented
above I have also estimated a higher dimensional (five variable) VAR model,
which allows for four independent demand shocksatill identified as shocks
that do not have a permanent effect on the level of productivity. Even though
I make no attempt to identify each of demand shocks separately (which would
require imposing additional restrictions), the estimated model still provides
interesting information regarding the effects of technology shocks on a larger
number of variables than was the case for the small VAR.
4.2.1

Specification

The specification considered uses data on money, interest rates, and prices,
in addition to the productivityy and labor input series discussed above. My
measure of the stock of money, denoted by m, is the (log) of M2. The price
finding, interpreting it aa being consistent with the traditional Keynesian model.
15A discussion of what is precisely meant by “similar” dynamic responses across dist urbances can be found in the appendix to Blanchard and Quah (1989).

20

measure (p) is the (log) of the CPI. The nominal interest rate measure (r)

is the three-month Treasury Bill rate. Because of limited data availability
for M2 the sample period for this specification is 59:1-94:4 . Results of
unit root tests applied to the previous time series, reported in the panel
(b) of Table 1, suggest that both money g-rowth (Am) and itiation (Ap)
can be thought of as cointegrated 1(1) processes with cointegrating vector
[1, –1], implying a stationary process for the rate of growth of real balances,
{Am, – Ap,}. Analogous propertim also seem to hold for the nominal rate
r and iflation Ap, implying a stationary (ex-post) real interest rate process
{r - Ap,+l}. This lead us to consider the moving average model Aq, =
C(L) &~,where Aq~ - [Az~, An~, Arn~ – Apt, r~ – Apt, A2pL]’, and Et E
[c;,~~’,~~,&~,&, ~’]’. In order to identify technology shocks we assume
EE~E~ = O, and (using obvious notation) Cl~(l) = 0, for j = 2,3,4,5. In
words, technology shocks {E: } are resumed to orthogonal to demand shocks,
as well as the only source of the unit root in productivity. 16
4,2.2

Conditional

Correlations

The last pair of columns in Table 2 (“Large VAR’ ), displays the estimated
conditional correlations of productivity and employment based on the five
variable model described above, for each combination of labor input and
data transformation. Across the board, the estimates point to the same
phenomenon picked up in the bivariate model: the technology-driven component of productivity and employment are negatively correlated, whereas
the corresponding demand-driven component (i.e., the sum of the components associated with the four different non-technology shocks allowed for)
is positively correlated.
4.2.3

Impulse

Responses

Figures 4a. and 4.b. display the impulse responses of a number of variables
to a technology shock, using hours (4a.) or employment (4.b,) as a labor
input measure. The pattern of responsw of productivity, output, and employment is very similar to that obtained from the small VAR: a positive
technology shock leads to an immediate increase in productivity that is not
lGIn separate tests (not reported), I was unable to establish cointegration among z,
n, m – p, and Ap, thus justifying the firsbdifference transformation of those variables that
is used in the find specification.

21

matched by a proportional change in output (the latter’s response building
up more slowly over time), implying a (largely) transitory but persistent (and
quantitatively nonnegligible) decline in employment. Two small differences
may be worth pointing. first, when the hours series is used (but not when I
use employment) the estimated output response shows a small (and hardly
significant) decline in output in the short run, which is not easily explainable
with the fi-amework laid out in section 2 (though one can always come up
with some stories). Secondly, the initial negative effect of the technology
shock on labor input is now more than fully reversed over time (regardless of
the labor input measure used), leading to a positive, though quantitatively
small, long term effect.
Notice that the gradual response of output parallels the slow build-up of
real balances over time. The latter, in turn, results from the combination of
moderate but persistent deflation and positive money growth. Though not
shown explicitly in the Figure, velocity (m – p – y) is persistently higher
after the shock, which is consistent with the observed decline in the nominal
rate. Finally, and because of movements of identical sign and similar magnitude in the nominal rate and ifiation, the response of the (ex-ante) real
rate (r — Ap+l ) is largely insignificant, with the exception of the substantial
increme at impact under the specification using hours. Though alternative
interpretations may be possible, I view the joint response of those variables
as being largely consistent with the hypothesis of sluggish price adjustment,
and a monetary response that works in the direction of stabilizing prices and
employment, but which falls well short of achieving that stability.17

5

International

Evidence

In this section I report evidence on the correlations of productivity and employment based on data for the remaining G7 countries: Canada, U.K., Germany, Rance, Italy, and France. 18 For each country I have estimated a
bivariate VAR model identical to the one underlying the benchmark results
171n the context of the sticky price model developed above, avoiding the decline in
employment requires a more expansion= y monetary stante, the latter being necessary to
generated sticient
demand in the short-run to absorb an increase in output proportional
to the increase in multifactor productivity, without the need for the slow price adjustment
actually observed.
18Evidence for Spain using a related approach can be found in GaU (1996).

22

for the U.S., but limited to a single specification that uses employment as
a labor input me~ure. My data set includes the time series for the (log)
employed civilian labor force as a measure of employment, (log) GDP w the
output measure, and a series for (log) labor productivity (constructed with
the other two). All data are quarterly, and seasonally adjusted. Sample
periods vary across countries, depending on data availability
y.lg
Table 3 reports the results of ADF unit root tests on the levels and first
differences of the time series considered. With a few exceptions the test
results point to the presence of a unit root in the levels of employment,
productivity and output series, but they tend to reject a unit root in their
first differences (at a 5% significance level). The exceptions lie in the results
for some of the employment series. Thus, for Prance the test rejects a unit
root in n, a result that leads me to adjust the VAR specification accordingly
for that country . On the other hand, U.K., Germany, and Italy I cannot
reject (marginally) the null of a unit root in An. The latter result, however,
is likely to reflect the low power of the test, since it is not consistent with
the parallel rejection of a unit root in Ay and AX in the same countries.
Most importantly for my identification strategy, the characterization of the
productivity series as being integrated of order one holds in each of the six
countries considered.
For each country, Table 4 reports (under the heading ~) the unconditional
correlation of employment and productivity. When first differences of those
variables are used, the correlations are very small in absolute value, with the
exception of Itsly, where it is –0.47. The average correlation is –O. 14. The
results for the HP-filtered series are not too different, though now the outlier
is France with a 0.29 correlation value. The average correlation for the HP
filtered series is 0.02. Overall, and in accordance with the estimates breed
on U.S. data, there is clearly no evidence of the large positive correlations of
productivity and employment predicted by flexible price, technology-driven
RBC models.
The remaining two columns in each country’s panel (~z and ~~) report
the estimated conditional correlations, based on a just-identified VAR model
for [Az, An]’ analogous to the one underlying the benchmark results for the
19Sample periods: U.S. (54:1-94:4), Canada (62:1-94:4), U.K. (62:1-94:3), Germany
(70:1-94:4), France (70: 1-94:4), Italy (70:1-94:3), and Japan (62:1-94:4).
Employment
data are drawn from OECD Quarterly Labor Force statistics. GDP data are taken from
the OECD Quarterly National Income Accounts.

23

U.S..20 ~enthecomelatiom
recomputed mingfist differences, in five out
of six countries (Japan being the outlier) the estimates point to a negative
correlation between the technology components of employment and productivityy, with the corresponding demand-driven components showing a positive
correlation. The signs of those correlations is reversed for Japan, When the
(log) levels of the estimated components of the series are transformed using the HP-filter the pattern of correlation signs remains largely unchanged,
though now both conditional correlations have a positive sign in Canada and
Japan.
Figures 5.a.-5.f. display the corresponding impulse responses of productivity, output, and employment to a technology and demand shocks, for the
six countries considered in this section. With the exception of Japan, the
patterns of responses to the two shocks are not too different from the U.S.,
though a few difference can be detected. Among the latter, perhaps the
most interesting lies in the much stronger persistence and negative permanent effects of a positive technology shock on employment, in three European
countries (UK, Germany, and Itsly). By way of contrast, in Canada the short
run negative impact on employment is fully reversed by the third quarter after the shock, and ends up having a strong positive effect ~ymptotically. The
dynamic responses to a demand shock seem to be quite similar across the
board (with the exception of Japan), and close to those obtained for the U.S.
On the other hand, the estimated impulse responses for Japan seem to accord better with the prediction of standard RBC models, with the response
of employment, output and productivity to a positive technology shock is
very weak in the short run, and only builds up (eventually stabilizing at a
different level) as the horizon increases, and negative (though insignificant)
impact of a positive demand shock on productivity.

6

Estimates

of SRIRL

The decomposition of the output and employment time series into their demand and technology-driven components allow us to estimate a version of
20Motivated by the results of unit root tests, the estimated VAR for Prance included
the (log) level of employment (and a time trend as an additional regressor), instead of
the employment growth rate. Yet, and for the sake of comparability with other countries, all the correlation estimates for Prance were based on either a first-difference or HP
transformation of the relevent series.

24

the reduced for-m production function (11).21 The latter is rewritten here in
(log) first-differences as:

where u~ - Az~ – 6, and 6 a E(Az~ ). It is important to emphasize that
in the context of the model above, p is a “reduced form” parameter, which
captures, in addition to the hours-elasticity of output, the effect associated
with unmeasured variations effort that accompany movements in hours in
equilibrium.
The difficulties associated with estimation of (26) given raw output and
employment data are well known. They stem from the potential correlation
between the error term Az~ and the regressor Ant, as well as the unrestricted
serial correlation in Azt. 22 In particular, estimates of p obtained with OLS
are generally believed to be biased upward, since the error term is presumed
to be positively correlated with the regressor. Interestingly, some of the
empirical evidence reported above calls that presumption into question, by
raising the possibility that Azt and Ant might be negatively correlated, in
which case OLS estimates of p would be downward biased.
Furthermore, the empirical model used to identify and estimate the effects
of technology shocks may also provide a means to overcome the simultaneity
problem that lies at the root of the inconsistency of the OLS estimator,
without having to rely on often poor and somewhat ad-hoc instruments. To
see this, notice that one can rewrite (26) as

where tit ~ p Any+ Az~ – 6, and where {An~} represents the time series for
the demand component of employment variations generated by the structural
VAR decomposition in the previous section. Conditional on our identification
being correct, Anm is orthogonal to Az at all leads and lags, thus making it
possible to estimate p consistently by applying OLS to (27).23 In other words,
21The exercise in this section was suggested by Bill Brainard.
22The latter rules out using the lagged valuw of any (potentially) endogenous variable
w an instrument.
23The fact that we do not observe {Any} directly but need to rely on a constructed series
based on our estimates implies that both variables in the regression are measured with
error in small samples. Though the latter vanishes asymptotically (given the consistency
of our procedure), our estimates of p will be subject to small sample bias.

25

the structural VAR exercise is used to generate an “artificial” variable which
is, by construction, an appropriate instrument for employment variations in
a production function regression.
Table 4 reports several estimates of p for the U.S. economy, using both
hours and employment data. In all ewes “robust” standard errors are re
ported in brackets. The first column ( “OLS” ) reports the estimates of p
resulting from applying OLS to (26). In a way consistent with other authors’ analogous regressions the resulting p estimates are substantially higher
than the observed labor income share. Interpretations of that finding as evidence of increasing returns, market power, and/or variable effort are generally
muted by the possibility of substantial bias, as mentioned above.24
The second and third columns report estimates for p using as a regressor
the series for Anm generated by the bivariate and five-variable models, respectively. In all cases the point estimates are significantly above one, thus
suggesting the presence of substantial increasing return to labor, possibly
due to procyclical fluctuations in unobserved effort.25
Table 5 presents similar evidence based on international data. In this case
the original OLS estimates of p, using actual employment changes as a regressor, show considerable variation across countries, ranging from 0.33 in Italy
tol. 15 in Germany. The average point estimate is 0.81. Yet, the corrected
point estimates (using the demand component of employment changes) are
above one for all countries but Japan, though both in Canada and Italy they
are insignificantly different from one. The average point estimate is 1.26 (and
as high as 1.41 if we exclude Japan).
Thus, our results point to the presence of substantial short run increasing
returns to labor (SNRL) for all countries in our sample, with the exception of Japan. Since values of p greater than one correspond to positive
comovements of employment and (measured) labor productivity in response
to demand disturbances, the previous estimates mirror the estimates of conditional correlations found in Table 4, where Japan also stood out as an
exception.
24See Burnside (1996) for a useful overview of that literature, as well as some additional
findings.
25The fact that the estimates using employment as a labor input measure are systematically higher than the ones based on hours should not be surprising, given the positive
correlation between employment and hours per worker.

26

7

Do

Technology

nizable)

Business

Shocks

Generate

(Recog-

Cycles... ?

A central feature of business cycles is the strong, positive comovement in
GNP and labor input measures. That property, which has been documented
extensively, appears to hold for all industrialized countries, and is robust
to the specific data series and/or detrending methods used. Any theory
of business cycles which failed to capture that feature would be viewed as
empirically irrelevant and would arise little attention horn the profession, so
it is thus not surprising that a high, positive output-employment correlation
lies among the key predictions of equilibrium business cycle models driven by
technology shocks. Yet, whether technolo~ shocks in actual economies are
responsible for the pattern of output and employment fluctuations msociated
with business cycles remains an open question, and one which should provide
a critical test of the relevance of a research program that interprets the bulk
of aggregate fluctuations as resulting from those shocks. Conditional on my
identification scheme being correct, the empirical framework developed above
allows me to address that question in a straightforward way, by examining
the decomposition of output and employment time series into technology vs.
demand-driven components.
The basic output of that exercise is displayed in Figures 6.a and 6.b.. In
order to save space, I report only results for the U.S., based on the bivariate
VAR using hems data. 26 The figures display the two estimated components
of output and hours, detrended using the HP filter (A = 1600). In addition,
the two figures show as a shaded area the periods corresponding to the nine
NBER-dated recessions. The patterns that emerge seem quite revealing in a
number of ways.
Consider the output and employment fluctuations that the empirical
model identifies w being driven by technology shock–and which are shown
in Figure 6,a . Though such fluctuations are by no means negligible, the
patterns displayed by the two series hardly coincide with “recognizable” US
business cycles. That is particularly true in one dimension: the strong, positive comovement of GDP and employment that is generally viewed as central
characteristic of business cycles seems hardly present in Figure 6.a.; in fact
the estimated correlation between the two series is –0.02.
A look at the estimated demand components of the GDP and hours series–
26Results for most other specifications and countries are qualitatively similar.
27

shown in Figure 6.b.– yields a completely different picture. In addition to
the dominant contribution of demand shocks to US fluctuations-which a
comparison of Fig. 6.a. and Fig. 6.b. makes apparent–the estimates point to
an unambiguous pattern of positive comovements of employment and output
over the cycle, with an estimated correlation of 0.97.

8

Concluding

Cements

Many macroeconomists seem to have been attracted by the hypothesis that
aggregate fluctuations experienced by industrialized countries can be explained, at least to a first approximation, as the result of the economy’s
response to exogenous, random variations in technology. That approach is
often justified by the (largely recognized) ability of RBC models to generate
time series for a number of aggregates whose unconditional moments display
patterns similar to their empirical counterparts.
In the present paper I have tried to provide some evidence that raises
some doubts on the empirical merits of that class of models. The paper
builds on the observation of a near-zero unconditional correlation between
productivity and employment, both in the US and in other industrialized
economies. Proponents of RBC models have interpreted that evidence as
reflecting the coexistence of technology shocks with other shocks; under that
view, the positive employment-productivity correlation induced by the former (resulting horn labor demand shifts) is roughly offset by the negative
correlation resulting from non-technology shocks (and which will be manifested in labor supply shifts). Yet, and to the extent that technology shocks
are a significant source of fluctuations in those variables, we would expect
RBC models to provide at least an accurate description of the economy’s
response to such shocks. For the majority of the G7 countries, however, the
estimates of the effects of technology shocks yield a picture which is hard
to reconcile with the predictions of those models: positive technology shocks
lead to a decline in employment, and tend to generate a negative comovement
between that variable and productivity.
The observed results seems to favor instead a class of models with imperfect competition, sticky prices, and variable effort. In those models–a
stylized version of which hw been presented in Section 2–the combination of
price rigidities and demand constraints leads fires to contract employment
in the face of an exogenous increase in multifactor productivity, wherein the
28

presence of variable effort explains why measured labor productivity may rise
with employment in response to an demand expansion. Needless to say, the
nature of aggregate fluctuation and the potential role for policy associated
with such an economy are very different horn those identified with the RBC
paradigm.

29

REFERENCES

Aiyagmi, Rae, Lawrence Christian, and Martin Eichenbaum (1992):
“The Output, Employment, and Interest Rate Effects of Government Congumption, ” Journal of Moneta~ Economics 30, 73-86.
Basu, Swanto (1995): “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or
Cyclical Utilization ?,” NBER WP#5336.
Benassy, Jean-Pascal (1995): “Money and Wage Contracts in an Optimizing Model of the Bwiness Cycle,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35,
no.2, 303-316.
Blanchard, Olivier J. (1989): “A Traditional Interpretation of Macroeconomic Fluctuations,” Ametican Economic Review, vol. 79, no. 5, 1146-1164.
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Danny Quah (1989): “The Dynamic Effects of
Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances,” Ametican Economic Review
79, no. 4, 654673.
Blanchard, Olivier J., Robert SOlOW)and B.A. Wilson (1995): “Productivity and Unemployment ,“ mimeo.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (1993): “Labor
Hoarding and the Business Cycle, ” Journal of Political Economy 101, no. 2,
245-273.
Christian, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum (1992): “Current Real
Businws Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations, ” American Economic Review 82, 430-450.
Cooley, Thomas F. and Jang-Ok Cho (1990): “The Business Cycle with
Nominal Contracts,”, rnimeo.
Cooley, Thomas F., and Mark Dwyer (1995): “Business Cycle Analysis
Without Much Theory: A Look At Structural VARS,” rnimeo
Forni, Mario, and Lucrezia Reichlin (1995): “Let’s Get Real: A Dynamic
Factor Analytical Approach to Disaggregate Busin~s Cycles,” CEPR Discussion Paper Series #1244.
Galf, Jordi (1994): ‘[Government Size and Macroeconomic Stability,” European Economic Review, vol. 38, 117-132.
Gali, Jordi (1996): “Fluctuaciones y Persistencia del Empleo en Espafia,”
in R. Marimon ed., La Economia Espafiola: una Visi6~tDiferente, C~I and
Antoni Bosch, editor, Barcelona, 1996, 139-169.

30

Gamber, Edward N., and ~ederick L. Joutz (1993): “The Dynamic Effects of Aggregate Demand and Supply Disturbances: Comment ,“ Amefican
Economic Review, vol. 83, no. 5, 1387-1393.
Gordon, Robert J. (1990): “Are Procyclical Productivity Fluctuations a
Figment of Measurement Error ?,” mimeo.
Hairatit, Jean-Olivier, and Franck Portier (1993): “Money, New Keyne
sian Macroeconomics, and the Business Cycle,” European Economic Review
37, 33-68.
Hairault, Jean-Olivier, F!rangoisLangot, and Franck Portier (1995): “Time
to Implement and Aggregate Fluctuations,” mimeo.
Hansen, Gary D., and Randall Wright (1992): “The Labor Market in
Real Business Cycle Theory,” Quatierlzj Review, Federal Reserve Bank of
Minneapolis, 2-12.
Kim, Jinill (1996): “Monetary Policy in a Stochastic Equilibrium Model
with Real and Nominal Rigidities,” mimeo.
King, Robert G., Charles 1. Plosser, and Sergio T. Rebelo (1988): ‘[Production, Growth, and Business Cycles. I. The Basic Neoclassical Model”
Journal of Monetay Economics 21, 195-232,
King, Robert G., and Mark Watson (1995): “Money, Prices, Interest
Rates, and the Business Cycle,” Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 58,
no 1, 35-53.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1991): “Time to Build and
Aggregate Fluctuations, ” Economettica 50, 1345-1370.
Kydland, Finn E. and Edward C. Prescott (1996): “The Computational
Experiment: An Econometric Tool,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
10, no. 1, 69-85.
Mishkin, l?rederic S. (1992): “1s the Fisher effect for real ?,” Journal of
Monetaq Economics 30, 195-215.
Prescott, Edward C. (1986): “Theory Ahead of Business Cycle Measuremerit,” F.R.B. of Minneapolis Quatierlg Review 10, 9-22.
Rotemberg, Julio J. (1995): “Pricw, Output, and Hours: An Empirical
Analysis Based on a Sticky Price Model,” Journal of Monetay Economics,
forthcoming.
Rotemberg, Julio J. and Michael Woodford (1996): “Real Business Cycle
Models and the Forecast able Movements in Output, Hours, and Consumption,” Ametican Economic Review, vol. 86, no. 1, 71-89.
Sbordone, Argia M. (1995): “Cyclical Productivity in a Model of Labor
Hoarding,” Princeton University, mimeo.
31

Shapiro, Matthew D., and Mark Watson (1988): “Sources of Business
Cycle Fluctuations,” in Stardey Fischer ed., iVBER Macroeconomics Annual
1988, 111-148.
Singleton, Kenneth J., (1990): “Specification and Estimation of Intertemporal Asset Pricing Models,” in ~iedman and Hahn eds., Handbook of Moneta~ Economics, vol. 1, 583-626.
Sims, Christopher A. (1989): “Models and Their Uses,” Ametican Journal
of Agricultural Economics 71, no. 2, 489-494.
Sims, Christopher A. (1996): “Macroeconomics and Methodology,” JOUTnai ofEconomic Perspectives, vol. 10, no. 1, 105-120.
Watson, Mark W. (1993): “Measures of Fit for Calibrated Models)” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 101, no. 6, 1011-1041.

32

Table 1: Unit Root

Tests

U.S. Data
(a)
nh
nj~
xh
xc
Y
(b)
m
P
m—p
i
i–Ap

level
-334
-2.60
-3.26
-3.20
-2.84
level
0.90
1.30
-2.12
-2.36
-3.76*

A
-7.36*
-6.50’
-6.79*
-5.67*
-6.04”
A
-2.76
-3.27
-3.77*
-4.66*
-7.47*

Note: t-statistic for the null hypothesis of a unit root in the level or
the first difference of each time series, based on an ADF test with 4
lags, intercept and time trend. 5% significance critical value: -3.41
(lower values denoted with asterisk). Sample period: 49:1-94:4, with
the exception of m and m – p (59:1-94:4). Source: Citibase.

Table

2: Employment-Productivity

Correlations

U.S. Data
Data
(a)
hours:
(An,, Az.)
(R~, z~)
(b)
employment:
(An,, Az.)

(tie,
2.)

p
-0.26
-0.29
~

Bivatiate
FZ

-0.83
-0.79
P.

b?-n

0.28
0.04
Pm

Large VAR
?.

-0.68
-0.68
?.

-0.02 -0.85 0.65 -0.64
0.28 -0.68 0.54 -0.62

Pm

0.25
0.16
Pm

0.42
0.54

Note: ~ is the estimated unconditional correlation of employment and
productivity , ~z is the estimated correlation of the technology components of the same variables, ~~ is the estimated correlation of their
non-technology (demand) component. Panel (a) reports results obtained using hours as labor input series, whereas Panel (b) reports
the results for employment. The transformation of the raw data or
the estimated components on which correlations are computed is rep
resented by A (first-differences) and ‘( HP-detrended). See text for a
description of the model specification and data sources.

Table 3: Unit Root

Tests

International Data
Canada
U.K.
Germany
France
Italy
Javan
I

n
-1.75
-3.16
-1.74
-3.48*
0.04
-2.69

x
-1.22
-2.39
-3.30
-2.66
-1.15
-0.00

Y
-1.67
-2.39
-3.33
-3.07
-2.63
-2.17

An
-4.26*
-3.32
-3.32
-3.83*
-3.25
-3.78*

Ax
-4.49*
-4.90*
-4.86*
-4.41*
-4.64*
-3.98*

Ay
-4.67*
-4.40”
-4.40*
-3.93*
-5.28*
-3.90*

Note: t-statistic for the null hypothesis of a unit root in the level or
the first difference of each time series, based on an ADF test with 4
lags, intercept and time trend. 5% significance critical value: -3.41
(lower values denoted with asterisk). Sample period: Canada (62:194:4), U.K. (62:1-94:3), Germany (70:1-94:4), France (70:1-94:4), Italy
(70:1-94:3), and Japan (62:1-94:4). Data source: OECD Quarterly
National Accounts.

Table 4: Employment-Productivity

Correlations:

International Data
Canada
(An, Ax)
(h, i)

P
-0.12
-0.09

?.

-0.59
0.08

U.K.
Fm

0.59
0.56

P

-0.10
-0.10

France
F
(An, Ax)
(n, 2)

-0.18
0.29

P.

-0.75
-0.81

P.

-0.90
-0.92

Germany
?m

P

0.44
0.23

0.08
0.07

Italy
Pm

0.62
0.83

P

-0.47
-0.25

3.

-0.93
-0.91

P.

-0.63
-0.80

Fm

0.22
0.14

Japan
Pm

0.30
0.43

I

P

-0.07
0.21

2=

0.44
0.47

P.

-0.60
0.11

Note: ~ is the estimated unconditional correlation of employment and
productivity , PZ is the estimated correlation of the technology components of the same variables, ~~ is the estimated correlation of their
non-technology (demand) component. Panel (a) reports restits obtained using hours as labor input series, whereas Panel (b) reports
the results for employment. The transformation of the raw data or
the estimated components on which correlations are computed is represented by A (first-differences) and ‘( HP-detrended). See text for a
description of the model specification and data sources.

Table 5: SRIR.L Estimates

U.S. Data
OLS IIBivatiate

Lar9e VAR

hours:
@
s.e.
employment:
P
se.

0.79

1.16

(0.05) (0.05)
0.97
(0.11)

1.46
(0.10)

1.30
(0.11)
1.50
(0.14)

Note: @ is the OLS estimate of p in the regression equation Ay~ =
6+ p An: + ut, where An; = Ant (i.e., observed employment or hours
growth) in “OLS” , and An; = Any (i.e., the estimated demand
component of employment or hours growth) in “Bivariate” and “Large
VAR” .

Table 6:

SRIRL

Estimates

International Data

@
se.

s:.

Canada
OLS Bivatiate
1.19
0.84
(0.11)
(0.10)

U.K.
OLS
Bivatiate
1.72
0.78
(0.24)
(0.25)

Germany
OLS Bivariate
1.15
1.34
(0.18)
(0.17)

fiance
OLS Bivariate

Italg
OLS Bivatiate
1.25
0.33
(0,14)
(0.15)

Japan
OLS Bivariate
0.79
0.50
(0.23)
(0.28)

(i::!)

(;.::)

Note: @ is the OLS estimate of p in the regression equation Ay~ =
6+ p Anj + ut, where An; = Ant (i.e., observed employment or hours
growth) in “OLS” , and An; = An~ (i.e., the estimated demand
component of employment or hours growth) in “Biv~iate”.

❑
❑

❑

0
❑

⑤

0

o
u
0

❑ uo

❑

❑

❑
❑
❑

❑

❑
❑
0
❑

0“
❑

0

❑

❑

1

1

1

1

u

❑

0

0

0

I

I

I

1

I

1

0

❑

%“

❑

❑

0
❑

❑

o

❑

❑

❑
°0

°
❑

❑

m

0

#
❑

❑o
❑

❑

n

❑

❑

o

❑

❑

]0

❑

❑

❑
✠

❑

0
0
❑
❑

0
0

n
I

I

❑

❑

❑
❑

❑

❑
0
❑

0

0

❑
❑

0

❑

0

❑
1

3°% ❑O.
,0

D
o

❑

❑

0

on
0

❑

r
❑
❑

❑

L

❑
I

US

(groMh
dafa

US

tales)

(hp filler)
dale

30

.

o
2.5

.

.

a

.

20
15
;$

,0

$05
7
a

Do
45
-10
-<5
3

-2

.1

0

7

64

3

2

32

4a

lech”olcgy

no

.16

3.2

t .6

hours

hours

techn.kgy

CLwlpnenl

25

comment

o

❑
.
2.0

0°

!.5

.

1.0
2D5,:
s

.
0,0

;
a45

.10

-15
-20

..OO

1

❑
I

I

-20

.1,5

-10

45

00

05

10

16

on

40

40

.16

-14

1.5

houm

demand

campne.f

I

❑

‘i

o

o

I
I

*

.13
-28

-21

.1,4

47

00

0.7

14

21

● 48

.36

-24

.1.2
houm

houm

Figure

2a.

00

12

24

38

US

(hp filter)
da(a

4

I

1

4
.5

-’
-15

-10

45

00

05

10

1.5

.

j
.3

:

.2

.1

0

Ischnolcgy

1

2

employment

employment

mm-

g“ COmpnnenl

tech”

3

.

❑

2
I

I

❑

0.

1

0

-3

~
.3

4
.100

475

450

425

OM

025

0%

0.75

475

45U

.025

000

0.25

050

075

100

employment

demand

Cmwenf

5
I

I

-1.5

.
❑

.2.0 i

-15
.20

-15

-1.0

45
employment

00

05

1.0

15

❑

-3

-2

-1

0
employment

1

2

3

US: demand

shock

pcducil.,y
030

025
T

06

020
0.15

0.4
010
005
02
Om
4.05

00
1

4,0

I

.015

w

012345

6709

012345

67091011

<0,1

1,50

06

1.25

05

I ,00

0.4

075

03
0.2

1

0.50

0.1

025

0,0

O.m

-0.1
1
42

I

4,25

0123456

7891011

bouts

0,16

Iwurs

1.50

0.08

1.25

0.00

1.00

4,08
0.75
‘“l

-0.16

0,50

-0.24

:
1

025

4,32
000

-0.40

4,48

I

I

0123456

4.25

I

012345

7891011

Figure

3a.

M

6789101

I

u
US: technology

shock

US: demsnd

10
0,3

06
04

02
00
-02
012345

67.39

040 ~–
032
024
016
003
Ow
408
~ 16

~011

012345

HP

1,2

67891011

@P

,.

,7

I
1.0

08

shock

@ucll”lfy

12

1,0

j

08

06

0.5
i

0.4

0.4

0.2

02

0,0

00
i

4,2

ti

1

[

012345

0.10

i
4.2

67891011

012345

67891011

enlpiope”l

em floment

1.0

1

0.05

08

-0,00

0.6

-0,05

0.4

4.10

0,2

4,15

0.0

4,20

[

I

I

I

1
0123456

7891OI1

42

1
0123456

Figure

3.b.

7891011

u

pdmwti

0s

mm”

gm

till

O 25

048

020

040

015

032
010
024
005
0.16
Ow

008

405

Om

4.10

408
~ 16

415
0!

2345

B78BTO11

0,1345

Oti#

878910,,

i.flal,on

07

o !0

06
005

05
04

000
03
02
405
01
00

410

41
42

415
01>

145

67091011

01134S

IlOua

6789101!

mmm d /mere .( ml.

024

0,04

0.12

002

0 no

Dc.1

412

401

424

*W

4%

.OM

~ 48

408

460

410
012145

678910

m al

II

012345

bdmes

,n.lmlemsl

0 ,,0

2 on

175

87

,,1.

0105

! 50
0 oTO

125

0.035

Im
‘“~
075

&

‘O.m

050
4035
025
a 070

Ocu
425

012345

87

4105

B9101t

Figure

0,2345

4a.

87891011

B9i011

m-

08

mm”

030

Qlntih

025

06

ox
0.15

04

010
005

02

am
00

405
410

.02

–’
012345

E70n

4 !5

1011

012345

67091011

~F

10

Inn.tmn

0 lM
0075

08

0059
06

0025
-Ym

04

4025
02

-Y 050
4.075

00

4,1W
42
012345

.0125

67891011

012345

emphymti

018

I

67891011

“mm

OD4

.1 ,m.m ,1 ml.

012

001

Oc%

I

000

Om
4M
412

402

;

-o la
4C4

.024
-030

~
012345

4C%

67891011

i
012345

rodb.lames

175

67

md

0,105

Jnr.msf

m.

15U
0070

125

0035

100

1

075

0000

050

4015
025

4070

Om
425
012345

4105

87891011

D12345

Figure

4.b.

67891011

BQ

1011

CANADA:

technology

shock

CANADA:

dud,.w

096
080

demand

shock

pd”dv,ty

020
015
{

084

048

032

0.46

000
-016

h
01

010
i
005

Om
.005
410

[

[

-015

34

1.2

1,25

1.0

1.W

08

L

0.75

06

0,50

04

025

02

000

0.0

4,2

4.25

0i23i56

7i

91011

0,40

0i2ii5

u
k7ii101i

emdomenf

12

-

.

032

0.24

0,s

0.16

06

O.on

0,4

d
1

.

0.00

-0.08

~16

0.2

0.0

i
.

4.2
0123456

7.991o1l

I

0123456

Figure

5a.

7891011

UK: technology

UK: demand

shock

08~

shock

pd”cf!”!ty

07
06

06

05
04

04

0,3

I

02
02
01

4
00

$

00
41

-.

42
012345

67091011

ni2i45

&

0.6

1

I

67891011

@P

1,4 —

0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0,0
4,1
4.2

!
78

emdomd

0.1

1,0
0.8
06
04

I

0.2
0,0
. .
-..

h

employment
1.2

1,0
4.0
08
4.1

06

0.4

4.2

0.2
43
0,0

-02

4,4
0123456

1
012345

7891011

Figure

5.b.

67

B9t01

I

GERMANY:

technology

shock

GERMANY

Produd(vrv

0s
048

06

040

05

032

04

024

03

016

02

0,06

01

shock

I

00

Om

-01

408

. .-

*

demand
m.~.w

07

,.

47

012345

I

oii

67891011

MD

0.2

iii

67891071

1.25

1,00

0,2

0,75
0. I
0.50
00
025
-0 I

0.00

(

-02
Oiii

U1LJ4>

emdovmeti

0,0.9

4.25

7i9i011

iii

..-

.-.

Ora

.m@oyment

1.00

000
0.75
-O,oa
0,50

-016

-0,24

025

-032
0.00
4.40
\
-0,25

4.4a
012345

I

d
0123456

67891011

Figure

5.c.

7891011

Ylu

.

..
11

u

FRANCE:

technology

shock

FRANCE:

md,v,v

051-

1

demand

shock

Pfai”d,v,w

036
0,30

04

024

03

010

02
072

01
0.C6

00

Om

41

4C6

I

-22

)
012345

6709

012345

@P

042

4.12

?011

67891011

9dP

0.75

0.35
0.50

0.28
0.21

0,25

0.14
007

0.00

000
407
-0,14

I

I

~,25
012345

e7B

910(

012345

1

032

..

0.24

0.4

67.39

!011

.m*yment

“.

0.3

0,16

0.2
0.08
0,1
000
40
4,0B

1

4.16
-0,24
4,32

i

4.4
0123456

769101

I
0123456

I

Figure

5.d.

7891011

ITALY

technology

ITALY:

shock

demand

shock

ti”chv!~
125

0“

~“~

04B

j

I
7m

I
0%
075
024
0%
012
023
Om

Om

412

n

4E
012345

&P

I .0

7,

67891011

@P

i 25

I

08

I .W

06

0.75

04

0.50

02

025

00

O.w

42

.99

01234

(0

4.25

11

0123456

7891011

enlploynlenf

empbfle”f

@2

,

!

1.0

I

0.1

I

,

08

–

04

–

02

~

0.0

—

4.0

4.1

42

43

44
I

45
012345

42

(

‘
0123456

67891011

Figure

5.e.

7B

91011

JAPAN:

technology

shock

JAPAN:

muc(,v,~

280

020

240

015

200

010

160

005

i 20

-0 w

000

~ 05

040

430

000

a15

440

012345

shock

a 20

67.991011

012345

@P

30

demand
od,d.fw

67.9910

HP

050

I——
11

2,5

2.0
0.25
1.5

1.0
O.m
0.5

0.0

4.5
0123456

0123456

,nl@oymed

025

I

4.25

7891011

!!

7691011

employment

0,4

020
0.3
0.’5
02

0.10

0,05

0.1

000
0.0
405
I
-010

4.1

012345

6789101

I

I

0123456

Figure

5.f.

7891011

Decomposing

the Business

Cycle: Technology

-\{/
\P

vs. Demand

technology shock component (hp-filtered)

4
3
2

.

1

II

O
/\

/\

0

\,
\,

,
\

-1

,1’t

\’

,/
I

-2
-3
-4

\’

[

i
55

58

61

64

70

67

73

76

79

82

demand shock component (hpfiltered)
4—

I

3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4

I

gdp

Figure

hours

---

6

85

88

