                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          TECHNOLOGY, FACTOR SUPPLIES AND
                            INTERNATIONAL SPECIALIZATION :
                             ESTIMATING THE NEOCLASSICAL
                                        MODEL




                                          James Harrigan




                                       Working Paper 5722



                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     August 1996



This paper has benefitted from the comments of my former colleagues at the University of Pittsburgh
and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Rutgers, Purdue, British Columbia,
Harvard, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Penn State, and Princeton. James Cassing helped
greatly in the development of the ideas used in this paper, and two anonymous referees were
instrumental in improving it. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in International Trade
and Investment. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, or the National Bureau of Economic Research.

@ 1996 by James Harrigan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                         NBER Working Paper 5722
                                                                                     August 1996

                             TECHNOLOGY, FACTOR SUPPLES AND
                               INTERNATIONAL SPECIALIZATION:
                                ESTIMATING THE NEOCLASSICAL
                                           MODEL

                                            ABSTRACT

       The standard neoclassical model of trade theory predicts that international specialization will

be jointly determined   by cross-country   differences in relative factor endowments         and relative

technology levels,   This paper uses duality theory combined with a flexible functional form to

specify an empirical model of specialization consistent with the neoclassical explanation.    According

to the empirical model, a sector’s share in GDP depends on both relative factor supplies and relative

technology differences, and the estimated parameters of the model have a close and clear connection

to theoretical parameters.    The model is estimated for manufacturing    sectors using a 20 year, 10

country panel of data on the OECD countries.     Hicks-neutral technology differences are measured

using an application of the theory of total factor productivity comparisons,   and factor supplies are

measured directly. The estimated model performs well in explaining variation in production across

countries and over time, and the estimated parameters are generally in line with theory and previous

empirical work on the factor proportions     model.   Relative technology levels are found to be an

important determinant of specialization.




James Harrigan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER
james.harrigan@ frbny.sprint.com
                  Technology,       Factor Supplies and International  Specialization:
                                     Estimating the Neoclassical Model

                                               James Harrigan
                                     Federal Reserve Bank of New YorkL

                                                     July 1996

1. Introduction

        In the neoclassical general equilibrium         model of international trade, countries trade with

each other because of their differences. Countries may differ in their preferences, their

technologies, or their factor supplies, and these differences jointly determine comparative

advantage and hence trade. Twhnology            differences as a source of comparative advantage were

first studied by Ricardo, who identified different relative labor productivities             as the cause of

trade, while Heckscher and Ohlin assumed away technology differences and focused on

differences in relative supplies of capital and labor m the causes of trade. The Ricardian and

Hmkscher-Ohlin       explanations    have been generalized by post-war trade theorists, with the general

factor proportions explanation encompassing            many goods and factors while the generalized

Ricardian explanation encompasses           general technology differences. Modem theorists of course

recognize that general technology and factor supply differences can jointly determine




     ‘ Research Department, 33 Liberty Street, New York, NY 10045, e-mail: james.htigan      @frbny.sprint.tom,
phone: (212) 720-8951, fax: (212) 720-6831. This paper has benefited from the comments of my former colleagues
at the University of Pittsburgh and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute, Rutgers, Purdue, British
Columbia, Harvard, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Penn State, and Princeton. James Cassing helped
greatly in the development of the idew used in this paper, and two anonymous referees were instrumental in
improving it. The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necesstily reflect the position of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve System.

                                                          1
comparative advantage.        The purpose of this paper is to estimate just such a model, using data on

technology, factor supplies, and production from a panel of industrialized                countries.

         While this has been the standard model of trade for many years, economists have spent

little effort on empirical evaluation of the model, and most of the tests of the model have been

inconclusive and/or unfavorable to the model, beginning with Leontiefs famous paper on the

trade of the United States (1954). Starting with Learner (1984), a number of researchers have

used theory in a careful way to evaluate general versions of the factor proportions explanation of

specialization    and trade, including Maskus (1985), Bowen, Learner and Sveikauskas (1987),

Staiger (1988), andHarrigan(1995).           Each of these efforts has explicitly assumed identical

t~hnologies      across countries, and the factor proportions model comes out looking to one degree

or another seriously deficient in each case. An exception is Brecher and Choudhri (1993), who

find that US-Canadian       production patterns are consistent with the factor proportions approach.

         In an important recent paper, Trefler ( 1995) has evaluated a model where there are

technology differences across countries which are common across sectors (or equivalently,

factors). In Trefler’s model, a technological         improvement increases the effective supply of all

factors proportionately.     Since relative factor supplies are unchanged by neutral technological

change, relative opportunity costs are not affected, and hence the pattern of comparative

advantage remains determined solely by relative factor supplies. This simple extension of the

factor proportions model works remarkably well. In particular, Trefler finds that the factor

content of a country’s net exports is approximately equal to its effective excess factor supplies.




   * While recognized as a theoretical possibility, differences in tastes have only rarely been analyzed m a source of
comparative advantage. An interesting exception is Markusen (1986) and Hunter and Markusen (1988).

                                                          2
An unappealing aspect of Trefler’s model is that relative factor prices and relative factor

intensities are identical everywhere. This implies, for example, that the capittiabor   ratio in

Brazilian manufacturing is the same as the capital/labor ratio in Japanese manufacturing. Trefler’s

model also conflicts with direct evidence on relative technology differences by Dollar and Wolff

(1993), van Ark and Pilat (1993), Jorgenson and Kuroda (1990), and Harrigan (1994a, 1994b).

Dollar and Wolff provide some evidence that these relative productivity differences are related to

differences in net export performance (in particular, their Section 7.3, pages 144-148).

        As noted above, general versions of factor proportions theory have been subject to a fair

amount of empirical scrutiny. In contrast, this author is not aware of any such efforts to evaluate

general twhnology differences as sources of comparative advantage. This impression is bolstered

by the surveys by Deardorff ( 1984) and Learner and hvinsohn      ( 1995), neither of which find any

studies that evaluate general Ricardian explanations for trade, never mind any studies that look at

the joint impact of technology and factor supply differences on specialization   and trade. Dollar

and Wolff (1993) do not formally address the influence of factor supplies on trade, but they do

note that relative factor endowments   interact with relative technology differences in determining

comparative advantage, and suggest that considering these sets of influences together may help to

better explain the pattern of trade (pg. 148).

       One aim of this paper is to fill this gap in the empirical literature. The paper proposes an

empirical model which is flexible enough to jointly estimate the impact of differing technologies

and differing factor supplies on international specialization and trade. The model comes from

applying a flexible functional form to the revenue function representation   of the general

equilibrium of the production sector, where there are Hicks-neutral technology differences across


                                                  3
countries and over time. The model requires a minimal number of assumptions beyond the most

basic ones (exogenous prices and factor supplies, competitive market clearing, no joint

production, and constant returns to scale). This model is estimated on a data set of ten industrial

countries over twenty years for seven different manufacturing        sectors. Technology differences are

measured by applying the theory of total factor productivity (TF’P) comparisons        to a data set on

industry inputs and outputs, and factor endowments         are measured directly. The empirical results

show that technology differences are an important determinant of specialization,        and that factor

supplies alone cannot explain which industrial countries produce which goods. An implication of

the results is that the factor proportions approach which has dominated much of the empirical

and policy oriented research in the past may need to be replaced by a model which accounts for

relative technology differences in addition to relative factor supply differences.

        This paper does not provide a definitive test of the neoclassical model for two reasons.

The first is that testing against a composite alternative in the classical statistical sense is

inappropriate, since the neoclassical model is known to be a simplification       of a complex world

and is not intended to be taken as literally true. Second, it is not possible to test the neoclassical

model against a well-specified      alternative because there is no well-specified general equilibrium

alternative model to which it can be compared. The most prominent alternative explanations for

the pattern of international    specialization   include industry-level economies of scale (see

Helpman, 1984, and Helpman and K.rugman, 1985) and path-dependent              geographical models

(e.g., Krugman, 1991). However, these more recent models have not been integrated with the

neoclassical literature so it is not possible to design a statistical model which precisely pinpoints

the areas of disagreement      between them and the neoclassical model. For these two reasons, the


                                                       4
strategy of this paper is to follow Learner and hvinsohn’s   (1995) sensible injunction to

“estimate, don’t test”. The estimated model turns out to be statistically successful and generally in

line with the predictions of theory, so the neoclassical model comes out looking rather well.

        Section 2 of the paper briefly explains the theory of how Hicks-neutral   technology

differences influence outputs in general equilibrium,   and outlines the dual representation of the

economy’s production sector as a function of prices, technology differences, and factor supplies.

Section 3 develops the empirical model, and section 4 discusses data, measurement,       and

econometric issues. Section 5 presents the empirical results.

2. Theory

       This section closely follows the standard treatments of Woodland (1982) and Dixit and

Norman (1980). Consider a small open economy characterized by fixed aggregate factor supplies,

constant returns to scale and competitive market clearing. As is well known, the general

equilibrium of this economy will maximize the value of final output. A common formulation of

this maximization   problem is

       Max p-x subject to x ~ Y(v)                      p,x ERN, vERM

where x is the final goods vector, p is the vector of final goods prices and Y(v) is the convex

production set for endowments    v. The solution to this problem gives the maximized value of

GDP as Y = r(p,v). As long as the revenue function r(p,v) is twice continuously     differentiable,

which requires smooth substitutability   among factors and at least as many factors as goods




                                                  5
(MzN), the vector of net output supplies x(p,v) is given by the gradient of r(p,v) with respect to

P3:



           ‘j(p,V) = dr(p,v)j      ‘Pj                             j = 1,...,N

           Hicks-neutral technological differences across countries and/or time can be modeled

easily using an extension of the dual approach. In addition to the standard assumptions on the

revenue function, suppose that there exists a production function for each good given by

           ij = ej.f(vj)   =   ej Xj                                       j = 1,...,N

where Oj is a scalar parameter relative to some base period and/or country, and VJ● RM is a vector

of inputs. The assumption of the existence of distinct production functions implies that joint

production is ruled out. Increases in Ojrepresent Hicks-neutral technological                    progress in industry

j, It can be shown’ that the resulting revenue function has the form r((3p, v), where 6 = diag (0, ,

02, .... 0~ ). This formulation            implies that industry specific neutral technological change can be

modeled in the same way as industry specific price increases, and the net output vector is again

given by the gradient of the revenue function with respect to p. Differentiation                   of r(ep, v) with

respect to 0 establishes that the elasticity of an industry’s output with respect to technical

progress in that industry is equal to one plus the own-price output elasticit~.

           It is straightforward         to show using revealed profit maximization       logic that there is a

positive correlation between technical progress and output, holding factor supplies fixed; this




    3 If there are more goods than factors, the GDP-maximizing      output vector is not unique, and the gradient rP(p,v)
needs to be re-interpreted as a set of sub-gradient vectors.

      4 See, for instance, Dixit and Norman (1980), pg. 137-139.

      ‘ A discussion of these issues in terms of the primal cost functions can be found in Jones (1965)

                                                             6
follows also from the convexity of r(p,v) in p. It is not generally true, however, that if we look

across countries that technical advantage in an industry will be associated with greater relative

output in that industry. This is because the Rybczynski effects of differences in relative factor

endowments        may affect outputs in the opposite direction. It is difficult to obtain useful

theoretical results on the relative importance of factor supplies and technology differences in

determining   specialization,    especially in the general case of large numbers of goods and factors.

This fact is a partial motivation for this paper: only estimation tied closely to theory can shed

light on the empirical importance of the different determinants of specialization.

3. An Empirical       Model

         To make further progress on a model which can be used as a basis for empirical work

requires that we assume a functional form for r(6p,v). Following Woodland (1982) and Kohli

(199 1), suppose that we approximate the true revenue function with a translog function, in

particular,

         in r(ep,v) = ~+      Xj ~ in (3jpj + WZj      X, ?, In 6j pj in 0,&




                           + Y,.zj XI Cjiin 6j pj in   Vi


where the summations over j and k run from 1 to N and the summations over I and m run from 1

to M. Symmetry of cross effects requires that ~~ = ~j and bi~ = b~i for all j, k, I, and m. Linear

homogeneity       in v and in p requires

         ~j~j=l            ~IbOi=l          ~ja~j=o         ~Ibi~=O         ~lCji=O




                                                       7
Differentiating in r(Op,v) with respect to each In pi and imposing the homogeneity restrictions E ,

~j = O and xl cji = O gives the share of product j in GDP, Sj = pj.xj /Y as a function of technology

puameters,      prices and factor supplies:




Now suppose that each country faces the same prices in each period (that is, free trade), but that

countries differ in their factor endowments               and technologies. Choosing a country and a year as a

reference point and using c and t subscripts to denote countries and years, we have



                                                                                                           (1)




Defining dj( = Z,%,      In(pJpl,),     equation (1) simplifies to


                                            e                       Vicr
       Sjc, = aoj + dj, + ~           akjln A       + f     c,ln—                                          (2)
                              k=2           0 1c1     i=2         ‘Icf


With data on output shares, tahnology,              and factor endowments, this equation can be estimated

over a panel of countries and years for each industry j. If there are neutral technology differences

across sators                                          = eC[,then the first summation in (2) disappears
                  for a particular country, so that OkC[

and output shares depend only on relative factor supplies. In such a case cross-country

technology differences determine the level, but not the composition, of GDP. This is the

assumption about technology made by Trefler ( 1995).




                                                              8
        A complication     arises when we consider that many goods are non-traded. Denoting the

full vector of goods prices as P, partition P into

        P=(pq)

where p is an N] x 1 vector of traded goods prices and q is an N2 x 1 vector of non-traded goods

prices. Free trade still allows us to assume p,, = p, for all countries c, but generally qC,# q~[for

two countries b and c. This implies that equation (2) becomes


                                         0                    qk,   + M
       SjC, = aoj + dj, + ~        akjln ~      + ~      abln—        z                                (3)
                             k=2         6 I cl  k=N, +l      PI,    ,=2


Equation (3) differs from (2) by the presence of the summation involving relative non-traded

goods prices; in (3), the term dj( absorbs only the traded goods prices:




Note also that the first summation in (3) includes both traded and non-traded goods relative

technology parameters.

       With data on non-traded goods prices and technology across countries, equation (3) can

be estimated in the same way as equation (2). However, data on the prices of non-traded goods

are not generally available. In addition, measurement of the output and productivity of the

government and service sectors (to name the two largest non-traded sectors) is notoriously

difficult even within a single country, and international comparisons are yet more difficult.

Accordingly,     these variables are for practical purposes unobservable.     An approach which

recognizes both the importance and the unobservability          of the non-traded goods effects is to treat


                                                       9
them as random with some estimable probability distribution. Define the sum of the non-traded

goods price and non-traded technology terms in (3) as



                                                                                                        (4a)


A simple and flexible model for the stochastic process governing                  Ejct   is

       Ejct =   ~jc + Pjl + ‘jcl          ?                ejct- N(Oju2j)                                (4b)

That is, treat the sum of the non-traded goods effects as a random variable with country fixed

effects qk, time fixed effects ~j(, and a random component e~( with constant variance 02j. Re-

writing (3) using the definition in (4) gives the equation to be estimated:

                                    N,

       SjCl = qjC + bjr + ~               a41n0&   + ~     ctiln~        + e.,.                          (5)
                                   k= [              ;=2
                                                                  ‘let




where bj( =   Pj[ + ‘jt   ‘s ‘he   combined    ‘ime-sPecific ‘ffect ‘f al] goods Prices and ‘on-traded goods

technology parameters. Note that since not dl technology parameters are observed, there is no

homogeneity restriction governing the sum of the observable technology effects. The only sign

restriction on equation (5) that can be established by theory is that the own-TFP effect, ~ , is

positive: holding factor supplies and other levels of TFP constant, an increase in a sector’s TFP

should lead to an increase in the share of GDP accounted for by that sector. Theory also requires

that the cross-TFP effects are symmetric, a~j= ~~ for all sectors j and k, k # j.




                                                             10
4. Data, Measurement,         and Econometrics

         Empirical implementation        of the model described in the previous section requires data on

output shares, technology, and factor supplies. I first briefly discuss the theoretical issues

involved in measuring industry technology, and then discuss data sources. Lastly, I discuss

appropriate econometric       techniques for dealing with the cross-equation          restrictions, partial

adjustment, and potential measurement error biases.

4.1 Total Factor Productivity         Comparisons

         The Hicks-neutral     technology parameters 0 ~C[are measured using an index of total factor

productivity (TFP). TFP calculations at the industry level require real, internationally comparable

data on industry outputs and inputs of primary factors and intermediate goods. For practical

purposes, information      on inputs other than capital and labor is not available in internationally

comparable form, so I calculate value added TFP indexes. Value added TFP calculations are

strictly appropriate only when a well-defined value added function exists, which requires

separability between capital and labor and other inputs. Consequently,              the TFP calculations

reported in this paper should be treated as approximations           to true TFP6.

        TF’P comparisons       area classic index number problem and therefore TFP indexes have no

unique optimal form, but an index proposed by Caves, Christensen,                and Diewert (1982) is

appropriate for this application. Suppose that value added y is a function of capital k and labor 1.




    ‘On the theory of value added functions, see Diewert ( 1978). Jorgenson and Kuroda ( 1990) compute US-
Japanese TFP comparisons using appropriately (and laboriously) constructed data on materials and intermediate
goods, and their calculations of TFP levels are not too different from the value-added TFP comparisons in Harrigan
(1994b).

                                                        11
Suppressing the industry and time subscripts for readability, the index for any two countries b

and c is given by




        ‘Fpbc=?[i)ob[:)’-”b[+)o’[:                                                                    (6)


where 1 and k are geometric averages over all the observations in the sample and OC= (SC+ 3 )/2,

where s, is labor’s share in total cost in country c. To interpret (6), notice that if the value added

function is Cobb-Douglas,    then the labor shares are constant and (6) reduces to the Cobb-

Douglas index:




        The index (6) is superlative, meaning that it is exact for the flexible translog functional

form. Furthermore, (6) is transitive:

        m==      TFPm”mk

which makes the choice of base country and year inconsequential. For more on the theory of TFP

comparisons and its application to cross-country    comparisons of industry level data, see Harrigan

( 1994b).

        Computation   of indexes like (6) requires real, internationally comparable data on value

added, labor input, and capital input. The OECD has a database called the “htemational         Sectoral

Data Base” or ISDB which contains just such data classified according to the nine two-digit

categories of the ISIC. The ISDB data reports capital stocks in addition to employment       and value

added for eleven OECD countries (the United States, Canada, Japan, Sweden, Norway and six


                                                   12
European Union states: Britain, France, German y, Italy, Belgium, and Denmark) for the years

1970 to 1990. I adjust the ISDB data on employment by average hours worked per week in

manufacturing to get a measure of labor input. A problem with the ISDB data is that the share of

labor in value added is very noisy, and frequently exceeds one. To control for this, I use a

smoothing procedure based on the fact that, when the value added function is given by a translog

and standard market clearing assumptions hold, labor’s share in value added in industry j in year t

in country c is

          s,j, = 61C,+   b*j   in   (~jflcjt)



If   obsened   labor shares deviate from this equation by an i.i.d. measurement error term, then its’

parameters can be estimated by regressing labor shares on country fixed effects and industry

capital-labor ratios, with a separate regression for each industry. I use the fitted values from these

regressions as the labor cost shares in constructing the TFP indexes given by equation (6).

          The ISDB uses overall GDP purchasing power parity exchange rates to convert industry

outputs into internationally              comparable units. This implicitly assumes that relative prices are the

same in different countries; to the extent that they are not, output comparisons will be distorted,

For example, suppose that country A and country B have identical technology but that the price

of machinery relative to chemicals is higher in country A than in country B, perhaps due to

differences in the quality mix in the two countries. Deflating industry outputs by the overall GDP

price level will lead to the erroneous conclusion that country A has superior technology in

chemicals and inferior technology in machinery in comparison to country B. If the structure of

relative prices is fairly constant within a country over time, then this measurement procedure




                                                              13
induces a constant country-specific         multiplicative      measurement error into the TFP comparisons’.

The implications of this for estimation are addressed in section 4,3 below. For futiher details on

the ISDB data and the computation of TFP, see the appendix to this paper.

4.2 Factor Supplies

         I consider three types of factor supplies: land, labor, and capital. Data on aggregate capital

stocks come from version 5.6 of the Penn-World Tables, available by arton ymous ftp from

nber.hward.edu.       The Penn-World Table classifies capital stocks into producer durables, non-

residential and other construction, and residential construction. I use only the first two capital

stock measures, since residential construction           is most appropriately regarded as a component of

consumption for the purposes of this paper. Information on arable land comes from the World

Resources database on diskettes.

         I classify labor endowments according to the educational levels of workers. The data on

educational attainment comes from Barro and Lee (1993), whose data are also available by

anonymous ftp from nber.harvard.edu.            Barro artd be      construct estimates of the level of

educational attainment in the population, and I use their data to classify workers into three

categories:

         1. Highly-educated      workers, who have at least some post-secondary education




    7 It is possible to compare the structure of relative prices across countries by examining the source documents
for the construction of the OECDS purchasing power parities. Harrigan (1994b) does this, and shows that relative
prices vary much less over time within a country than across countries at a point in time. This supports the view that
a constant multiplicative factor will capture most of the error in the TFP calculations in this paper.

     BIt would be desirable to use data on other natural resources. Arable land is the only natural resource variable
that I use in the empirical work kause    of gaps in the coverage of other natural resource stocks.



                                                           14
         2. Medium-educated        workers, who have at least some secondary education but no higher

         education, and

         3. Low-educated      workers, who have no secondary education (almost all of this category

         consists of workers with at least some primary education).

This education based classification        is probably preferable to the occupational          based classification

used by (among others) hamer           (1984) and Harrigan (1995) for two reasons. The first is that

educational levels are more likely to be exogenous with respect to output shares than

occupational classifications,      since growth in some industries might induce workers to shift their

occupations. The swond is that education is probably more closely related to skill than is

occupation.

4.3 Estimation:     Cross-equation       restrictions,   partial adjustment,       and measurement         error

         As noted at the end of section 3, the translog functional form implies that there are linear

cross-equation symmetry restrictions among the system of output share equations (5) for a group

of industries. These restrictions      are imposed by using a restricted SURE estimator, which is an

asymptotically efficient GN         estimator if the restrictions are valid9.

        The neoclassical model assumes frm movement of factors among sectors. If re-allocation

of factors occurs with a lag in response to changes in technology, prices, and aggregate factor

supplies, then equation (5) will hold only after adjustment hm taken place. With slow adjustment

to equilibrium, output shares in the short run can be modeled as




    9 See Greene ( 1993), Chapter 17, for a clear exposition of estimating a system of translog share equations. As
Greene notes, if data on all sectors is available, then the system is singulw and maximum likelihood is the
raornmended estimator. Since I do not estimate shares for all sectors, restricted GLS is appropriate.

                                                          15
                                                                                                     (7)




where kj is the s~d   of adjustment, and the long-run effect of a change in Okis given by ~j /( 1-

Aj). Because symmetry requires ~j = ~~ , it also requires Aj= k~. Therefore, the coefficient on the

lagged output share will be constrained to be the same for each equation when (7) is estimated.

As noted in Hsiao (1986, section 4.2), for short panels the ON estimator of Aj is biased

downward and inconsistent. A consistent estimator uses a two period lag of the dependent

variable to instrument for the lagged dependent variable, and this is the procedure that is

followed in the results reported below.

        A problem with estimation of (5) and (7) is the severe measurement error in all of the

right hand side variables. It is likely that there are two types of measurement error that infect

observed factor supplies and relative TFP. The first is systematic, and is a result of differences in

measurement procedures and factor quality across countries and over time. For example,

differences in soil quality are country speeific and will infect the measurement of arable land,

while exchange rate fluctuations and imperfections       in the calculation of purchasing power parity

exchange rates are both country and time spaific        and will affect the comparisons of capital

stocks and TFP. The second type of error is classical random measurement error which arises due

to imperfmt application of any given measurement technique. A model of this dual type of

measurement error for explanatory variable I in country c at time t is




                                                   16
        Zict= ~.bt.z*iC,.exp{ eiCt}                                                                     (8a)

where ziC~= observed value of variable I in country c at time t,

        Z*,C,= actual value of variable I in country c at time t,

        ~, bt = country-specific      and time-specific systematic measurement errors

        e]C,= normally distributed classical measurement error with mean O and variance Ozi

Taking logarithms of both sides of (8a) gives

        In Zu, = ~, + ~~+ in   Z*i~t + eict                                                            (8b)

where aC = in ~ and ~, = in b,. Substituting        (8b) into (5) or (7) and collecting terms, it becomes

apparent that the systematic measurement          errors aC and ~1will be absorbed into the country and

time fixed effats   qk and bjt, leaving only the classical measurement errors ek, on the right hand

side. Of course, the ideal solution to classical measurement error is to use an instrumental

variables estimator. It seems reasonable to assume that true technology levels are correlated

across countries while technology measurement errors are uncorrelated across countries, which

means that one country’s TFP level is a valid instrument for another country’s TFP level.

Consequently, I instrument industry k TFP in country c in year t by the average of all other

country’s industry k TFP in year t. In other words, the instrument for 6~a is



                                              k = 1,...J


where C is the number of countries in the sample.

       Unfofiunately, there are no good instruments available for factor supplies. As shown by

Klepper and Learner (1984), the degree of inconsistency caused by clmsical measurement error

in multiple right hand side variables can be bounded, and the tightness of the bounds is a function


                                                       17
of the R* of the regression equation. The R2S of the regressions of the share equations (5) and (7)

vary between 0.92 and 0.98, so that the degree of inconsistence y due to classical measurement

error in the factor endowment variables is very small. Consequently,     I do not pursue the

calculation of the measurement error bounds as outlined by Klepper and Learner.

4.4 Data Summary

       Table 1 summarizes the coverage and organization of the data. The sample includes all of

the largest developed countries as well as a number of smaller European ~onomies        and covers

the period 1970 to 1988, with a number of countries having data up to 1990. Table 2 gives an

indication of how the ten countries differ in what they produce. The first column of Table 2 gives

the share of manufacturing   value added in each country’s total GDP in 1970 and 1988. Each

country saw a drop in manufacturing’s share of GDP over the period. The other columns of the

table give the share of each industry in total manufacturing   value added. By far the largest sector

is Machine~,   which accounted for over a third of total manufacturing    value added in most

countries. The sector which saw the largest decline in its share of manufacturing was Textiles

and Apparel. After Machinery, the next two largest sectors were generally Food and Chemicals,

with Paper an important sector in the heavily forested countries of Canada and Sweden. The

variability in these output shares across countries and over time is what the empirical model in

the next section is designed to explain.

       The explanatory variables of the model are summarized in Tables 3 and 4. Table 3 shows

the levels of factor endowments   at the end of the sample as well as the average annual growth

rates of the endowments   over the sample. The type of systematic measurement error discussed in

the previous section is evident in this table, particularly in the education variables. For example,


                                                  18
Germany has a very small number of college-educated        workers relative to the United States but

far more low-educated workers, which may have more to do with differences in the educational

systems in the two countries than with differences in the skill levels of the two workforces. Most

countries saw small declines in arable land and somewhat larger declines in low-educated

workers over the period, while the other types of labor and both types of capital generally grew.

        The total factor productivity data are summarized in Table 4. Not surprisingly,      there is

generally strong growth over time in TFP, although there are some exceptions, particularly in the

Food sector. The US was the leader in TFP in most sectors both at the beginning and at the end

of the sample, an observation which accords with Dollar and Wolff (1993) and Harrigan (1994%

1994b) among other researchers. Careful scrutiny of this table uncovers a number of apparent

anomalies (for example, was Japanese TFP in Food real] y 23% higher in 1970 than US TFP in

1988?), so these comparisons     should be taken as fairl y noisy indicators of true technology

differences.

5. Empirical    Results

        Equations (5) and (7) are estimated as a system of restricted seemingly unrelated

re~essions,    and the results are reported in Tables 5 and 6 respectively, with hypothesis tests

reported in Table 8. Standardized coefficients for equations (5) and (7) are reported in Table 7.

The estimates in Table 5 are computed subject to the symmetry and homogeneity constraints,

while the Table 6 results have the additional restriction that the coefficient on the lagged

dependent variable is the same in each equation. For each sector, the dependent variable is the

percentage share of that sector’s output in GDP, and the explanatory variables are the log of TFP

in all sectors and the log of six different types of factor endowments. Since the dependent


                                                   19
variable is a percentage, the estimated parameters have the interpretation          of a semi-elasticity, For

example, a parameter estimate of 2.0 means that a 10% increase in the independent variable will

raise the output share by 0.20 percentage points. Country and time fixed effects are included in

each equation but are not reported for space reasons; they are reported in an app,ndix which is

available upon request.

        For each estimated equation, the TFP variable corresponding            to the industry output share

being explained is highlighted to make the table easier to read. According to the theory, this

parameter is the own-price output effect and should be non-negative.            In most cases, this own-

TFP parameter is estimated to be positive and statistically significant: in Table 5, five of the

seven smtors have positive own-TFP effats,          while in Table 6 all seven sectors have positive

own-TFP effects]o, The largest positive effect is in the Machinery sector: a 10% improvement in

relative TFP raises Machinery’s share of GDP by 0.2 or 0.3 percentage points. The Chemicals

sector has an own-~        effect of over 1, while the Apparel, Glass, and Metals sectors have

relatively small own-TFP effects of less than 1. The Paper sector has a small positive own-TFP

effect which is significant only in Table 6, while the Food category has an own-TFP effect

ambiguous sign: it is negative in Table 5 and positive in Table 6. This failure of the theory for the

Food sector is in itself an interesting result which hints that the output of this swtor depends

more on factors such as government policy than on purely monomic considerations.                 Students of

agricultural policy in the world economy may find this particularly unsurprising.




    ‘0The covariance matrix of the restrictedGLSestimator is asymptoticallynormal. Here and in what follows, my
cutoff for “statistical significance” is It I z 1.64, which is the 107’ cutoff point for the standard normal.

                                                      20
        As the theory suggests, the cross-TFP effects area mix of positive and negative, although

the signs and statistical significance are somewhat fragile across the two tables. Of the21 cross-

TFP effects, only 3 are statistically significant and of the same sign in both tables: negative

Machinery-Chemicals,    Glass-Foods,   and Apparel-Chemicals     cross-effects. The strongest cross-

TFP effect is between TFP in Chemicals and Machinery: TFP growth in one of these sectors

evidently draws resources out of the other sector. These are also the two sectors with the largest

own-TFP effwts.

        Turning to the effect of factor supplies on GDP shares, I first focus on Table 5. The two

types of capital tend to have different effects. Abundance in producer durables is generally

associated with larger output in most sators,   while greater supplies of non-residential

construction are associated with lower output shares: this pattern holds in the Apparel,

Chemicals, Glass and Machinery sectors, and in addition producer durables have a positive effect

in the Food sector. Abundance in highly educated workers has a uniformly negative or negligible

effect on the output shares of all industries, medium-educated    workers have a positive or

negligible effect on the output shares of all but the Chemicals sector, and low-educated      workers

have large effects only in the Chemicals (negative) and Machinery (positive) sectors. The effects

of land are mixed, with a surprising negative effect in the Food sector, although it should be

recognized that this sator   is the output of processed food and beverages and not agricultural

production per se,

       To summarize, the most reliable inferences across sectors about the effects of factor

abundance on output shares are 1) Producer durables and medium-educated         workers are

associated with larger shares, and 2) Non-residential   Construction and High-educated      Workers


                                                  21
are associated with lower shares. These findings suggest a simple story: the service sector is

intensive in non-residential   construction   (office buildings and retail stores) and college-educated

workers (managers, professionals,     educators), so that abundance in these factors draws other

resources out of manufacturing     and into the service sector, By contrast, the manufacturing      sectors

are intensive in producer durables and medium-educated         workers, so that abundance in these

factors draws resources out of services and into manufacturing sectors. While plausible,

confirmation of this explanation would require data on direct factor shares which tie not easily

available in internationally   comparable form,

        The results about factor abundance are roughly consistent with Harrigan (1995). That

paper used a somewhat different model, data set, and set of factor endowment variables, and

found that capital abundance was associated with larger output in most manufacturing          industries

and skilled labor abundance was associated with lower output in most industries. The results are

also roughly consistent with hamer’s      (1984) findings about the net export effects of factor

abundance.

        Turning to Table 6, it is much more difficult to sign the effects of factor supplies on

output shares. For example, non-residential     construction has a significant effect in only one

sector, and medium-educated      workers have no significant effects. Evidently, the slow adjustment

(the estimated coefficient on the lagged output share is 0.699) of output shares to the movement

of relative factor supplies obscures the equilibrium relationship that was apparent when

adjustment was assumed to be immediate, as it is in Table 5,

       To help understand the size of the effects reported in Tables 5 and 6, Table 7 reports

standardized coefficients, which are transformations      of the regression coefficients into units of


                                                    22
sample standard deviations        1. For example, a standardized coefficient of 1.3 means that a one

standard deviation increase in the explanatory variable will increase the dependent variable by

1.3 standard deviations. The standardized coefficients corresponding                to Table 5 are reported in

columns A of Table 7. Columns B of Table 7 report long-run standardized coefficients, where

each slope is first divided by 1 -1 to convert it into a long-run effect. Boxes are shaded if the

corresponding slope in Table 5 or 6 is significantly different from zero at the 10~0 level. The

estimated long-run own-TFP effects in columns B are invariably larger than the effects in column

A; generally, a one-standard deviation increme in own-TFP hm a moderate to large effect on the

GDP share. The cross-TF’P effects are almost all negligible except for the Machinery-Chemicals

effect. Where statistically significant, the factor endowment effects are generally large, with

many standardized coefficients greater than one in absolute value and most greater than 0.5.

         Table 8 reports some hy-pothesis tests relating to the results in Tables 5 and 6, The

symmetry restrictions (Hypotheses A 1, B 1, and B2) are rejected, while the homogeneity of the

factor supply effects is generally not rejected (Hypotheses A3 and B3). The TFP and factor

supply effects are jointly significant for each equation in Table 5, but the picture is less clear for

Table 6: the TFP variables are not significant in the Food s~tor, and factor supplies do not have

significant effects in the Glass and Metals sectors.

        Because the results of Tables 5 and 6 are computed using a fixed effmts estimator, cross-

country variation in TFP and factor supplies is not used in estimation; in other words, only time-

series variation within countries is used to identify the parameters. Mechanically, the estimator



    L[ Standardized coefficients are often known as “beta” coefficients. Standardized coefficients are formed by
multiplying the regression slope by the standard deviation of the explanatory variable and dividing by the standard
deviation of the dependent variable.

                                                         23
proceeds in two steps: first, country and time means are subtracted by regressing each variable on

country and time period dummies; second, the restricted SURE estimator is applied to the

residuals from these regressions. To see how the estimated model does in predicting cross-

country variation in GDP shares, I constructed predicted values using the estimated coefficients

multiplied by variables with only time means removed. These predicted values are compared to

the actual GDP shares in Table 9. Not surprisingly given the large magnitude of cross-country

variation in GDP shares (see Table 2), the results are mixed: for equation (5) the correlation

between predicted and actual is positive in five of seven sectors, while Chemicals and Metals

have negative correlations. Equation (7) does much better, with high positive correlations in all

sectors; this is surely due to the lagged dependent variable in Equation (7). Better cross-country

measurement of TFP and factor supplies, as well as modeling of cross-country differences in the

size of the non-traded goods sector, would probably lead to a smaller amount of unexplained

cross-country variation in GDP shares.

6. Conclusion

        This paper is the first to estimate a model where technology and factor supply differences

jointly determine international specialization.   This methodology is consistent with but less

restrictive than the even model of Learner (1984) and Harrigan (1995) and also encompmses        the

modified factor price equalization approach of Trefler (1993, 1995). The estimated effect of

technology differences is generally large and in accord with the theory, suggesting that Ricardian

effects are an important source of comparati ve advantage. Factor endowment differences are also

found to have large effects on output shares, and the pattern of estimated effects is informative,




                                                   24
although the factor supply effects are elusive when a lagged dependent variable is included in the

specification.

        While the paper does not explicitly address trade, the implications for trade are

immediate: to the extent that countries have similar tastes, the inferences about the determinants

of a country’s production pattern found here will translate into inferences about the country’s

trade pattem12. The results of this paper do not necessarily conflict with Trefler’s (1995) result

that the factor content of a country’s net trade is approximately equal to it’s effective excess

factor supplies. Trefler showed that for aggregate calculations about the factor content of trade it

is reasonable to abstract from non-neutral technology differences by resuming that each country’s

factor requirement matrix13 is a scalar multiple of the US matrix. What the current paper shows is

that non-neutral technology differences are important for explaining specialization.                   One

difficulty in comparing Trefler’s paper to this one is that the effective factor content of trade is

not well-defined when there are non-neutral technology differences across sectors: when a

country’s factor requirements       matrix can not be expressed as scalar multiple of the US matrix the

measured factor content of trade will depend on which factor requirements matrix is used in the

calculation.

        This paper has been primarily concerned with testing the neoclassical theory of

international specialization,     but it has implications for empirical modelers and policy makers as

well as theorists. For empirical modelers using the neoclassical framework, the message is that




    12Similarity in tmtes may explain why the results of this paper are consistent with Learner’s (1984) estimates of
the effeck of factor endowments on net exports, as noted in the previous section.

    13That is, the A matrix in the usual statement of the factor market clearing conditions, Ax = v.

                                                          25
some of the defects of the Heckscher-Ohlin    model can be remedied by consideration of Hicks-

neutral technology differences. For policy makers, the message is that both factor supply and

technology differences have important impacts on a country’s pattern of specialization in the

global economy, and that these factors must be considered jointly when formulating policies

intended to effect the structure of production and trade.

       A final contribution   of the paper is that it has demonstrated that the dual approach to

general equilibrium   theory can greatly simplify cross-country empirical analysis in trade models,

especially when panel data is available. The dual approach has been used extensively in time

series analysis of trade models, especially by Kohli (1991), but has not been applied to a panel of

countries before.




                                                  26
                                          References

Ark, Bart van, and Dirk Pilat, 1993, “Productivity Levels in Germany, Japan, and the United
       States: Differences and Causes”, Brookings Papers: Macroeconomics 2, 1993, 1-69.

Barre, Robert J., and Jong-Wha Lee, 1993, “International Comparisons of Educational
       Attainment”, NBER Working Paper #4349, April.

Bowen, Harry P., Learner, Edward E., and Leo Sveikauskas, 1987, “Multicountry, Multifactor
      Tests of the Factor Abundance Theory”, American Economic Review, (December), 77:
      791-809.

Brecher, R, and E, Choudhri, 1993, “Some empirical support for the Heckscher-Ohlin    model of
        production”, Canadian Journal of Economics, v. 26 no. 2 (May): 272-285.

Caves, Douglas W., Laurits R. Christensen, and W. Erwin Diewert, 1982, “Multilateral
       Comparisons of Output, Input, and Productivity using Superlative hdex Numbers”, me
       Economic Journal 92 (March): 73-86.

Deardorff, Alan V., 1984, “Testing Trade Theories and Predicting Trade Flows”, Chapter 10 in
       Ronald W. Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics,
       Volume 1, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Diewert, W. Erwin, 1978, “Hicks’ Aggregation Theorem and the Existence of a Real Value
       Added Function”, pp. 17-51 in M. Fuss and D. McFadden, Eds., Production Economics:
       A Dml Approach to Theory and Applications, vol. 2, Amsterdam: North Holland.
       Reprinted as Chapter 15 in Diewert and A. O. Nakamura, Eds., 1993, Essays in Index
       Number Theo~, vol. 1, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Dixit, Avinash, and Victor Norman, 1980, The Theo~ of International   Trade, Cambridge,
        England: Cambridge University Press.

Dollar, David, and Edward N. Wolff, 1993, Competitiveness,   Convergence, and International
        Specialization, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Greene, William, 1993, Econometric Analysis, 2nd Edition, New York: Macmillan.

Harrigan, James, 1994a, “Econometric Estimation of Cross-Country Differences in Industry
        Production Functions”, University of Pittsburgh Working Paper.

Harrigan, James, 1994b, “Cross-Country Comparisons of Industry Total Factor Productivity:
        Theory and Evidence”, University of Pittsburgh Working Paper.




                                              27
Harrigan, James, 1995, “Factor Endowments and the International bcation of Production:
        Econometric Evidence for the OECD, 1970-1985”, Journal oflnternational  Economics v.
        39:123-141.

Helpman, 1984, “Increasing Returns, Imperfect Markets, and Trade Theory”, Chapter 7 in Ronald
      W, Jones and Peter B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Volume 1,
      Amsterdam: North Holland.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul Krugman, 1985, Market Structure and Foreign Trade: Increasing
      Returns, Impe@ect Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge, Mass: MIT
      Press.

Hunter, Linda, and James Markusen, 1988, “Per Capita Income as a Determinant of Trade”,
       Chapter 4 in Robert Feenstra, Ed., Empirical Methodsfor Intematioml  Trade,
       Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.

Jones, R., 1965, “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models”, Journal of Political
       Economy, v. 73:557-572 (December).

Jorgenson, Dale W., and Masahiro Kurod% 1990, “Productivity and International Compet-
        itiveness in Japan and the United States, 1960-1985”, Chapter 1 in Charles R. Hulten,
        Ed., Productivi~ Growth in Japan and the United States, Chicago: University of Chicago
        Press. The paper also appears in Economic Studies Quarterly, v. 43 (December 1992):
        313-25.

Klepper, Steven and Edward E. bamer, 1984, “Consistent Sets of Estimates for Regressions
       with Errors in All Variables”, Econometrics 52, 163-183.

Kohli, Ulrich, 1991, Technology, Dmlity, and Foreign Trade, Ann Arbor: University of
       Michigan Press.

Learner, Edward E., 1984, Sources of International   Comparative Advantage:   Theory and
        Evidence, Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

Learner, Edward E. and James Levinsohn, 1995, “International Trade Theory: The Evidence”,
        Chapter 26 in Gene Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, Eds., The Handbook of International
        Economics, Volume 3, Amsterdam: North Holland,

Leontief, Wassily, 1954, “Domestic Production and Foreign Trade: The American Capital
        Position Re-examined”, Chapter 30 in Richard E. Caves and Harry G. Johnson, eds.,
        Readings in International Economics, 1968, hndon: Allen and Unwin.




                                               28
Markusen, James, 1986, “Explaining the Volume of Trade: An Eclectic Approach”, American
       Economic Review, v. 76:1002:1011.

Maskus, Keith E., “A Test of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Theorem: The Leontief
       Commonplace”, Journal oflntemational      Economics, v. 19:201-212,

Staiger, Robert W., 1988, “A Specification Test of the Heckscher-Ohlin   Theory”, Journal of
        International Economics, v. 25:129-141,

Summers, Robert, and Alan Heston, 1991, “The Penn World Table (Mark V): An Expanded Set
      of International Comparisons, 1950-1988” Quarterly Journal of Economics, v. 106:327-
      368.

Trefler, Daniel, 1993, “International Factor Price Differences: Leontief was Right!”, Journal of
         Political Economy, v. 101 (December): 961-987.

Trefler, Daniel, 1995, “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries”, American
         Economic Review, v. 85 (Dwember): 1029-1046.

Woodland, Alan D., 1982, International   Trade and Resource Allocation, Amsterdam: North
       Holland.




                                                29
                                  Table 1- Data set Description

Years     1970-1990 (many series stop in 1988)

Countries 10 OECD countries: Canada, the United States, Japan, Belgium, Britain, France,
Denmark, West Germany, Italy, and Sweden.

Product Classification Svstem Seven of the nine categories of the two-digit level of the
International Standard Industrial Classification (ISIC). The categories, and their three-digit
constituent parts, are listed below. ISIC 33, Products of Wood, and ISIC 39, Other
Manufacturing, are excluded from the analysis because of missing data.

Food            311/2   Food manufacturing
                313     Beverage industries
                314     Tobacco manufactures
Apparel         321     Manufacture of textiles
                322     Manufacture of wearing apparel except footwear
                323     Manufacture of leather products except footwear and apparel
                324     Manufacture of footww except rubber or plastic
Paper           341     Manufacture of paper and paper products
                342     Printing, publishing and allied industries
Chemicals       351     Manufacture of industrial chemicals
                352     Manufacture of other chemical products
                353     Products of Petroleum refineries
                354     Miscellaneous products of petroleum and coal
                355     Rubber products
                356     Plastic products not elsewhere classified
Glass           361     Pottery, china and earthware
                362     Glass and glass products
                369     Other non-metallic mineral products
Metals          371     Iron and steel basic industries
                372     Non-ferrous metal basic industries
Machinery       381     Fabricated metal products, except machinery and equipment
                382     Manufacture of machinery except electrical
                383     Electrical machinery, apparatus, appliances and supplies
                384     Transport equipment
                385     Professional, scientific, measuring and control equipment




                                                  30
                          Table 1- Data set Description,   continued

Shares of each industry in GDP
       Source: the OECD’S International Sectoral Database (ISDB).

Total Factor Productivity
       Author’s calculation of total factor productivity uses data on real value added, capital
       stocks, and employment by industry, country, and year from the ISDB. For details see the
       text and the appendix.

Factor Endowments
Capital      Using version 5.6 of the Penn-World Table (PWT 5.6), capital is classified into
             two categories: 1) durable goods capital and 2) non-residential construction and
             other capital. Units: millions of 1985 international dollars. See Heston and
             Summers (199 1) for details.

Labor         The economically active population (from PWT 5.6) is classified according to
              education level: 1) low, workers with at most primary education, 2) medium,
              workers with at most secondary education, and 3) high, workers with at least some
              higher education. Units: Thousands of workers. The educational classification for
              1970, 1975, 1980, and 1985 comes from Barro and Lee (1993); intervening years
              are interpolated and years after 1985 are projected using the 1980-85 trend. See
              Barro and Lee (1993) for details.

Land          Arable land. Units: thousands of hectares. The source is the World Resources
              Data Base on diskette.




                                              31
.-E
I II QI   1   1   1   1   1   m   m   m   ,
                                              w
                                                Table 8- Hypothesis        Tests

Panel A: No lagged dependent variable, equation (5), Table 5
Al. symmetry of cross-TFP effects:          O.000

                          Food        Apparel       Paper     Chemicals      Glass     Metals    Machinery   All
A3, Homogeneity             0.471        0.498        0.823        0.290       0.512     0.308       0.098   0.041
Significance   tests (conditional   on A 1 and A3 imposed)
A4.   m                     O.000        0.000        0.000        0.000       0,ooo     0.000       0.000   0.000
A5. Factors                 O.000        0.000        0.019        0.000       0.000     0.000       0.000   0.000
fi6.TFP & Factors           O.000        0.000        0.000        0.000       0.000     0.000       0.000   0.000


Panel B: Lagged dependent vwiable, equation (7), Table 6
B 1, symmetry of cross-TFP effeck:         0.019
B2. equality of lagged effwts:             O.000


                          Food        Apparel       Paper     Chernicats     Glass     Metats    Machinery   All
B3. Homogeneity             0.026        0.230        0.224        0.975      0.138      0.002       0.112   0.001
Significance   tests (conditional   on B 1, B2, and B3 imposed)
B4. TFP                     0,086        0.227        0.638        0.000      0.004      0.013       0.000   0.000
B5. Factors                 0.025        0.109       0.068         0.030      0.071      0.623       0.009   0.000
~6.TFP    & Factors         0.021        0.076       0.177         0.000      0.008      0.009       0.000   0.000


Notes to Table 8: This table reports the marginal significance levels of hypothesis tests of the
specifications reported in the previous two tables. Each test is calculated by computing the
appropriate Wald statistic, which has a X2distribution with degrees of freedom equal to the
number of restrictions being tested.

A1, B1             Hypothesis: cross-TFP effects are equal, ~j = ~~ , k, j = 1,...,7, I #j, which
                   amounts to 21 cross-equation linear restrictions. The test statistics are X2(21).
B2                 Hypothesis: coefficients on lagged dependent variables are equal, Aj= a~, j, k =
                   1,...7, which amounts to 6 cross-equation linear restrictions. The test statistic is X2
                   (6).
A3, B3             Hypothesis: sum of the factor endowment terms is zero. For each industry
                   separately, the test statistic is X2(1), For the hypothesis that homogeneity holds
                   for all seven industry, the statistic is X2(7)
A4-6, B4-6         Hypothesis: The indicated coefficients are all zero. For each industry separately,
                   the test statistics are
                   A4, B4:            X2(7)
                   AS, B5:            X2(5)
                   A6, B6:            X2(12)
                   For all seven industries together, the test statistics are
                   A4, B4:            X2(49)
                   A5, B5:            X2(35)
                   A6, B6:            X2(84)


                                                              38
                     Table 9- Comparison                 of Predicted and Actual GDP Shares

                           Predicted       values from Equation (5)      Predicted values from Eq uation (7)
         Industry           Corr.           intercept         slope      Corr,         intercept        slope
                                       I                  I                        I                I
         Food                0.285              0.098           0.144      0.659          -0.044          0.417
                                                ( 1.52)         (4.22)                    (-0.88)       (12.10)
         Apparel             0.315              0.116           0.288      0.976          -0.041          1.168
                                                (1.74)          (4.71)                    (-2.67)        (62.1)
         Paper               0.378             -0.046           0.682      0.886          -0.006          0.764
                                               (-0.89)          (5.78)                    (-0.22)        (26.42
         Chemicals          -0.323              0.182          -0.306      0.933          -0.024          0.953
                                                (1 .96)        (-4.83)                    (-0.67)        (35.9)
         Glass               0.521              0.059           0.698      0.768          -0.012          0.944
                                                (2.30)          (8.66)                    (-0.62)        (16,6)
         MeMs               -0.235             -0.033          -0.296      0.698          -0.033          0.941
                                               (-0.54)         (-3.43)                    (-0.72)        (13.5)
         Machinery           0.339              0.170           0.457      0.742          -0.005          0.960



Notes to Table 9: Fitted values SK, are formed by applying the estimated coefficients from
Tables 5 and 6 to the explanatory variables after each explanatory variable has had time means
removed. Actual GDP shares SjC1also have time means removed. Time means are removed by
keeping the residuals from regressions of each variable on the set of year dummies, The column
“corr” reports the correlation between SjcLand SjC,for each industry j, and the columns “intercept”
and “slope” report the estimated coefficients and t-statistics from the regression of SjC,on ~j,, for
each industxy j.




                                                              39
