NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WOMEN HELPING WOMEN? ROLE-MODEL
AND MENTORING EFFECTS ON FEMALE
PH.D. STUDENTS IN ECONOMICS

David Neumark
Rosella Gardecki

Working Paper 5733

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

We thank Jodi Messer and Ramona Taylor for assistance with the research, and Kathleen Beegle,
Robert LaLonde, and Jennifer Tracey for helpful comments. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research,
O 1996 by David Neumark and Rosella Gardecki. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including @ notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5733
August 1996
WOMEN HELPING WOMEN? ROLE-MODEL
AND MENTORING EFFECTS ON FEMALE
PH.D. STUDENTS IN ECONOMICS
ABSTRACT
One potential method to increase the success of female graduate students in economics may
be to encourage

mentoring

relationships

between these students and female faculty members.

Increased hiring of female faculty is viewed as one way to promote such mentoring relationships,
perhaps because of role-model effects. A more direct method of promoting such relationships

may

be for female graduate students to have female faculty serve as dissertation chairs. The evidence in
this paper addresses the question of whether either of these strategies results in more successful
outcomes for female graduate students.

The evidence is based on survey information on female

graduate students and faculties of Ph.D.-producing economics departments, covering the mid- 1970s
to the early 1990s.
With respect to characteristics

of the institutions

at which students are first placed when

leaving graduate school, the empirical evidence provides no support for the hypothesis that outcomes
for female graduate students are improved by adding female faculty members, or by having a female
dissertation chair. However, with respect to time to complete graduate school, and the completion
rate, there is some limited evidence of beneficial effects of female faculty members.

David Neumark
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824
and NBER
dneumark@msu.edu

Rosella Gardecki
Department of Economics
Michigan State University
East Lansing, MI 48824

I. Introduction
Women in the economics profession are underrepresented

at all academic levels, leave

graduate programs at higher rates, and achieve tenure at lower rates than their male counterparts
(Kahn, 1995). This is despite the fact that men and women apparently have equivalent probabilities
of being admitted to graduate school and of graduating from the top-tier graduate programs (Attiyeh
and Attiyeh, 1994). There are a variety of possible explanations for the underrepresentation
women in economics, ranging from discrimination
investment.

of

to preferences to optimal human capital

However, a number of sources have cited the lack of same-sex mentoring in the

economics profession as contributing to the relative scarcity of female economists (Hem, 1994), and
steps are being taken to encourage mentoring relationships

between female economics faculty and

female graduate students (CSWEP, Spring 1994). Support for mentoring programs is bolstered by
evidence of negative relationships between male faculty and female graduate students (see the
review in Berg and Ferber, 1983), and evidence that graduate students tend to seek out same-sex
role models (Gilbert, 1985).1
Concern over low representation
women are severely underrepresented
despite some recent improvements
women in traditionally-male

of women is not unique to economics.

in computer science, engineering, and physics departments,

(Gries and Marsh, 1992). To remedy the underrepresentation

mentoring relationships

of

fields (including economics), a number of universities and advocacy

groups propose formal mentoring programs.
different ways, including--in

For example,

These programs may operate at different levels and in

addition to mentoring of graduate students by faculty--formal

between junior and senior faculty members (Douthitt 1993), and increased

10n the other hand, survey evidence presented in Shelbum and Lewellyn ( 1995) indicates
possibly offsetting influences of the sex composition of the faculty. For example, they find that
male students are more likely to socialize with (predominantly male) faculty, while women
report more frequent invitations for discussions of their progress.
1

hiring of women in traditionally

male fields to encourage female students to pursue similar lines of

study (Girgus, 1992; Canes and Rosen, 1995). Likewise, the National Science Foundation seems to
have embraced the potential gains from mentoring.

Earlier this year, the NSF established the 1996

Mentor Award, part of the ‘Presidential Awards for Excellence in Science, Mathematics,
Engineering Mentoring Program.’
encourage the participation

and

The stated purpose of this program, and others like it, is to

of underrepresented

groups in these fields.

While there seems to be widespread acceptance of the view that mentoring will help solve
the underrepresentation

problem, this view has been subjected to relatively little empirical analysis.

The goal of this paper is to provide new evidence, focusing specifically on the influence of role
models and mentoring provided by female faculty on the success of female graduate students in
economics.

It is left to future research to examine whether our results generalize to other male-

dominated academic disciplines.
There are two paths one could take in evaluating the effects of mentoring.

One is

exemplified in research by Canes and Rosen ( 1995), who ask whether the presence of female faculty
has an effect on female students; they looked at choice of college majors, whereas we examine
success of female graduate students.
black box--something

This research strategy in some sense treats mentoring as a

that may or may not occur when women are better represented among the

faculty. A second strategy is to try to get inside the black box, and ask what specific forms of
mentoring might be most productive.

Of course, ultimately both types of evidence are important.

In this paper, we describe evidence on the effect that female faculty in economics have on
outcomes for female graduate students.

We obtained most of our data by surveying all Ph. D.-

granting economics departments in the U. S., requesting information on all female Ph.D. graduates
from 1973 to the present.
relevant characteristics

This data set is unique in that it provides information on the individual’s

(such as GRE scores) and their first j ob, as well as other measures not
2

available in existing data sources.2
We focus primarily on the quality of the first job placement.

The first job seems a critical

step in the development of an academic career. Some studies find that males and females have
similar placements at first j obs once account is taken of factors such as prestige of the graduate
department.3

On the other hand, a relatively recent studybyBarbezat(1992)

AEA members finds that, controlling for numerous characteristics

based on a survey of

of graduate programs, women as

compared with men are relatively more likely to receive their first placement at liberal arts colleges
as opposed to business schools or economics departments ranked in the top 30.4 We use various
measures of “rankings” of economics departments to measure graduate student success in job
placements.

We also measure graduate student success by the time to attain a first job, and rates at

which students complete Ph.D. programs.

Graduates with a longer time to attain their first job

forego earnings early in their career; thus, those who attain a first job earlier have a higher lifetime
value of earnings.

The costs of beginning but not completing a Ph.D. program are probably

considerably higher,
To test for role-model or mentoring effects, we use the sex of the student’s dissertation chair
and (alternatively) the number of female faculty and ratio of female faculty to female students.

We

2The Universal Academic Questionnaire (UAQ) does not contain much of the information
needed for this study. First, it contains no data on the qualifications of students entering Ph.D.
programs. Second, it contains few details regarding their placements. Third, as explained below,
it does not provide an accurate count of the number of female students beginning a program in
each year.
3See Willis and Pieper (1 992).
4This evidence ranges from marginally significant to significant at the five- or ten-percent
level. Once controls are included for individuals’ reported preferences, the sex differences in
relative placement probabilities become insignificant, which may be the basis for Kahn’s (1995)
conclusion that gender differences in placements can be completely explained by predetermined
characteristics (Kahn, 1995, p. 197). However, this survey was completed after individuals
became employed. It thus seems entirely plausible that reported preferences adjusted to reflect
actual outcomes, and hence themselves reflect the sex differences in placements.
3

assume that the sex of the student’s dissertation chair serves as a proxy for whether the student
experiences a same-sex mentoring relationship; thus, this variable is introduced to address the
mentoring relationship directly.

If same-sex mentoring has a positive impact on graduates, we

expect female students with a female chair to place earlier and in better jobs than other female
students.5 In contrast, we interpret our evidence on whether increased representation

of females on

the faculty improves outcomes for female graduate students as more relevant to role-model effects,
or possibly other aspects of mentoring relationships.
Three caveats should be mentioned at the outset, to avoid drawing overly strong conclusions
from our research. First, our evidence is certainly not decisive with respect to all forms of
mentoring.

Although we attempt to go “inside” the mentoring black box with our evidence on the

sex of the dissertation chair, rather than looking solely at the representation

of women on the

faculty, one can argue that we miss the essence of the mentoring relationship, and should instead
have examined some other aspect of graduate students’ experiences.b

However, regardless of how

well we capture mentoring relationships with our data, in our view the results regarding the
representation

of women on the faculty are of independent interest. It is entirely possible that

female role models, in and of themselves, have important consequences,

so that the mere presence

of women on the faculty does have beneficial effects on female graduate students (see, e.g.,
Ehrenberg, 1995).7 In fact, many colleagues report having heard (or made) this argument made with
respect to hiring decisions.

5This assumes that a longer time to attain one’s first j ob is not associated with better training
and better placement. Our data indicate a strong negative association between years to complete
graduate school and quality of placement, although this is not necessarily causal.
cSee Adarns (1992), Douthitt (1993), Elkiss (1995), and Newby and Heide (1992), for
discussions of the mentoring relationship.
7A related possibility raised in the literature is that a certain number of women faculty is
needed to attain a “critical mass” at which conditions might become more favorable to women
(Etzkowitz, et al., 1994).
4

Second, because the outcomes we study are related to success in the labor market, we cannot
distinguish between effects of female faculty that operate through the quality of students’ training,
research, and other factors related to faculty input, and effects that operate through placement.

In

fact, additional female faculty could improve the training of female graduate students, but be offset
by discrimination

against students of female faculty members.g

Third, much of our evidence focuses on graduate student success defined in terms of
placements at academic departments, and at higher-ranked departments within academia.

These

measures of success may be too narrow. Female colleagues have suggested to us that non-academic
jobs and academic jobs in lower-ranked departments may sometimes be preferable for women, if
factors such as chance of promotion, respect from colleagues, cooperation, etc., are superior at such
jobs. In fact, one could argue that female graduate students with female mentors are made more
aware of such factors, and may therefore sometimes prefer placements that are considered” worse”
by the criteria we use. It is therefore important to keep in mind that our results are restricted to
success as we define it. We offset this problem to some extent by studying years to completion and
completion rates, since it seems to us that fewer years to completion and higher completion rates
indicate greater success on any score.
Despite these caveats, the evidence is still informative.

For example, if adding female

faculty members has little positive effect on outcomes for female graduate students, then we at least
know that this strategy in isolation is not likely to improve outcomes for these students.
~g
One set of studies related to role models and mentoring focuses on the influence of the sex

‘Existing studies that examine placement of female graduate students provide no evidence on
the sex of a student’s dissertation chair or the sex composition of the faculty at a student’s
institution (Barbezat, 1992; McMillen and Singell, 1994; Singell and Stone, 1993).
5

composition of college faculties on college major choices of female students.

Dynan and Rouse

(1995) study whether female students respond differently to introductory economics classes taught
by women as opposed to men, asking whether the lower relative probability that a female chooses
an economics major is raised by the presence of female role models in the classroom.

They find

that female faculty do not affect the probability that either males or females continued to study
economics.

Using longitudinal data from three schools, Canes and Rosen (1995) test whether an

increase in the proportion of female faculty has a positive impact on the percentage of females
studying science or engineering, finding no evidence to support this contention.

Solnick (1 995)

studies this question (as well as questions regarding the effects of the sex composition

of the student

body) by comparing changes in academic majors among women at single-sex vs. coed colleges.9
She finds that women at single-sex colleges switch to traditionally male-dominated
higher rate than women at coed colleges.

majors at a

However, she does not find that women at single-sex

schools are any more likely to remain in traditionally male-dominated

fields than are women at coed

institutions.
Ehrenberg, et al. (1995) address the issue of female mentoring at the grade-school level.
Using an 8th grade test score as a baseline, they test whether the sex or race of a student’s 10th
grade teacher affects the amount learned by the student, measured by the difference between the 8th
grade score and the 10th grade score. Although there was not a significant change in the amount of
material learned, white female teachers tended to rate the performance of white female students
higher than other students, even when controlling for the student’s ability.

One interpretation

the white female teachers provide mentoring through encouraging evaluations.

is that

Thus, the white

female student is perceived to benefit from the relationship, even though the student does not learn

9Tidball (1 980) documents the higher percentage of female faculty at women’s colleges.
6

more material.

As the authors note, it remains an open question whether the higher ratings

ultimately confer some benefits.
A second set of papers extends the analysis to look at labor market as well as educational
outcomes.

Rothstein (1995) tests whether the proportion of female faculty affects future labor

market and educational outcomes of female students.

Using data from the NLS High School Class

of 1972 surveys, she finds that the probability that females attain a higher degree is positively
related to the proportion of females on the faculty. Although an advanced degree results in higher
earnings, Rothstein does not find any evidence of a direct positive effect of a higher percentage of
female faculty on earnings.

In related work, although focusing on blacks who attend historically

black colleges and universities (HBCU’S), Constantine (1 995) finds that respondents who attend
HBCU’S earn higher future wages than respondents attending other colleges.
Ehrenberg andRothstein’s(1994)
other black undergraduates

This contrasts with

finding that although students at HBCU’S are more likely than

to receive a bachelor’s degree, there is not a significant wage differential

between the blacks graduating from HBCU’S and blacks graduating from other colleges.’0
Johnson and Scandura (1 994) address the issue of mentoring on the job, rather than in
educational institutions.

Using a sample of Certified Public Accountants, they test whether

mentoring in general, or a specific type of mentoring (coaching, friendship, or role-model),
influences the earnings of employees.

Although the amount of mentoring was not significantly

different between males and females, Johnson and Scandura show that the presence of coach-type
mentors increases female wages. There is no corresponding

effect for male employees, regardless

of the type of mentoring relationship.
There are a smaller number of papers more closely related to the specific question and

1°Constantine argues that these differences arise because she uses data further along in
workers’ careers.
7

context we address in this study. Tolbert, et al. (1995) use female faculty turnover rates as a proxy
for the level of mentoring experienced by females in an academic department (a low turnover rate is
presumed to be associated with a higher or more successful level of mentoring).]]

They find that,

over some range, a higher proportion of women in academic departments resulted in higher
turnover, which they interpret as consistent with the view that as the relative size of a minority
grows, there is increased competition among its members.

However, as the minority proportion

reaches a critical mass (estimated at 35-40 percent), the level of competition among minority
members decreases and turnover rates fall, suggesting that minority faculty members only serve as
role models or mentors when the proportion of the minority is above a threshold level. Etzkowitz,
et al, (1994) also present descriptive evidence from the science field that supports this view.
To summarize, the evidence on role models and mentoring presents somewhat of a mixed
bag. Looking at college students, the evidence suggests some role-model effects on choice of
college major and educational attainment, but no direct effect on labor market outcomes (at least for
women).

With respect to female faculty, there is certainly no compelling evidence of positive role-

model or mentoring effects. Finally, we have not yet come across any research on the potential
impact of role models and mentors on the success of female graduate students, in economics or in
any other field.
III. The Samnle and Data
Beginning in November 1994, we surveyed all Ph.D.-granting

economics departments in the

United States. The two-part survey, which consists of a section on faculty and a section on female
Ph.D. students, collects all available data from 1973 to the survey date, although some departments
provided information on students begiming

in the mid- 1960’s (see Appendix for survey forms and a

]10f course, turnover could sometimes stem from offers of employment
which should perhaps be thought of as success.
8

at better departments,

copy of the letter sent to department chairs). In the faculty section, we requested information on the
number of tenured and non-tenured female faculty and the total number of faculty. In the graduate
student section, we requested information on female Ph.D. students who had been placed in jobs.
As explained below, we also had some interest in all female students who ever entered a graduate
program.

However, preliminary investigations

indicated that departments would have much more

difficulty providing data on all such students than on the subset of those who were placed. We
solicited information on the year of program entry, citizenship status (U.S. or foreign), the math
GRE score,]2 the sex of the dissertation chair, and the employer and year of the graduate’s initial job
placement.
Of the 130 programs surveyed, 58 programs returned at least one section of the survey. This
yielded at least partial information on 709 graduate students.

We restrict the sample to those who

began their graduate study afier 1972 (since we only requested and received information on faculty
beginning in 1973), and who attained a job by the survey date. We exclude those whose placement
was outside the U. S., and those with no job placement data. When the initial j ob is at a multicampus university, we assume job placement at the main campus unless the department reports
otherwise.

We classify the handful of placements in university research jobs as non-academic.

Finally, individuals attaining a postdoctoral position (in which case we have no information on
subsequent jobs) are included only in the analyses of the time to attain a first job.
We use the data from our survey to construct five outcome variables measuring the success
of graduate students: four that measure the graduate’s relative j ob placement, and one that measures
the time required to complete the doctoral program.

We measure the time to completion from the

12Asmall number of schools reported the GRE percentile instead of the GRE score. We
converted the GRE percentiles into GRE scores, using the yearly publication “Guide to the Use
of the Graduate Record Examinations Programs.”
9

date a graduate began studying to the date of the initial job placement.

The first measure of job

placement is a dummy variable indicating whether the woman was placed in an academic job (in the
United States). The second is whether the initial academic job is in a Ph.D.-granting
(now excluding non-academic

positions).

program or not

The two remaining measures of job placement are based

on published rankings of departments in which students are placed. Depending on the level of detail
supplied by respondents, and limitations of the published rankings, we are sometimes unable to
classifi all observations

in terms of each of these outcome measures, in which case the observations

are dropped from the corresponding

analysis.

The published ranks are from two sources: the National Resource Council’s &RC)

1992

report, and the rankings used by the American Economic Association’s (AEA) Commission

on

Graduate Education in Economics (Hansen, 1991), a five-tier quality ranking of most Ph. D.granting institutions.

We define the variable based on the NRC report as the rank based on faculty

quality. 13 The rankings are inverted so that the top department gets the highest ranking (1 07). We
augment the AEA classification by adding a sixth tier, which includes all Ph.D.-granting
departments not included in the rankings, and a seventh which includes non-Ph.D.-granting
departments (since we are studying placements, whereas the tiers were developed to study graduate
programs); these tiers are inverted so the highest number refers to the top tier. We also use these
rankings to measure the quality of the institutions from which the students received their Ph. D.’s.
Finally, based on some of the findings reported in the existing literature, we wanted to
obtain a measure of the likelihood that women complete the Ph.D. program.

As noted above,

obtaining records on all women who enrolled in Ph.D. programs posed overly-extensive

demands

13Both sets of rankings are from a single year, so we do not detect changes in quality of
placements over time. However, rankings of departments are very stable. For example, the
correlation between the 1982 and 1993 NRC rankings is .95.

10

on the survey respondents.

To obtain a measure of completion, therefore, we use the UAQ, which

includes information on students and faculty in economics departments.

This survey, which is

mailed in the fall of each year, does not contain an ideal measure of completion rates. However, it
elicits the numbers of male and female Ph.D. students registered for the previous fall (unfortunately,
not broken down by years enrolled in the program), and the number of Ph.D.’s awarded to males and
females during the previous academic year. If we denote the number of female students R,, and the
number of Ph.D.’s awarded to females D~,and assume 1) that students take five years to complete
their Ph. D., and 2) that all students are registered, then a crude estimate of the completion rate for
female students initially enrolling in year t, is (D,+j/R,)x5. Note that the denominator

will be

inaccurate to the extent that the number of female graduate students varies by year. The numerator
will be accurate, however, as long as the assumption regarding years to completion is correct. Also
note that nothing constrains this estimate of the completion rate to be below one; to avoid influential
outliers we drop a handful of observations with estimated rates exceeding two. Finally, note that
this measure is available for school-year observations,
collected in our survey. We can form corresponding

as opposed to the individual-level
school-year observations

data

on the female faculty

variables using our survey data, and match by school and year to the UAQ.
We also use the UAQ to assess the quality of some of the data requested in our survey that is
also requested in the UAQ. In particular, both our survey and the UAQ include data on the number
of tenured and non-tenured female faculty. In part because respondents to our survey appear not to
have been fully consistent with respect to the inclusion of instructors and other non-tenure-track
faculty, the correlations are considerably below one for non-tenured faculty. Nonetheless,

they

appear reasonably high: .88- .89 for tenured female faculty, and .60- .78 for non-tenured female
faculty, depending upon whether (as discussed below) we look at the faculty numbers as of students’

11

third year or the year prior to their enrollment. 14
~
We estimate econometric models for each of our outcome variables as functions of the
individual’s math GRE test score and citizenship (U.S. vs. non-U. S.), in order to control for
differences in abilities and qualifications

across individuals, as well as characteristics

of the

graduate program including tier and faculty size. As already explained, our proxies for role models
and mentoring are the representation

of women on the faculty (measured various ways), and

whether the student had a female dissertation chair. Based on the assumption that most students
begin their dissertation research in their third year, and that this is when mentoring begins to be
most important, we measure the representation

of women on the faculty as of the beginning of the

third year for each student. 15 We examine the effects of the total number of female faculty as well
as the number of tenured female faculty, because the latter may provide stronger role models or
mentoring relationships.
All of our observations are outcomes for female graduate students, which entails an
important implicit identi@ing assumption in our approach.

Specifically, we assume that changes in

the sex composition of the faculty do not affect outcomes for male students.

We would ideally like

to have data on male and female students, and to estimate the dz~ferentia2 effect on them of, for
example, additions of females to the faculty. However, requesting data on male graduate students
would have been asking too much of those who supplied the data, given the far greater number of

14These estimates are based on overlapping observations in the two data sources,
approximately 100 observations depending on the exact variable used. Obviously, we can also
use the female faculty variables constructed from the UAQ as independent variables when we
study completion rates; we report such results below.
]5The Committee on Graduate Education reports that coursework should take only two years
to complete (Hansen, 1991). Our qualitative results were not sensitive to using data from the
second year instead.
12

male students.

We assume, instead, that the other control variables (GRE scores, department size,

and year and school dummy variables) adequately capture sources of variation in outcomes for male
students.

Of course, even if female faculty (or dissertation chairs) help male and female graduate

students alike, the results would be of interest, although they would then suggest that female faculty
are better mentors per se, not necessarily better same-sex mentors. ‘h
A potentially important problem is that of endogenous selection.
the highest-quality

For example, suppose that

female students enter programs with relatively high numbers of female faculty,

either because of self-selection or more aggressive recruiting.

Then given that we do not measure

all dimensions of the quality of incoming students, we could find a positive relationship between
females on the faculty and female student performance that reflects neither role-model nor
mentoring effects. 17 To mitigate this problem, in some specifications we include as control
variables the same measures of the representation

of females on the faculty for the year before the

student began, since it is this measure that, if any, is likely to be associated with endogenous
selection.
V. Descri~tive Statistics
Figure 1 and Table 1 report descriptive statistics for our data. Figure 1 summarizes the
distribution of observations

across years and department tiers. To some extent, departments in

lower tiers (which are lower quality) are more strongly represented in the later years of the data.
Because of such changes in sample composition over time, our data cannot be used to generate
consistent time series. Table 1 reports statistics for the full sample, for graduate departments broken
into tiers, and for (roughly) the two decades covered by our data. The figures in the table are

‘bWhen we look at completion rates, we can actually assess different impacts on men and
women, since we can use the UAQ data to estimate these rates for men and women.
17Altematively, those women most in need of mentoring may select such departments,
creating bias in the other direction.
13

consistent with many of our expectations, which helps to confirm the validity of the data. For
example, students from higher-tier departments are more likely to be placed in Ph.D.-granting
departments’s and higher-ranked

or higher-tier departments, to have higher GRE scores, are more

likely to be U.S. citizens and to come from larger departments, and have higher completion rates.
Table 1 also provides descriptive statistics on female faculty. The average number of
female faculty is slightly higher at higher-tier departments (although overall depatiment size is also
higher), while the average number of tenured female faculty is lower. The ratios of female faculty
to students are highest at the middle-tier departments.

The proportions of female students with

female dissertation chairs are very low across the board.
Despite our caveats regarding comparisons over time, the estimates in columns (5) and (6)
may provide some crude evidence on the relationship between female faculty and the success of
female graduate students.

All four of the female faculty measures (numbers and ratios) increased

from the 1973-1980 period to the 1981-1990 period. At the same time, all of the variables
measuring success of female graduate students increased.

The improvement

in these latter variables

occurs despite the shift of the sample toward lower-quality departments in later years, suggesting
that this improvement

is not spurious.

Consequently,

these comparisons might suggest that adding

female faculty contributed to the greater success of female graduate students.
numbers tell us nothing about whether the improvements

Of course, these

for female graduate students occurred in

those departments that added female faculty. To address these and many other issues, we next turn
to regression analysis of the micro data.

18They are less likely, however, to be placed in academic jobs, presumably because federal
employers (the FTC, BLS, Federal Reserve Board, etc.) tend to hire from better departments.
This suggests that we should be cautious in interpreting an academic placement as “better.”
14

VI. Regression Analysis
Table 2 presents our baseline regressions for the six outcomes described in the previous
section. In these regressions we include the variables--other
mentoring--that

than those related to role models and

may be associated with graduate student outcomes.

We present these results in part

to check whether the data conform to expectations with regard to questions unrelated to the
hypotheses we are testing.

We estimate the models with just these control variables, then adding

year and school dummy variables to control for secular changes and for department-specific

effects.

In the following tables, we turn to the evidence on role models and mentoring.
Table 2 reveals that U.S. citizens receive lower placements, with the exception of the
academic/non-academic

distinction.

They are significantly less likely to obtain a j ob in a Ph. D.-

granting department, and they obtain placements in lower-tier and lower-ranked departments
(significantly so in the first case). Students fi-om higher-tier departments, on the other hand, do
better in terms of placement at Ph.D.-granting

institutions, placement in higher-ranked

departments,

and completion rates. 19 Looking at GRE scores, almost without exception students with higher
scores obtain higher placements--again
placements--and
significant.

with the exception of academic vs. non-academic

finish more quickly, although most of the estimated coefficients are not statistically

Finally, graduate department size is largely unrelated to most of the outcomes we study.

On the whole, however, the data appear to behave as we would expect, as students with higher test
scores and students from better institutions get better placements and finish more quickly and with
higher probability .20

‘9This parallels results in Barbezat (1992), Broder (1993), and Moore, et al, (1983).
200f course better schools attract better students. This is presumably why the estimated effect
of GRE scores sometimes falls considerably once school dummy variables are added. Also,
students likely differ on unmeasured dimensions systematically correlated with departments, so
the estimated effects of department tier should not necessarily be interpreted as causal.
15

Table 3 turns to evidence on role-model and mentoring effects on placement at an academic
institution.

The entries next to the letters A-D explain variations in the specification.

headings indicate the alternative proxies used for role models or mentoring.

The column

Looking first at

columns (1) and (2), in the first three rows the estimated coefficients of the number of female
faculty (total or tenured) are small and insignificant.

In the fourth specification (Panel D) we add a

control for the number of female faculty in the year prior to the student’s enrollment.
intended to control for selection of students based on characteristics

This is

of departments with respect to

female faculty. In this specification, we identi~ the effect of the number of female faculty from the
change in this variable from the year prior to the student’s enrollment to the student’s third year,
“solving” the selection problem by identi~ing

effects from variation in female faculty that occurred

afier the student decided to enroll; obviously, this asks a lot of the data, given that the female faculty
variables from the third year and the year prior to enrollment are likely to be highly correlated.

In

Panel D, the estimated effects of total or tenured female faculty are again small and insignificant.
Certainly there is no evidence of a positive effect of the number of female faculty on the probability
that female graduate students are placed at academic departments.
In columns (3) and (4) we instead look at ratios of female faculty to female students.

The

results in Panels A-C now indicate positive but insignificant effects on outcomes for female
graduate students.

Once we control for selection in Panel D the estimated effects of the ratio of total

or tenured female faculty to female graduate students become negative, although still remaining
small and insignificant.

Overall, these results are most consistent with no causal effect of increases

in the ratio of female faculty to female students on outcomes for female graduate students, although
we recognize that our ability to identify such effects in Panel D (and Panel C, to a lesser extent) may
be limited.
Finally, column (5) looks at the mentoring relationship in terms of whether the dissertation
16

chair was female. The estimated effects on the probability of placement at an academic department
are negative for each of the specifications we can estimate, and are marginally significant.21
Overall, the message from Table 3 is that there is no compelling evidence of positive role-model or
mentoring effects when the outcome considered is placement at academic institutions .22
Table 4 turns to the evidence regarding placement at a Ph.D.-granting

department.

Looking

at column (1), the estimated coefficient of the number of female faculty in the third year is negative
but insignificant in all four specifications.

In column (2), the estimated coefficients are also

insignificant, although positive in Panels C and D. Columns (3) and (4) look at ratios of female
faculty to female graduate students, rather than levels. The results are very similar to those in
columns (1) and (2), and in fact in column (3), once we control for selection in Panel D the
estimated effect of the ratio of female faculty to female graduate students has a significant negative
effect on the probability of placement at a Ph.D.-granting

department.

However, the sign is

reversed (although the estimated coefficient is insignificant) when we restrict attention to tenured
female faculty in column (4). Column (5) looks at the mentoring relationship in terms of whether
the dissertation chair was female. The estimated effects on the probability of placement at a Ph. D.granting deptiment
we can estimate.

are relatively small and statistically insignificant for each of the specifications
Overall, the evidence in Table 4 provides no statistically significant evidence of

21For this mentoring variable, there is no corresponding variable for the year prior to
enrollment to include in order to correct for endogenous selection. We could attempt to control
for this selection by including numbers of total or tenured female faculty from the year prior to
enrollment, since this is likely related to the probability of having a female dissertation chair.
When we did this, the qualitative conclusions did not change; results are available from the
authors upon request. Another consideration is that female dissertation chairs are likely to be
younger, on average, than male chairs, given the more recent entry of women into the profession.
To the extent that age of the dissertation chair affects placements positively, the results are biased
against finding evidence of mentoring effects; we did not collect data on the age of the
dissertation chair.
221fwomen are overrepresented in fields with better non-academic
any role-model or mentoring effects on academic placements.
17

options, this could dilute

positive mentoring effects when the outcome considered is placement at Ph.D.-granting
departments.

Indeed, many of the signs of the estimated coefficients are in the opposite direction,

although they are generally not significant.
In Table 5, we instead look at placement of female graduate students in terms of the tier of
the hiring department, based on regression estimates using the numerical tier of the department as
the dependent variable. 23 In this case, there is somewhat stronger evidence of--if anything--negative
role-model or mentoring effects, especially when we look at the total number of women faculty, or
the ratio involving this number.

In the columns corresponding

to these variables (columns(1)

and

(3)), the estimated effects are negative, and significant at the five-or ten-percent level before we
include school dummy variables.

Table 6 looks at a similar outcome, although classifying the

department of placement by NRC rd,

rather than tier. In this table, most of the estimated

coefficients are negative but not statistically significant.

Again, though, for the variables involving

the total female faculty there is some evidence of negative role-model effects; for the ratio of total
female faculty to female students, once school dummy variables are added the t-statistics exceed
1.5.
Thus, using four alternative definitions of outcomes with regard to placement, there is quite
clearly no evidence suggesting that role-model or mentoring relationships--insofar

as they are

reflected in numbers or ratios of female faculty or female dissertation chairs--increase

the success of

female graduate students.
This negative conclusion is moderated somewhat, however, when we measure success in
terms of number of years in graduate school and completion rates. Table 7 reports regression results
using years to completion as the outcome measure.

In columns (1)-(4) most of the estimated

23The results were similar using ordered probit models.
18

coefficients are negative, indicating that female graduate students finish more quickly when there
are more female faculty. The evidence is statistically significant or marginally so when we look at
the number of female faculty (total or tenured).

However, the estimates change once we attempt to

control for selection, with the estimated effects becoming insignificant in columns (1) and (2), but
positive and significant (at the ten-percent level) in column (3). The estimates in column (5) are
positive, indicating that a female chair results, if anything, in a longer time to completion; however,
these estimated coefficients are insignificant.

Thus, this table provides some mixed evidence of

positive female role-model or mentoring effects.
Finally, Table 8 reports results for completion rates. Panels A-D present results measuring
the completion rate using the UAQ data, but taking the other data from our survey. The estimated
effects of the total number of female faculty, in column (1), provide some evidence of positive rolemodel or mentoring effects, as this variable has a sizable and significant (or marginally so) positive
effect on completion rates. The magnitude of the effect implied by the estimates seems large, as the
estimates imply that an increase of one female faculty member increases the completion rate by .1 to
.2. On the other hand, an increase of one female faculty member is a large percentage increase, and,
as explained above, our estimate of the completion rate is rather crude. The evidence is weaker for
the other variables measuring female faculty, and never statistically significant (nor consistently
positive) once year dummy variables are added.
Panels E-H report results using only the UAQ data, for as many observations
in our data set as possible.

on the schools

With the UAQ data, we can only measure the number of female faculty,

not the ratios of faculty to students. 24 Using these data, the estimates are still mostly positive, but

24We chose not to construct a crude measure of this ratio based on the student count used to
construct the completion rate. Classical measurement error in the dependent variable only
creates imprecise estimates, whereas measurement error in independent variables (such as the
ratio of female faculty to female students) creates bias.
19

smaller and no longer significant in any specification.

As an alternative, we used the UAQ data for

the subset of observations used in Panels A-D. The results replicated closely those using our survey
data, indicating that while the results are sensitive to the sample of observations used, they are
robust to using the female faculty variables from either data source (other than persistent differences
in measurement across departments that are captured in the school dummy variables) .25
Finally, completion rates are the one outcome that we can study for male as well as female
graduate students, to look for differential effects of female faculty on male and female students.

For

the most part, the estimated effects were considerably closer to zero for male graduate students,
although generally positive, suggesting that the estimates in Table 8 overstate somewhat the
differential effects of female faculty on the completion rates of female graduate students.2b Thus,
we read the overall results for completion rates as providing at best some limited evidence of
positive role-model or mentoring effects on female graduate students.
An important consideration

with respect to all of the results we have examined is whether

there is sufficient variation in the female faculty variables to permit plausibly-sized
variables on the outcomes we consider to be identified as statistically significant.

effects of these
Our sense is that

we could identifi effects of reasonable magnitudes as statistically significant, especially in the
specifications in Panels A and B of Tables 3-8, which exclude school dummy variables.
standard errors in these tables suggest, for example, that increased probabilities
academic or Ph.D.-granting

The

of placement at

departments would be significant if their magnitudes were in the range

25We also tried averaging the estimated completion rates based on the assumption of five or
six years to completion (since in our data mean years to completion exceeds five years), to
reduce measurement error. In addition, we tried including the outliers for the estimated
completion rates. In these alternative estimations, for a couple of specifications there was
stronger evidence of beneficial effects of female faculty on completion rates. Results are
available from the authors upon request.
2GResults are available from the authors upon request.
20

.04-.08 (or larger), and that effects on NRC rtiings

would be significant if they were in the range

of 6-9. Thus, we regard the results as failing to find significant role-model or mentoring effects not
primarily because of imprecise estimates, but because whatever effects exist are rather small (and
sometimes in the wrong direction).
VII. Conclusions
One potential method to increase the success of women in traditionally-male
fields--including

economics--is

to encourage role-model or mentoring relationships

faculty and female graduate students.
promote such relationships.
students may be another.

academic
between female

Increased hiring of female faculty maybe one way to

Having female faculty serve as dissertation chairs for female graduate
The evidence in this paper addresses the question of whether either of

these strategies results in better outcomes for female graduate students.

The evidence is based on

survey information on female graduate students and faculties of Ph.D.-producing

economics

departments, covering the mid-1 970s to the early 1990s.
With respect to first jobs, the empirical evidence provides no support for the hypothesis that
outcomes for female graduate students are improved by adding female faculty members, or by
having a female dissertation chair. This is true in relatively “demanding” specifications
identifi the effects of female faculty or dissertation chairs from within-school
and also in specifications that exploit cross-sectional

in which we

variation (over time),

as well as time-series variation.

It is also true

whether or not we attempt to control for selection of female graduate students into different
departments based on the representation

of women on the faculty prior to students’ enrollment.

However, with respect to time to complete graduate school, and the completion rate, there is
some limited evidence of beneficial effects of female faculty members.
across all specifications,

This evidence is not robust

but we think there is sufficient evidence to believe that there is a

reasonable possibility that this effect exists.
21

We do not think that our relatively unsupportive

evidence on role-model or mentoring

effects should be interpreted as implying that role-model or mentoring relationships

between female

graduate students and female faculty hold no promise for improving outcomes for female graduate
students.

Our evidence does not rule out the possibility that an explicit mentoring program may

have some benefits.

In addition, our evidence does not permit us to rule out the possibility that

adding female faculty or having a female dissertation chair improves the training of female graduate
students, but that such students suffer from discrimination
faculty “recommenders,”

in the labor market against their female

so that any potential benefits on placement of female students are offset.

Evidence on these latter two questions requires additional research.
Despite the remaining questions, we think the lack of evidence that adding female faculty or
increasing the proportion of female graduate students with female dissertation chairs improve
placements for female graduate students, and the modest evidence of beneficial effects on
completion, is informative.

With our data, we cannot tell whether this generally weak evidence

arises because such changes do not spur constructive mentoring relationships,

because mentoring

relationships with female faculty are not relatively more productive, or because there are offsetting
responses to the same changes that create constructive mentoring relationships.

Nonetheless,

the

evidence indicates that relatively simple solutions to the lagging success of women in economics-such as an emphasis on hiring female faculty, and arranging for female-female

mentoring

relationships via the dissertation chair--may be largely ineffective, especially when it comes to
placing female graduate students in more prestigious jobs.

22

Adams, Howard G. 1992. “Mentoring: An Essential Factor in the Doctoral Process for Minority
Students.” Mimeograph, National Consortium for Graduate Degrees for Minorities in Engineering
and Science.
Attiyeh, Gregory, and Richard Attiyeh. 1994. “Testing for Bias in Graduate School Admissions. ”
Mimeograph, University of Arizona.
Barbezat, Debra A. 1992. “The Market for New Ph.D. Economists. ” Journal of Economic
Education, Vol. 23, No. 3, Summer, pp. 262-76.
Berg, Helen M., and Marianne A. Ferber. 1983. “Men and Women Graduate Students: Who
Succeeds and Why?” Journal of Higher Education, Vol. 54, No. 6, November/December, pp. 62948.
Broder, Ivy E. 1993. “Professional Achievements and Gender Differences Among Academic
Economists.” Economic Inauirv, Vol. 31, No. 1, January, pp. 116-27.
Canes, Brandice J., and Harvey S. Rosen. 1995. “Following in Her Footsteps? Faculty Gender
Composition and Women’s Choices of College Majors.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 48, No. 3, April, pp. 486-504.
Committee on the Economic Status of Women in the Economics Profession Newsletter.
1994, p. 19.

Spring,

Constantine, Jill M. 1995. “The Effect of Attending Historically Black Colleges and Universities on
Future Wages of Black Students.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, April, pp.
531-46.
Douthitt, Robin. 1993. “University of Wisconsin-Madison Women Faculty Mentoring Program
Training Manual. ” Mimeograph, University of Wisconsin-Madison.
Dynan, Karen E., and Cecilia Elana Rouse. 1995. “The Underrepresentation of Women in
Economics: A Study of Undergraduate Economics Students.” NBER Working Paper No. 5299,
Ehrenberg, Ronald G. 1995. “Role Models in Education.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review,
Vol. 48, No. 3, April, pp. 482-5.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., Daniel D. Goldhaber, and Dominic J. Brewer. 1995. “Do Teachers’ Race,
Gender, and Ethnicity Matter? Evidence from the National Educational Longitudinal Study of
1988.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, April, pp. 547-61.
Ehrenberg, Ronald G., and Donna S. Rothstein. 1994. “Do Historically Black Institutions of Higher
Education Confer Unique Advantages on Black Students? An Initial Analysis.” In Ronald G.
Ehrenberg, cd., Choices and Consequences: Contem~or arv Policv Issues in Education (Ithaca, NY:
ILR Press), pp. 89-139.

Elkiss, Helen. 1995. ’’Mentors and Proteges: Women in Union Leadership.’’ Mimeograph,
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Etzkowitz, Henry, Carol Kemelgor, Michael Neuschatz, Brian Uzzi, and Joseph Alonzo. 1994. “The
Paradox of Critical Mass for Women in Science.” Science, Vol. 266, October 7, pp. 51-4.
Gilbert, L. A. 1985. “Dimensions of Same-Gender S~dent-Faculty
Roles, Vol. 12, Nos. 1/2, pp. 111-23.

Role-Model Relationships.”M

Girgus, Joan S., et al. 1992. “Program for Recruitment and Retention of Women Faculty in Science
and Engineering: A Report to the Dean of Faculty Robert C. Gunning. ” Mimeograph, Princeton
University.
Gries, David, and Dorothy Marsh. 1992. “The 1989-90 Taulbee Survey. ” Communications
ACM, Vol. 35, No. 1, January, pp. 131-43.

of the

Hansen, W. Lee. 1991. “The Education and Training of Economics Doctorates: Major Findings of
the Executive Secretary of the American Economic Association’s Commission on Graduate
Education in Economics.” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 29, September, pp. 1054-87.
Horn, Patricia. 1994. “Walls Are Falling for Women in Economics, But Slowly.” CSWEP
Newsletter, Winter, pp. 8-9, reprinted from The Christian Science Monitor.
Johnson, Nancy Brown, and Terri A. Scandura. 1994. “The Effect of Mentorship and Sex-Role
Style on Male-Female Earnings.” Industrial Relations, Vol. 33, No. 2, April, pp. 263-74.
Kahn, Shulamit. 1995. “Women in the Economics Profession.” Journal of Economic Pers~ectives,
Vol. 9, No. 4, Fall, pp. 193-205.
McMillen, Daniel P., and Larry D. Singell. 1994. “Gender Differences in First Jobs for
Economists.” Southern Economic Journal, Vol. 60, No. 3, January, pp. 701-714.
Moore, William, Robert Newman, John Raisian, and R. William Thomas. 1983. “A Quality
Adjustment Model of the Academic Labor Market: The Case of Economists.” Economic Incluirv,
April, pp. 241-54.
Newby, Timothy J., and Ashlyn Heide. 1992. “The Value of Mentoring. ” Performance Improvement
~,

Vol. 5, No. 4, pp. 2-15.

Rothstein, Donna S. 1995. “Do Female Faculty Influence Female Students’ Educational and Labor
Market Attainments?” Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 515-30.
Shelburn, Marsha R., and Patsy G. Lewellyn. 1995. “Gender Bias in Doctoral Programs in
Economics.” The Journal of Economic Education, Vol. 26, No. 4, Fall, pp. 373-82.
Singell, Larry D., and Joe A. Stone. 1993. “Gender Differences in Ph.D. Economists’ Careers.”
Contem~or ary Policy Issues, Vol. 11, No. 4, October, pp. 95-106.
Solnick, Sara J. 1995. “Changes in Women’s Majors from Entrance to Graduation at Women’s and

Coeducational

Colleges.” ~,

Vol. 48, No. 3, April, pp. 505-14.

Tidball, M. Elizabeth. 1980. “Women’s College and Women Achievers Revisited.” Signs, Vol. 5,
No. 3, Spring, pp. 504-17.
Tolbert, Pamela S., Tal Simons, Alice Andrews, and Jaehoon Rhee. 1995, “The Effects of Gender
Composition in Academic Departments on Faculty Turnover.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, pp. 562-79.
Willis, Rachel A., and Paul J. Pieper. 1992. “Academic Placements of New Doctorates in
Economics. ” Mimeograph, University of North Carolina.

Aupendix:

Survey Documents

November 2, 1994
Dear Professor
As you probably know, there is growing interest in the role of mentoring in the
performance of female Ph.D. students. To study this question, I am collecting data on the
presence of women in the faculty and performance of female graduate students, measured in
terms of both job placement and time to complete the program. I am attempting to collect data
from all Ph.D. granting departments in the U. S., and sincerely hope that you can help me.
Enclosed are two forms that a department administrator should be able to complete
quickly. One form asks about the number and tenure rank of female professors. We would like
to get information back to 1973, but even if it is not possible to go back that far, any number of
years of data would be helpfi-d. The second form asks for limited information on female doctoral
students. Again we would ideally like to get information back to 1973, if possible. There is no
need to include students begiming your program in 1991 or afterwards.
The identity of individual departments will be strictly confidential.
The research that
circulates will simply state that all Ph.D.-granting programs were surveyed, and a certain number
responded. No data will be reported at the level of the individual department.
Only means,
regression results, etc., will be reported, The raw data will not be circulated.
Again I hope that you can find someone to provide these data. Naturally, I will be happy
to share the results of the study with you. Please have your department administrator contact me
if there are any questions. Also, please supply the name of a person whom we can contact with
questions, if necessary.
Sincerely,

David Neumark
Professor of Economics

FACULTY
DEPARTMENT

SUCCESSION
OF ECONOMICS

AT:
YEAR

1973
1974
1975
1976
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995

# FEMALE

# FEMALE

FACULTY

FACULTY

OF FACULTY

WITH TENURE

WITHOUT

( MALE&

TENURE

FEMALE)

TOTAL #

FEMALE GRADUATE
DEPARTMENT
YEAR
BEGAN
PROGRAM

Us.
CITIZEN
YES/NO

AT:
MATH
GRE
SCORE

STUDENT SUCCESSION
OF ECONOMICS

FEMALE
CHAIR OF
THESIS
COMMITTEE
YES/NO

YEAR
OF
INITIAL
JOB
PLACEMENT

INITIAL
JOB PLACEMENT

.

m.

m :. .
:

I

(

Table 1: DescriptiveStatistics

Tier of GraduateDepartment:

Academicplacement
Placementat Ph.D.grantingdepartment
Tierof hiring
department(l-7)
hiring
department

Rank of

Numberof years
in graduateschool

Student’s Beeinnin~

Year:

Full Sam~le
(1)
.67

Tiers 5&6
[Hiphest)
(2)
.64

Tiers 3&4
(3)
.68

Tiers l&2
(4)
.71

1973-1980
(5)
.61

1981-1990
(6)
.70

Total # Ohs.
(7)
459

.53

.65

.54

.34

,47

.56

290

2.66
(1.95)

3.29
(2.18)

2.58
(1.83)

1.76
(1.25)

2.29
(1.81)

2.80
(1.99)

286

67.1
(30.1)

74.9
(28,1)

66.6
(29.3)

44,3
(27.0)

63.3
(3 1.4)

68.3
(29.7)

134

5.69
(1.71)

5,61
(1.60)

5.70
(1.91)

5.78
(1.62)

6.19
(2.14)

5.47
(1 .44)

459

.57
(.57)

,60
(,54)

.59
(.63)

,53
(.45)

,40
(.46)

.65
(.60)

86

Numberof female
faculty

2.35
(1.31)

2.50
(1,22)

2,49
(1.57)

2.01
(1,03)

2,07
(1.40)

2.44
(1.27)

362

Numberof tenured
femalefaculty

.84
(.96)

.71
(.92)

.99
(1.19)

.84
(.70)

.52
(.87)

.95
(.97)

362

1.23
(1.16)

.82
(.79)

1.67
(1.49)

1.27
(.98)

1.10
(1,11)

1.28
(1.18)

362

,47
(,71)

.21
(.33)

.74
(1.01)

.52
(,55)

.40
(.79)

.50
(.69)

362

Femaledissertation
chair

.06

.06

.05

.07

.06

.06

458

U.S. Citizen

,69

.73

.69

.62

.81

.64

459

Completionrate

Femalefaculty/
femalestudents
Tenuredfemale
faculty/femalestudents

MathGRE
Score

664.1
(82.8)

692.3
(66.2)

659.3
(83.0)

622.4
(90,1)

644.9
(83.4)

670.9
(81.7)

306

Graduate
Dept.Size

28.9
(10,0)

35.7
(11.2)

28.2
(8.3)

23.9
(7.0)

26.8
(9.4)

29.6
(10.1)

253

Department tier is based on the rankings in Hansen (1991); a graduate department rank of six indicates a school with a Ph.D.
program of the highest quality, while a rank of one indicates a school with a Ph.D. program of the lowest quality. Hiring tier ranges
from one to seven, with a lowest rank (equal to one) added for schools without Ph.D. programs, and the other ranks incremented
by one. Department rank is based on the 1993 NRC rankings of the scholarly quality of program faculty. The rankings are inverted
so that the top department gets the highest ranking. Estimates in this table are based on the maximum number of observations for
which the variable is available for the regressions reported in the tables that follow. The completion rate is based on UAQ data
for the subsarnple of observations also appearing in our data set. The variables involving numbers of female faculty are based on
students’ third years. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses for most variables, except for binomial variables.

Table 3: Probability of Academic Placement

Number of
Female Facultv
(1)
A.

Number of
Tenured
Female Facr.dtv
(2)

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)

Tenured
Female Faculty/
Female
Female Student Dissertation Chair
(4)
(5)

Controls for U.S. Citizen,
Dept. Tier, GRE Score,
and Dept. Size:

.004
(.02)

.02
(.03)

.03
(.02)

.05
(.04)

-.14
(.09)

B.

Year dummy
variables added:

-.004
(.02)

.01
(.03)

.02
(.02)

.04
(.04)

-.14
(.09)

C.

School dummy
variables added:

-.003
(.03)

.03
(.05)

.01
(.03)

.01
(.06)

-.15
(.09)

D.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s fust year added:

-.01
(.03)

.02
(.06)

-.02
(,04)

-.003
(.08)

...

.04
(.03)

.06
(.07)

.06
(,05)

.05
(.10)

...

Variables prior to first year:

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for descriptions of dependent variable, control variables, sample, and estimates. Female faculty are
measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panel D, where measures of number of female faculty and female faculty/female
student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate
estimation. There are 362 observations with data on the number of female faculty and the female faculty/female student ratio (with
somewhat fewer available in Panel D), and 458 with data on sex of dissertation chair.

Table 4: Probability

of Placement at a Ph.D.-Granting

Department

Number of
Female Facultv
(1)

Number of
Tenured
Female Facultv
(2)

Controls for U.S. Citizen,
Dept. Tier, GRE Score,
and Dept. Size:

-.04
(.03)

-.01
(.04)

-.04
(.03)

-,01
(,05)

-.03
(.16)

B,

Year dummy
variables added:

-.04
(.03)

-.02
(.04)

-.04
(.03)

-.0002
(.05)

-.08
(.16)

C.

School dummy
variables added:

-.01
(.04)

.08
(.08)

-.03
(.05)

.07
(.08)

.05
(.1 8)

D.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s first year added:

-.04
(.05)

.08
(.10)

-.16
(.07)

.15
(.14)

...

.04
(.04)

-.03
(.11)

.15
(.08)

-.22
(.17)

A,

Variables prior to first year:

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)

Tenured
Female Facultv/
Female
Female Student Dissertation Chair
(4)
(5)

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for descriptions of dependent variable, control variables, sample,
and estimates. Female facultv. are
.
measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panel D, where measures of number of female faculty and female faculty/female
student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate
estimation. There are 235 observations with data on the number of female faculty and the female faculty/female student ratio (with
somewhat fewer available in Panel D), and 289 with data on sex of dissertation chair.

Table 5: Tier of Hiring Department

Number of

Tenured
Female Facultv/
Female
Female Student Dissertation Chair
(4)
(5)

Number of
Female Facultv
(1)

m
Female Facul~
(2)

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)

Controls for U.S. Citizen,
Dept. Tier, GRE Score,
and Dept. Size:

-.18
(.10)

-,10
(.14)

-,20
(.10)

-.12
(.17)

.08
(.57)

Year dummy
variables added:

-.17
(.10)

-.16
(.14)

-.18
(.10)

-.11

(.17)

.002
(.57)

c.

School dummy
variables added:

-.06
(.14)

.14
(.27)

-.14
(.14)

,10
(,28)

.24
(.60)

D.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s first year added:

-.20
(.15)

.05
(.31)

-.50
(.19)

.33
(.42)

.09
(.14)

-.10
(.36)

.46
(.22)

-.60
(.52)

A.

B,

Variables prior to first year:

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for descriptions of dependent variable, control variables, sample, and estimates. Female faculty are
measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panel D, where measures of number of female faculty and female faculty/female
student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate
estimation. There are 230 observations with data on the number of female faculty and the female faculty/female student ratio (with
somewhat fewer available in Panel D), and 285 with data on sex of dissertation chair.

Table 6: Rank of Hiring Department

Number of
Female Facultv
(1)
A,

Number of
Tenured
Female Facultv
(2)

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)

Tenured
Female Faculty/
Female
Female Student Dissertation Chair
(4)
(5)

Controls for U.S. Citizen,
Dept. Tier, GRE Score,
and Dept. Size:

-1.83
(2.58)

2.79
(3.67)

-3.50
(3.16)

,51
(4.82)

-1.25
(14.34)

B,

Year dummy
variables added:

-2.85
(2.77)

1.82
(3.91)

-4.97
(3.53)

-.12
(5.18)

.04
(14.91)

c,

School dummy
variables added:

-2.52
(3.78)

-.87
(9.01)

-8.97
(5.66)

-10.05
(1 1.72)

-8,73
(15,68)

D.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s first year added:

-2.76
(3.99)

-6.70
(10.46)

-11.53
(7.42)

-7.34
(17.42)

,.,

-.75
(3.55)

11.64
(9.34)

2.84
(6.28)

-4.85
(18.57)

.

Variables prior to first year:

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for descriptions of dependent variable, control variables, sample, and estimates, Female faculty are
measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panel D, where measures of number of female faculty and female faculty/female
student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate
estimation. There are 106 observations with data on the number of female faculty and the female faculty/female student ratio (with
somewhat fewer available in Panel D), and 133 with data on sex of dissertation chair.

Table 7: Number of Years in Graduate School

Number of
Female Facultv
(1)

Number of
Tenured
Female Facultv
(2)

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)

Controls for U.S. Citizen,
Dept. Tier, GRE Score,
and Dept. Size:

-.20
(.08)

-.07
(.11)

-.14
(.08)

-.15
(.13)

.40
(.34)

B.

Year dummy
variables added:

-.17
(.08)

-.08
(.11)

-.15
(.08)

-.16
(.13)

.43
(,33)

c.

School dummy
variables added:

-.22
(.09)

-.52
(.18)

-.15
(.10)

-.29
(.20)

.30
(.32)

D.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s fust year added:

-.03
(,09)

-.31
(.1 9)

.20
(.12)

-.02
(.26)

.

-.23
(.09)

-.37
(.22)

-.37
(,15)

-.30
(.33)

,..

A.

Variables prior to first year:

Tenured
Female Facultv/
Female
Female Student Dissertation Chair
(4)
(5)

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for descriptions of dependent variable, control variables, sample, and estimates. Female faculty are
measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panel D, where measures of number of female faculty and female faculty/female
student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate
estimation. There are 362 observations with data on the number of female faculty and the female faculty/female student ratio (with
somewhat fewer available in Panel D), and 458 with data on sex of dissertation chair.

Table 8: Completion

Number of
~

Rates

Number of
Tenured
Female FaculW
(2)
.13
(.08)

Female Facultv/
Female Student
(3)
.05
(.06)

Tenured
Female Facultv/
Female Student
(4)
.04
(,08)

A

Controls for Dept. Tier
and Dept. Size:

(1)
.20
(.06)

B.

Year dummy variables
added:

.16
(.07)

.09
(.09)

.02
(.07)

-.004
(,09)

variables added:

.12
(.08)

-.03
(.17)

-.01
(.08)

-.18
(.15)

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables fi-om year
prior to student’s first year added:

.12
(.08)

-.02
(.17)

.05
(.11)

-.14
(.18)

Variables prior to first year:

.01
(.08)

-.06
(,24)

-,12
(,11)

-.12
(.25)

E.

Controls for Dept. Tier
and Dept. Size, only UAQ data:

.01
(,04)

.01
(,04)

.

.,.

F.

Year dummy variables
added, only UAQ data:

,02
(.04)

.01
(,04)

.

.

G.

School dummy
variables added, only UAQ data:

.02
(.05)

-.05
(.10)

H.

Same as C, but with role-model/
mentoring variables from year
prior to student’s first year added,
only UAQ data

.01

-.08
(.11)

.

(.05)
.04
(.05)

.08
(.11)

.

c. School dummy

D.

Variables prior to first year:

,..

,..

See notes to Tables 1 and 2 for description of dependent variable, control variables, sample, and estimates. Data in
Panels A-D are based on combined survey and UAQ data, with71 observations. Data in Panels E-H use only the
UAQ data for the same set of schools, with 155 observations in Panels E-G, and less in Panels D and H. Female
faculty are measured as of the student’s third year, except in Panels D and H, where measures of number of female
faculty and female faculty/female student ratio from the year prior to the student’s first year are also included as
controls. Each estimate reported is from a separate estimation.

