NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ADMiNISTRATIVE COSTS IN PUBLIC
AND PRIVATE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS

Olivia S. Mitchell

Working Paper 5734

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1996

Presented at the NBER Conference on Social Security Privatization, August 1996. Useftil comments

were provided by Jonathan Dickson, Robert Luciani, Phillip Lussier, Dennis Mahoney, Jerry
Rosenbloom, and William Shipman, though none of these persons is responsible for errors or
omissions. Opinions are solely those of the author and not of the institutions with whom she is
affiliated. This paper is part of NBER's research program in Aging. Any opinions expressed are
those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1996 by Olivia S. Mitchell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
is given to the source.

notice,

NBER Working Paper 5734
August 1996

ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS IN PUBLIC
AND PRIVATE RETIREMENT SYSTEMS

ABSTRACT

This paper collects and analyzes available information on administrative costs associated
with public and private retirement systems. We explore expenses of the US social security system
and compare these with data from national systems in other countries. We find that administration

costs of publicly-run social security systems vary a great deal across countries and institutional
settings. A key factor influencing public old-age program costs is the system's scale: plans with
more assets and more participants are less expensive. We also investigate expenses reported by US

pension plans and mutual ftinds, programs seen by many as alternative mechanisms for managing
retirement saving. Based on an analysis of costs associated with retirement savings plans managed
by financial institutions, we conclude that privately managed old-age retirement programs would be

somewhat more costly to operate than current publicly-managed programs, depending on the
program's specific design. Nevertheless these costs would be accompanied by new services for
participants.

Olivia S. Mitchell
Department of Insurance and Risk Management
304 CPC, 3641 Locust Walk
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

1

Administrative Costs

in Public and Private Retirement Systems
"[L]iterally every dollar which is unnecessarily or uneconomically expended on
administration is a dollar which could otherwise go to the plan participants." (Hoexter
1984: 134)

"...[l]he question may well be raised as to whether the administrative expenses are too low,
with the result that the insured persons are not receiving adequate service... [Social
security] beneficiaries deserve better service and could well be willing to bear the slight
additional amount needed" (Myers 1992: 16).

Looking across countries, government-managed old-age social security systems differ widely

in the level of benefits they provide, their methods of financing, and their overall extent of
redistributiveness. Despite these differences, a feature common to most of these old-age income

programs is that they are heading toward insolvency. As a result, there is increasing interest in
and support for moving toward a mostly-private retirement system, one which relies at least in part

on investing retirement assets in private capital markets.'
This paper addresses a possible concern arising from a move toward a privatized retirement
system, namely whether administrative costs in a privately managed system would be expected to

be higher or lower than those found in national, centrally-run social security systems. The
particular focus we take is that of the US social security system, asking the following questions:

• What are the administrative costs of the current US retirement system?
• Does the US spend too much on administering its old-age social security system?
'What are administrative costs of prominent alternatives to social security systems?
• Would a privately-managed retirement system cost more or less than the current old-age
income system?
We analyze available evidence on costs associated with the US and other national social

security systems, and compare them to expenses reported by various other institutions that might
be seen as alternative means to supply retirement protection.
To preview the conclusions, we find that administrative costs of publicly-run social security

systems vary greatly across countries and institutional settings. Some are less expensive to manage
than others, and it is clear that scale matters: larger publicly-managed old-age programs cost less

than do smaller public plans. It is also clear that quality varies across programs: some public

sscst.doc - 5/18/96 - Mitchell

2

systems have low expenses, but deliver few andlor poor quality services. While public system
administrative costs could in some cases be reduced, cutting expenses cannot save an insolvent
plan, and cost pressure could lessen service quality. We also examine the possibility of replacing a

publicly managed retirement system with privately-managed alternatives in the United States, and
conclude that a privately managed old-age retirement saving program would probably be more

costly than the current publicly-managed social security program. Nevertheless, a privately
managed system is likely to offer better and more diverse services in exchange for these higher
costs, including the opportunity to self-direct pension asset investments, the possibility of investing

in higher-return assets, the likelihood of more frequent reporting to participants, and possibly

greater satisfaction with the system as a whola

I, An Overview of Government-Run Social Security System Administrative Costs
It is useful to begin by recamng the objectives of a national social security system before

hoping to understand whether the costs associated with managing one can be altered or reduced.
Looking across countries, it is clear that two (at times competing) objectives are common to most

countries' programs: providing earnings replacement for retirees, and providing welfare support for

the elderly indigent. In this section we first review available data on publicly-run, governmentally
managed social security systems from developed and developing countries, and then we turn to a
more detailed look at the US old-age retirement income system. 2 Finally, we offer an evaluation of

the factors that influence social security administration costs in a multivariate framework.

A. International Perspectives on Social Security Costs
Social security systems around the world approach the twin goals of welfare and earnings

insurance in numerous ways, and with weights that differ across countries. For instance, in the
United States, the social security program concentrates mainly on old-age, survivor, and disability
benefits, while in Europe, medical and unemployment insurance programs are also included under
the social security umbrella.3 The form of the benefit varies a great deal across countries too; some
follow a defmed benefit formula, wherein the benefit payment is linked to years of service and

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

3

earned income, while others follow a defined contribution approach, tying payments to assets

accumulated in an investment account.
Because our focus is on the expenses associated with running a retirement system, it is
useful to define social security administrative expenses as the costs of providing these retirement

benefits. That is, we focus not on the tax andlor investment revenue used to pay benefits, but
rather on the expenses jncurred in collecting the funds, managing the records, investing the money,
determining eligibility, and paying out benefits.
An economic measure of this concept would include the full resource costs of producing

these services, which is not necessarily the charges that government agencies report. A discrepancy
sometimes occurs because government services are often not valued at their economic resource cost
--

particularly when public agencies do not purchase their inputs in a competitive market.
As an example, many governmentally-managed social security systems use public buildings

and land. Reported social security administration costs under such a system will not reflect
economic scarcity values. Nor will reported public sector provision costs be an accurate estimate of

the likely costs private sector counterparts would charge in performing the same services.
Similarly, government contracts to install computer systems are awarded on a non-competitive
basis in many countries, and in other cases the public pension agency may obtain its mail and
telephone services at a subsidized rate. Depreciation and fringe benefits often do not appear on a
government agency's budget, and costs of collecting the payroll tax are often shouldered by the

central tax authority.
For all these reasons, publicly-managed old-age programs would be expected to appear less

expensive than they actually are, relative to privately managed plans. Conversely, when services

are contracted through private firms, administrative costs wifi probably appear higher than in
public plans because market prices for inputs will have to be paid. As a result, the resulting
public/private cost differential may be more apparent than real.4
Keeping these caveats in mind, we next review reported social security administration costs
around the world from almost fifty developed and developing countries.5 Table 1 reveals that

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

4

countries in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) spent an order of

magnitude less on social security costs at the end of the 1980's -- 3 percent of their annual system
budgets - - as compared to the developing nations of the Latin American and Caribbean region

(LAC), where administrative costs ran 28 percent of annual expenditures.
One of the least costly programs on the list in Table 1 is the US old-age program, whose
reported administration costs stood at less than one percent in 1990 (0.7%) of old-age benefit

expenditures after falling by a third during the 1980's. By contrast, the LAC countries with the
lowest reported administration costs as a fraction of benefit expenditures included Argentina, with
reported administration costs for its public plan at 2.3% of benefit expenditures, Costa Rica with
4.8% of benefit expenditures devoted to administration costs under the old-age and disability
insurance, and Chile's public plan with an 8% expense rate overall (Sunden and Mitchell 1993).

Part of the explanation for the marked differences in social security administrative costs
across countries is that program objectives vary internationally, in terms of the particular mix of
social assistance (benefits tied to need) versus insurance (benefit tied to contributions), the degree to

which the programs are government-run versus privately-managed, and even the types of payments
offered, including cash and in-kind transfers to the elderly, to survivors and the disabled, the sick,
new mothers, the unemployed, and so forth. For example, in both Argentina and Chile the range of
government programs is wide and includes old-age, survivor and disability benefits, cash sickness

and maternity benefits, medical care and work injury coverage, an unemployment insurance
system, and a family allowance plan. In Costa Rica, by contrast, unemployment and family
allowance plans are not included in the social security system design. For this reason, cross-

national data on administrative costs are somewhat treacherous to interpret6
A related issue is how one should handle measurement problems that arise when assessing
social security costs. Ideally, the administration costs would be normalized by a direct measure of
the service being provided -- namely, social security administration. Unfortunately there is no

simple measure of this multidimensional service. Normalizing by total benefit expenditures, as in

sscst.doc . 8/18196 - Mitchell

5

Table 1, tends to make costs look lower in more generous systems, and also in mature systems with

many beneficiaries versus contributors. Conversely, costs appear lower in systems paying high
benefit levels, when one normalizes program expenditures by beneficiaries. Normalizing by assets
is meaningless when the publicly managed plan has few assets (as in pay-as-you-go systems),

though this is the statistic of choice often given by private pension plans and mutual funds.

Normalizing program expenditures by per capita income tnd to make richer countries with more
generous programs look more cost-effective. Clearly there is no perfect, nor universally accepted,

normalization method to use in reporting retirement system costs.
At least one useful approximation to a measure of social security administration services is

the number of clients a system serves. In other words, one could sum contributors and
beneficiaries, ideally appropriately weighted to reflect the relative contribution of each client type to

the administrative service demands placed on the social security agency. Lacking a simple,
defensible method of assigning weights to client types, the common practice is to simply assign
equal weights.

The impact of using differential cost measures across social security administering agencies

is not trivial. Table 2 offers data on administrative retirement system costs in Chile, Costa Rica,
Argentina, and the United States normalized by fmancial flows (either contribution or benefit
payments). Data on four public plans were developed by Reid and Mitchell (1995), namely Chile's
public sector INP system, Costa Rica's public CCSS system, Argentina's publicly-run ANSES

system, and the US OASI system. Across these four public systems, administrative costs range
from about 1 to 7% of benefit payments, with the lowest being for the U.S. OASI program.7 In
addition, data are provided on Chile's private sector pension agencies, known as the AFP funds.

These have been criticized as having high administrative costs, and certainly Table 2 indicates that
they are the most costly of those shown, with 1993 administration costs equaling 17% of
contributions. However it should be noted that these AFP costs have fallen steadily from a high of
25-30% of contributions at the system's inception in the early 1980's.

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

6

To show how different normalization methods change perceptions of system
expenses, Table 3 offers other variants. During the early 199€Ys, for example, expenses under

Chile's privately-managed AFP program were roughly equivalent to those incurred by that
country's public social security system (INP) on an active contributor basis -- around US$50 per

year. The figures would be even lower if one used total rather than active contributors, since there
are many inactive accounts under the Chilean AFP system. On a total contributor basis, Chile's
privately managed pension plan administrative costs stood at between US$23 and $45, only two-

thirds the level of Chile's public INP per-member costs (US$l992). Clearly, privately managed
retirement systems are not necessarily more expensive than their public sector counterparts.

Another interesting finding from Table 3 concerns the wide range of pubhc system costs. At

the low end of the range are US retirement system costs at $12-$l4 per covered worker per year,
and Costa Rica's system reported expenses are less than $10.10 At the upper end among the cases

studied is the Argentinean public system, where annual per member costs total about $70 ($1992)."

In any event, the Chilean public as well as private system figures appear to be about midrange in
absolute dollars, and certainly not outliers in terms of available data. 12

Some lessons may be drawn from the discussion thus far. First, data problems limit
comparisons that can be made across systems, and no cost normalization is ideal for all purposes.

When comparing costs across countries, it is likely that normalization by the number of participants
comes closest to capturing trends in the levels of administrative expenses, though it cannot account
for differences in the services provided -- a flaw shared by all the typical normalization procedures.
Second, it would be useful to have service-specific cost-accounting, identifying the specific functions

performed by a social security system, as well as the costs incurred in undertaking them.

B. A Closer Look at US Social Security System Functions and Administrative Expenses
The US social security system is a large and complex institution. Its four main programs
include the Old Age (OA) retirement program, the Disability Insurance (DI) program, the Hospital
Insurance (Hi) program, and the Supplemental Medical Insurance (SMI) program (SSA 1995).

sscst.doc - 8/18196 - Mitchell

7

Most proposals to privatize the retirement portion of the social security system have focused almost

exclusively on the OASI program, and hence the discussion here will be mainly concerned with

costs of administering that program. In contrast, the Medicare and disability components will not
concern us further here except when data limitations require it.
Turning to Table 4, it is useful to gain a working familiarity with the size and scope of what

is generally known as the retirement component of the social security system in the US. The
OASDI program is a mandatory, virtually universal program, collecting tax revenues in 1994 from
some 139 million workers annually, and paying benefits to 37 million retired plus 6 million disabled
persons each year. OASDI system revenues in 1994 totaled $380B , or about 12% of covered

earnings ($2,700 in contributions and interest per covered worker per year in 1994). OASDI
system benefits came to $3l7B in 1994, paying an annual retired worker benefit averaging $8,400 - approximately 35% of covered payroll -- and a disabled worker benefit of about $7,900. Because

the nation's social security system is mostly a pay-as-you-go account, the difference between system

revenues and annual outlays is quite narrow. The excess revenue has been deposited into so-called
trust funds projected to grow and then be depleted as the baby boom cohort ages. In 1994 the OASI
Trust Fund amounted to only about 125% of one year's annual outlays or $2,270 on a per-

participant basis. Thus the OASI Trust Fund could not guarantee a robust flow of retirement
income if it were to be allocated among participants covered by the system today, contrary to some
popular opinion.

In approaching the question of how expensive the current social security system is to
administer, Table 4 shows that costs totaled $ 1GB in 1994. This may be broken down to an annual
$12 per covered worker (or $9 per participant including retirees). As a fraction of benefits paid,
these administrative costs equaled 0.6% of benefits paid, or 0.4% of contributions. Computed
administrative costs as a fraction of system assets would amount to 0.39%, or 39 basis points;

though this computation is the usual one reported for mutual funds, it is meaningless to report
figures this way since the system is mostly unfunded.'3

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

8

One fact to point out regarding social security administrative costs is that they have

apparently fallen over time quite substantially. This pattern is partly explained by the fact that as
a system grows, fixed costs can be spread over larger participant pools, and partly by the fact that

benefit payouts and retiree numbers rose over time. Robert Myers (1992) traces the time path of
administrative expenses since the social security program's inception, and concludes that costs in

the early days of the program were over ten times greater than they are now. His analysis used
total OASDHJ costs, which during the 1940-44 period amounted to 22% of benefits; at the beginning

of the l99Us these total costs stood at just 1% of benefits paid (Myers 1992: 16). This trend
conceals across-program differences, however (Table 5). Costs for the old-age and survivors'
program were halved between 1980 and 1994, faIling from 1.07% of benefits paid to 0.59%. In

contrast, administrative expenses for the DI program rose substantially over the same period, from
2% to 2.7% of benefits. It seems fair to conclude that the retirement component of the social
security system has become more cost-effective over the period, but that the disability program has
not.'4

A different approach to measuring costs under the US retirement system is to assess the
ways in which the system allocates its administrative expenditures (Mitchell and Sunden 1993). It
is probably not surprising to learn that the OASI system devotes the lion's share -- 93% - - of its

administration expenses to the benefit function. This benefit function entails determination of
eligibility for prospective retirees, spouses, and survivor recipients, along with actual payment of
benefits. Because most of the payroll tax revenue is collected by the Internal Revenue Service, a
relatively small amount -- on the order of 7% of administrative expenses - - is devoted to revenue

collection. In this sense, the social security system benefits from substantial externalities by
piggybacking on the IRS collection mechanisms and enforcement structure. Finally, a tiny fraction
of expenses - - less than one one-hundredth of a percent - - is currently allocated to the money

management function. This is because the social security system's Trust Funds are by law required

to be invested in special issue Treasury Bills. Clearly under current regulations, there is no need

sscst.cloc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

9

for a large financial management staff, and the system's costs are held down because of this
condition.

II. Determinants of Social Security Retirement System Administrative Expenses
A. Measuring Inputs and Outputs
The question of whether social security expenses are at the "right" level (or too high or low)

is a difficult question to address, since often a nation's social security system is run as a government

monopoly producing outputs that are not competitively priced As a result, it is difficult to
determine whether levels of output produced, costs incurred, and services generated by the
government agency are comparable to or differ from what one might anticipate if the system were

operated by the private sector.
As an example, the US social security retirement program currently provides benefits which

are in part earnings insurance and in part rethstributive welfare payments. It is debatable whether
a private market could, and would, substitute for a mandatory system with an equally strong
redistributive bent, particularly if participation were voluntary (Mitchell and Zeldes 1996). If one
thought that private producers could replicate the social insurance program, then private sector
costs could be used to compare with government costs, in order to assess whether the government

program was paying an appropriate level of administrative expenses. On the other hand, if no
private group could replicate the government program, it might be impossible to ascertain whether

current levels of administrative costs are equal to those that would prevail in a competitive market.
In addition, of course, social security system expenses should properly be assessed in the
context of a model which specifies production inputs, constraints, and the available technology with

which these can be combined to produce desired outputs. In practice, it is difficult to develop such a
model using real-world data, since the system produces many outputs using a range of inputs, all of
which are difficult to measure empirically.

To ifiustrate this point it is helpful to turn to some aggregate output data on the US
retirement system. Annually some 43 million recipients receive OASDI benefit checks, and about

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

10

48 million new cases are filed each year (SSA, 1995: T 2.F). The SSA also collects contributions for
139 million workers and tracks earnings records of more than 200 million people over time.

These aggregate performance measures aside, it is far more difficult to determine whether
the system is providing optimal levels of service for the costs incurred. In particular, the retirement
system portion of the Social Security Administration (SSA) has several different responsibilities,

including issuing all workers (and most recently, children) social security numbers, maintaining

earnings records, and determining eligibility and paying benefits in a timely manner. The agency

has set itself internal standards, which it has been meeting to a greater or lesser degree. For
example, as Table 6 notes, 98% of applicants filing for Social Security numbers receive them within

24 hours and obtain their cards within 5 days; there appears to be little error in this process. This is
a massive task, inasmuch as the SSA issued 17 million new numbers per year in the early 199Us
(personal interviews with SSA). (That the system has upgraded service from the early 1980's is
evident from the fact that a decade ago, obtaining a social security number took six weeks; Sunden
and Mitchell 1994).

Nevertheless the system seems to be slow in tracking earnings and contributions. Under
current law, employers furnish reports of wage earnings to the SSA (the self employed report pay

via their income tax reports). Annually on the order of 227 million earnings reports are received.
Of late there has been some delay in the recording of earnings within the Agency's own
recommended time line, such that only 70% of earnings were posted within 6 months of the tax year
end in 1991 (though accuracy rates were 99.2% as per Sunden and Mitchell 1993). This

performance is within the Agency's standards, and is certainly a vast improvement since the early
1980's when updating of earnings records took two to three years (Doggette 1988). Nevertheless, it
might be suspected that delays in posting earnings would be quite problematic if the system were to
move toward an individual-account type program. Indeed, when lags of 90 days were recently
detected for privately sponsored 401(k) accounts, the US Department of Labor deemed this period
unusually and unacceptably long (Limbacher 1995).

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

11

Since benefit payments are the major activity of the SSA, it is here that performance data
are most critical. One performance statistic (see Table 6) indicates that about 95% of all initial

benefit payments are correctly determined each year. Overall, new claims are around 7 million per
year (counting all OASDHI applicants), and meeting this workload is a substantial task. A different
way the SSA judges its performance is by its new claims accuracy rate, which stood at 99.8% for oldage benefits, and 94.2% for DI benefits (in 1993; SSA 1995: T 2.F7). A further performance
standard is the computed "accuracy of lifetime benefits per award", which is reported close to 100%

for some time. Finally, the Agency monitors whether benefits are received on time. On average, it
takes 17 days between the time a retiree files for benefits and the first payment is received, a figure'

slightly higher than the performance target of 15 days. The Agency also reports that it makes
99.9% of retirement benefit payments on the scheduled delivery dates, a statistic that is certainly
consistent with reliable service.
In providing these services, the Agency is aware of and seeks to reduce system fraud. As in
all programs, some level of investigation is required to determine whether new applicants are in
fact eligible for benefits, and whether current beneficiaries should continue to receive payments
Common forms of deception include failure to notify the Agency when recipients change eligibility

status (due to marriage or death, for instance); also some participants have more than one social
security number, potentially enabling them to receive multiple benefit checks. As the SSA has
upgraded its computer files and systems in the last decade, greater cross-checks have become

feasible. In addition, in recent years the SSA has required beneficiaries to recertify their eligibility
periodically and actively pursues allegations of fraud through the office of the Inspector General
(Sunden and Mitchell 1994).

Whether the optimal level of output (including service and fraud control) is being expended

by the SSA is difficult to be determined given available data. What we do know is that the Agency
has faced substantial cutbacks in its workforce over the last decade, such that it now employs some
64 thousand full-time employees, or 0.37 employees per 1,000 active participants, down from 0.68

workers per 1,000 insured in 1980 (l'able 4 and Sunden and Mitchell 1994). Downsizing was made

sscsLdoc- 8/18196 - Mitchell

12

possible by the introduction of an new computer system that helped reduce reported administrative
costs by about one-third over the last couple of decades (Doggette 1988). Computerization also

permitted better cost accounting for each separate Agency function, including tracking of personnel
salary and benefits (accounting for approximately 60% of SSA expenses). One potentially
troublesome area identified by the US General Accounting Office is the fact that it is not always
possible to detect poorly performing SSA employees; hence Federal government employees tenure is
not readily rescinded in such cases (IJSGAO 1989).

How do US system performance levels compare to those of other nations?'5 With regard to

collecting tax contributions, for instance, the Chilean private system reports an error rate of 0.8-1%
in posting contributions to individual accounts, similar to the US SSA's error rate of 0.8% in posting

contributors' Summary Earnings Record.16 The Chilean private pension system appears to do
better updating accounts, reporting only 6% delayed accounts within a one-month window (in the
US there is a 30% incidence of non-updated accounts within 6 months of the close of a tax year).

Another issue has to do with system evasion, an increasingly serious problem around the world.

Argentina reports that as many as half of all eligible contributors do not pay into the system, and in
Uruguay the figure is estimated at 44% (Reid and Mitchell 1995). Having a computerized database

of covered earnings greatly facilitates this supervisory task, as in the United States and many other
developed nations. it is likely that a system will be more efficient when the revenue collection and
record-keeping functions are handed by a single agency, and thus when Mexico developed its new
individual account retirement system, it opted for centralized computer technology to track taxed
paid and benefits delivered.
Performance can also be compared with regard to the effectiveness of delivering retiree
benefits. This complex of tasks is handled rather inexpensively by the US social security system,

since initial payments are in error only 5% of the time, and a mere 17 days are required to process
an old age pension claim (it takes 90 days to process a disability claim). In contrast, the Chilean

privatized pension system reports a 27% error rate in benefit determinations, and processing of

normal retirement pension determinations requires 17 days, while for early retirement and survival

sscst.doc - 8118/96 - Mitchell

13

pensions it takes 65 and 74 days respectively (and 146 days for a disability pension application).

Public plans in other countries fare poorly on this criterion as well: in Costa Rica, 20-50% of old-age

pension determinations are appealed annually, after 60-150 days to process an old age pension and
150-180 days to process an invalidity pension. The public pension system in Argentina, ANSeS,
requires 60-150 days to process pension claims, and almost one third of all benefit determinations

are appealed. One positive finding is the Chilean public pension (INP) system was successful in its
effort to halve its determination times between 1990 and 1993, as a result of concerted effort on the

part of the government and international lending agencies. In general, both privately and publiclyrun retirement systems could improve service quality to program beneficiaries (Reid and Mitchell
1995).

A third function which both public and private retirement systems bear responsibility for is

the management of contributed funds. It seems reasonable to expect that assets held in a partially
(or fully) funded system should be invested prudently, following accepted money management (and

possibly fiduciary) practices. By law in the US, social security Trust Fund investment practices are
sharply constrained, but in other countries more flexibility is evident and performance has been

widely variable. Overall, it appears that private pension system managers subject to competitive

market pressures often tend to generate higher real rates of return on average than do publicly
managed funds. For example, the Chilean private defined contribution system reported returns of
13% and 9.2% over the 1980-85 and 1985-90 periods respectively (Valdes-Prieto 1994); this exceeded

returns of 7.7% and 9.6% achieved by the U.S. SSA fund over the same periods, as well as the 7.8%

return in large U.S private pension funds, and the 9.2% and 7.3% returns earned by public funds in
eight industrial countries.17 Even worse, Costa Rica's and Peru's public pension funds reported
negative real rates of return over the decade of the 1980's -- as have large numbers of other public
pension systems around the world (World Bank 1994).

To sum up thus far, assessing the efficiency of the US government-run social security
system is problematic because it is a government monopoly, providing services for which there are

no precise private market counterparts. In any event, administrative expenses for the US Social

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

14

Security Administration's old-age retirement program are moderate in terms of international

comparisons, and also have declined over time. US annual retirement system administration costs
currently cost under $15 per worker; these equal 0.42% of contributions, or 0.57% of benefits paid.

As a percentage of system assets, costs sum to 0.39% or 39 basis points; this figure is not directly

comparable with privately managed plans, however, since the system is only very partially funded.
Also, inasmuch as social security taxes are collected by the IRS, and the SSA Trust Funds are

invested in Treasuries, the majority of administrative costs are attributable to the benefit function.
Though it is debatable whether the system spends "enough" or "too much" on administrative
expenses, it seems clear that determination of eligibility for old-age benefits is handled with
alacrity, and payments are on time. These costs have trended down in part because fixed costs are
now amortized over a larger participant pool, and also due to computerization and the subsequent

downsizing of the Agency. The fact that workers' earnings take a while to be posted to their Social
Security earnings me does not materially influence the system as it is structured now; however,
such a delay would certainly be more troublesome in an individual-account system. The DI system
appears to be experiencing relatively more administrative difficulties; costs including DI are under
$20 per worker; 0.68% of contributions; 0.93% of benefits; and 0.63% of the combined OASDI trust

funds.

B. Multivariate Models of Social Security Costs
A more systematic assessment of social security costs is facilitated with a multivariate model
linking production costs to output. While a cost function methodology is most familiar to those
examining firms operating in a competitive market framework, it has also been applied to the study
of governmental units in order to determine whether scale economies exist in the production of
government services, and to ascertain which technological factors most influence measured costs.'8

In the context of the social security question, analysts have used a general cost model
relating system administrative costs to output levels, input prices, and indicators of program
characteristics and technology, as follows:

sscst.doc - 8118196 . Mitchell

15

(1) Social Security Costs = f(Output, Input Prices, Program Characteristics, Technology)

The idea is that social security costs, usually measured as reported administrative expenses
somehow normalized, should be influenced by output (proxied by benefit measures such as system

expenditures), holding constant other factors. Depending on the country and system under study,
one would want to control on other factors such as input prices (for labor, land, and capital), and
program characteristics varying by locale including, for instance, whether the program is means

tested, whether it is centrally run or decentralized, and other related aspects of the program itself.
Additionally, when one looks across systems and countries, it is clearly important to try to control
for differences in technology, including the degree to which computerization has been achieved by

the system, the degree to which the system relies on a modern communication and banking

infrastructure, and the overall literacy (and perhaps financial literacy) rate in the population.
Finally, as Va].des Prieto (1993 and 1994) has pointed out in a case study analysis of Chile, the US,

Malaysia and Zambia, it is important, but extremely difficult, to control for quality differences in
services provided across public pension systems.

For all of these reasons, and others relating to data limitations, only a few studies have
estimated a multivariate model of social security administration costs. The few economic studies
that do, adopt a simple Cobb-Douglas cost specification, relating social security administration
expenses across a set of developed and developing nations to output measures (Mitchell et al. 1994a

b; Palacios 1994). In this framework, both costs and output are measured in natural logs, so that
the estimated coefficient ai in the following equation is interpreted as a measure of scale economies:

(2) Social Security Expenses = a0+ a1 Output Measures + a2lnput Prices
+ a3Program Characteristics + a4Technology + c

That is, if a1 proves to be less than unity, it would be concluded that larger systems would be less

expensive to operate than smaller systems. One problem with this prediction is that only rarely do
countries report expenses for their old-age programs separately from their other programs, and
thus overall costs would be anticipated to rise when the social security system has many different
social insurance program obligations. Hence the empirical models seek to control for the fact that in
sst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

16

some countries

the social security agency is responsible for retirement payments as well as

provision of health care, unemployment insurance, maternity care, etc. It is likely that cash
payments to general retirees are less costly to deliver than are means-tested and non-cash benefits
like health care and food stamps.

Another hypotheses tested with this framework is that social security systems may be more
costly to operate when more agencies are involved. Unlike in the United States, in some countries
the federal, state, municipal, and even smaller units of government are involved in the collection of
revenue and disbursal of social security benefit payments. Looking across countries, it is also

important to control on the degree to which the population is integrated into a national financial
system; in practice this is often done with a proxy variable measuring the fraction of the population

that is rural-dwethng, which probably is inversely correlated with computerization, integration into
a banking system, literacy, and so forth. Finally, it is useful to control on differential input prices
across countries, though in practice obtaining good measure of this proves difficult; one approach is
to include a measure of GDP per capita to capture cross-country differences in pay.

Turning to the empirical findings, Mitchell et al. (1995) use as a dependent variable Social
Security administration costs expressed as a percentage of GDP (to control for exchange rate

differences) and regress this against social security benefit expenthture (also standardized by
GDP).19 The analysis uses cross-section data for 43 countries including all the OECD nations as

well as those in the Latin American and Caribbean region. For this sample, the authors find
evidence of substantial scale economies, irrespective of the other control variables included in the

equation. Across the sample as a whole, a one-percent increase in output measured by benefit
expenditures is found to be associated with 0.5% increase in system administration costs. Further

refmements indicates that a modification of this overall conclusion are required. One is that the
OECD nations have very large social security systems, and appear to face constant returns to scale;

hence only the Latin/Caribbean nations in this sample face increasing returns given the small
social security programs they currently support. Second, for the subset of nations able to furnish

cost data on the national retirement system separately from their overall social security program,

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

17

the evidence is consistent with constant returns to scale, rather than increasing returns. These
fmclings are robust to the inclusion of controls for other program characteristics, and none of the

other factors is consistently significant in the empirical analysis.
As far as we know, the only other multivariate study of social security costs is that of
Palacios (1994; summarized in James and Palacios 1995). Here the focus is on system

administrative costs for 40 nations surveyed by the International Labor Organization around the
year 1986. Social security system administrative expenses are regressed on the size of the
participant pool, a parameter indicating whether the system offers a universal demogrant sort of
benefit versus an earnings-related benefit, and a special variable to account for unusual costs
experienced under Chile's privately-managed national defined contribution system. Of most interest
is the fmding of scale economies once again: a one-percent increase in participants raises social

security retirement system costs by only 0-6-0.9%. There is also evidence that a universal,

demogrant system is significantly less costly to administer than a means-tested or earnings-related
program. Controls measuring the country's level of technology include energy consumption, which
proves to be strongly negatively correlated with costs, suggesting more developed countries manage
their systems less expensively. Finally, the "Chile effect" is positive but only marginally significant

(at the 10% level), suggesting that given the small size of the system, costs are not terribly out of
line.

C. Further Considerations Regarding Social Security System Costs
After reviewing social security costs around the world, we fInd that US system

administrative expenses are in the middle of the range for developed nations at 3% of total
expenditures, and are on the order of ten times lower than the developing country average. The US
system's per active participant costs appear to be quite low (under $15 per worker per year)

compared to many other countries. For example in Chile, annual per contributor costs totaled about
$30 under the private system, and $41 under the public system, and in Argentina the public system
expenses ran $40-GO annually.

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

18

Nevertheless there are important, and very difficult to answer, questions about whether the

funds are well-spent, and whether output levels and output quality is as good as it could be given
available funds and technology. In many countries including the US, for instance, service could be

improved by cutting the delays experienced in posting earnings to the social security records. In
many countries system evasion of social security taxes is an important and growing problem, as in
Japan and in Chile where some 30-50% of earnings are believed to be outside the purview of the

payroll tax (Watanabe 1996; Valdes Prieto 1994). Another difficulty is that plan participants are
beginning to expect private market rates of return on their contributions to the social security
system, despite the fact that usually most government old-age pensions are defined benefit rather
than defined contribution promises. This expectation has not been met by public pensions around
the world producing zero or negative real rates of return on assets over the last decade (World Bank
1994).

As a result of these issues, serious questions are now being raised about the ability of
conventional government-run social security programs to produce high-quality money management,

benefit delivery, and other services, in countries around the world. Therefore we turn next to
examine costs of possible alternatives to a publicly managed social security agency, with the
intention of comparing potential costs across sectors.

III. Administrative Costs of Alternatives to Social Security
One reason to assess expenses incurred in running the government-run social security
system is that market alternatives might be expected to result in lower costs andlor greater services
provided. Costs could be high in publicly-provided plans if, for example, if there were diseconomies

of scale in production, or if private institutions could select more efficient technologies and inputs

than government bodies. Also, under some scenarios, privately managed financial institutions
might generate outputs more to participants' liking than did the public sector. In this sense, it is of
interest to ask whether fmancial institutions such as mutual funds, pension funds, andlor life
insurance companies, might be able to provide lower-cost but equivalent (or better) service than the

government-managed program.

sscst.doc - 8/18(96 - Mitchell

19

To address this-question we examine what is known about some of these alternative

financial institutions, and offer some tentative conclusions about the fmdings. The specific

institutions we analyze are the mutual fund industry, the pension industry, and the life insurance
industry.

A. Mutual Fund Industry Costs
The US mutual fund industry has been in existence for at least five decades: recently,
mutual funds have become the second largest financial intermethary after commercial banks (ICI
1995). In mid-1996, the industry held over $3 trillion in assets.
As US mutual funds have grown in size and influence, fmancial market analysts have

devoted substantial attention to assessing their investment performance, ranking individual funds,

and exploring anomalies.2° Analysts agree that understanding mutual fund costs requires delving
into two general categories of charges, namely loads and expenses.2' Loads refer to commissions

levied at the time the investor purchases or sells fund shares, or may be exacted when the investor
reallocates fund shares across holdings in a "fund family". For example, a fund's front-end load is
computed by subtracting the price at which one may purchase a fund share (the buy price) from the
price at which one may sell the fund share (the sell price); this figure divided by the buy price
equals the front-end load. Commonly seen loads or commissions range from 4 to 8.5% of invested

assets; no-load funds do not charge this fee. In back-loaded funds, the term generally refers to a
commission associated with redeeming a fund investment, which may be a flat rate or a percent of
assets. A mutual fund employing this type of load may levy a 5-6% charge if the funds are

withdrawn during the first year of the investment, with the rate declining to zero over six or seven
years. Additionally, some funds charge an exchange or transaction fee when dividends are
reinvested, andior impose a fee when assets are shifted across different fund types.
These loads are reported in fund prospectuses in accordance with regulations devised by the
Securities and Exchange Commission, but are typically not included in expense ratio information.

Instead, expense ratios refer to the fraction of investor assets expended annually in fees and
charges. Included in this tally are operating expenses due to investment advisory/management

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

20

fees, and costs attributable to fund administration. In adthtion, mutual funds must report so-called
"12b-1" expenses, or distribution costs that may be charged to fund assets. Under SEC rules, such

fees and charges must be included in the expense ratio information reported by mutual funds
However, the fact that loads are not incorporated in expense ratio data should be kept in mind
when comparing expense ratios across funds, particularly in the retail or individually purchased
mutual fund arena. (No-load funds are more common in the institutional market).
Table 7 summarizes categories of fund expenses from a recent Lipper Analytical Services

survey of individually-purchased, mutual funds. Expense ratios for some of the larger mutual funds

in this class appear in Table 8, again for the retail market. Perhaps not surprisingly, Table 7
indicates that the "index fund" group reports the lowest expense ratios of all those represented:
these funds reported average costs of 0.32% of investor assets.22 This relatively low expense ratio

may be compared to several benchmarks, one being the next lowest rate in the Table, which is for
money market funds. This latter group reported almost double the index fund level of costs (0.6 1%
of assets). Another comparison group is the all-fund average of 1.05% of investor assets reported for

1994 (Vanguard 1995: 4). These cost differentials are striking because of the fact that index funds

are relatively new and hence relatively small: index funds on the Lipper list start at asset levels of
$ lOOM, with an average account size of $21,000, whereas there are numerous money market funds

on the list with over $1B, and average account size is double the index fund amount ($43,000 in
1994).

To the extent that there are scale economies, and Baumol et al. (1990) has reported that

there are -- costs rise by only 0.4% to 0.9% as assets grow in the mutual fund industry -- one might
expect the much larger money market portfolios to be more cost effective than index funds.

However at least at this aggregate level, expense ratios for larger, more actively managed funds,

are higher than those for the smaller, more passively managed set. Expense ratios reported for socalled "growth" and "global" funds are even higher, at over 1% of assets per year. A possible

explanation for these higher expense ratios is that the more actively managed funds tend to provide

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

21

different service levels-and restrictions over investor behavior, as compared to the passive index

funds. These include differential access to check writing privileges, limits on trades over given time
periods, and other such factors.

A cost metric that appeass to generate somewhat different rankings uses annual dollar
expenses per account, figures appearing in the last column of Table 7. Not surprisingly, the equity
index fund again comes in with the lowest costs, at $68 per account per year. But now the peraccount costs of money market and fixed income funds are far higher, between $265-300 annually, a

result stemming from their higher expense ratios and larger average account size. Even costs for
the "balanced' portfolio totaled around $140 per year (these funds seek a mix of equity and fixed
income).

One possible explanation for the relatively low index fund costs is that managers in this
fund group hold broadly diversified portfolios designed to match the investment returns of the
overall market; on the whole they devote relatively little time and effort to stock-picking. 23 This
does not directly explain the differences because commissions tend not to be reported in the

administrative cost figures (rather, lower commissions from a more passive management style

would be capitalized in the mutual fund's share price). Nevertheless it appears that as turnover
rises, so do fund expenses: thus a positive (but not precisely measured) response of turnover on
expenses is also reported by Baumol et al. (1990: 185).

This matters because higher expenses would be expected to lower ei rates of return on the
more actively managed funds, to the extent that markets are efficient. Evidence supportive of an
inverse expense/returns relationship was offered in an analysis of US retail mutual funds, that
concluded that better-than-average returns earned by high-performing mutual funds were offset by

higher fund expenses (lppolito 1989). More extensive trading and investment research did appear
to generate higher returns, but also produced higher costs were associated with generating these
returns. 24

A far lower estimate of mutual fund expenses appears to characterize those funds serving
the institutional market, targeted to large investment pools such as employer pension plans.

sscsl.doc - 8118196 - Mitchell

22

Because of their considerable size, these plans would be expected to benefit from some economies of

scale. Nevertheless, obtaining clearly comparable estimates of expenses in this market is difficult,

since the larger mutual funds tend to tailor an institutional plan to a particular employer's
specification, and each custom component can alter expenses in important ways- Two examples for

which data were gathered include the Institutional Index Fund at Vanguard, that reported a 1995
expense ratio of 6 basis points for a minimum $1OM investment (down from 7-8 bp the previous four

years), and the same firm's Employee Benefits Index Trust (EBIfl, that charges an initial 10 bp in
expenses down to 1 bp for funds over $200M (a transaction fee is also charged of 0.15% on net cash
flows over $4M). 25Mter reviewing similar figures, Dickson concluded that the marginal cost of

money management would be even smaller for a large, centrally held mutual fund invested in

primarily in equities:
"[TJotal fees charged by an investment adviser for managing a broad equity index

would be considerably less than 1 basis point per year. If the money manager were
allowed to earn profits through securities lending activities, investment management
expenses would be bid down to zero. If securities lending were prohibited, then
management fees might total 1/4 to 1/2 of 1 basis point per year." Dickson (1996:9)
To these money management costs must be added annual per capita recor4keeping fees for
individual accounts of around $30-35 (Dickson, 1996).

In sum, data on mutual fund administrative expenses suggest several conclusions:

'The least costly retail mutual funds report expense ratios of 20 to 30 basis points at their current
level of operation. They appear to be those offering a portfolio consisting of a broad cross-section of

the capital market.

'Mutual fund products aimed at the institutional market report significantly lower expenses, at
under 10 basis point annually for money management fees (excluding administrative expenses,
thought to be around $30-35 per year per participant).

'Until very recently, mutual funds have perceived their mission as investment companies rather
than full-service retirement plan administrators, so that their expenses may fall as they learn the
new market. 26

sscst.doc - 8/18196 - Mitchell

23

B. Costs of Managing Pension Plans

Employer-sponsored pension plans are an institution that some believe offer a viable and

cost-effective alternative to a government social security retirement program. Like the government
system, a pension plan collects contributions, manages funds, keeps records, and is in charge of

disbursing benefits. Pension plans also have functions and responsibilities that differ from those of
a social security system, which in the US include reporting and disclosure requirements to plan
participants, the government, and shareholders (in publicly held firms); monitoring and compliance
with nondiscrimination laws; and in the case of a defined benefit pension, the plan must also pay
annual premiums to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (see Hustead 1996).
Private Sector Pension Plan Cost Levels

Establishing pension plan total expenses has been an interest of regulators for many
decades, though it remains the case that it is much more difficult to obtain good data on investment

fees and recordkeeping costs in pensions, as compared with mutual funds. The standards for
reporting are less clear, and employers sponsoring a single-firm pension plan tend to underreport
their pension costs, since much of the record-keeping, payroll, and benefits payment work is
handled in-house and not necessarily billed to the pension plan as an expense (Hoexter 1984).

It is sometimes argued that pension costs are most reliably reported in the case of multi-

employer pension plans, since these plans are run by a joint union/management board that pays
expenses centrally. Early evidence supportive of this notion was offered by Hoexter (1984) who

found that per-member total expenses for the multi-employer plans were over six times higher than
for single employer plans. She also found substantial scale economies among these plans, such that
costs grew by only 2.5 when membership rose by 100, and costs grew by two-thirds when assets

were 20 times larger (Hoexter 1984). Expense ratios stood at 1.6% of assets for multi-employer
plans with under $2.5M, but only 0.4% for plans with assets over $50M.

More recently, the US Department of Labor has released tabulations on private sector
pension plans from Form 5500 data (LISDOL 1996). Required to be collected by law, the Form

includes reports on plan expenses, participants, assets, and liabilities. Here again, it must be kept

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

24

in mind that single employer pension plan expenses will tend to be underreported, inasmuch as the
sponsoring companies absorb some portion of the plan's administrative costs rather than charging
them directly to the pension plan. Among multi-employer pensions, where the pension plans cover
employers of several different companies, reported expenses would be expected to be higher partly

because a fuller accounting of costs is ensured in the multi-employer group. On the other hand,
multi-employer pension costs may be unduly high inasmuch as these plans have recently faced

substantial legal expenses, incurred as they seek to obtain delinquent contributions from small
employers.

Private sector pension plan total expenses are summarized in Table 9 for plan year 1992,
which reports expenses for pensions with at least 100 participants.27 Single employer plans in the
sample held approximately $2 trillion in assets, versus $214 million for the multis in 1992.
Nevertheless, because 66 million participants were in the single employer plan pool and 10 million

in the multiemployer pool, net assets per participant were similar, at $27 and $21 thousand,
respectively. Annual contributions were quite different, standing at $1,600 in the single employer

plan and around half that, $900 that year, in the multi-employer pension system. Defined benefit
pensions for both employer types held more assets than did the defined contribution plans, though

contribution levels in both sectors were higher than for the DB plans, attesting to the relatively
mature status of the DB plans in both cases (generally contributions decline as the workforce

matures and moves into retirement).

Turning now to expenses, the data reveal that among defined benefit pensions, reported per
capita total expenses were between $130 and $150 per participant per year (1992$). By contrast,
defined contribution plan expenses were much lower, at $34 per year for singles and $97/year for

multis. The fact that they were lower is in part due to lower actuarial costs and also to the fact that
DC plans do not pay premiums to the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation (PBGC) for pension
insurance. These expenses totaled 12% of contributions for single DB plans, and 17% of

contributions for multi-employer DB plans. DC plans experienced lower expense rates, but again a

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

25

sectoral difference is evident: expenses came to 2% of contributions for single employer DC plans,
and 10% for the multis. In terms of assets, expenses came to 0.65% and 0.82%, respectively, for
multi-employer DB and DC plans.

The data also show that both types of plans devoted a similar proportion of the overall total
expense to investment advisory and management fees - - on the order of 40% of the total. Single
employer defined benefit plans reported costs almost 20% lower than multi-employer plans. For DC

plans, the single/multi-employer differential was even larger, with single-employer plans reporting

costs about one-third those of the multi-employer plans. One reason that these costs differed so is
that multi-employer plans spend more on legal fees, for reasons already explained. They also
devoted more money to contract administration and salaries, as compared to single employer plans.
More systematic studies of private pension plan administrative costs have been conducted
by two research teams who focused on multi-employer pension fund expenses (Caswell 1986;

Mitchell and Andrews 1981). Using multivariate econometric analysis; both studies concluded that
economies of scale were quite prevalent in the pension industry. The former article was limited to

the construction industry; in the latter research, the analysts examined a broader range of multiemployer plans using a cost function of the form:
(3)

Expenses = f (Participants, Assets, % Retired, % Pooled)

where annual plan expenses were regressed on the number of plan members and dollars of plan
assets, as well as the fraction of members retired, and the fraction of the assets held in pooled funds.

Data from the late l970s were obtained from reporting forms med under the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act of 1974.28 The results provided evidence of statistically significant scale

economies in this set of defined benefit plans. Specifically, holding constant the number of plan

participants, increasing the plan's asset size by one percent (holding participants constant) was
predicted to increase costs by only 0.27%; in other words adding to existing pension plan asset pools

is relatively inexpensive. That paper also showed that, raising the number of plan participants by a
percent (holding benefits payable constant) would raise pension administrative costs by 0.8%, or less

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

26

than one percent. In other words, increasing the size of the participant pool by adding new

members with comparable assets would raise costs by less than proportionally.

An important reason to ask about variation in pension plan costs, of course, is because such

variability in costs might correlate with fund performance. A multivariate regression study relating
equity management fees to five-year annualized pension fund performance found that lagged strong
returns were only weakly associated with higher subsequent fees (Lakonishok et al. 1992).
Nevertheless, the same study concluded that the equity portion of pension portfolios
underperformed mutual funds by 50 to 100 basis points between the mid -1960s and the mid- 1980s,
suggesting that high expenses might reduce fund performance.
Costs of 401(k) Pension Plans

Over the last decade in the US, a new breed of retirement saving vehicle has grown up,
namely 401(k) pensions. These plans are often thought of as a type of defined contribution
pensions, but in fact have become increasingly distinct in character from the old employer-directed
defined contribution pension accounts.
In a 401(k) plan, generally the sponsoring employer will select a set of investment vehicles

to which participating contributors may direct their contributions; inthvidual plan participants
often have substantial flexibility over subsequent asset allocations. For example, many funds

permit participants to inquire about their account balances and alter their accruals as well as new
contribution flows via a 24-hour telephone service center. In addition, many employers allow

participants to take loans from their 401(k) plans, a feature which increases these plans' popularity
but one that would also be expected to raise their operating expenses (Mitchell 1992). In addition,
the 401(k) rubric encompasses a wide range of plan types and structures including those funded by

profit sharing, those with or without employer pre-tax match amounts, and thrift plans. Finally,
the fact that employers are concerned about liability for participants' investment choices,
substantial funds are devoted to investor education efforts as well as periodic statements of
accounts to participants.

sscst.doc . 8/18/96 - Mitchell

27

In contrast to the old corporate (and public sector) pension model, at the time of retirement,
participants in a 401(k) plan may elect from a variety of different payout options (Mitchell 1992).

One is to take the accruals in a lump sum (and perhaps roll it over into a tax-qualified Individual
Retirement Account); another is to use the funds to purchase an annuity; and a third is to elect a

graduated payout in accordance with Internal Revenue Service requirements. Because these and
other feasible payout options are tailored to the mthvidual retiree, one might anticipate that 401(k)
administrative costs would exceed those of conventional defined contribution plans.

Evidence on the cost impact of plan flexibility is as yet preliminary. Assets in 40 1(k) plans

total more than half a billion dollars. The ICI (1995) data indicates that 401(k) plans have on the
order of 18M participants, with assets per participant running about $26,000 (median $16,000), and
median overall contribution rates of $2286 per year (with 35% contributed by employers). Median
recordkeeping expenses reported by 40 1(k) plans in 1993 totaled $66 per account per year, or 3% of

annual contributions. Of course, to the extent that administrative fees are sometimes charged to
the 401(k) plan sponsor, reported administrative expenses may appear unduly low flCI 1995).

Nevertheless one might anticipate that 401(k) plans would require somewhat more administration

than individually purchased mutual funds, inasmuch as the tax-qualified plans permit participant
involvement in the asset allocation process and also require monitoring for tax purposes. On
average, 20% of the 401(k) plans permit daily reallocation of accruals or new contributions; 12%

permit monthly exchanges; 40% permit quarterly adjustments, and only 20% limit changeovers to

once or twice a year (p. 10). While attractive to many participants, industry experts point out that

permitting more transactions in retirements raises costs. Also almost three-quarters of the plans
give out quarterly statements of participants' asset allocation and performance, and most devoted

substantial effort to marking their assets to market, many on an hourly basis.
Table 10 indicates average total expenses charged by 401(k) pension plans, costs generally

attributable to start-up fees, annual per-person service charges, loan fees, annual reporting fees,
transaction charges, and approximately 5-10 basis points for trustee charges, presumably mostly
insurance (ICI 1995). As a matter of practice, money management fees are not included in these

sscst.doc - 8118196 - Mitcheli

28

tallies and must be added to obtain total expenses. The data indicate that average recordkeeping
expenses range from a low of 80 basis points in the short-term bond fund, to 188 basis points in

international equity funds, with the midrange for equity funds around 140-150 bp per annum. On
an annual basis the average per participant cost of administering a 401(k) plan appears to be
between $5-55 annually, including nondiscrimination testing, quarterly statements, and investor
information.29

One of the most difficult issues in the 401(k) field is that the 401(k) plans often offer a life

annuity at retirement, so that the product provided is distinct conceptually from a simpler money

accumulation plan. Figuring out what additional expense the insurance annuity adds, as distinct
from the money management and record keeping costs, is not a simple matter. Some modest
evidence in this direction compares expense ratios for small and midsized 40 1(k) plans with and

without an annuity product embedded in the offering; see Table 11. (Not reported are record-

keeping and administrative fees which are similar for both plan types). Not surprisingly, it appears
that administrative expense ratios are higher for 40 1(k) plans offering insurance annuities: the
additional asset-based charge over the mutual fund investment options appears to be 6 to 32 basis

points.°

Public and International Pension Plan Administrative Cost Comparisons
It is useful to compare of the private pension plan costs reported thus far with a range of
other plans, as a method of gaining some perspective on the range of figures. Comparing expenses
of large US corporate plans with US public sector pension plans and endowment/foundation funds

shows that fees paid to outside managers totaled 34 basis points (bp) among public funds, versus 45
among the larger corporate funds in 1994 [Greenwich Associates 1995a, c, dl. While the
government-run plans are somewhat less expensive, there is little evidence of scale economies

among this set of public plans examined: public funds with over $ lB in assets paid 30 bp versus 37
bp for plans with less than $ lOOM, whereas in the corporate sector, plans with over $1B in assets

sscstdoc - 8118/96 - Mitchell

29

paid 33 basis points in expenses versus those with under $ lOOM in assets paying 50 bp (Greenwich

Associate, 1995a: 26). Nevertheless no formal model was used in that study holding other factors
constant; more will be said on this below.

As we have noted, corporate plan sponsors are not required to account for all pension

expenses separately, in contrast with more complete reporting in public plans. For instance in
1994, 68% of US corporate pension plans reported that the plan sponsor (typically a private

employer) directly paid a portion of pension plan staff costs rather than charging the pension plan,
but only 42% of public sector plan sponsors devoted staff time to pension fund activities [Greenwich

Associates 1995a: 35]. The smallest public/private reporting differential found is in the area of
investment management fees, where 76% of the private pension funds and 77% of public plans

reported that their investment management fees were charged to the pension plan [Greenwich
Associates 1995a: 35]. Overall, fewer corporate funds charge actuarial fees, pension consulting

fees, and performance measurement fees to the pension fund, as compared to the public plans. In
general, then, the higher fees paid by US private plans are probably still underreported.
Other datasets offer distinct comparisons between US corporate funds and Canadian and
British pension plan costs. Across these three groups, the US mean (median) private pension
expenditure on annual money management fees is systematically the highest, at 40 bp (38),
compared to Canadian corporate funds which pay 30 bp (28) and UK private funds where the mean
is 22 bp (18). An examination of these countries' corporate pension fund management expense

distributions reveals that US plans having a distribution shifted far to the right, and the two
comparator nations having far fewer funds reporting expenses greater than 50 basis points
[Greenwich Associates, l995a: 26].

Other places to seek evidence on pension expenses are in the nonprofit as well as

governmental pension plans. In the former case, complete expenses are reported only to the extent

that the plan is charged full cost for expenses incurred its behalf. A rather interesting case is that
of the College Retirement Equity Fund (CREF), the nation's largest defined contribution pension

plan covering employees in higher education and research institutes. It is a non-profit institution

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

30

and for historical reasons, receives special treatment under ERISA law. CREF is national plan,

covering people in many different institutions, and employers participating in the system tend to
cover most of the payroll-based costs as part of their own benefits function. This suggests that the
CREF plan would appear to have lower costs as compared to a plan where all benefits and payroll-

related costs were charged to the plan. The system is also quite responsive to individual
participating employers, permitting cross-employer differences in contribution levels, rules

regarding lump-sum versus annuity payouts, and asset allocation choices; these differences may
drive up expenses. Additionally, CREF contributions include the value of annuity insurance, since

strictly speaking participants in the contributory phase purchase a deferred variable annuity. for
this reason, costs would not be expected to be reflective of nor directly relevant to those experienced

by corporate pensions. In any event, it is of interest to inquire about CREF's expense structure
because of its large scale, and because some have suggested that this might be a viable model if
social security should be partly privatized.
CREF costs are reported in Table 12, where it wifi be seen that total expenses (including
money management and record keeping) ranged from 0.29% of assets per annum for the money

market fund to 0.42% for the growth fund (plan year ending 12/94). This narrow differential is
attributable to CREF's application of identical administration and distribution expenses (0.21 and
0.03% of assets, respectively) to all funds. As a result, the only source of reported cross-fund

variation is due to investment advisory fees that vary from 0.05% to 0.18%. Certainly these are low
levels of cost, and the differentials narrow, in light of the expenses reported for other funds
described above. it is possible that these lower figures, 5-18 basis points, would characterize money
management fees if a large scale funded government program modeled on CREF were to replace the
current, mostly unfunded, social security system.

A different pension plan outside the corporate sector is the Federal Government retirement

system, known as the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Fund. This civil service retirement
plan is reasonably large, including over 2 million participants and $36B in assets, and is a

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

31

contributory defmed contribution plan that may be allocated at the participant's behest into a stock

fund, a bond fund, and/or a government securities fund. The 1996 annual report indicates that
administrative expense ratios in this system total 9 basis points; however this figure excludes costs
associated with collections of employer and employee contributions, since individual agency's or

office's payroll system handles these separately. Even more striking is the low reported level of
investment expenses -- computed at under one basis point. This figure is indicative of the extent of
scale economies feasible in a centrally managed, large defined contribution pension plan, which
restricts its investment choices to a very small set of indexes.

US state and local pension plans afford another data point on large pension plan costs, but

here defined benefit systems are generally the norm.3' In a recent study of more than three
hundred public employee retirement systems with assets of $791 billion and 10.6 million active
members in 1992, administrative expenditures for these public employee pension plans averaged 9%
of total pension contributions; median per participant expenses were $130 per year ($1992; Hsin

and Mitchefl 1994). This is comparable to private plan costs reported above (yet private plan
figures may be biased downward for reasons already noted).32

The econometric analysis recognized that public sector pensions might not operate on the
economically efficient feasible frontier with minimum possible expenditures, inasmuch as public

retirement systems usually are not subject to market pressures. Hence a frontier cost model was
estimated using a general multi-product cost function of the form:
(3)

Administrative Costs = f(Output Vector, Input Prices; a) +

where a is a vector of parameters, and c is an error term made up of two independent components

(ci = v1 ÷ u where v captures random error and u 0). Of particular relevance to the present work

is the finding of substantial scale economies: among public sector pension plans, a 1% increase in

the number of plan participants raised pension administrative expenditures by 0.74%, holding
assets per participant constant, and a 1% increase in assets ceteris paribus raised costs rise by less

than half a percent. A more troubling fmding was that some thirty percent of reported
sscst.doc - 8/18196 . Mitchell

32

administrative expenditures was attributed to inefficiencies, though this figure was lower than
those reported in other public sector agencies.
Having measured pension pian inefficiency gaps, the analysis then explores factors
associated with measured inefficiencies. The evidence suggests that public plans were more efficient

when investment services were contracted out to private money managers. It was also found that
granting pension boards authority over their administrative budgets reduced administrative
efficiency, particularly when administrative.budgets were picked up by the sponsoring employer

(versus having the pension fund cover its own costs). In general, therefore, administrative costs of
public pension plans could probably be reduced somewhat, perhaps by as much as a third, with

somewhat different reporting and management structures.33
Trends in Pension Administrative Costs Over Time

Estimates of trends in pension plan administration costs over time are relatively few, but
one source is a recently revised and updated report on defined benefit and defmed contribution
pension plans over the period 1981-1996 (Hustead 1996). Table 14 summarizes annual defined
benefit costs on a per person basis (in 1996 dollars) as computed from an actuarial simulation for a

hypothetical plan and real cost trends over time.

The results indicate that average per-participant costs rose rapidly for all sizes of plans and

for both plan types, particularly during the latter half of the 1980's. Whereas annual private plan
expenses stood at about $23-26 per participant in larger pensions in 1981 (1996$), by the mid 1990's

the cost has risen almost three times for the defmed benefit pension plan and by almost double for

the defmed contribution plan. Similar percentage changes characterized small pension plans,
though the levels of administrative expenses for both plans are much higher because the smaller
plans could less ably capture scale economies. In 1981, small plans of both types experienced per
participant costs of under $200 per year per participant in 1981, but by 1996, DC costs were $287

and DB costs higher than $600 per participant per year. Large plans reported administrative costs
of $68 (DB) versus $49 (DC) per year in 1996. (It should be noted that these administrative

sscst.doc . 8/18196 - Mitchell

33

expenses exclude

investment management fees, but they do include Pension Benefit Guaranty

Corporate premiums for the defined benefit pension plan figures).

Several explanations have been offered for the increasing cost levels as well as the rising
differential between DB and DC plans; most prominent explanations are the increasingly complex

nondiscrimination rules that plan sponsors must meet, and the rising cost of insurance premiums
for DB pension pians (Hustead 1996; Clark and McDermed 1990).
Overview

This investigation into pension plans of different types and in different sectors suggests

several conclusions regarding pension administrative cost levels, differentials, and trends. These
include:

'Large corporate pension plans reported total administrative costs of $68 (DB) versus $49 (DC) per

year in 1996. These costs have risen steadily in real terms over time.
'Scale economies are significant for pension plans. Total administrative costs are much higher -perhaps 5-10 times as high -- on an annual per person basis, in company pension plans with 15

participants versus 10,000 participants.
'Overall pension plan expenses appear to be split approximately two-fifths to advisory and money

management fees, and three-fifths to contract administration and salaries. Paying benefits in the
form of an annuity adds additional costs, roughly 6-32 basis points over a mutual fund investment.

'US corporate pension plans report substantially higher money management fees than do their
Canadian and UK counterparts, at about 40 basis points instead of 20 to 30 bp. Corporate US
pension plans also report higher outside management fees than do public US pension funds (where
the latter devote about 33 basis points to outside fees).

'Public and nonprofit sector pension plan expenses tend to be lower than corporate plan costs. For
example, the CREF plan covering employees in higher education and research institutes reports
devoting 29 - 42 basis points to expenses, with a constant fraction devoted to recordkeeping and

distribution (24 bp) across plans. The Federal Thrift Retirement plan devotes 9 basis points to

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

34

administrative costs, and less than one basis point to money management costs. These figures

should not be directly extrapolated to the private sector arena however.

D. Administrative Expenses in the Insurance Industry
Another line of inquiry pertains to the question of how well could insurance firms supply

retirement annuities, in the event that social security benefits were scaled down substantially. In
this regard, it is important to address two issues: first, how efficient are privately managed
insurance firms, and second, how well does the insurance market work as a whole? Presumably the
appeal of social security privatization would increase if private firms could be anticipated to fill the
gap, and to do so at relatively low cost.

In terms of the life insurance business in the US, the American Council on Life Insurance
(ACLI 1995: 37) reports that life insurance firms in 1994 received some $453B in annual premiums

and investment earnings. On a per-dollar of asset basis, expenses totaled 11% of annual income
(16% of annual contributions), and amounted to some 2.6% of the asset base of almost $2 trillion in
1994. Some 45% of the total expense dollar is devoted to selling costs, or agents' commissions.

To date much of the insurance economic literature has explored efficiency in the property-

casualty market (e.g. Cummins and Weiss 1995). As a rule these stuthes estimate cost functions,
and the availability of firm-level panel data has permitted the estimation of quite flexible functional
specifications. A persistent problem acknowledged across all these stuthes is that it is difficult to

measure insurance firm output and quality. Hence persistent cost differentials over time between
different lines of insurance and different distribution systems for the same insurance product turn
out to be quite difficult to interpret (c.fi Berger et al. 1995). Nonetheless, looking across the

available literature it appears that firms in the US property/casualty insurance sector are operating
inside their efficient production frontier by significant margins, suggesting room for reductions in
system administrative expenses.M

In addition to the general efficiency question just raised is a serious concern regarding how
seriously adverse selection and moral hazard pose important real-world obstacles to the

privatization of retirement annuities. Allowing individuals to elect whether to take their retirement

sscstdoc . 8/18/96 - Mitchell

35

accounts as a lump sum or an annuity suggests that there are some potentially troubling

weaknesses in the market for annuities. One influential study concluded that expected annual
yields on inthvidual life insurance policies were approximately 2 percentage points lower than on

group policies due to adverse selection (Warshawsky 1988). Other evidence suggests that

purchasing inthvidual annuities costs approximately two-thirds more than group purchase
(Diamond and Valdes Prieto 1993). These findings, along with the high and not necessarily efficient

annual costs reported above, suggest that privatization of the insurance portion of the system would
raise costs beyond current public provision of the old-age annuity.

IV. Relating These Findings to a Privately-managed Old-Age Retirement System
How these findings might be relevant to a privatized social security system in the US

depends on the exact institutional structure that would be implied under such a reform. One
option, dubbed the "Maintain Benefits" option by members of the Social Security Advisory Council,

is to simply invest a portion of the existing social security Trust Fund in equities. This approach
would leave intact the current revenue collection mechanism, the Social Security Administration's
record-keeping and benefit payout functions, and all else; the only change would be that the
government would now invest a portion of the fund, probably in an index portfolio (Quinn and
Mitchell 1996).

Whether or not purists would deem this a real step toward privatization, it is nevertheless
seen by many as a viable political possibility. Supporters argue that the SSA could earn higher

rates of return than on Treasury bills; detractors point to the fact that system participants may be
forced to confront greater capital market risk than under the current defmed benefit plan (Mitchell
and Zeldes 1996). In any event, it is plausible to argue that system expenses would increase as the
government took on an additional money management function, but the additional costs would
probably be relatively small. If the Trust Fund were simply deposited in an indexed passively
managed mutual funds, administrative expenses would rise by as little as 1 to as much as 20 basis

points, with the likeliest number being at the lower end of the range

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

36

This figure relies on cost figures currently experienced by large, passively managed, mutual

funds, it could rise if more actively managed, portfolios were chosen. Some analysts have

expressed concern that political pressures would be brought to bear on a government-managed
pension account worth, eventually, several hundred billion dollars.36 To the extent that this did
occur, expenses would be higher and investment performance lower than the returns offered by
competitive privately-managed mutual funds (Mitchell and Hsin 1995). This estimate also assumes

that the government would continue to collect revenues, maintain records, and disburse benefits as
now; in other words, the investment fee would be the only incremental charge over the system's

current expenses.
A different approach to social security privatization is the proposal to establish a "Personal
Saving Account (PSA)" approach.36 This plan would require all participants to deposit a portion of

their payroll taxes into individual private pension accounts managed by regulated but private fund

administrators. These pension managers would then invest participants' assets and pay out
benefits at retirement. An important question regarding how such accounts might work in the US
has to do with how much self-directed investment would be permitted in the PSAs, and how inter-

fund competition would be regulated since the system's inception. In Chile, for instance, private
pension fund asset allocation decisions have been heavily restricted, There, workers may change
pension allocations only 3-4 times per year (and must hold all their funds in a single pension fund
at any given time), and fund managers face extensive regulation regarding asset composition,

permissible (and prohibited) commission charges, and reserves. Though early in that nation's
privatization drive, administrative costs were quite high (about 23% of contributions or 14% of
assets), these costs have dropped more recently (15% and 2.3% respectively)- It is of course

inevitable that costs would be higher initially; the subsequent downward cost trend results partly
from competition and partly from scale economies as assets have grown. Still, however, after fifteen

years, the Chilean AFP pension system is relatively small by US standards, having assets of around
US$25B (Edwards, this volume).

sst.doc. 8/18/96 - Mitchell

37

If a PSA system were mandated in the US, system administrative expenses would clearly
rise, but probably not as much as the high end of the costs experienced in Chile. Inevitably, specific
cost rates would depend on specific plan design details, such as what investors are permitted to do

with their funds, how often they can reallocate their investment portfolio, and what restrictions on

fees and other rules are instituted. An optimistic assessment would take the Federal Thrift Plan
numbers, where it will be recalled that only three relatively passively managed options are

permitted. In that system, administrative expense ratios in this system were 9 basis points
(excluding collection costs) and money management expenses are estimated at less than 1 basis
point. Obviously, fund charges could be higher if people opted for more actively managed accounts;

recent research on 401(k) plans has concluded that the first cohort to. have access to these plans
chose fixed income and guaranteed insurance company holdings, but younger participants have
chosen equity funds by substantial margins (see Table 15). The CREF plan offers many additional
options, and has estimated expense figures of 30-40 basis points annually (including recordkeeping).

A PSA account system that required investors to place their contributions with mutual
funds would probably experience higher administrative and record-keeping fees, and also would

probably incur costs associated with providing annuities. In terms of the former expense, if
individual pension accounts were offered as add-ons to existing company-sponsored 401(k) plans,

administrative costs would probably be on the order of $50-GO per year. This assumes that the plan

does not require (or offer) that benefits be paid out in an annuity. If one were to additionally
require that benefits be paid as an annuity, costs would probably rise by an extra 10% of

contributions or $100 per participant per year, extrapolating from multi-employer defined

contribution plan costs. This figure might be lower if, as the annuity market grew, private
insurance firms experienced substantial scale economies; it might be higher if substantially greater
adverse selection resulted from optional annuity purchases.

V. Conclusion

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

38

Opponents of social security privatization argue that privately-managed systems are more

costly than public systems to manage, and this is a charge that advocates must evaluate carefully.
This paper contributes to the discussion by exploring a range of evidence on public and private

pension system administrative expenses, as well as the determinants of retirement system
administrative efficiency in the US and elsewhere.

The research shows that the administrative costs of providing old-age retirement benefit
services through a public system are often difficult to measure with precision. Conceptually, a

comparison of public administration costs with private plan costs requires not only assessing the
expenses incurred in delivering pension services, but also controlling for the quality of services

delivered. Available data fall far short of the desired measures. Nevertheless, our evidence from

international sources indicates that there are wide differences in retirement system administration
costs from plan to plan, and from country to country. Some of these differences are due to the level

of privatization, but most appear to be attributable to particularinstitutional structures and
management practices.
For example, the US Social Security Administration manages a very large old-age system at
costs which are mid-range among developed nations, but these costs are low compared to smaller

systems in smaller countries. Using several different metrics, these costs may be alternatively
described as 0.7% of benefit expenditures; 0.4% of contributions; $12- 14 per covered worker per

year ($9 per participant in 1994); or 0.39% of system assets (the latter figure is however misleading

because the system is mostly unfunded). In exchange for these costs, the US social security system
appears to do some things quite well. Focusing on the provision of benefits, for instance, there is
reason to believe that most eligible retirees receive the benefit amounts to which they are entitled
on time. On the other hand, the posting of workers' earnings to system computer ifies could be

improved, though this delay causes no particular problem under current rules. Under current
rules the 115 social security system bears relatively small expenses for collection of revenues, and

virtually nothing for money management, since funds must by law be invested in special-issue
Treasury Bifis.

sscst.doc - 8118196 - Mitchell

39

These figures were compared with expenses reported by a range of other fmancial

institutions who might be potential players in a privatized social security system. Data from both
retail and institutional mutual funds were collected, along with private and nonprofit pension

plans, and insurance companies. Each of these private alternatives produces a somewhat different
mix of outputs and with varying types of participant tailoring and service. The data suggests
adding a privately managed individual savings account to existing mutual fund or 401(k) plans
would be relatively low-cost, with money management fees potentially ranging between 1 and 20
basis points (for a passively managed indexed portfolio), and administrative costs of perhaps $50 per

year. Money management costs could be substantially higher for more actively managed funds.
If a group model were taken as the likely prototype of a privatized system, such as a
national TIAA-CREF-type or Federal Thrift-type plan (and the range of options were limited quite

substantially), investment costs have been estimated to be on the order of a basis point or less per
year. Administration costs would be potentially on the order of 20-30 basis points, judging from

available evidence. In addition, one must add the costs of providing longevity insurance if annuities

are to be guaranteed.
Even if a privately managed defined contribution system would result in somewhat higher

administrative costs, compared to the current pay-as-you-go system, these higher administrative
expenses would have consequences that many would find appealing. These additional expenses

make possible a system that handles the pension system's necessary functions with greater alacrity,

while permitting workers to undertake more active asset management in their retirement
portfolios. A variant of this approach has been suggested by several members of the 1994-5 US
Social Security Advisory Council: under this scenario, the government would offer and manage

three to four funds among which plan participants could choose. This approach would also result
in higher administrative costs as compared to the current social security system, but would still
permit some of the advantages of having individual accounts.
All of the privatization options considered here would be expected to cost somewhat more in

administrative expenses than the current publicly-run plan in the US, but the precise level of

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

40

administrative costs in-a privatized social security system will depend crucially on the specifics of

the plan proposed. Costs will rise, experts believe, if actively managed funds are permitted, if
twenty-four hour call-up access were allowed, and if participants can obtain loans from the funds.
Some of the variants would also entail higher collection costs, reporting expenses, and insurance
annuity costs. A lower-cost system would require only a few investment options with little hands-on

participant access and infrequent reporting. Offsetting these additional costs, of course, are
potentially substantial economic benefits flowing from having a privately-managed system
(Feldstein 1995; Kotlikoff 1996; Quinn and Mitchell 1996; Mitchell and Zeldes 1996). These benefits

could include the opportunity for participants' contributions to earn a higher rate of return than
that feasible under the public program, the possibility that labor supply and savings disincentives
would be diminished, and a reduction in the political risk regarding future benefits.

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

41

References

American Council on Life Insurance (ACLI), Life Insurance Fact Book, 1994. and Supplement 1995
Washington, D.C.: American Council on Life Insurance.
Arthur Anderson, LLP. 1996 Report of Independent Public Accountants to the Executive Director of

the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. March 15.
Atkinson, Anthony B. 1987. "Income Maintenance and Social Insurance." In Auerbach, AJ. and M.
Feldstein, eds. Handbook of Public Economies Vol. IL Elsevier Science Publishers B.V.
(North-Holland).

Atkinson, Anthony B. 1989. Poverty and Social Security. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Barr, Nicholas. 1992. "Economic Theory and the Welfare State: A Survey and Interpretation."
Journal of Economic Literature 30 (June): 741-803.
Baumol, William J., Stephen M. Goldfeld, Lull A Gordon, and Michael F. Koehn. 1990. The

Economics of Mutual Fund Markets: Competition Versus Regulation. Rochester Studies in
Economics and Policy Issues. New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Borcherding, Thomas E., Werner W. Pommerehne, and Friecirich Schneider. 1982. "Comparing the
Efficiency of Private and Public Production: The Evidence from Five Countries,"
Supplement 2 Journal of Economics.
Berger, Allen, J. David Cummins, and Mary Weiss. 1995 "The Coexistence of Multiple Line

Systems for Financial Services: The Case of Property-Liability Insurance". The Wharton
School, Center for Research on Risk and Insurance Working Paper, March.
Caswell, Jerry. 1976. "Economic Efficiency in Pension Plan Administration: A Study of the

Construction Industry". Journal of Risk and Insurance. June: 257-273.
Clark, Robert and Ann McDermed. 1990. The Choice of Pension Plans in a Changing Regulatory

Environment. AEI Press: Washington, D.C.
Cummins, J. David and Mary A Weiss. 1995. "Measuring Cost Efficiency in the Property-Liability

Insurance Industry". Journal of Banking and Finance 17:463-481.

sscst.cioc- 8/18/96 - Mitchell

42

Diamond, Peter. 19942'Privatization of Social Security: Lessons from Chile". Revista de Analysis

Economi.co, 9 (1) June: 21-33.

Diamond, Peter and Salvador Valdés-Prieto. 1993. "Social Security Reforms," in Eds. B. Bosworth,
R. Dornbusch, and R. Laban. The Chilean Economy: Policy Lessons and Challenges,

Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Dickson, Joel. 1996. "Analysis of Financial Conditions Surrounding Individual Accounts", R39eport
prepared for the 1994-5 Social Security Advisory Council. April.

Doggette, H. 1988. "Technological Change and Its Impact on the Management of Social Security
Agencies", International Social Security Review. 4 (61): 355-367.

Elton, Edwin J., Martin Gruber, Sanjiv Das, and Matthew Hlavka. 1993. "Efficiency with Costly
Information: A Reinterpretation of Evidence from Managed Portfolios". Review of Financial
Studies v6 (1): 1-22.

Fidelity Investments, Prospectus, various dates. Boston, Mass: Fidelity.
Fields, J. and N. Murphy. 1989. "An Analysis of Efficiency in the Delivery of Financial Services:

The case of life insurance agencies" Journal of Financial Services Research (2): 323-356.

Friedman, Benjamin and Mark Warshawsky. 1990. "The Cost of Annuities: Implications for Saving
Behavior and Bequests". Quarterly Journal of Economics 105 (1): 135-154.

Gardner, Linda and Martin Grace. 1993. "X-Efflciency in the US Life Insurance Industry".
Journal of Banking and Finance: 17(2/3): 497-5 10.
Grace, Martin F and S. Timme. 1992. "An Examination of Cost Economies in the US Life Insurance

Industry". Journal of Risk and Insurance 59: 72- 103.
Greenwich Associates. 1995. Eleven Thorny Problems, Greenwich Report, Greenwich, CT [1995aj

Greenwich Associates. 1995. Higher Standards, Stretched Resources, Greenwich Report,
Greenwich, CT [1995b]

Greenwich Associates. 1995. Investment Management 1995: Statistical Supplement, Greenwich
Report, Greenwich, CT 11995c1

sscst.doc - 8118196 - Mitchell

43

Greenwich Associates. 1995. More Equities, Greater Diversification, Sensible Shifts, Greenwich

Report, Greenwich, CT. [1995d1

Hay/Huggins Company, Inc. 1990. Pension Plan, Cost Study. Report prepared for the PBCGJ
Washington, D.C., September.

Hoexter, Elsie. 1970. Administrative Expenses of Welfare and Pension Plans. US Department of
Labor. Labor Management Services Administration. Washington, D.C.: USGPO.
Hsin, Ping-Lung and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1994. "The Political Economy of Public Pensions: Pension
Funding, Governance, and Fiscal Stress". Revista de Analisis Economico. 9(1) June: 151168.

Hsin, Ping-Lung and Olivia S. Mitchell. Forthcoming. "Are Public Pension Plans Administratively
Efficient?". In Positioning Pensions for the 21st Century. Eds. M. Gordon, 0. 5. Mitchell, M.

Twinney. Pension Research Council. University of Penn. Press: Philadelphia.
Hustead, Edwin C. Forthcoming. TMRetirement Income Plan Administrative Expenses: 1981 through

1996". In Mitchell, 0. and S. Schieber, eds. Living with Defined Contribution Plans.
Pension Research Council, The Wharton School

Investment Company Institute (ICI). 1995. , 401(k) Plans: How Plan Sponsors See the Marketplace.
ICI Research Report.

Investment Company Institute. 1995. Mutual Fund 1995 Fact Book. ICI: Washington, D.C.
Ippolito, Richard A. 1989. "Efficiency with Costly Information: A Study of Mutual Fund

Performance, 1965-1984". Quarterly Journal of Economics, February. 104(1): 1-23.

James, Estelle and Robert Palacios. 1995. "The Cost of Administering Publicly-Mandated Pensions"

Finance and Development 32(2), June.
Lakonishok, Joseph, Andrei Schleifer, and Robert Vishny. 1992. "The Structure and Performance of
the Money Management Industry". Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
Microeconomics: 339-391.

Limbacher, Patricia. 1995. "ERISA Reform Hidden Agenda in 401(k) Furor". Pensions and

Investments Dec. 1: 1.

sscst.doc - 8/18(96 - Mitchell

44

Mehay, Stephen, and Rodolfo Gonzalez. 1985 "Economic Incentives under Contract Supply of Local
Government Services," Public Choice: 46.

Mesa-Lago, Carmelo. 1989. Ascent to Bankruptcy: Financing Social Security in Latin America.

Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Mitchell, Olivia S. 1994. "Retirement Systems in the Developed and Developing World:

Institutional Structure, Economic Effects, and Lessons for Economies in Transition". Report

prepared for the World Bank.
Mitchell, Olivia 5. 1992. "Trends in Pension Benefit Formulas and Retirement Provisions". In
Trends in Pensions 1992. Eds. J. Turner and D. Belier. Washington, D.C.: US Dept. of
Labor, PWBA: 177-216.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Emily Andrews. 1981. "Scale Economies in Private Multi-Employer Pension

Systems", Industrial and Labor Relations Review, 34 (4) July 1981: 522-530.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Gary Fields. 1994. "Designing Pensions for Developing Countries". Report to
the ESP Division of the World Bank and Pension Research Council Working Paper,

University of Pennsylvania.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Ping Lung ilsin. Forthcoming. "Managing Public Sector Pensions". In Public

Policy Toward Pensions. Eds. John Shoven and Sylvester Schieber. Twentieth Century
Fund.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Ping-Lung Hsin. 1994. "Public Sector Pension Governance and

Performance". NBER Working Paper 4632. January.
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Robert Smith. 1994. "Public Sector Pension Funding". Review of Economics

and Statistics: 278-290.

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Annila Sunden. 1993. An Examination of Social Security Administration
Costs in the United States. Report to the Public Sector Management Division, LAC
Technical Dept., The World Bank.

sscst.doc - 8/18196 - Mitchell

45

Mitchell, Olivia S., Arnuika Sunden, and Ping-Lung Hsin. 1994. "Social Security Costs in Latin

America, the Caribbean, and OECD Nations", Journal of International Compensation and
Benefits, 2(4), Jan/Feb. [1994a]

Mitchell, Olivia S., Annika Sunden, Ping-Lung ilsin and Gary Reid. 1994 "An International
Appraisal of Social Security Administration Costs". Report to the Public Sector Management
Division, LAC Technical Department of the World Bank. May. [l994b]

Mitchell, Olivia S. and Steven Zeldes. 1996. "A Framework for Analyzing Social Security
Privatization". American Economic Review, March.

Myers, Robert J. 1992. "Can the Government Operate Programs Efficiently and Inexpensively?"
Contingencies. March/April.

Myers, Robert J. 1992. "Chile's Social Security Reform After Ten Years," Benefits Quarterly, Third
Quarter: 41-55.

Palacios, Robert. 1994 "Determinants of Administrative Costs in Publicly Managed Pension
Schemes". World Bank. Unpublished mimeo.

The Participant. 1996. "CREF Cuts Charges", May: 6.
Pinera, José. 1991. "PrincIpios y F'undamentos del Sistema Privado de Pensiones en Chile," In

Análisis del Sistema Privado de Pensiones en Chile. Santiago, Chile: Congreso
Iberoamericano, AsociaciOn de Administradoras de Fondos de Pensiones.

Quinn, Joseph and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1996. "Prospects for Social Security Reform". American
Prospect, May-June(26): 76-81.

Reid, Gary and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1995. Social Security Administration in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Report to the Public Sector Modernization and Private Sector Development Unit,
The World Bank, March.

Schieber, Sylvester and Gordon Goodfellow Forthcoming. "Investment of Assets in Self Directed
Retirement Plans". In Positioning Pensions for the 21st Century. Eds. M. Gordon, OS.
Mitchell, and M. Twinney. Pension Research Council: University of Pennsylvania Press,

Philadelphia PA.

sscst.doc - 8/18(96 - Mitchell

46

Schutan, Bruce. 1995.1'Fidelity Pursuit Changing Face of Total Benefits Outsourcing". Employee
Benefit News 9(5): 1,18-19.

Social Security Administration (SSA). 1995. Social Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical
Supplement, 1995. Washington, D.C.: USGPO.

Sunden, Annika and Olivia S. Mitchell. 1994. An Examination of Social Security Administration
Costs in the United States. Report to the Public Sector Management Division, LAC

Technical Department, World Bank, and Pension Research Council Working Paper, The
Wharton School.

Technical Panel on Trends and Issues in Retirement Saving (FIRS). 1995. Final Report to the 199495 Advisory Council on Social Security, US Social Security Administration, September 1995.

Turner, John and Daniel Beller, eds. Trends in Pensions, U.S. Department of Labor, Pension and
Welfare Benefits Administration, Washington, DC: 1989.

US Department of Labor (IJSDOL), Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration. 1996. Abstract
of Form 5500 Data Financial Reports, Bulletin #5, Winter.
US General Accounting Office (USGAO). 1989. Poor Performers: How They Are Identified and

Dealt With in the Social Security Administration, Washington, D.C.: USGPO, January.
Valdés-Prieto, Salvador. 1993. "Administrative Costs in the Chilean Pension System: Evidence
from an International Comparison," Instituto de Economla, Pontificia Universidad Catolica
de Chile: Santiago, Chile, Mimeo, January.
Valdés-Prieto, Salvador. 1994. "Administrative Charges in Pensions in Chile, Malaysia, Zambia, and
the United States," Policy Research Working Paper No. 1372. World Bank: October.

Vanguard. 1995. Facts on Funds for your Retirement. Valley Forge, PA: Vanguard. December..

Vanguard. 1996. Plain Talk about Index Investing, Marketing Bulletin,.
Vanguard. Various years. Prospectus, various funds. Valley Forge, PA: Vanguard.
Vanguard. 1995. Ten Reasons to Index, Marketing Brochure.
Warshawsky, Mark. 1988. "Private Annuity Markets in the United States: 1919-1984", Journ.al of
Risk and Insurance LV September: 5 18-28.

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitcheil

47

Watanabe, Noriyasu. 1996. "Private Pension Plans in Japan". In Securing Employer-Provided
Pension,s: An International Perspective. Eds. Z. Bodie, OS. Mitchell, and J. Turner. Pension

Research Council, University of Pennsylvania Press: Philadelphia PA
Yuengert, Andrew M. 1993. "The Measurement of Efficiency in Life Insurance", Journal of
Banking & Finoiwe: 17(2/3): 483-496.

World Bank. 1994. Averting the Old-Age Crisis: Policies to Protect the Old and Promote Growth.

Policy Research Report, Policy Research Department, The World Bank: June.
Zi, Hongmm. 1994. "Measurement of Cost Efficiency in the US Life Insurance Industry". Working
Paper, Univ. of Pennsylvania, Wharton School.
11n the US, this topic was the subject of a recent (3/25/96) Senate Finance Committee hearing that
reviewed options for privati.zation as described by members of the Social Security Advisory Council

as well as the Chairs of the Technical Panels reporting to the Council. See also Quinn and Mitchell
(1996).

2This section draws on Reid and Mitchell (1995) and Sunden and Mitchell (1994). It should be

emphasized that the present paper focuses on the provision of retirement income, and not health
care and welfare/social assistance. Also, disability benefits are treated only in passing.
A discussion of the rationale for retirement systems is offered by Atkinson (1987 and 1989) and
Barr (1992) among others.

4Private pension plans must also recognize a premium to cover the longevity, inflation, and interest

rate risks they assume, whereas most government-run retirement systems wifi instead implicitly
bear the costs and raise taxes if the need arises (c.f. Sunden and Mitchell, 1993; Mitchell et al. 1994;
Reid and Mitchell 1995).

Where possible, only old-age retirement programs were included in Table 1 but social security
costs were not always broken down by type in developing countries.

6Here we do not investigate whether a social security program is consistent with national goals of
growth and income distribution, though some systems are probably more conducive than others to
these objectives (c.f. World Bank, 1994).
sscst.doc . 8/18/96 - Mitchell

48

71n the case of Argentina there was some question as to the proper cost to assess for payroll tax
collections. The data given assume that average tax collections costs should be charged to the public
pension system for collection of social security taxes; while this is probably too high a charge, no
other figures are available (see Reid and Mitchell, 1995).
8

High administrative expenses have also been experienced under Argentina's new private defined

contribution system modeled after the Chilean regime; here, administrative charges currently
amount to 32% of contributions @ersonal communication, Rafael Rofman). However the Argentine

private pension system is only in its second year of operation, and charges would be expected to
decline over time.

91t should also be noted that there are important difference in services rendered across systems in
Chile; most private pension (AFP) members are not retired, while most public plan ('NP)

participants are retired.
10

It should also be evident that system cost comparisons are sensitive to the measure of participants

used. For instance, normalizing by beneficiaries yields US system cost estimates more than three
and a half times higher than those generated by normalizing with contributors.
11

This high figure assumes that average rather than marginal tax collection costs should be

assessed against the public plan. While this is no doubt unrealistic, more precise data do not exist.
12

Salvador Valdes-Prieto notes that the figures for Chile are not exactly comparable with those

reported in other countries, since Chile's system exacts a one-time fee when the defined
contribution monies are contributed, and no additional fees are charged on the accruing assets
(personal communication). Larry Kotlikoff argues that it is more appropriate to spread the Chilean
one-time up-front fee over the pension accrual phase in order to determine its impact on annualized

returns which he estimates at approximately 80 basis points per year for younger contributors
(personal communication).
13

For the combined OASDI program, total administration costs amounted to $2,600M in 1994, or

$19 per worker (and $14 per participant). As a percentage of benefits paid, administrative costs for

sscst.cloc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

49

this segment of social security caine to (193% of benefits, or 0.68% of contributions; and 0.63% or 63

basis points of the combined OASDI trust funds.
fact that disability claims require collection of medical data and subsequent medical

14

assessments probably helps explain why the process is more cumbersome.

data in the next three paragraphs are taken from Reid and Mitchell (1995).
'6As might be expected, many developing countries national social security systems do not

regularly provide data on the accuracy and timeliness of tax and benefit functions. This was true,
for example, in a recent analysis of the Costa Rican national retirement system (Caja Costarricense
de Seguridad Social, CCSS), the Argentine program (Administracion Nacional de la Seguridad
Social, ANSeS), and the Chilean public retirement system (lnstituto de Normalizacion Previsional,
INP).
17

Some

would argue that the Chilean market's return should not be compared to those of developed

countries since the Chilean AFP's were initially restricted to holding mainly government paper, and

still are very heavily concentrated in Chilean firms. Hence their investment universe had very
different risk/return characteristics than US or European markets.
'8For examples of this literature see Borcherding et al. (1992) and Mehay and Gonzales (1985),
among others.

'

Benefits and system membership were too cothnear to permit including both in the same

equation.
20 For

example, a compilation of mutual fund returns and expenses appears weekly in the Walt

Street Journal, and frequent updates are available from Lipper Analytical Services and
Morningstar Mutual Fund Reports, among others.
21

The discussion in this paragraph draws on Vanguard (1995:2).

22 Between

1981 and 1994, the expense ratio for the lowest-cost family of mutual funds fell 48%,

from 0.58% to 0.30%, though for the mutual fund industry as a whole expense ratios rose 42%, from
0.65% to 0.92% of assets (Vanguard 1995:3).

sscst.doc - 8118196 - Mitchell

50

23 Mutual funds as a whole averaged yearly portfolio turnover rates of 76%, much higher than the

2-6% rates for some of the prominent funds such as Fidelity's Market Index, Vanguard's Total Stock
Portfolio, and Vanguard's 500 Portfolio (Vanguard, 1996:2, see also Table 8).
24

Ippolito data were reanalyzed by Elton et al (1993) who conclude that mutual funds did not

earn higher than average returns. Analysis by Lakonishok et al. (1992) suggests that average
mutual fund performance lagged behind index fund performance by 7-80 basis points over the
Ippolito study period (1964-85), but detects evidence of better mutual fund performance over the
period 1983-89.

25Vanguard prospectus April 23, 1996; personal communication with Joel Dickson, May 1996.

23Within the last year Fidelity Investments announced that it would be the first mutual fund group
to provide a full menu of benefit offerings for companies consillering benefits outsourcing (cf Shutan
1995).
27

Under ERISA, small plans do not face the same annual reporting requirements.

28

Because the

market for pension professionals was assumed to be national in scope, the lack of

cross-sectional data on input prices was not deemed critical
29 The

range of recorcikeeping costs for 401(k) plans suggested by industry experts is $ 15-30 per

year.
3° What

is interesting is that in the 401(k) plan containing only an index fund, adding the annuity

costs increases costs by 32 basis points, while the annuity raises costs by only 3-8 basis points for

the money market, balanced, and equity accounts. This may be explained by the fact that few
mutual funds offer an annuity product in the large institutional 403(b) marketplace, so that
reported data may be skewed by an overweighting of smaller retail plans. Hence adding the annuity
charge appears to raises expense ratios by a low of 4% to a high of double, depending on the fund.
31

In the last few years, however, a handful of states and municipalities have offered a defined

contribution alternative. For example the city of Westminster, Colorado provides defined

contribution plans for its police, firefighters, and general city employees, holding plan assets or

$43M for some 770 participants. Expenses per participant are reported at $248 per year per person
sscst.doc - 8118196 - Mitchell

51

($1994).

On a percentage basis, annual expenses total 0.45% of assets, or 5.4% of contributions.

These expenses are allocated roughly two-fifths to operational expenses, and three-fifths to money
management costs.

32These public plan costs could stifi be understated, to the extent that public sector pensions
probably do not fully account for collection costs, the use of public land and buildings, and benefits
provided by other government agencies.
331n related work, Mitchell and Hsin (1994) and Mitchell and Smith (1994) found that public plan

funding and investment performance was related to the composition and responsibilities of the
Pension Boards managing the plans. Specifically, funding and returns were lower when a pension

plan had more participants on the Board, when in-state investments were required, and when
Board members were not required to carry liability insurance.

" For studies on life insurance industry costs and efficiency see Grace and Timme (1992); Fields
and Murphy (1989); Gardner and Grace (1993); Yuengert (1993), Zi (1994).
36Testiznony of Sylvester Schieber, Senate Finance Committee, March 25, 1996.

3For further discussion of the Chilean system see Diamond and Valdes Prieto (1994) and World
Bank (1994).

37mere is debate over whether this plan would be mandatory or optional, and how funds would be

collected. If contributions were collected at the individual level instead of continuing to use the
Internal Revenue Service, collection costs could also be expected to rise substantially. Many of the

issues raised in this discussion are taken up by the TIRS Technical Panel Report (1995).

This is one aspect of the current Social Security retirement account that might continue to be
managed by the government, though encouraging the formation of groups for insurance purposes
may suffice.

sscst.doc - 8/18/96 - Mitchell

Table 1. Administrative Costs as a Percentage
of Social Security Benefit Expenditures
L. Amer./Carribbean
Mean

27.78

Standard deviation

31.16

Argentina
Bahamas
Barbados

2.30
30.75
5.56
89.49
21,39
7.00
8.00
81.80
4.75
46.97
31.72

Belize
Bolivia

Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dominica
Dominican Republic

Ecuador
El Salvador
Grenada
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico

Panama
Peru
St. Lucia
Trinidad and Tobago

Uruguay
Venezuela

1355
33.40
9.85
12.72
22.66
18.25
6.40
23.55
5.88
130.98
48.31
15.29
6.51
17.46

OECD
Mean
Std. dev.
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Iceland
Ireland
Italy

3.12
1.28
1.22

2.48
4.55
2.80
2.98
3.36
4.18
2.86
6.72
1.71

4.88
2.20

Japan

1.79

Luxembourg

2.74

Netherlands

3.10
2.42

New Zealand
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland

Turkey
United Kingdom
United States

1.00

4.86
2.81

4.24
3.04
2.62
3.10
3.28

Source: Mitchell et a!. (1994).
Note: Data may reflect expenditures on pensions in all cases; in some additional functions as the provision of health services are
included.

Table 1.doe . 8/18196

Sources:

17%

25%
24%
20%
18%

1.6%
1.9%

1.3%

1.1%

Table2.doc . 8/18/98

Reid and Mitchell(1995)
Note: Datain this table reflect onlypension-relatedsocial securityfunctions.

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993

Year

COSTA RICA
CCSS

5.1%

AFP
INP
Admin.
Adinin. Costs Admin. Costs
Charges per per Benefits per Benefits
Contribs.

CHILE

1.7%
1.8%
2.7%
2.2%
2.3%
3.3%
2.7%
4.7%
7.4%

5.6%
5.1%

5.5%

4.1%

Collection costs

ARGENTINA
ANSES Costs per Benefits
w/o
with

0.7%
0.7%

0.9%

1.1%

2.4%
2.4%

2.8%

2.0%

Cost per Benefit:
Disability

OASI

SSA

U.S.

Table 2. Annual Social SecurityAdministrative Costs per Financial flow Measures

Table3.doc. 8/18/96

(continued)

$29.8
$40.8

$47.7

$7M

$45.0
$46.0
$49.0

$42.0

$51.6

$31.8
$27.8

$44.0

1988
1989
1990
1991

1992
1993

$16.8

$23.2

$39.0

1987

$24.2

$24.9

$44.2

$24.5

$42.0

1986

$39.2

$46.0

$20.7

5.4

8.5

$11.0

$
$

$22.6

$43.0

$ 6.7
$ 8.9

$50.0

1985

$29.5

$35.8

$65.2

$72.6

$39.1

$28.4

$12.9

$15.7

$21.5

w/out
with
Collection costs

1984

Member

per Plan

$44.7

Member

per Plan

ARGENTINA
ANSES Cost per Member

$55.0

per

Contributor

COSTA RICA
CCSS

$7L0

per Active Contributor

INP

1980
1981
1982
1983

Year

AFP

CHILE

Table 3. Administrative Costs per Participant Measures (constant 1992 US$)

$130

$11.7

TabIe3.doc . 8/18/96

Source: Reid and Mitchell (1995)
Note: For similardata on 42 countries worldwi4e, including some of the above, see WorldBank (1994) Table A.9.

1992
1993

1991

$43.8
$47.7

$151.7
$148.2

$175.9

$16.2

$58.6

1985

1986
1987
1988
1989
1990

$114.9

$17.0

$62.2

1980
1981
1982
1983
1984

$5.7
$6.1

$6.5

$5.5

Disability Insurance Cost per:
Covered Worker
Beneficiary

Pensioner

Covered Worker

OASI Cost per:

U.S.
SSA

Year

Table 3 (continued)

Table 4. Facts and Figures about OASDI ($1994)

Revenues and Tax Base
OASI Revenues ($M)
DI Revenues ($M)
• Workers with Taxable Earnings (M)

Workers Fully Insured (M)
Covered Earnings ($M)
Av. Earnings/Coy. Worker ($)
OASI Revenues/Covered Worker ($)
OASI Revenues/Coy. Earnings (%)
OASDI Revenues/Coy. Worker ($)
OASDI Revenues/Coy. Earnings (%)

Quantity
$328,271
$52,841
139
173

$3,229,100
$23,231
$2,362
10%

$2,742
12%

source:
T 4.A1

T 4•B1

T 4.C1
T 4.B1
[au.calc.]
tau.calc.1

jau.cáic.J

[au.cc.1
[au•calc]

Beneficiaries and Benefits
OASI Benefits Paid ($M)
DI Benefits Paid ($M)
•
OASI Recipients (M)
DI Recipients (M)
Av. Annual Ret.Wkr. Benefit ($)
Av. Ret. Wkr. Ben/Av. Coy. Earnings (%)
Av. Disabled Wkr. Benefit ($)
Covered workers + OASDI Recip's

$279,068
$37,704

'F 4.A4

37

T 5.A4

6
$8,368

'r 6.A4

36%

$7,940
182

T 4.A4

T 3.C4
[aucaJc.]
T 5.A1

[au.c.]

Trust Fund Accumulation
OASI Fund yr end '94 ($M)
DI Fund yr end '94 ($M)
OASI Fund/Revenues (%)
OASDI Fund/Revenues (%)
OASDI Funds/Part's ($)

T4. - USSSFACTxIs - 8/18/96

$413,460
$22,925
126%
115%

$2,399

T 4.A1
T 4•A2

[au.caic.j
[au.calc.]

[aucalc.I

(continued)

Annual OASDI Administrative Costs
Administrative Costs ($M)
Admin.Costs/Cov. Worker ($)

$2,600

p. '4

$19
$14

[aucaic.]

Admin.Costs/Participant ($)
Admin.CostslBens Paid (%)
Admin.Costs/'Frust Fund (%)
Admin .Costs/Contrib's (%)

0.93%
0.63%
0.68%

[au.calc.; act. + ret.]
[au.calc.]
[au.caic.]
[au.caic.]

Annual OASI Administrative Costs
Administrative Costs ($M)
Admin.Costs/Cov. Worker ($)
Admin.CostsIParticipant ($)
Admrn.CostsfBens Paid (%)
Admin.Costs/Trust Fund (%)

$1,600
$12
$9
0.57%
0.39%
0.42%

Admin . Costs/Contrib's (%)

p. 14
[au.calc.]
[au.calc.; act;. + ret.]

[au.calc.]
[au.calc.]
[au.calc.]

Administrative Data (All OASDHI included in counts)
No. of SSA employees
No. of SSA offices
Field & Regional offices
Appealsfllearings offices

Service Centers
Data Operations Center
Claims Information
Processed Claims/yr (000)
Accuracy Rates - OASI ($)
Source: Social Security Administration, 1995 Annual Statistical Supplement,
USGPO: 1995; refs. given in last column,

T4. - USSSFACT.xls . 8/18/96

64,234

T 2.F2

1,412

T2.F1

146

T 2.F1

6

T 2.F1

1

T 2.F1

3,206

T 2.F4

99.80%

T 2.F7

Table 5. US Social Security Administration Costs Over Time
(Per Capita, $1994)

Program

Admin. Cost Per
Beneficiary

Admin. Cost Per
Covered Worker

Old Age & Survivor Insurance
1980
1985
1990
1994

$65.72
61.91
46.25
44.10

$35.95
17.13

$121.43

$5.77
6.86
5.98
7.40

12.35
11.83

Disability Insurance
1980
1985
1990
1994

185.85
160.28
259.19

Hospital Insurance
1980
1985
1990
1994

$136.34
165.39
129.59
164.03

$8.16
9.25
6.20
9.09

Supplementary Medical Insurance
1980
1985
1990
1994

$61.59
58.00
63.55
57.56

Source: 1980-90 figures from Sunden and Mitchell (1993).

1994 data from Social Security Annual Statistical Supplement
T. 4A1 and2, 4B1. 5A4, SB! and2

T5 - SSTOTCSTxIs .8/18/96

$9.68
10.45
12.95
12.22

T. 6 - ssperf,xls - 8/18/96

Pay benefits on time

Pay benefits correctly

Issue SS Numbers

Quality of Service

—7

to 8 M issued
per year

Assign SSN in 24 hrs
of receiving documentation

'98% get SSN in 24 hrs; cards
within 5 days
• Issue SSN correctly
"99.8% of SSN correct
• Correct SSN probs <30 days Not measured
Benefit expenditures • 100% accuracy goal, initial •94.8% of initial payments
correct
payment
100% accuracy goal, lifetime
99.8% of lifetime dollars
correct
payment
Accurate DI determinations
96.7% DI accuracy rate
•
17 days average payment
First benefit check within
15 days of filing for old-age
time
• 9&9% of
benefits
regular payments
benefits
on
schedule
Regular old-age
paid on schedule
DI benefits paid wIth 6 mos. 90 days average to process
of disability or 60 days of filing disabilitycases
Deniedclaims noticed win •229 days average to process
60 days, 120 days for hearings, hearing, 239 for appeals case
13.2% of hearings w/ decision
90 days for review of appeal
wIn 120 days of filing

Service Provided Output Measure Standard

Table 6. US Retirement System Performance Standards and Quality Measures

Standard

T. 6 - ssperf.xls- 8/18/96

"87.5% w/ appt. seen in <= 15 min.
"Else 82.3% seen in <=30 min.
4.7% w/o appt. seen <=30 mm.
92.9% of callerscan access
800 number in <=24 hrs
12.5 days for handling inquiries

Quality of Service

No.

30 days

'99.2% of reported earnings
of contributors,
Post earningsaccurately
Amt. of contributions
posted accurately
• Earnings posted wIn 6 mos. 70% of reported earnings posted
wIn 6 mos of tax year end
of end of tax year
• Resolve earnings cliffs. win
Not presently measured

a

Number of telephone <= 15 min.wait time in field
calls, letters, visitors office wI appt.; 30 min. w/o
Accurate handling of phone
calls in 24 hours

Output Measure

Source:Adapted from Sunden and Mitchell (1994)

Maintain accurate
earnings records

Service Provided
Personalcontact

(continued)

7.

(%)

0.895
1.250

0.834

1.043

0.150
0.150
0.280
0.500
0.390
0.350
0.840

(3)

0.324
0.613
0.876

Quartile

Average

T. 7 - lipper.xls - 8/18/96

Source: Lipper Report, Dollar WeightedEzpense Ratios for sampLes of mutual funds
ofdesignatedsize, fiscal years ending 1994/95.
Expense ratio defined as fraction of assets devoted to fund administrativeexpenses annually.

Equity Index (A>$100M)
Money Market (A>$1B)
Fixed Income (A>$1B)
Growth (A>$500MT)
Growth &Income(A>$500M)
Balanced (A>$250M)
Global (A>$250M)

Type of Fund

Lowest

1.640
1.000
2.000
2.460
1.840
1.910
1.380

(%)

Quartile

Highest

Dollar Weighted Average Expense Ratio

Mutual Fund Expense Ratios by Fund Type

(Funds with assets> given levels)

Table

$20,968
$43,276
$34,530
$16,800
$22,027
$15,360
$14,686

($)

Av. Acct. Size

Table 8. Large Mutual Fund Portfolio Expense Ratios and Other Data
Exp. Ratio
(% of assets)

Size of Fund
($M)

Fidelity Funds
Market IndexB
(S&P index)
Blue Chiph
(blue chip stock fund)'
Fidelity Fundd
(LT capital growth)

Disciplined Equity
(undervalued S&P)
Contraria&
(undervalued stock)

$288

2%

1.02

2,229

182

0.64

1,592

157

0.96

2,088

221

1.00

8,694

235

$786"

2W

0.20i

9,356k

6'

0.20m

297"

32°

0.20

4Ø3i

16r

0.20

l,731t

33u

(large-cap index)

Balancedlndex

(60/40 stocks/bonds)

TotalBonclPortfolio

(%)

0.45%

Vanguard Funds
Total Stock Portfolio
(Wilshire 5000 index)
500 Portfolio
(S&P index)
ValuePortfolio

Turnover Rate

(bonds)

a Fidelity Market Index Fund prospectus6/95. Aiso an additional $10 account fee charged per account per year and a .50%
redemption fee is charged on shares held less then 180 days. Redemption fee not included in returns figure given.
Assumes annual eccount larger than $2500: else $12 annual account maintenance fee charged. Total returns do not include
one-time sales charge.
Fidelity Blue Chip Growth Fund Prospectus, 11195.
Fidelity Fund prospectus, 8/96. Also see note a.
• Fidelity Disciplined Equity Fund prospectus, 12/95. Also see note a.
Fidelity Contrarian Fund prospectus, 2/95.
'Vanguard Facts on Funds, 12/95. Includes $10 annual account maintenance fee cherged to account smaller than $10,000.
1994 year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
1994 year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
I Vanguard Facts on Funds, 12/95. Includes $10 annual account maintenance fee charged to eccount smaller then $10,000. Also
portfolio transaction fee of 0.25% per dollar invested assessed in 1995 (not included in expense ratio).
Ii 1994
year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev, 9.95.
1994 year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
Vanguard Facts on Funds, 12/95. Includes $10 annual account maintenance fee charged to account smeller then $10,000.
1994 year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
o 1994 year end; Vanguard Index Trust Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
Vanguard Facts on Funds, 12/95. Includes $10 annual account maintenance fee charged to account smaller than $10,000.
1994 year end: Vanguard Balanced Index Fund Prospectus, Rev. 4.95.
1994 year end; Vanguard Balanced Index Fund Prospectus, Rev. 4.95.
• Vanguard Facts on Funds, 12/95. Includes $10 annual account maintenance fee charged to account smaller than $10,000.
1994 year end; Vanguard Bond Index Fund Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.
1994 year end; Vanguard Bond Index Fund Prospectus, Rev. 9.95.

T. 8 - mgmtfees.doc . 8/18/96

$79.28

0.0503
0.0028
0.0029

5214

0.0036
0.0036
$130.23

0.1217

1122
4009

0.0018
$34.42

0.0170
0.00 17

1204

173
304

9

22
103
370
26

148

$49

Contrib.

Defined

T. 9 - do192.xls - 8/18/96

76

89

1239

286

17

0.1576 0.1720
0.0067 0.0065
0.0068 0.0066
$141.39 $152.23

1432

352

20

1

33
55
123
508

41
59
142
566
2

$140

$161

Total

Defmed
Benefit

> 100 Participants

0.1027
0.0082
0.0083
$96.84

66
193

4

0

13

58

19

8
4

$21

Defmed
Contrib.

Multiemnloyer Plans

Source: USDOL, PWBA. Abstract of 1992 Form 5500 Reports, Priuote Pension Plan Bulletin No. 5,
Winter, 1996. USGPO: Washington, D.C. 1996.
Note: Assets: Table C5, single > 100; C6: multis > 100, Eapenses:C9 single =>100; GiG: multia>l00
Contributions: same as expenses;Participants: Table B4. *Jj.UJ,3 PBGC premium.

Expenses/Participant ($)

Contnbutions(%)
Total Assets (%)
Net Assets (%)

Expenses as a Percent of:

Total Expenses ($M)

1426

17

OtherAdmin.Expenses*

8
310

128

483

102

2037

Defmed
Benefit

$181
69
324
226
1667

$231
216
346
330

Total

Accounting Fees
Actuarial Fees
Contract Administrator Fees
Invst. Advisory & Mgmt. Fees
Legal Fees
Valuation/Appraisal Fees
Trustee FeeslExpenses

Salaries andAllowances

Expenses ($M)

> 100 Participants

SinEle Emnlover Plans

Table 9. Private Pension Plan Administrative Expenses (1992)

Table 10. Expenses for 40 1(k) Plans Holding Mutual Funds

Exu. Ratio
(%)

Short Bonds
Intermed. Bonds
Long Bonds
BalancecliTotal Return
Income/Utility
Growth/income
LongTerm Growth
Agressive Growth
Global Bonds
Int'l/Global Equity
Source: Plan Sponsor, Feb. 1996, p. 75

T 10 - 4Olkexp.xls - 818I96

0.84
1.01
1.16
1.41
1.36
1.27
1.44
1.58
1.54
1.88

Assets
($B)

$46
$131
$71
$132

$99
$290
$340
$136
$39
$175

0.84
1.53

0.6

Fixed Income
Money market
International

Index

T.11 - sm4Olk.xls- 8/18/96

Source: CFO, October 1995

*Assetbasedcharges (investment expenses) equal FYoperatingexpen.ses
divided by average net assets. Both plansalso levy recordkeeping and
administrativefees onplan sponsors.

2.14

0.85

Balanced
0.5

1.06
1.04
1.27
1.19
1.16

0.06
0.03

1.07
0.82
0.66
0.42
1.32
0.28

1.13

Equity
0.18
0.08
0.21
0.32

[1/2]

Ratio

[1-2]

Diff

(401k, no anziuity)

Type of Fund
(401k with annuity)

[2]

Mutual Fund

[1]

Life Insurance Fund

(basis points)

Table 11. Expense Ratios for Small and Midsized 401(k) Pensions
With and Without an Annuity product

0.42
0.41
0.33
0.29
0.30

0.34

0.32

N

crefcost.xls - 8/18/96

Source: College Retirement EquitiesFund Prospectus1
April 191995;data cover year ending 12/94

Equity Index
Stock Account
Growth
Global equities
Social choice
Money Mkt.
Bond MIct.

Type of Fund

1994

Total
Exnenses
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21
0.21

0.08
0.10
0.18
0.17
0.09
0.05
0.06

N

Exuenses

Advisory Fees

N

Admin.

Investm't

0.03
0.03

0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.03

N

Exnenses

Distribution

Table 12. College Retirement Equity Fund (CREF) Administrative Expenses

Table 13. Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board Financial Data
(1995$)

I. Summary Data, Federal Thrift Plan (year end 1995)
Average Account Size

$16,500

2.2M
Total Participants
Investments
Total Investments
$26.5B
36.3B
Net Assets
Contributions
$5.6B
$3.8B
Participant
$1 .8B
Employer
Administrative Expenses
$33.4B
As % of net assets
0.09%
As % of total contributions
0.59%
Investment Expenses
$0.002B
As % of net assets
0.006%
As % of total contributions
0.03%
II. Data by Fund Type
US Govt. Securities Investment Fund
Assets
$12.8B
Admin. Expenses
$0.024B
0.19%
Admin. Expenses/Assets
Wells Fargo Equity Index Fund
Assets
$11.5B
Admin. Expenses
$0.008B
0.07%
Admin. Expenses/Assets
Wells Fargo US Debt Index Fund
Assets
$2.2B
Admin. Expenses
$0.002B
0.09%
Admin. Expenses/Assets
Note: Expenses associated with collection of payroll contributions not included in expense figures. Fiduciary insurance
premiums set at zero in 1995, Investment expense ratio not available on aper.fund basis.
Source: Arthur Andersen LL#P (1996)

t13. . fedtsp.doc . 8/18/96

Table 14. Actuarial Analysis of Defined Benefit Pension Administrative Costs Per Person
($1994)

Size of Pension Plan
15 Particiøants in Plan

10.000 Participants in Plan

Year

DB

DC

DCIDB

DB

DC

DC[DB

1981

$184

131

71%

$22

24

110%

1985

456

374

82

31

32

104

1991

518

259

74

62

46

74

Source: Author's calculations from Hay/Fluggins (1990), p. 31, 39

T, 14 . haytext.doc - 8/18/96

Table 15: Defined Contribution Asset Holdings by Participant Age
Age of Plan Participant

Proportion of Assets Held In:
Fixed—Income Funds

Domestic Equity Funds
BalancedFunds
CompanyStockFunds
'International Equity Funds

21-30
41%
39

31-40

6

8
9

11
3

43%

36
3.

Source: Derived from &hieber and Goodfel low (forthcoming), Table 4.
Note: Columns may not sum to 100 percent due to rounding error.

t.15 - dchold.doe - 8/18/96

61+

41-50
49%
30

51-60
62%
22

11

8
6

1

3

1

6
4

85%
10
3

