NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CASH WELFARE AS A CONSUMPTION
SMOOTHING MECHANISM FOR
SINGLE MOTHERS

Jonathan Gruber

Working Paper 5738

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996

I am gratefil to Raaj Chitaley for expert assistance in creating the PSID database, to Becky Blank,
Janet Currie, Bruce Meyer, Robert Moffitt, Aaron Yelowitz, seminar participants at the University
of Wisconsin and the NBER, and particularly Hilary Hoynes for helpful comments, and to the
National Institute on Aging for financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs
in Labor Studies and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
0 1996 by Jonathan Gruber. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5738
September 1996
CASH WELFARE AS A CONSUMPTION
SMOOTHING MECHANISM FOR
SINGLE MOTHERS
ABSTRACT
While there has been considerable research on the disincentive effects of cash welfare under
the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, there is little evidence on the
benefits of the program for single mothers and their children. One potential benefit of this program
is that it provides short-run consumption insurance for women at the point that they become single
mothers. This is only true, however, to the extent that the program is not crowding out other sources
of support, such as own savings, labor supply, or transfers from others. I assess the importance of
this insurance mechanism by measuring the extent to which AFDC smooths the consumption
women who transition

to single motherhood.

I use longitudinal

of

data on family structure and

consumption expenditures on food and housing from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID),
matched to information on the welfare benefits available in each state and year over the 1968-1985
period. I find that raising potential benefits by one dollar raises the food and housing consumption
of all women who become single mothers (and their fmilies)

by 30 cents. This estimate implies that

for each dollar of AFDC received by this population their consumption of these categories of goods
rises by up to 95 cents. This consumption

smoothing benefit appears to be larger for women who

become single mothers through marital dissolution, rather than through out-of-wedlock childbearing;
this is due to increased housing expenditures of the former group but not of the latter.

Jonathan Gruber
Department of Economics
Room E52-274c
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER
gruberj@athena. init. edu

One of the most extensively debated government expenditure programs of the past few years
has been the provision of cash welfare to single mothers and their children under the Aid to Families
with

Dependent

expenditures,l

Children

(AFDC)

program.

Despite

absorbing

only

1% of government

this program has been roundly criticized because of the perceived distortions arising

from the structure of program incentives.
the most part) ctigorically

In particular, since AFDC is both means Ested and (for

restricted to single mothers, critics have claimed that the program leads

to both reductions in work effort and dissolution of the family unit.

While empirical evidence on

these questions is very mixed, they remain compelling criticisms in theory and have motivated calls
for reform, and perhaps even abolition (MurrayJ 1984), of our cash welfare system.
At the same time, the key benefit of this program
presumably quite needy population.
the generosity

of this program

is that it transfers

resources

to a

Proponents of AFDC have therefore painted proposals to reduce

as po~ntially

devastating to single mothers and their children.

However, these types of arguments presume that reductions in AFDC benefits are not compensated
by increases in support from other sources.

In fact, as critics such as Charles Murray (1984) and

Marvin Olasky (1992) have noted, in the absence of this cash transfer program other mechanisms
might respond to maintain the standard of living of single female headed families. Such mechanisms
muld include self-insuranm through savings and through own or family labor supply, transfers from
family members of cash or in-kind benefits, or transfers from other charitable institutions.

If there

are private market or non-market mechanisms which are being “crowded out” by the current welfare
system, then the implications of reductions in AFDC generosity for the standard of living of single
female-headed families is unclear.

But while the disincentive effects of AFDC have been subject to

‘In 1992 AFDC expenditures were $22.2 billion, slightly more than 1% of combined Federal
and State an; heal expenditures of $2100 billion (U.S. House of Representatives, 1993; Economic
ReDort of the President, 1994).

2
extensive empirical testing and criticism, there is very little evidence to support or refute the benefits
that this program has in terms of raising the standard of living of recipients.
It is impossible to know what types of institutions might emerge to support single mothers
and their children in the absenu

of any cash welfare system, so that one cannot estimate the effect

of eliminating AFDC on the standard of living of this Population.z

In this paper, I pursue a more

modest goal: to explore the role of the existing cash welfare system as a consumption smoothing
devim for women at the point that they become single mothers.

Divorce or out-of-wedlock

childbearing is potentially associated with a large reduction in the standard of living of these women
and their families.
as unemployment

One goal of the welfare system, as with other social insurance programs such
insuranw,

is to insure family income against this adverse event.3 To the extent

that AFDC provides such insurance, it represents a benefit of the program which must be weighed
against any distortions that arise from the structure of this means-tested categorical transfer.
I assess the extent to which AFDC provides this insurance by exploiting the tremendous
variation in the generosity of this program across states, and within states over time. If cash welfare
is playing such a consumption

smoothing role, there should be corresponding

variation in the

consumption change for those becoming stigle mothers in different states and times. That is, to the
extent that AFDC is not simply crowding out other sources of support, then increases in benefit

@ne potential empirical strategy for answering this question would be to use historical evidence
on insurance arrangements before the growth of the AFDC program. For example, Olasky (1992)
argues that private charity provided an effective safety net for the indigent before the emergen~ of
the New Deal. But, even to the extent that this is true, underlying changes in the nature of the
economy and private insurance mechanisms over the subsequent years make it difficult to extend this
conclusion m the removal of the current social safety net.
3At the same time, of course, critics claim that cash welfare is causing these transitions to single
motherhood; I address this important point at length below. For a related argument and evidence
for the unemployment insurance system, see Gruber (forthcoming).

3
levels should be translated directly to smaller (per capita) consumption reductions associated with
becoming a single mother.
My primary source of data for this analysis is the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID).
This longitudinal survey allows one to follow women as they move between marital and childbearing
states. I use two different measures of consumption that are available in the PSID: food expenditures
and housing expenditures.

The PSID data are matched to information about the welfare system in

each state over tie 1968-1985 period to estimate the basic consumption smoothing relationship.
To summarize, I find that the transition to single motherhood is associated with only a small
3% reduction in food and housing expenditures on average.
to the important assumption
AFDC ~li~ib~

However, this small reduction is due

smoothing role played by AFDC.

For the full sample, each dollar of

mitigates the consumption fall associated with single motherhood by 30 cents. That

is, the reduction in consumption from this adverse event would be over seven times as large if AFDC
were not available.

I also find that for each dollar of AFDC received by those becoming single

mothers is associated with (at most) a 95 cent rise in consumption of food and housing.

This result

suggests that there is not a significant crowdout of other sources of support by the AFDC system.
This mnsumption

smoothing effect operates for both women who become divor~

and those single

women who have children, although the effect is larger on the former group, primarily through the
effect of AFDC on housing expenditures.
The paper proceeds as follows.

In Part I, I provide background on the welfare system and

related research, and a simple model to illustrate the potential for AFDC to serve as a consumption
smoothing mechanism.

Part II describes the data, and Part III discusses the empirical strategy.

Part

IV then presents the basic PSID regression results, and pursues a number of specification checks and
extensions.

Part V concludes.

4
Part I: Welfare and Consumption Smoothing

Background on ~C
AFDC is the largest cash welfare program for the able-bodied non-elderly
Benefits under the AFDC program have been traditionally

in tie U. S.’

limited to single mothers who meet

relatively restrictive income criteria; on average across the states in 1987, AFDC eligibility was
limited to those below 60 % of the poverty line. But there has also been tremendous variation across
the states in the generosity of their AFDC programs, as well as substitial
over time.

differences within states

In 1968, tie average state had AFDC benefits of $1971 for a family of three, but this

varied from a low of $546 ~ississippi)

to a high of $3875 (New Jersey).

Over the next 16 years

(the period covered by my PSID sample), nominal benefits grew by an average of 111%, but this
growth ranged from a low of 29% (Illinois) to a high of 416% (Alaska).s

In real terms, benefits

fell by 31% over this period; real benefit growth varied from -58% to 67%.
States also have the option of covering married couples as well, if the head is under-employed
(working less than 100 hours per month),
traditionally been quite small, however.

under the AFDC-UP

program.

This program has

In 1970, only 4% of families on AFDC were enrolled

through this option; this share had grown to only 7% by 1985, the last year of my sample (U.S.
House of Representatives,

1993).

Thus, for the purposes of this analysis I will treat AFDC

eligibility as being restricted to single mothers.

4The SS1 program, which provides benefits to the poor disabled and elderly, is of roughly the
same magnitude as the AFDC program. Additional cash welfare is provided by some state General
Assistance programs. I will only focus on cash welfare through AFDC in this paper, although when
I measure welfare income receipt in the PSID I will include all welfare income, since the distinction
in the survey between AFDC and other welfare may not be a clear one.
‘Alaska is an outlier in terms of positive benefit growth; for the next highest state, growth was
258% (Maine). Even using this figure, the disparity in benefit growth is substantial, with a 10-fold
difference in growth rates across states.

5
There is an enormous literature which has focused on the effects of cash welfare on behavior;
see Moffitt (1992) for a comprehensive
previous research in this area.

review.

There are two common features to almost all

First, the identification strategy generally relies on variation in the

generosity of cash welfare across states and time.

Second, in almost every case the focus of the

research has been on the ~isinwntive effec~ of AFDC.
on the potentially
childbearing,

deleterious

All of tie articles reviewed by Moffitt focus

effects of the AFDC program

long term welfare dependence, or migration.

for labor supply, marital status,

But there is little work on the benefits

of the program for the targeted group, single mothers.
There is a large body of older research which attempts to assess the adequacy of AFDC, in
terms of raising recipients out of poverty; see Danziger et al. (1981) for a review.

But, as Danziger

et al. emphasize, this literature has all been static; that is, none of these studies have allowed for any
offsetting income flows in response to increases in AFDC generosi~.

To the extent that any

offsetting behavioral responses to the program exist, these calculations overstate the effects of AFDC
on the standard of living of single mothers,

But there has been little attempt to incorporate these

responses in measuring the extent to which increases in AFDC generosity translate to an improved
standard of living.
In theory, the adequacy of AFDC could be assessed by using eviden~

from these previous

studies on how other sources of support for single mothers are reduced, or crowded out, when
welfare becomes more generous.

But the list of potential sources of support is a very long one, and

here is only evidence on some of these margins.
in the AFDC guaran&

For example, there is some evidence that changes

reduce labor supply (see the evidence reviewed in Danziger et al., 1981 ).6

bMoffht (1986) provides more recent evidence, and the results are mixed once state fixed effects
are included in the model.

6
But the evidence on the crowdout effect on transfers from others is mixed,’ and there is no work
on the response of savings behavior. a
In addition,

there is substantial

anecdotal and personal interview evidence that AFDC

recipients are maintaining their living standards by relying on legal and illegal income sources that
are not reported to the -C

c~worker

and presumably not reported to the (PSID or other) survey

interviewer either (Edin, 1995). But no previous research has assessed how these unreported sources
of income respond to AFDC generosity changes, and it is difficult to imagine doing so giving the
inherent data problems.

Finally, there is no work on how these different margins interact; the

response of private transfers to AFDC generosi~ may be a function of how labor supply responds,
for example.

Thus, an alternative approach must be used to answer this question.

The approach

proposed in this paper is to directly examine how AFDC generosity differences are translated into
changes in the standard of living for women who transition to single motherhood.

A Model
In order to lay out the nature of the expected relationship between AFDC and consumption
changes, it is useful to write down a simple model of the consumption implications of the transition
to single motherhood.

The unit of observation, which I label the “welfare unit”, is a woman and her

(zero or more) children, who faces some risk of becoming a single mother either through divorce
(in the case where she is married,

and there are some children already present),

or through

‘Rosenzweig and Wolpin (1994) find only a small crowdout effect of AFDC on parental
mntributions to young women. Cox and Jacubson (1995) find a crowdout of the probability of
receiving support, but not the amount of support. Scheoni (1994) finds a larger crowdout for blacks.
*Powers (1996) does find that asset limits under the AFDC program appear to affect asset
accumulation levels, but she does not explore the role of benefits variation.

-.
—

7

childbearing (in the case where she is unmarried, and there are not yet children present).

In the first

period of the model, the welfare unit has earned income of y available with which to finance the
mnsumption

of the women and her children.g The woman can also set aside some of this inmme,

s, for savings, either in the form of financial assets or loans to others that can be drawn down at
some later date.’0

She faces a risk of (1-a) of becoming a single mother in period 2; this is

assumed to be exogenous, a point to which I return in the empirical work.

If she becomes a single

mother, the net income of the welfare unit falls to ky, where Oc k < 1; this is either because the
husband leaves (in the case of dissolution), or because the woman either cannot work or must hire
child care (“m the case of child-bearing).

On the other hand, in this case the woman has three

additional resources with which to finance mnsumption:

her own savings (s), AFDC payments (A),

or transfers from others (t). Transfers from others are gifts, wnsisting of some lump sum amount,
and also (potentially) of some amount which is a general function of her net income in the single
mother state:
(1)

t =T+f(ky+A)

Following the details of the current AFDC program, benefits are the maximum AFDC payment@
minus a 100% tax rate on other income.

However, I assume that transfers from others are not

reported to the AFDC authorities; nor do the authorities measure the “savings” that the woman has

me amount y can be viewed as the outcome of a within-family bargaining process which yields
some division of mnsumption between the welfare unit and other household members. An important
limitation of the PSID data in practice is that I only obseme total family consumption in the data and
not the consumption of the welfare unit alone; I discuss this issue in more detail below.
‘°For example, groups of women who face a high risk of single motherhood may make loans to
their friends when they become single mothers. These are different than the transfers modelled
below, which are not “balanced budget” but are simply gifis to the single mother.

8
available. 11 Thus, AFDC benefits are:
(2)

A=~.~-s

If she doesn’t beame

a single mother, the woman consumes her savings, but receives no AFDC or

transfers from others.
(3)

U=

Thus, the woman maximizes the two period utility function:

U~-s]-

1/(1 +6)[a*U~

+ s*(1 +r)] + (1-a) *U[ky + s*(1 +r) + A + t]

where d is her discount rw and r is the rate of return on savings,
This model can be solved for the change in consumption upon single motherhood,
function of the AFDC guarantee 4.

as a

To provide illustrative results, I solve the case where 6 =r=O,

where utility is of the log form, and where previous income is normalized to one. The results of this
exercise are depicted in Figure 1. The AFDC maximum payment is displayed along the x axis, and
the change in consumption is measured on they axis. I mnsider the case where a =0.95 (5 percent
chance of becoming a single mother), and k =0 (no earned income for the welfare unit after the
transition to single motherhood),
be 20% of predissolution

for four different scenarios: transfers which are a lump sum set to

income, but which are not a finction of AFDC benefits, and no savings;

savings with lump sum transfers;

savings,

and transfers

which offset one-half of net AFDC

payments; savings, and transfers which exactly offset AFDC payments.
In the fust case, with no savings and no transfers,

there is a one-for-one

consumption

smoothing rok of AFDC; that is, since there is no souru of private insuranw, each dollar of public
insurance is translated directly to consumption.
80% of pre-dissolution

In fact, in this case, if AFDC replaces more than

income there is an increase in consumption due to the fixed transfer.

In each

1lThis is consistent with the evidence in Ed in (1995). Making transfers “taxable” by the AFDC
system would not qualitatively change the conclusions of the model. Similarly, I do not condition
transfers on the mother’s savings; this does not change the qualitative conclusions, since these are
two different margins of crowdout.

9
of the other cases, however, the mnsumption

smoothing effect of AFDC is smaller.

Introducing

savings, but excluding transfers, mitigates the consumption smoothing role of AFDC substantially
for low AF’DC benefits, since there is negative infinite utility h zero consumption; as AFDC benefits
rise, savings crowds out a smaller share of benefits, sinu the marginal utility of consumption in the
second period is sufficiently high.

Introducing transfers further increases the crowd out of AFDC

(and of savings); in the limit, with fully offsetting transfers, there is no consumption

smoothing

effect.
Thus, only “in the limiting case of no savings and no transfers from others will increases in
AFDC benefits be directly translated to consumption;
will crowd out private insurance mechanisms.
empirical question.

~is

in other cases, some of the benefit increase

The ultimate extent of consumption smoothing is an

model suggests tie empirical formulation of that question as a regression

of the Chmge in consumption upon single motherhood on the amount of AFDC benefits available;
this is me approach that I pursue below.

Retied Work
There are two previous papers that directly assess the welfare gains from increases in AFDC
generosity.

Currie and Cole (1993) examine the effect of changes in AFDC generosity on the health

of infants born to AFDC recipients; they find no correlation between AFDC payment levels and
infant health. ” A previous attempt to measure the consumption effects of AFDC is Pollack (1994).
He also uses the PSID data to model the consumption of AFDC recipients as a function of state/year
AFDC generosity, for the 1981-1987 period.

He finds that a 10% increase in program generosity

raises the food consumption of AFDC recipients by roughly 7%.
his approach suffers from three problems.

This is a suggestive finding, but

First, while empirical estimates of most behavioral effects

—

10

of AFDC are in general inconclusive, the one response which has been documented most clearly is
that AFDC participation does respond to AFDC generosity (see the evidence reviewed in Moffitt,
1992; also Moffitt, 1986).

This leads to a potential sample selection bias in the estimates, if the

women who select into this sample as AFDC bemmes more generous have differential consumption
patterns.

Second, an important consideration in this type of regression is the fact that AFDC benefit

changes are potentially correlated with state-level changes in the cost of living over time, and thus
with consumption expenditures.

This is not surmounted by the inclusion of state effects of even

individual fixed effects, since there may be low frequency movements in prices within areas which
drive both consumption expenditures and AFDC benefits over time. Finally, one problem with using
PSID data for this type of analysis in the past has been the fact that subfamilies (in which roughly
1/2 of single mothers reside) have not been identified in the data; I present an approach to
surmounting this problem below.

Part II: Data
The primary data set for this analysis is the PSID. This longitudinal survey has been carried
out continuously since 1968, following the same sample of families and their “split-offs” over time.
The original sample consisted of a nationally representative

cross-section

and a sub-sample of

families in poverty; in the analysis below I use both samples in order to increase the precision of the
estimates.
The PSID is the only multi-year
consumption behavior.

longitudinal

data set available with information

on

Each year, respondents are asked how much their family “usually” spends

on food at home and food away from home, as well as the amount of food paid for by food stamps.

—

11

—

They are also asked about expenditures on rent and mortgage payments.’2 I deflate each component
of consumption by the CPI for that mmponent in the month of the interview, and then sum the real
components (including food stamps).
is imputed,

rather than reported

I also exclude observations where any element of mnsumption
directly by the respondent.

It is unfortunate

that broader

consumption aggregates are not available in the PSID, forcing me to limit myself to food and housing
expenditures.

These are, however, the types of necessary expenditures that are of most interest for

those ancemed

about the well-being of single mothers and their families. 13

There are at least three potentially important data issues with using the PSID sample.
first is timing.

The

The rent and mortgage questions clearly refer to the point of the PSID interview.

Although the frame of reference for the fwd consumption measures is not entirely clear, Zeldes
(1989) convincingly

argues that it refers to the point of the interview (rather than the previous

year). ‘4 This timing matches the information on family structure, which is recorded at the point
if the interview as well.
from the previous
mnsumption

However, it does not match the information on welfare receipt, which is

calendar year.

This will introduce measurement

error in a regression

of

on welfare income, a problem to which I return below.

12Food consumption data are missing for 1973; mortgage payment data are missing for 19731975. But I am able to use some data for 1974 and 1975 by noting that mortgage payments are zero
for renters. The PSID also gathers information on expenditures on utilities, but these data are
missing for several additional years so I did not use them in the analysis.
131have attempted to replicate this analysis using the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CE~,
which provides information on all consumption expenditures for the 1980 to 1993 period.
Unfortunately, there were sufficiently few transitions to single motherhood (roughly 220) in those
data that I was unable to estimate the response to AFDC with any precision. For those transitions,
food and housing” expenditures were roughly 40% of total non-durable expenditures in the period
preceding single motherhood.
“0ne exception is food expenditures paid for using food stamps. Before 1977, this is measured
using average food stamp expenditure last year; from 1977 onwards, food stamp expenditure in the
month of the survey is used.

12
Semnd,

an important limitation of the PSID for this type of analysis is the difficulty in

identifying relationships

The data set identifies clearly the household in

among sample members.

which each sample member lives, as well as their relationship

to the household head.

identifies subfamilies that moved into existing PSID households.

It also

Thus, for nuclear households

(father, mother, and own children under 18), or for new subfamilies (ie. divorced daughters with
children who move back into their parents’ home), it is easy to identi~ family relationships.
for other types of non-nuclear households,

But

containing related or umelated subfamilies, it is much

more difficult m identi~ welfare-eligible family units, and to track women over time as they become
single mothers.

For this reason, for example, Hoynes (1995) defines single motherhood as single

household headship, except for those women who move out of their parents homes and then back
in.

This follows most other work on family structure using the PSID.

This is clearly a major

limitation, since much of the policy interest in AFDC focuses on women who are in subfamilies.
Moffitt and Rendall (1993) suggest a means of surmounting this problem for the period 19681985 by using the PSID “Relationship

File”.

This file provides pairwise

relationships between all members of the PSID sample, using detiled

information

on the

fertili~ and marital histories.

This allows one to construct welfare-eligible

family units from the raw data, and to follow women

over tire” as their family structure changes.

The basic strategy suggested by Moffitt and Rendall is

m search over all children in the PSID and assign them to a mother, which I do with varying degrees
of accuracy; this allows me to state whether women are mothers regardless of whether they are
identified family heads or not.

I then use the marital history information to assign marital status,

completing the measure of single mothership.
Third, consumption in the PSID is measured at the family level, and the event of interest for
this study by necessity

changes the composition

of the family, thereby

changing underlying

13
mnsumption

needs. For example, family consumption will by definition fall when there is a divorw

and the husband moves out of the household.

In other words, due to the sampling frame of the PSID

there is a form of buiIt in “state dependence” in consumption changes: women who become single
mothers may see a change in their measured family consumption even if their per capita living
standards don’t change. 15
Ideally, this problem would be surmounted by measuring the mnsumption of the welfare unit
only, but these data are not available in the PSID.
in the empirical analysis.

I therefore deal with this problem in three ways

First, I include detailed controls in the regression models for the level of

and the change in family composition.

These controls should help to pick up any change in the

underlying demand for consumption from changes in family structure.

Second, in one extensions

below, I measure the change in mnsumption of the entire origina! family, and not just of the welfare
unit; that is, for a woman who moves out of her parents house, I measure the aggregate change in
the consumption
imposition

of her plus her parents.

of the consumption

This allows me to maintain the same underlying

unit across interviews.

Of course, to the extent that there are

economies of scale in consumption which aren ‘t captured by my composition controls, then measured
expenditures ,will change when households split even if the underlying consumption
limiting be advantages of this approach.

Therefore, as a third approach, I focus on the results for

wives who divorce and become family heads.
losing the consumption of a husband.

is the same,

This population all has a similar shock: they are

Thus, by restricting to this sample, the constant picks up the

effect of composition change, and the AFDC coefficient picks up the consumption smoothing for the

151fchanges in household composition were independent of AFDC benefit levels, then this would
bias the estimate of the average change in consumption from single motherhood, but not the marginal
impact of AFDC. In fact, however, there is evidence that women move into independent residences
as AFDC is more generous (Ellwood and Bane, 1985).

14
mother and her children.
The sample consists of all 14-64 year old women who become single mothers between one
interview and the next. Women can make this transition for one of two reasons: marital dissolution
or out-of-wedlock

childbearing. ‘b They can then bemme either clearly identified family heads or

live in unidentified subfamilies; this distinction is important because consumption is measured at the
family level, so the effects of AFDC on family consumption will be clearest in the cases where the
family consists of the welfare-eligible

unit only.

marital dissolution, and 56% to childbearing.

44% of the transitions in my sample are due to

Almost all of the women who get divorced are clearly

identified family heads, while almost all of those who have children out of wedlock live in
unidentified subfamilies.

The fact that roughly one-half of the women in my sample are not family

heads highlights the importance of including sub-families in the analysis, using the Moffitt and
Rendall methodology.
An important consideration

in selecting my sample, of course, is that becoming a single

mother may be a function of the generosity of the welfare system.

If the types of women who

transition to single motherhood as benefits rise have disproportionately
bias towards a spurious mnsumption

smoothing finding.

childbearing
effects.

probabilities,

it could

The extent to which this bias exists is a

direct function of the effect of welfare generosity on single motherhood.
mixed, as reviewed by Moffitt (1992).

high consumption,

Evidence on this front is

Early studies found no effect of AFDC on divorce or

while more recent cross-sectional

analyses have begun to find some

But once state fixed effects are included in these models, as they are in the regressions

below, any effects of welfare on single motherhood disappear (Moffitt, 1994; Hoynes, 1995). This

161will refer interchangeably to marital dissolution and divorce. There may be some dissolutions
in my sample which are due to the death of the husband, but I do not distinguish these from other
types. In my age range there should be relatively few dissolutions due to death.

-.

15

—

suggests that there is no potential for sample selection bias in the sample of single mothers.

I

explicitly test for sample selection below.

Part III: Empirical Stiategy

Reduced Form
I begin by running reduced form regressions in the PSID of the form:
(1)

ACW = ~ + ~IM~

where

ACi~ is the real change in consumption for family i in state j in year t
M%
is the real maximum AFDC payment level
~ is a set of family-s~ific
control variables
Z~ is a set of state/year-specific mntrol variables
~j is a full set of f~ed state effects
7, is a full set of fixed time effects
TREND is a linear time trend
In this specification,

+ ~z~

+ ~sz~ + ~qbj + 857t + @6bj*~END

+ 6W

I model the effect of potenfial AFDC benefits (the maximum benefit

entitlement) on the consumption change of women who become single mothers (beween periods t-1
and t) and their families.

By using consumption changes, I potentially avoid an important limitation

of cross-sectional regressions in this context: AFDC benefits may be set as a tinction of the cost of
living in the state, which is also mrrelated with consumption expenditures.

Even with state effects

included in the regression, changes in prices within a state will induce a spurious positive correlation
between benefits and consumption levels.

But, by differencing out consumption from the previous

period, I am able to control for short-run price differences across areas. That is, instead of requiring
no correlation between AFDC benefits and price leveh, I impose the weaker assumption that there
is no correlation between AFDC benefits and price changes.

This most likely surmounts any

problems that arise from my inability to control for area-specific food and housing costs.
While this assumption is considerably

weaker, there remains the possibility that omitted

16
state/year factors affect both AFDC benefits setting and consumption

changes within a state.

therefore pursue two additional steps to ensure that this assumption is warranted,
to a set of state freed effects, I include a full set of state-specific trends.
term within-state mrrelated

I

First, in addition

This will capture any long-

shifts in consumption patterns and AFDC benefit generosity,

Semnd,

I include two state/year mntrol variables that will help to absorb any generaI correlation between
AFDC

knefit-setting

unemployment

and the nature of consumption

opportunities

in a state and year: the

rate and the log of personal income per capita.

Despite my use of consumption changes, I use the level of potential AFDC benefits as the
key regressor.

This is because for this population,

their potential AFDC benefits are zero by

definition in period t-1.17 So using levels is the same as using changes here, since the lagged level
of benefits is mro.
The regression also controls for a set of individual demographic characteristics:

race, own

age, the age of the family head (who may or may not be the woman, depending on the sample), and
the education of the family head.

The key regressor is the maximum AFDC benefits for which a

family is eligible, based on the state and year, and on the size of the AFDC family unit.
include dummies for the size of the AFDC family unit fid
regression,

I also

the total PSID family size in the

to ensure that there is not spurious identification from the fact that larger families are

eligible for a larger AFDC benefit. 18 Similarly, I include dummies for the change in family size,

’71npractice, some of the women in the treatment group will have received AFDC in period t-1,
due to the problems of data timing that I have discussed.
18These two mncepts differ only for those in subfamilies. An alternative approach to avoid
identification from family size would be to use the benefits for a fixed family sim in each state and
year. Using benefits for a family size of three yields a similar coefficient estimate to that reported
below, but the stidard error is approximately 50% larger, reflecting the reduced variation in the
independent variable.

--

17

~ control for the fact that a husband is leaving or a child is added, thus the total consumption needs
of the PSID family may change. 19 I also include the change in the family’s “food needs”, which
is a variable construc~d
as well.

by the PSID to reflect not only family size but the age of family members

Fina!ly, I ticlude an indicator for whether this transition to single motherhood was caused

by marital dissolution or by childbearing,

since there may be quite different changes in underlying

food needs from these different events; I separate the analysis into these two subgroups below.m

Benefits Receipt
The regression (1) answers the question: if you make single female heads eligible for one
more dollar of welfare receipt, what happens to their consumption?

A different question that could

be asked is: for each dollar of welfare received by single female heads, what happens to their
consumption?

Eligibility does not translate directly to receipt, for two reasons.

First, there is much

less than fill takeup of AFDC benefits; Blank and Ruggles (1992) estimate that takeup is only about
2/3.

Second, not all single heads are eligible for the maximum benefit level; in particular, there is

a tax rate on inmme after some deductions that has varied from 66% to 100% over the sample
period.
On the other hand, this receipt question cannot be answered by a direct regression
consumption

changes on welfare benefits received.

of

As discussed earlier, takeup of welfare is

l~at is, I include dummies for each of the following categories: no change in family size; an
increase of one person, 2 persons, 3 persons, or 4 or more persons; and a decrease of one person,
2 persons, 3 persons, or 4 or more persons.
‘Note that I do not include controls for changes in other family resources, besides AFDC; by
the crowdout argument detailed earlier, these are endogenous to the generosity of AFDC. In a
specification check below, I do include lagged values of family resources as controls to capture any
heterogeneity in ex-ante circumstances correlated with AFDC benefits.

18
endogenous,

leading to a potential sample selection bias to the estimates.

Furthermore,

there is

considerable measurement error in information on AFDC benefits received, both due to the usual
reporting problems and the fact that in the PSID the timing of the consumption data is different than
the timing of the welfare receipt data. There is a natural instrumental variable for benefits remived,
however: the maximum benefit amount. me maximum benefit entitlement is clearly correlated with
benefits received, and the working hypothesis of this paper is that maximum benefits is uncorrelated
with consumption
instrumenting

changes other than through

welfare remived

the effects of the welfare system.

ThUS,

by

by maximum benefits, I solve the problems with reduced form

estimation of the second stage equation.
That is, I run a system of equations of the form:
(2)

WELF@ = u + ~lM~il

+ &X@ + 632P + ad~j + ~~ri + 6bdj*TREND + ~ijt

ACi@= a + ~lWELF@ + r2~~ + ~~Z@+ Tdbj+ ~~~,+ Tb6j*TREND + ~i~
where WELF is the amount of welfare income received by family i and the other variables are
defined above. Estimating this system by Two-Stage Least Squares yields the parameter coefficient
of inkrest, 71, which is the effect of receiving another dollar of welfare on the consumption change.
Both the reduced form parameter from equation (1) @l) and the 2SLS parameter
equation (2) (r,) are of interest.
(1994).

The former is most directly policy relevant, as argued by Gruber

Government policy-makers

level of potential benefits.

from

cannot directly control AFDC reuipt,

but they can control the

So 61 measures the relationship of direct policy interest, which is the

effect of raising welfare generosity on consumption of the potentially eligible population.
allows one to assess how consumption responds directly to income received.

The latter

That is, if we are to

understand the extent to which other sources of support are crowded out by AFDC, we need to
model how much consumption rises for each dollar of AFDC receipt.

19
An important limitation of the 2SN estimate ~1, however, is that it might overstate the effect
of AFDC on consumption.

This is because there may be some option value of the program even for

those single heads that don’t take up benefits.

Suppose that there is some fixed wst to taking up

AFDC benef~;

a clear example here would be stigma associated with receipt of cash welfare

(Moffitt, 1983).

This is consistent with there being less than full takeup among those eligible for

the program.

Consider a new single mother who would prefer not to take up stigmatizing welfare,

but who is unsure of her prospects for finding other sources of income. She may delay takeup while
she sorts out her financial situation.

But in the meantime she will account for the presence of

insurance through AFDC in her consumption choices; that is, she will consume more today than she
would if this contingent option were not available, since she knows that she can go on the AFDC
program if necessary.
and non-recipients,

In this case, ~1will reflect the effect of benefits variation on both recipients

leading to a likely upward bias to the estimate for recipients only. The sign and

magnitude of this bias are explored firther in the Appendix.
In theory, this problem could be surmounted if there was a second instrument which could
be used to model selection into takeup of AFDC.

I was unable to find such an instrument, however.

It is worth noting that this is a general problem with the literature on AFDC and other social
insurance programs; analysts either estimate the reduced form or 2SN

coefficients, but are unable

to measure precisely the option value of these programs on those who do not take them up.

Means
Before exploring the consumption smoothing role of AFDC, it is first usefil to ask: given
the existence of AFDC, what are the average consumption implications of becoming a single mother?
Evidence on this question is provided in the first column of Table 1. The second column provides

ku

the consumption changes for the control group, as a basis for comparison.

The first number in each

cell is the mean change, and the second number is the standard deviation; the number in curly
brackets is the lagged mean value.

All dollar figures are in real 1984 dollars.

Combining food and housing expenditures,
becomes a single mother.

there is a reduction of $184 when the woman

This is only 3.1% of the baseline value of consumption of these goods .2]

For food, the drop is a larger 5.6% fall. But housing expenditures actually rise somewhat, reflecting
the fact that some women are moving to new residences; the rate of moving is roughly 50% higher
in the sample of women becoming

single mothers than for the control group.

The overall

consumption change for the control group is roughly zero, reflecting a commensurate small decline
in food mnsumption

and rise in housing consumption.

The means of the remaining PSID covariates are presented in Table 1 as well. Women who
become single heads are disproportionately
educational attainment.

minorities, and they are in families whose heads have low

These facts partially reflect the oversampling of disadvantaged households

in the PSID; note that even for the control group over 30% are black. 22 The non-zero welfare
receipt information for families which do not contain a single mother at periods t or t-1 may reflect
some transitions within the year that are not captured by my point in time household status measures,
or welfare remived during the calendar year of interview t-1 but before the point of the interview
itself (which is sometime in the spring).
general assistan~

It may also reflect receipt of other welfare under state

plans or the AFDC-UP program.

*’Of course this figure is not corrected for scale economies and is therefore somewhat
misleading, sin& family composition is changing for the single mothers. This is controlled for in
the regressions below.
2~en
the sample weights are used to account for this, the key variables (consumption and
AFDC benefits entitlement) are not much changed, but the sample appears much less disadvantaged
along observable dimensions (for both the treatments and the controls).

21

—

Part IV: Resu]ts

Basic Results
Table 2 reports the basic reduced form regression results.

I present results for food and

housing expenditures combined, and then for the two categories separately.
For total food and housing expenditure, there is a simable and significant positive coefficient
on maximum

AFDC payments.

For every dollar in po~ntia.1 benefits,

the consumption

fall

associated with single motherhood is mitigated by 30 cents. This implies that at the mean potential
benefits for the sample, consumption among this population is increased by $1170, relative to the
absence of cash welfare benefits.

This result is reflected in the next to last row, which shows the

implied consumption fall upon single motherhood for the (out of sample) case of a zero maximum
potential benefit.

In that case, the consumption fall upon single motherhood would be $1353, or

more than seven times as large as the consumption fall given our current system (from Table 1).
This represents almost 23% of baseline consumption for this population.

So this regression shows

that the small consumption change that we observe for women becoming single mothers is largely
due to the generosity
mnsumption

of our current cash welfare system; in the absence of this system the

fall would be substantial.

The remaining coefficients in the regression are uniformly

insignificant, except for the change in family consumption needs.
Dividing the dependent variable into food and housing expenditures,

we see that AFDC has

a positive and (marginally) significant effect in each case. The effect on food is about 50% larger,
but the two coefficients are statistically indistinguishable.

The results imply that in the absence of

AFDC food consumption would fall by roughly 23% of its baseline value when women became
single mothers, and housing expenditure would fall by roughly 22%.
AFDC is playing an important consumption smoothing role.

So, within each category,

22
The final row of the Table presents the 2SN
receipt on mnsumption.

estimates of the effect of a dollar of benefits

Recall that this is an upper bound estimate of the extent to which a dollar

of benefits received is translated to consumption spending.
fa totaI consumption;

This upper bound estimate is 95 cents

that is, one cannot reject the hypothesis that each dollar of AFDC received

is translated to a dollar of increased food and housing expenditure.
unts

Of this 95 cents, roughly 56

mmes from increased spending on food and 39 cents from increased spending on housing,

although these two 2SN
Thus,

wefficients

the basic results

are not very precisely estimated.

indicate that AFDC

is playing a very important

consumption

smoothing rok for those becoming single mothers, through both food and housing expenditures.
Moreover,

the results suggest that there is not an important crowdout effect of AFDC on other

sourms of support.

Of murse, to the extent that there is an option value of the program for non-

recipients, this is an upper bound estimate, so that if the option value is large there may be a
substantial crowdout.

Also, given the fact that we only have data on only 40% of the consumption

bundle for these women, we cannot precisely infer crowdout here.

nevertheless,

the results are

suggestive of a small degree of crowdout.

Other ~amfer Progrm
One potential problem with the empirical work thus far is that I have used as my key
regressor cash welfare benefits only.
assistance as well.

In fact, single mothers are also eligible for other government

One important example is food stamps.

stamps leads to a downward

bias to my consumption

conditioned on income, including AFDC.
stamps by increases

in AFDC,

The exclusion of the value of food

smoothing estimates,

since benefits are

This means that by there s an automatic crowdout of food

so that when food stamps are accounted for the estimate of

23

—
assumption

smoothing will rise even further.

Unfortunately, it is difficult to appropriately account for the effects of in-kind programs, since
to combine their influence with that of AFDC would require a cash equivalent of their value.

For

the case of food stamps, however, a number of studies suggest that Food Stamps benefits are roughly
equivalent to cash transfers of the same value (ie. Moffitt, 1989), so that many previous papers on
the behavioral effects of the welfare system simply combine food stamp and AFDC entitlements to
get the overall effect of both programs. m I do the same in the first panel of Table 3, taking account
of the fact that food stamp benefits are reduced by a fraction of AFDC benefits,
deductions.”

after some

As expected, the estimated coefficients are somewhat larger when the combined

maximum is used. The reduced form coefficient now implies a 46 cent increase in consumption for
each dollar of AFDC benefits, and the 2SN

coefficient now exceeds one. 25 The precision of the

estimates has been reduced, however, so that one cannot reject that they are the same as those using
the cash welfare maximum alone.
The other two major public assistance programs for single mothers are public housing and
health insurance through the Medicaid program.

Accounting for the effect of these benefits is much

‘Fraker et al. (1995) review a number of studies which suggest that food stamps may be worth
somewhat less than a cash equivalent, but even in these cases the value is quite close (72 to 82 cents
of cash for each dollar of food stamps). Moreover, if food stamps distort consumption towards food,
this would further exacerbate the downward bias to my non-food stamps estimate for food
consumption (since food stamps are included in my food consumption measure).
‘Specifically, food stamp benefits are reduced by 30 cents for each dollar of income above and
beyond a standard deduction and deductions for shelter expenses and child care expenses.
‘Note that for -the 2SLS coefficient the dependent variable is non-food stamp consumption, and
the independent variable in the second stage is welfare income received plus consumption paid for
by food StampS.

-.

24

harder, since there is little consensus on their cash-equivalent

value.zb A further difficulty with

public housing, relative to food stamps, is that there is only a limited amount of housing assistance
available, so that one must account for the probability that the family actually receives help. Given
these problems, I do not attempt to account for the programs in the analysis.
benefits also “tax” inmme rewived

Since public housing

from AFDC, the argument above implies that I would only

increase my estimate if I accounted for the program, unless there are state specific differences in
public housing programs which are positively correlated with AFDC.27
from omitting program changes is hinder to predict.

For Medicaid, the net bias

Given the uniformi~

of most features of the

program, it is unlikely that there is a strong correlation between the AFDC maximum and the value
of Medicaid benefits.

On the other hand, increases in AFDC benefits, in general, raise the income

cutoff for Medicaid eligibility, which would raise the value of the program on average for single
women.”

2dSee, for example, Smeeding and Moon (1980), Wolfe and Moffitt (1991), and Manser (1992)
for the case of Medicaid; and Olsen and Barton (1983), Reeder (1985), and Schwab (1985) for the
case of public housing. One methodology used in some studies of Medicaid is to add average
state/year Medicaid expenditures per recipient to the food stamp plus AFDC benefit to get a
combined benefit total. But, given the uniformity of the Medicaid benefit structure across states,
average state/year expenditures largely reflect d inferences in population characteristics and price
differences, not insurance value.
27AIs0 the housing expenditure variable does not include the value of public housing. So if
subsidies ~istort consumption towards housing, this will lead to an offsetting bias against finding
consumption smoothing if I exclude potential public housing benefits (since increases in AFDC lower
public housing benefits, raising expenditure on non-public housing).
*aAnother important consideration with Medicaid is that, begiming in the mid- 1980s, the link
between AFDC and Medicaid was severed by a series of expansions of the Medicaid program to
traditional family structures and higher income levels (Currie and Gruber, 1996a, b). This could
confound the analysis, if Medicaid were available both before and after the transition to single
motherhood. However, these expansions had not started by the time that my PSID sample ends in
1985.

25

—

Specification ~ecb
The empirical results presented in Tables 2 are predicated on a key identification assumption:
that the underlying consumption tastes or needs of women who become single mothers in places with
more or less generous AFDC benefits are the same. In this section, I provide a number of tests to
assess the validity of this assumption.
One means of assessing the identification

assumption

underlying differences in the population of single mothers.
including a set of lagged individual and family characteristics:

is to control further for potential

I do so in the first row of Table 4 by
lagged values for family income, the

earnings of family head, the earnings of the woman (who may in some cases have been labelled by
the PSID the family head), and her hours of work. As the second panel of Table 3 shows, including
these extra controls has little effect on the results.
An alternative reason why AFDC may be spuriously correlated with consumption changes
is that I have not fully conditioned out the underlying correlation between AFDC benefits setting and
changes in consumption opportunities.

I can assess the validity of this criticism by rerunning the

regression for a within-stafe cowrol group: those who remain married or who remain unmarried nonheads from interview t-1 to t.
mnsumption

For these populations,

there should be little effect of AFDC on

changes. 29 But if there is a spurious correlation between AFDC benefits setting and

consumption opportunities,

it should be reflected in the consumption of women who don ‘t become

2~ere may be effects through long run behavior of those women who perceive some risk of
relying on AFDC. For example, as noted in the model above, these women may save less on their
own if AFDC is more generous, leading to faster consumption growth rates for the family. There
may also be effects on their labor supply and job choice. But all of these effects should be quite
small for the average married couple, given the low odds that a given married woman will end up
on AFDC. There also may be some small positive effects because some of these women may have
been single heads during the year (as illustrated by the non-zero welfwe income for this control
group).

26
single mothers as well.
In fact, as the final panel of Table 3 shows, there is only a very small positive effect of
AFDC benefits on the consumption change of this population.
impomt

omitted

correlates

of both AFDC

benefits

Thus, there does not appear to be

setting

and changes

in consumption

opportunities.
Finally, one reason why the identi~ing

resumption may be violated is sample section bias

arising from women becoming single mothers in response to changes in AFDC generosity.

Sample

selection bias to me estimates would require both that AFDC induce more women to become single
mothers, and that those women who are induced by AFDC have different underlying consumption
needs or tastes tha are not captured by my set of controls.

However, the first of these requirements

is refuted by the previous literature on AFDC which finds that, once state effects are included in the
regression, there is no effect of welfare on single motherhood (Hoynes, 1995; Moffitt, 1994).
To make this point more clearly for my sample, Ire-estimate
on the transition to single motherhood.

models of the effect of AFDC

That is, I estimate regressions of the form of (1), but where

the dependent variable is now a dummy for becoming a single mother, and the sample is both women
who do and do not become” single mothers,
motherhood

through marital dissolution

There are two regressions: one for transitioning to single
(from married mother to single mother);

and one for

transitioning to single motherhood through childbearing (from unmarried childless woman to single
mother) .30

30For these regressions, I exclude the controls for family size and food needs (but retain controls
for sim of the welfare unit), since these are clearly endogenous to whether the transition to single
motherhood is made. I also control only for the woman’s age, and not for the head’s age as well,
since the difference between these ages will be a function of whether the woman is a single mother
(since single mothers are often heads). The coefficient estimate of interest is not sensitive to either
of these changes in the regression specification.

27
The results of these probit regressions are shown in Table 4. For both ~pes of transitions,
the -fticient

on AFDC benefits is insignificant,

transition through child-bearing,

the -fficient

which is consistent with previous work; for

is even wrong-signed.

The third row from the

bottom of each mlurnn is the implied marginal probability of a $1000 increase in AFDC benefits on
the likelihood of being a single mother.

Even in the first w1umn, where the coefficient is positive,

the implied effect of this large benefits increase is only 3% of the mean likelihood of having a
transition.

Moreover,

taking a weighted average of these two coefficients for the full sample of

single mothers, the estimated effect is negative.

The implication is that these data support the

mntention from other studies that AFDC is not an important determinant of single motherhood in
models that include state effects.

tienswn:

~pes of Onswnption

Table 5 extends the tialysis

by further dividing the food and housing consumption measures.

I first divide the food consumption variable into food consumed at home and food consumed away
from home.

To the extent that AFDC generosity increases have their expenditure effects by simply

inducing a shifi from restaurant to home mnsumption,

it suggests that expenditure changes may

overstate changes in nutritioml value, which might be the underlying measure of most interest from
a social welfare perspective.

In this case, we would expect that increases in AFDC generosity are

reflected ‘mostly in food consumed away from home; in fact, it is possible that the coefficient on food
at home could be negative.

But we observe the reverse in Table 5: there is no effect of AFDC on

food away from home, and a large effect on food at. home.

While this doesn’t allow one to

definitively convert these estimates to nutritional values, it does reduce the concern over the result
being driven by a shift in the site at which food is consumed.

28
Inextdivide

tiehousing

expendimre vmiable into renmlmd

motigage expendimres.

Rental

expenditures have the advantage that they may more appropriately reflect the service flow from the
house, particularly if women are living in houses where much of the mortgage has been paid down.
In fact, while the estimates are not very precise, most of the housing expenditure effect appears to
be arising through changes in rental expenditures.

This suggests that women are truly improving the

quality of their living si~ation as AFDC benefits rise.
The final row extends the analysis of housing expenditures

by assessing whether AFDC

generosity affects the likelihood of moving when one becomes a single mother.

The coefficient is

from a probit regression, and the implied marginal probability is presented in the second column.31
There is a positive coefficient on AFDC benefits which is marginally significant.

It implies that each

$1000 of AFDC benefits raises the likelihood of moving by 4.3 percentage points.

This is roughly

a 12% rise in the likelihood of moving for women who become single mothers.

Taken further

confirms that one role played by AFDC is to allow single mothers to improve their living situations,
which is mnsistent with the conclusion of E1lwood and Bane (1985).

tiension:

Sub-Population

In Table 6, I explore how this result varies across the different types of transitions to single
motherhood.

I begin by dividing the sample into those who become single mothers through marital

dissolution, and those who become single mothers through child-bearing.
and housing is approximately twice as large for the former group.

The overall effect on food

For this group, the implied fall

in consumption at zero AFDC benefits is quite large ($1925 dollars), and represen~s 34% of this

31The set of controls in the regression is limited in the same manner as for the selection probits
described earlier.

29
group’s baseline pre-dissolution

consumption.

For those who have unmarried births, the reduced

form effect is smaller and is not significant, although the standard error is large.
Dividing mnsumption

into its components, it appears that most of the effect of AFDC on the

marital dissolution sample is coming through housing expenditures,

not through food.

In fact, for

food the estimated effect is larger for the unmarried births sample; but for this sample there is no
effect whatsoever on housing expenditures.
In the next row of the Table, I reduce the sample further to those who had marital dissolution
and are now family heads,
wnsumption

This removes noise in the consumption data by allowing me to measure

for the AFDC-eligible

unit only.

And, m discussed earlier, this allows for a more

precise control for composition change by using a sample that is undergoing a common transition.
In fact, for this sample the effects are all somewhat stronger than in the first row: the implied fall
at zero benefits is 44% of the baseline consumption before dissolution for this population.

The

difference between the first and third rows arises from a stronger food expenditure effect for those
who are now family heads; for this population, both components of consumption rise significantly.
Thus, to summarize, it appears that the effect of AFDC is stronger for those who become single
heads through marital dissolution,
consumption

and this is primarily

because there is an effect on housing

which is not present for those who enter this state through child-bearing.

In both

groups, however, there is a sizeable effect on food expenditure changes.
This finding for housing expenditures
question that is raised by the analysis.

is striking and bears on an important normative

A number of critics of the AFDC program have suggested

that the fact that single mothers may use their benefits to move out of the family home and set up
their own residence is a cost, not a benefit, of the program.

This is because, for example, it may

rob the new child of a stable home atmosphere that can serve as a role model.

I have ignored this

30
point in the analysis thus far, considering the woman as optimizing over her opportunity set; this
argument implies that the social welfare maximum may involve constraining the woman’s choice set.

Presumably,

however,

this argument applies more strongly to single women who have

children, as opposed to women who are divorced and may need to find a new place to live. But the
evidence presented here suggests that it is only for divorced women that AFDC generosity affects
spending on housing. 32 This suggests that there is less need for concern over the potentially
pernicious effects of AFDC generosity in encouraging young never married women to set up their
own residences.
Fidly,

as noted earlier, an alternative means of dealing with the fact that family composition

is changing is to hold the composition of the family constant.

That is, I can redefine the “family”

to include all former members of the family in which the woman resided in period t-1. By adding
together the period t consumption of all individuals who resided together at t-1, I avoid potential
biases arising from my focus just on those who reside with the woman in period t.
Of the 1320 women who become single mothers in these data, in roughly 1/4 of the cases
(317) there is data on the consumption
period t-l.

change of other families who resided with the women in

In the next to last row of Table 6, I show the basic results for the treatment families only

for this subsample.

The results are slightly stronger than the full sample findings from Table 2, but

they are similar to the results for heads, and most of this sample is heads.
the total consumption

In the next row, I use

in period t for all families that splitoff from the woman’s household in period

321ndeed when I rerun the moving equations from Table 5 separately for marital dissolution and
for single c~ildbearing,” I find that the effect is much stronger for the marital dissolution sample,
which is consistent with the housing expenditure results; however, the estimate is insignificant for
this group,

31
t-1. The coefficient estimates are almost identical, although the standard errors are somewhat higher,
making precise inferences difficult.

Interestingly,

the mean consumption change is much smaller

overall when we add in the consumption of splitoffs, and is wrong signed for the two components .33
The wrong signed components presumably reflect the fact that economies of scale considerations
dictate larger spending on average when households split than when they are together.

Part V: Conclusions
The current system of providing cash welfare to single mothers and their children is likely
to be a mntentious

source of debate for the foreseeable future.

Despite a lack of strong evidence

of disincentive effects, the intuitive case that more generous AFDC should lead to lower levels of
labor supply and family dissolution provides strong motivation for reform of the system.

me point

of this paper is to provide some evidence of the benefits of this program that can be weighed in the
reform calculus.
wnsumption

My findings suggest that AFDC plays an important

of women who become single mothers.

role in smoothing

the

Clearly, consumption expenditures is only one

proxy for well being, and there are other measures that should be considered in future work on this
topic.

But these best available proxies from the PSID suggest that reducing this safety net will lead

to a serious reduction in the standard

of living of women who bemme single mothers and their

families,
An important caveat to this exercise, however, is that I have only considered variations within
the existing structure of the cash welfare system.

If this system were abolished altogether, or

changed in some other dramatic fashion (such as through time limits or binding “work for welfare”

33Note that the predictions for the components need not add to the prediction for the total of
consumption, if the control variables have very different effects on food and housing expenditure.

-—

requirements),

32

it could cause a shift in the nature of private insurance mechanisms which would

mitigate the mnsumption

smoothing costs of reduced welfare generosity.

As states experiment with

such radical changes to their welfare systems, it would behoove administrators to collect information
not only on labor supply and family structure but on measures of material well being which can be
used to evaluate the insurance impacts of changkg the structure of the welfare system.

33
References
Angrist, Joshua (1990). “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft httery: Evidence from
Social Security Administrative Records, ” American Economic Review 80, 313-336.
Blank, Rebecca M., and Patricia Ruggles, ‘Why Do Women Use AFDC & Food Stamps: The
Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation, ” NBER Working Paper No. 4429, August 1993.
Currie, Janet, and Nancy Cole (1993). “Welfare and Child Health: The Link Between AFDC
Participation and Birth Weight, ” American Economic Review, 83.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996a). “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent
Expansions of Medicaid Eligibility for Pregnant Women, ” Journal of Poli[ical Economy,
forthmming
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber (1996b). “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical
Care, and Child Health, Quarterly JourMl of Economics, 111, 431-466.
❑

Danziger, Sheldon, Robert Haveman and Robert Plotnick (1981). “How Income Transfers Affect
Work, Savings, and the Income Distribution: A Critical Review, ” Journal of Economic

Literahire, 19:975-1028.
Economic Repoti of the President, 1984.
Edin, Kathryn J. (1995). “The Myths of Dependence and Self-Sufficiency: Women, Welfare, and
Low-Wage Work, ” Focus, Winter, p. 1-9.
Ellwood, David, and Mary Jo Bane (1985). “The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and Living
Arrangements, ” in Ronald Ehrenberg, Ed., Research in Lubor Economics, Vol 8.
Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.
Fraker, Thomas M., Alberto P. Martini, and James C. Ohls (1995). “The Effect of Food Stamp
Cashout on Food Expenditures, ” Journal of Hwn
Resources, 30.
Gruber, Jonathan (1994).

“The Consumption Smoothing Benefits of Unemployment
American Economic Review, forthcoming.

Insurance, ”

Hoynes, Hilary W. (1995). “Does Welfare Play and Role in Female Head ship Decisions?, ” NBER
Working Paper #5149.
Manser, Marilyn E. (1992). “Estimates of Cash-Equivalent Values from a Flexible Demand System
for the U.S.”. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics Office of Research and
Evaluation, Working Paper #235.
Moffitt, Robert (1983).

73:1023-1035.

“An Economic Mode! of Welfare Stigma, ” American Economic Review,

34
Moffitt, Robert (1986). “Work Incentives in Transfer Programs (Revisited): A Study of the AFDC
Program, ” in Ronald Ehrenberg, Ed., Research in Labor Economics, Volume 8. Greenwich,
CT: JAI Press.
Moffitt, Robert (1989).

“Estimating the Value of an In-Kind Transfer: The Case of Food Stamps, ”

Econometn”ca, 57:385-409.
Moffitt,

Robert

(1992).

‘Inmntive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review, ” Journal of

Economic Literore,

“

“Welfare Effects on Female Head ship with Area Effects, ” Jourwl of

Moffitt, Robert (1994).

H~

30:1-61.

Resources, 29:621-636.

Moffitt, Robert, and Michael S. Rendall (1993). “Using the PSID Relationship File to Construct
Measures of Female Family Head ship”. Mimeo, Brown Universi~.
Murray, Charles (1984).

tising Grouti.

New York: Basic Books.

Olasky, Marving (1992).

me ~agedy of American ti~msion.

Lanham, MD: Regenery.

Olsen, Edgar O., and David M. Barton (1983). “The Benefits and Costs of Public Housing in New
York City, ” Journal of Public Economics, 20, 299-332.
Pollack, Harold (1994). Informizl Transfers wirhinFamilies. Ph.D. Thesis, John F, Kennedy School
of Government, Hwvard University.
Powers, Elizabeth (1996). “Does Means-Testing Welfare Discourage Saving? Evidence from the
National bngitudinal
Survey of Women. ” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
R*der,

William J. (1985).

Jouml

“The Benefits and Costs of the Section 8 Existing Housing Program, ”

of Public Econom-cs, 26, 349-377.

Rosenzweig, Mark, and Kenneth I. Wolpin (1994).
“Parental and Public Transfers to Young
Women and Their Children, ” American Economic Review, 84, 1195-1212.
Scheoni, Robert (1994).
“Does Aid to Families with Dependent
Assistance?”. Mimeo, RAND Corporation.

Children

Displace Familial

Schwab, Robert M. (1985). “The Benefits of In-Kind Government Programs, ” Journal of Public
ECO?lOm”CS,
27, 195-210.
Smeeding, Timothy, and Marilyn Moon (1980). “Valuing Government Expenditures:
Medical Care Transfers, ” Review of Income and Wealth, 26:305-324.
U.S. House of Representatives,

Committee on Ways and Means (1993),

The Case of

Overview of Entitlement

35

Programs: 1993 Green Book. Washington, D. C.: U.S. Government Printing Office.
Wolfe, Barbara, and Robert Moffitt (1991).

“A New Index to Value In-Kind Benefits, ” Review of

Incow and Weakh, 37: 387-~8.
Zeldes, Stephen P. (1989).

Jouml

“Consumption and Liquidity Constraints:

of Political Economy, 97, 305-346.

An Empirical Investigation. ”

36

—

Appendix - Option Value and Bias to 2SLS Estimate
In this appendix I explore
smoothing impact of AFDC arising
a simple two observation example,
estimator, or a ratio of the reduced

the potential bias to the 2SU estimate of the consumption
from an option value effect. I do so within the framework of
which allows me to compute the 2SU estimate as a Wald
form and first stage effects (Angrist, 1991).

In this simplified example, consumption is modelled by:
+ /9*(1-a)*x*PB
where C is wnsumption
K is a constant
~ is the true consumption effect of AFDC receipt (the structural parameter of
interest)
a is the fraction of single mothers receiving AFDC
PB is potential benefits
x is the option value (O< x < 1)
The fust term is some constant which is independent of the AFDC system. The second is
the effect of AFDC on recipients, and the third is the effect on non-recipients, which is non-zero
only if there is some option value.
Differentiating this equation with respect to potential benefits:
(2) W/6PB

= /9 * [6a/6PB*PB*(l-x)

+ a + (1-cr)x]

Where ti/6PB is the marginal takeup effect of increases in potential benefits (the increase
beyond the automatic rise in benefits received at a given level of takeup). We can compute the 2SLS
coefficient of interest as 6C/6PB / dBEN/6PB, where BEN is benefits received. BEN is determined
according to:
(3) BEN = a*PB, so that
(4) 6BEN/dPB = 6cr/dPB*PB + a
Combining these equations, we obtain a 2SLS coefficient of
(5) ~’ = @ * JOa/OPB*F!B*(l-x) + a + (1-a)xl
da/6PB*PB + a
The second term is the bias to our parameter of interest, ~. The sign is indeterminate. If
x = O, ~’ =6; there is no bias if there is no option value, and the 2SN estimate is appropriate. If
X > 0, and 6a/6PB = O (no marginal takeup effect), then the bias is clearly upwards.
If Oa/6PB
> 0 as well, however, the bias is indeterminate, although it will still be upwards except when
6a/6PB is very large.

37
Given the PSID data available, I can wmpute the parameters that enter into equation (5),
ex~pt for x (the unobsemed option value). At the sample mean, PB is 3874, a is 0.26, and 6a/6PB
is 0.000015.N For these values, (5) yields:
(6) ~’ = ~ * [0.06*(1-x) + .26 + .74*x] / [0.06 + .26]

>

P

This expression is always greater than ~, indicating that the bias is clearly upwards in this
case. For an option value of 0.1 (being eligible for $100 in AFDC is equivalent to receiving $10
of AFDC), for example, there is an upward bias of “24% to the 2SLS estimate.

~cr is computed by simply taking the sample mean of benefits received/maximum payment for
the treatment group; the maximum value of this ratio is set to one for the few outlying observations
which report more AFDC benefits than potential entitlement.
6a/6PB is simply the first stage
coefficient from equation (2), minus alpha, divided by the mean of potential benefits.

o no save, no trans
save, 50% trans offset

A

Save,

no

tf’afIs

save, 100% trans offset

❑

o-

-.1 -.2-,3-.4 –
-.5-.6-.7-.B -.9-1 I
o

I

.1

I

.2

I

,3

I

.4

I

.5
afdc

I

,6

I

I

I

I

.7

.E

.9

1

Figure 1: Consumption Smoothing Effects of AFDC

38
Table 1: Means of the PSID Data
Variable

Single Mother
T~ansitions

Control Group

Change in Food&
Housing Expenditures

-184
[2435]
{5991]

8.88
[2528]
{6898}

Change inFood
Expenditure

-227
[1995]
{4035}

-70
[1929]
{4482]

Change in Housing
Expaditur~

43.0
[1303]
{1956]

78.9
[1544]
{2416)

Move Residence

0.372

0.250

AFDC Maximum Payment

3874
[2185]

4054
[2133]

White

0.276

0.565

Black

0.630

0.316

Age

25.5
[9.27]

30.8
[12.9]

Age of Household
Head

37.2
[12.3]

39.6
[13.1]

Head is HS Dropout

0.539

0.371

Head is HS Grad

0.202

0.202

Head has some College

0.214

0.284

Head is College Grad

0.045

0.142

AFDC Unit Size

2.65
[1.18]

2.58
[1.16]

Welfare Received

1371
[2646]

350
[1515]

Unemployment Rate

0.071
[0.020]

0.069
[0.020]

Log of Personal Inc
per capita

2.022
[0.437]

2.067
[0.426]

Number of Obs

1320
50841
~:
Standard Devlatlons In square brackets; lagged valu~ in curly brackets. All dollar figures are
in real 1984 dollars. Control group is hose remain non-single mothers over 2 periods.

-–

39

—

Table 2: Basic Regression Results
Food + Housing

Food

Housing

AFDC Maximum

0.302
(0.113)

0.177
(0.091)

0.124
(0.066)

White

-118
(372)

-305
(301)

187
(217)

Black

-36
(359)

-125
(300)

89.2
(209)

Age

-12.4
(11.0)

-11.3
(8.88)

-1.16
(6.41)

Head’s Age

5.14
(7.96)

4.49
(6.43)

0.65
(4.64)

Head is
HS Dropout

1957
(323)

-133
(261)

328
(188)

Head is
HS Grad

122
(335)

-94.8
(271)

216
(1895

Head has
some College

-13.9
(334)

-261
(270)

247
(195)

Marital Dissolution
vs. Child-Bearing

323
(255)

225
(206)

98.3
(148)

Change in Family
Consumption Needs

0.360
(0.080)

0.378
(0.064)

4.019
(0.046)

Unemployment
Rate

,-13800
(10955)

-10845
(8858)

-2954
(6385)

of Personal Inc

-3774
(4369)

4301
(3502)

528
(2547)

Implied Consumption
Change at O Benefits

-1353

-914

-439

2SLS Estimate

0.946
(0.422)

0.556
(0.354)

0.390
(0.251)

Number of Obs

1320

1320

1320

hg

Regressions also control for fixd effects for AFDC unit size,
Not~: Stand~d errors in ptienthm~.
family size, change in family size, state and year, and for state-specific time trends. 2SLS estimate is
from ‘a separate &timation of tbe system of equations (2) in the text.

40
Table 3: Specification Checks
Food & Housing

Food

Housing

Combined Maximum
Combined Maximum

0.467
(O.165)

0.256
(0.133)

0.211
(0.096)

Implied Consumption
Change at O Benefits

-2778

-1649

-1129

2SLS Coefficient

1.355
(0.955)

0.671
(0.579)

0.683
(0.507)

Including Lagged Characteristics
AFDC Maximum

0.293
(0.114)

0.171
(0.091)

0.122
(0.066)

Implied Consumption
Change at O Benefits

-1319

-891

-429

2SLS Estimate

0.979
(0.525)

0.573
(0.374)

0.407
(0.267)

Control Group Regression
AFDC Maximum

0.039
(0.020)

0.031
(0.015)

0.009
(0.012)

Implied Consumption
Change at O Benefits

-150

-194

43.9

Number of Obs

50841

50841

50841

Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also control for fixed effects for AFDC unit size,
family s~, change in family size, state and year, and for state-specific time trends. 2SLS estimate is
from a separate intimation of the system of ‘equations (2) in the text.

No=:

_—

41
L

Table 4: Selection Probits
Transition through
Dissolution

Transition through
Child-Bearing

AFDC Maximum
(I1OOOO)

0.114
(0.289)

-0.695
(0.61 1)

White

-0.118
(0.093)

-0.301
(0.113)

Black

0.133
(0.093)

0.350
(o. 109)

Age

4.002
(0.002)

-0.010
(0.003)

Head is
HS Dropout

0.349
(0.076)

0.319
(0.088)

Head is
HS Grad

0.2%
(0.078)

0.267
(0.094)

Head has
some College

0.288
(0.076)

0.071
(0.094)

Unemployment
Rate

-0.621
(3.002)

0.201
(3. 127)

Log of Personal Inc

-1.161
(1.170)

-0.139
(1.323)

Effect of $1000
AFDC Benefit Increase

0.00069

-0.00549

0.0227

0.0423

21851

16294

Mean of Dependent
Number of Obs

Var.

Not~: Standard errors in pwenthaes.
Regressions also wntrol for fixed effects for AFDC unit size,
state and year, and for state-specific time trends. Effect of $1000 AFDC Benefit Increase is change in
implied marginal probability from raising AFDC benefits by $1000, averaged across the relevant sample.

42

Table 5: Extension: Types of Consumption
Coefficient

Implied Change
at O Benefits
(or marg. prob.)

Food Out

-0.021
(0.034)

85.1

Food at Home

0.199
(0.084)

-999

Rent

0.096
(0.064)

-294

Mortgage

0.028
(0.056)

-145

Likelihood of
Moving Probit
(Coeff * ld)

0.134
(0.071)

4.26

Regressions also control for fixed effects for AFDC unit size,
Not=: Standard errors in parenthaes.
family size, change in family size, state and year, and for state-specific time trends (except for final row,
as described in text). Second mlurnn of contains implied effects at zero AFDC benefits or implied
marginal probability from probit regression.

43

Table 6: Extension: Sub-Populations
Food & Housing
Coeff.

Housing

Food

Implied
Change

Coeff.

Implied
Change

Coeff.

Implied
Change

0.266
(0.106)

-1135

Marital
Dissolution

0.377
(o. 159)

-1925

0.111
(0.114)

-791

Unmarried
Births

0.165
(0.269)

-708

0.163
(0.236)

-721

Dissolution
to Heads

0.465
(O.156)

-2450

0.199
(o. 113)

-1309

0.266
(o. 103)

-1140

Splitoffs in
PSID (elig.)

0,431
(0.329)

-2136

0.290
(0.260)

-2322

0.141
(0.191)

-616

Eligibles +
Splitoffs

0:457
(0.428)

474

0.294
(0.350)

692

0.163
(0.217)

1251

-8.9
(:”R)

M:
Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions also control for fixed effects for AFDC unit size,
family size, change in family size, state and year, and for state-specific time trends. Second column of
each panel contains implied effects at zero AFDC benefits.

