                              NBER WO~G           PAPER SERIES




                         HOW TO COUNT PATENTS AND VALUE
                           INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY: USES
                              OF PATENT RENEWAL AND
                                 APPLICATION DATA




                                        Jean O. Lanjouw
                                           Ariel Pakes
                                        Jonathan Putnam




                                      Working Paper 5741




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1996




Pakes thanks the NSF (grant no. SBR-95 12106) for support. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

01996 by Jean O. Lanjouw, Ariel Pakes and Jonathan Putnam. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5741
                                                                                 September 1996



                              HOW TO COUNT PATENTS AND VALUE
                                ~TELLECTUAL    PROPERTY: USES
                                   OF PATENT RENEWAL AND
                                      APPLICATION DATA

                                             ABSTRACT

        Patent counts are very imperfect measures of innovative output. This paper discusses how

additional data - the number of years a patent is renewed and the number of countries in which

protection   for the same invention is sought - can be used to improve on counts in studies which

require a measure of the extent of innovation.        A simple renewal based weighting     scheme is

proposed which may remove half of the noise in patent counts as a measure of innovative output.

The paper also illustrates how these data can be used to estimate the value of the proprietary rights

created by the patent laws. The parameters estimated in this analysis can be used to answer a series

of questions related to the value of patents. We illustrate with estimates of how the value of patent

protection      would vary under alternative legal rules and renewal fees, and with estimates of the

international     flows of returns from the patent system.   Recent progress in the development    of

databases has increased the potential for this type of analysis.



Jean O. Lanjouw                                                Ariel Pakes
Department of Economics                                        Department of Economics
Yale University                                                Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue                                            37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520                                            New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                                       and NBER
LANJOUW@ECON. YALE.EDU                                         ariel@econ. yale.edu

Jonathan Putnam
Department of Economics
Yale University
37 Hillhouse Avenue
New Haven, CT 06520
Draft: July 18, 1996

                        How to Count Patents and Value Intellectual Property:
                           Uses of Patent Renewal and Application Data

                           Jean O. Lanjouw, Ariel Pakes and Jonathan Putnam’


Patent counts are very impe~ect measuresof innov~”veoutput. ~ispaper discusseshow a&fitionaldata
- the number of years a patent is renewed and tk number of counm”esin whichprotection for the same
inve~”on is sought - can be used to improve on counts in studies which require a measure of the tient
of innovation. A simple renewal based weightingschme isproposed which may remove half of the noise
inpatent counts as a measure of innovativeo~ut. ~ paper also illustrateshow these data can be used
to estimate the value of the proprieta~ rights created by the patent laws. ~ parroters estimted in
this analysis can be used to answer a series of questionrelated to the value of patents. We illustrate w“th
estimates of how the value ofpatentprotection would vag under altemahx legal rules and renewalfees,
and ~“th estimates of the intemationalflows of returnsporn the patent system. Recent progress in the
development of databases has increased the potentialfor this type of analysis.



I. Introduction


         Patent data have b=n used both as a source of information on the extent of invention and as a
source of information on the value of the protection generated by the patent laws. This paper discusses,
in turn, how patent renewal and application data can be used to further our understanding of each of these
issum.


         Among measurm of the extent of innovation patents are unique in both the richnws of the
information they contain and in the breadth of their coverage. Patent documents contain detail on the
characteristics of individual innovations (eg. its technological area, or its citations to related imovations)
and their inventors (both the inventor per se and the owner or the assignee of the patent) not available
elsewhere.   Mor~ver,    unlike R&D expenditure data, which is at but available for a subset of larger
firms, patent data is available for all firms and individuals over a very long time period (Sullivan, 1994,
for example, usm patent renewal data to study 19th century innovation). Three featur= of patent data
make it possible to use them to study the efficacy of policies tailored to particular technological areas or

                                                                                                            ,




       ‘ Yale University and the NBER, Yale University and the NBER, and Yale University,
respectively. PakH thardcs the NSF (grant no. SBR-9512 106) for support.
                                                      2

specific typw of firms, the cross country flows of benefits from the patent system, externalities in the
knowledge generation procws, and many related phenomena.


         me primary impediment to fully exploiting this rich data source in the construction of measurw
of innovation is that the importance of rhe innovations protected by individual patents varim widely. As
a rmult, patent counts are very imperfect measura of innovative output. This generatm two problems.
First, there may be systematic different=     in the mean value of the innovations protected by different
groups of patents. ~is makm comparisons of counts a biased measure of different= in the value of tie
imovations being counted (be it their social or their private value). Second, even among groups with
similar mean values, the noise in patent counts makes it difficult to use munts to study the causw and
consequences of the variation across groups in the value of innovation.


         Recent rtiearch has attempted to use additional information horn the patent system to refine the
patent count measure. Studiti using patent renewal data exploit the fact that in most countria patentees
must pay periodic renewal f=      in order to keep their patents in force. Those using patent application
data make use of the fact that the same invention maybe patented in many countriw (producing a patent
‘family’). Provided more valuable inventions generate larger and/or longer-lived patent farniliw, we can
use the application and renewal data to attach weigh~ to patents and produce weighted patent count
indices which are more precise measur~ of imovative output than raw patent counts (see below).


        The second reason for interwt in application and renewal data is a direct reflection of the
incentives under] ying the application and renewal procws,     Patents reprment the legal right to exclude
others from using an imovation.     Thus the private value of a patent is determined by the difference in
the returns that would accrue to the imovation with and without patent prottiion.       Since it is this value
which determina      both application and renewal decisions, application and renewal data contain
information on the value of the proprietary rights created by the patent laws, that is on the value of patent
protection.


        Since patent rights are seldom marketed, application and renewal data are one of the few sources
of information on the value of patent protection available. These data can be distilled into a useable form
by mmbining them with models of application and renewal behavior. We can then investigate a host of
qumtions related to the value of patent protection: how it varies with legal institutions, which countiies
(or firms, or twhnology groups) gain disproportionately from the patent laws, and so on. In other words,
the renewal and application data can be used to investigate the efficacy and the implications of a major
tool of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) policy. In addition, the parameter wtimatm derived from three
models are informative about various featur= of the innovative procms including             the nature of the
procws by which the market for an innovation opens up, and the extent to which the returns from an
innovation bame      obsolete over time.


        The purpose of this paper is to provide a review of what has been learned from application and
renewal data to date, and then to consider how such data might be used to further explore important
issues surrounding innovation. We begin with a discussion of the alternative frameworks that have been
used to map the renewal and application data into wtimates of magnitudes of more direct inter=t (Section
II). Some of the empirical rwults currently available are then used to illustrate the potential usefulness
of the renewal cum application data in studies of the value of patented ideas (Section III) and in studies
of the value of patent protection (Section IV). An appendix outlinm the basic data sourcw.




II. The Framework of Patent Raewal and Application Models


        Emnomist’s interat in patent renewal data goes back at least to Nordhaus’ thesis (1969).        Pakm
and Schankerman (1984) stimulated broader interwt in renewals by showing how to use these data to
uncover characteristics of the value of patent protection.        We begin this section by outlining the
framework used in the PakH Schankerman study.


        They conditioned on a patent application having been made, and endowed each application with
an initial one period return to patent protection, say rO,which was assumed to decay deterministically at
an annual rate of 6 thereafter.   Patentees must pay an annual renewal fee to keep their patents in force
and this fee increases in age. A patent owner seeking to maximize the expected discounted value of the
(net) returns to patent protection will renew his patent at age ‘a’ if and only if current returns, r,exp(%a),
                                                      4

are greater than the current mst of renewal, say c,.2       Equivalently the patent will be renewed at age
a otdy if rO > ~exp(~a).


          The curve labeled f(rO)in Figure 1 shows the density of the initial distribution of returns. Thus
patents with initial rwms    to the right of the vertical line labeled clexp(bl), or the patents with returns
in the lined area, renew at age 1. The patents who drop out at the second renewal are those with initial
returns greater than clexp(~l) but lW than czexp(62), or those with returns in the hatched area in the
figure.


          Assuming a functional form for the initial distribution of returns, Pakes and $chankerman (1984)
show that the parameters of this distribution, tog~er     with 6, can be ~timated by finding the parameter
valuw that make the drop out proportions predicted by the thwry ‘as close as possible’ to those actually
observed in the data. me wtimatw obtained can be used to characterize the distribution of the value of
patent protection and its evolution over time (see below).


          Pakw (1986) allows a patentee to be uncertain about the sequence of returns that would be earned
were the patent to be kept in force.    The move to a stochastic model of returns allows for the fact that
inventors often apply for patents at an early stage in the innovative process, a stage at which they are still
exploring opportuniti~     for earning return from the use of the information embodied in the patented
ideas. In particular, the benefits of protection may increase as the owner learns about the characteristics
of the invention and the market. In this model, because there is a possibility that returns will increase,
even if current returns are less than the renewal fee, patent-    may find it worthwhile to renew in order
to preserve the option of protection in the future (once a patent lapses protection is lost forever). Thus
rather than a single decay rate, Pakm (1986) estimates a sequence of age specific conditional distributions
of returns (the distribution of returns at age ‘a+ 1‘ conditional on returns at age ‘a’). This additional
                                                                  “..                       ..”
detail allows us to obtain a deeper understanding of the
                                                      - nature ot the lmovatlve process and theretore of
the impacts of various policy options (see below).




        2 In this simple deterministic model if the rendition rhat current returns is greater than current
f= is not met in the current period, it will not be met at any age thereafter. This fact delivers the
myopic renewal rule given above. In the more complicated models that allow for learning about the
value of the patent, the renewal rule is more implicated.     See the discussion of stochastic renewal
models below.
                                                        5

         Mjouw      (1993) estimates a somewhat different stochastic model than that of PakM (1986) and
appli~ it to more recent and more disaggregate         data. h addition, she us= a behavioral model that
allows for the fact that a patentee must be willing to defend his rights against infringers in order for
patent protection to be mwingful.      Importantly, this merging of renewal data with available institutional
detail allows one to evaluate different legal institutions and IPR policy reforms (see below, Smion IV).


         One troubling aspect of th~e models is that they rely on assumed functional forms.          Although
the functional forms used were chosen partly to allow the =timatw to match available information, there
was not that much prior information to bring to bear on this problem, and, due to mmputational
constraints, little robustnas analysis was done.


         Ptiy     in rwponse to this problem, Pakes and Simpson (1989) develop ~timation and testing
techniquw that do not rely on strong functional form assumptions. They develop “nonparametric” tests
of the h~thesis     that the returns to patent protection for one group of patents are higher (in a first order
stochastic dominance sense) than those for another group. They also show that, with large enough sample
sizes and enough variation in renewal fee schedulw, patent renewal data is rich enough to identi~ the
entire sequence of conditional distribution functions.      Since in reality there is limited variation in fee
schedul~, they also show what can be determined horn any set of schedulw provided the sample is large
enough. While the sample siz~ they had available were large enough to make the tinting procedures
quite useful (see below), because of insufficient data they did not attempt to ‘nonparametrically’ identi~
the wnditional distributions of returns. Were the data sets we d~cribe in the last section of this paper
available, we are quite sure we wuld now make significant progrms in both the robustnws analysis
(where recent advancm in mmputers and in mmputational tools have been little short of miraculous) and
in the nonparametric analysis.


        Scherer (19%) notes that one striking finding that emerg~ from all of these studiw is that the
patents kept in force until the statutory limit of patent protection are significmtly more valuable than other
patenti (see below). In a directed survey, Scherer and Harhoff plan to interview the owners of German
patents which reached the statutory term limit in 1995 to obtain detailed information on their profitability,
characteristics, and on the role that patent protection played in helping them to appropriate the returns
from innovation.     This is a coarse and time intensive way of using the renewal data, but the detail it
producm may well prove invaluable to future work.
                                                       6

           The fist attempt to integrate application data into the analysis of the value of patent protection
 is in Putnam (1996). He extends Pakes and Schankerman’s (1984) analytic framework (which conditiom
 on application) by incorporating the inventor’s prior decisions as to whether to apply for patent protection
 in each country offering such protection.       The returns earned as a result of patents in the different
 Countii= are allowed to differ both by patent, and, for a given patent, by the characteristics of the
 wuntry.     However the returns earned in a given muntry are not allowed to depend on whether the patent
is kept in force in a s~nd     country. Inventom are assumed to apply for a patent in each country where
the expected dismunted value of net returns (returns minus application and renewal costs) is positive.


           Putnam’s (1996) study extends the usefulness of patent data in several ways. First, it shows us
how to ampute       wtimata   of the distribution of the total (domwtic and international) value of patent
protection accruing to inventions. Sand,        it allows us to study the international flow of returns from
patent protection (see below). Third,      it providm us with an ability to estimate differences in the cost
of application as a function of both the wuntry of origin of the patent and the country of application.
Fourth, because all relevant information about the family size of an invention is available within a few
years of fist fding, a patent weighting scheme based on applications data can be more timely than one
based solely on renewals.       Finally, combining application data and renewal data we can produce a
weighting scheme which is more precise than one obtained using renewal data alone (SW below).


           The models discussed above may be extended in many dir~ions.      However, they already provide
enough structure to illustrate, in the following sections, how patent renewal and applications data might
help in improving measurw of both the value of patented innovations and the value of patent protection.
We begin with the value of patented innovations.




III. Weighted Patent Counts aa a Measure of Innovation


           As noted above, a measure of the output of the imovative proce-ss would help us in analyzing a
host of policy and dmcriptive issues related to the causes and effects of technological change. Simple
patent count measur~ of output have been used extensively (see the review in Grilichm, 1990) but
because patents protect imovations of widely varying (private or social) value, the patent count measure
often runs into difficulties. In particular, if different groups of patents have different mean valua, patent
                                                     7

 munt mmparisons ca33be misleading.


         This is illustrated rather dramatically by Schankerman and PakN (1986). Previous studi~ had
 shown the patent/R&D ratio decliniig rapidly over time in most Wwtem countriw.          This, in turn, had
created a concern that we had entered into a period of ‘technological exhaustion’ in which the potential
for further productivity growth was small (see Evenson, 1984, and, for a more recent review, Kortum,
 1996). Using the Pakes and Schankerman (1984) model, but allowing the parameters of that model to
vary with both the patent mhort (the filing year) and the muntry, Schankerman and Pakes (1986)
wmpare aggregate paten.f COUIU
                             indices to their ~timated patenf vuZue indica for each of the U. K.,
France, and Germany for the period 1955 to 1975. Table 1 is taken from their study. On the basis of
this table they conclude that” ..one cannot draw inferencw on changw in the value of cohorts of patents
during this period from chang= in the quantity of patents, for there have been large (and largely
offsetting) changm in the ‘quality’ (or mean v~ues) of patents...”.    Gf course Schan.kerman and Paka
(1986) refer to the value of patent protection rather than the underlying value of the patented ideas, but,
at least a priori one would think that the two are closely related (see below).


        Pakes and Simpson (1989) draw similar inclusions       afier applying their nonparametric twting
procedur~   to Ftilsh   and Norwegian aggregate patent renewal data,         It is notable that the inverse
mrrelation betw-n quantity and quality across cohorts of patents was seen even in Finland where, unlike
in the other countri~, patent wunts increased over time. Schankerman (1991), using data from France
disaggregated by technology group for the period 1%9-81, also finds that decreasw in patent counts were
partially offset by increasm in the average value of patents in his data.3


        In addition to changes over time in the mean value of patents, it is also possible to discern
differences in their value in other dimensions. In the Norwegian and Finnish data, Pakm and Simpson
(1989) find that, additional   on the mhort and nationality of the patentee, patents from different ISIC



  3 There are several possible reasons for the average quality of the patents in a whort to be inversely
related to their quantity. The simplest is suggwted by the estimatw of the shape of the patent value
distribution. All of the studi~ discussed above fid that most patents are of very little value. Thus small
differencti in application costs or renewal fee schedul= can cause large changes in the number of patent
applied for even if the total value of the inventions that could be patented in a mhort remains fairly
constant over time. That is, variations in rests of renewal and application should cause a substantial
negative intercohort correlation betwwn average patent valu~ and patent munts.
                                                    8

categori= have different value distributions.    They derive a rough ordering across industry groups:
pharmaceuticals, lumber, wood and paper, and machinery and chemicals, dominate; followed by
electronics, fabricated metals, and stone, clay and glass; tha heavy industries and finally a ‘low-t&h’
grouping.    Conditional on whort and ISIC categori=, they do not find (significant) differenc~ in the
value distribution across different patentee nationalitiw.   However, in similar tats on German data
performed by Lanjouw (1992), equality is rejected in both nationality and technology dimensions (though
there was much stronger evidence of significant difference in the technology dimension).


        Even when mmparing groups of patents with similar mean valum, the large variance in patent
vrdua generatw a degree of noise in patent count measurm which mak~ them extremely difficult to use
in studies of innovation. There are varying estimata of the fraction of the total variance in patent valu=
captured by the patent wunt measure, and all indications are that the quality of the patent counts measure
depends on the type of data. For example, Grilichw (1990) =timates that the variance in nmbers          of
patents across fi    is just 7% of the variance in the vulue of patents across firms. The fraction of the
variance in patent valua captured by differenc~ in patent counts is likely to be even lower in the within
fm   across time dimension (see Pakes and Grilichm, 1980), but higher when we aggregate up to-inter-
industry differences in patent munts (see Lath, 1995). No matter the data, however, there is little doubt
that the variability in patent valum significantly reduc= the efficacy of patent munts as a measure of
invention.


        Indeed one of the longest lasting debates in the history of =nomic        measurement has been
whether the noise and the bias~ in patent munt measurm can be made small enough to make patent
munts useful measurm of innovative output in economic studi= (see, for example, the papers of Kuznets
and Sanders, and the comments of Schmookler, in Nelson, 1%2). We reiterate here that time problems
with the patent count measures are particularly unfortunate since the bwt alternative, R&D expenditure
data, is not mmprehemively    available. Moraver,    the R&D data that is available is not broken down
by technology group and mntains neither the detail on ownership, nor on relationships to other
inventions, found in patent data.


        Both renewal and application data can be used to develop a weighted patent count measure which
mitigates the problems in the standard patent munt measure. The idea is straightforward.      Rather than
simply counting the number of patents, we partition them into groups (say J of them) by the age at which
                                                        9

the patent was allowed to lapse (at which the renewal & was not paid) and/or by the set of wuntrim in
which patent applications were fled.     We then mnstruct a patent value index, say VI, as
                            (1)             VI - 2;.1 w, N,,
   .
           where Nj is the number of patents in group ‘j’ and Wjis the weight associated with that group.
To construct this index we need the {w,}.


        mere are a mrmh of alternative ways to ~              .    he   weights. One is to regre9s a =Ure
of the private and/or the social value of innovation on the NJ, and let the data ~timate the {wi}. Profits
or firm value are candid-      for the d~ent        variable whm we are interested in weights fir indices of
the private value of innovation, while measures of industry-wide productivity wodd be more appropriate
for measu.rmof social value (s*, Griliches, 1979, and, more ray,              Jon= and Williams, 19%, for
a discussion).   For attemptato &tablish the structural links ~~           private and social value we auld
mnstruct a weighting scheme which measures externalities more directly (see Jaffe, 1986, fir an example
of spi.llover measure that could be constructed in this way).


        mere are ~nometric        problems in using regression -w=           to obtain precise estimaw of the
needed weights.4 However, there are also reasons to expect that we can overmme them. In particular
there is, at least potentially, a wdth      of patent data.       Fur&her,if we are willing to assume some
mnnection between the value of patent protection and the value of patentd ideas, there is substantial
prior information on the structure of the weights that ought to be of significant help in =timating them.
We discuss this latter possibility in more dti      now.


        A starting point is to assume that the average value of the ideas embodied in the patents in a
p~icular    group is proportional to the value of patent protection in that group. If we then assume that
the distribution of the value of patent prottiion    is ~timated ~rrectly by our renewal and/or application




  4 Two ame immediate y to ti.          The fist is that the within group error in the patent wunt measure
of patent values will produce an errors in variables problem in ~ttilon.        We note that in casa where
R&D data is also available they area potential instrument. ‘The~nd        is the fact that the {Nj} sequenc~
are likely to be highly correlated across obs~ations (especially in studi~ where a major source of the
variation in the data is across time). This is likely to produu a precision problem similar to the problem
we ofien find in distributed lag ~timation. me information on the patternof the weights available from
the =timat= of the value of patent protion           is likely to be particularly helpful in mitigating this
problem.
                                                    10

model, we can obtain the weights needed for equation (1) up to a factor of proportionality from worbg
out the implications of our parameteratimat=.       As yet there are no rwults available where both the
choice of muntrim in which to apply for a patent and the subsquent        renewal decisions are analyzed
simultaneously.   Consequently we review =timat= of weights for groupings determined by the length
of time renewed in particular muntri=,   and for groupings determined by the countries in which a given
patent was applied for, separately.5


        Table 2 summarizm this information. Columns 1, 2 and 3 are taken from Lanjouw (1993) and
are calculated for the 1974 cohort of German mmputer and pharmaceutical patents (the paper mtimatm
for four t~hnology groups based on thirty cohorts of data). Columns 4 and 5 are computed horn Pak~
(1986) and are based on all patents applied for between 1951 and 1979 in France, and on all patents
granted that were applied for between 1952 and 1972 in Gexmany.


        The weights in dl but the second mlumn sum to one (we mme back to Column 2 below).
Lanjouw’s atimates imply that the average mmputer patent lapsing at age four is worth thr~ times as
much as one lapsing at age three. All of Lanjouw’s ~timates show patent weights growing approximately
linearly in lapse age until the group of, patents that survive to the maximum age (20 years). The latter
group are about 50% more valuable, on average, than those thatsurvive 19 years. Pakm’ estimatm show
somewhat lower weights for patenw allowed to lapse in the aly       ag=, ~paially    the weights based on
the French data. ~ereafier   they grow at a fairly steady rate, again until the gToup of patents that renew
until the statutory limit. Three are estimated to be 100% more valuable then the patents that lapse the
year before the statutory limit. Note that all mlumns imply that, were we to attempt to atimate the
weights econometrically, a three or four parameter family would suffice.


         Most of the differences between columns are explainable. For example the smaller weights for
patents that lapse early on in France might have bwn expected from the fact that the French data contain
all patent applications while the German data contain ody those paten~ bat were eventually granted.
The difference across columns in the weight given to the patents that renewed until the statutory term



  5 A more mmplete database would allow a two-way classification of patents into muntries of
application and the age at which the patent was allowed to lapse in each country. Since inventions which
patent in more countries are typically renewed longer in each auntry (Pumam, 1991), weights for a-two-
way classification can not be built up from the “marginals” of the two one-way classifications.
                                                    11

limit is a bit more troubling. Patents which are renewed until the statutory term limit are an “open
ended” group. mat is, since there never is an observed renewal fee that induces thae patents to drop
out, there is a sense in which we never have an upper bound to their returns. (See the nonparametric
analysis in Palces and Simpson, 1989.)      The model determin= the value of thwe patents from a
wrnbination of the fact that tie possibility of a patent becoming high valued has an effect on initial
renewal decisions, and tim    functional form assumptions. Thus we might expect this weight to be more
model dependent than the others-which is just what we find.


        The weights in Columns 1, 3, 4 and 5 apply directly to mhorts of patents which are older than
the statutory term limit. If we also want to weight the patents in younger cohorts, mhorts for which we
have not yet seen the entire sequence of lapse proportions, we will need weights for combined groups
(’truncation weights’). ~we      are based on the mean value of patents which are renewed up through a
given age. Column 2 provides an example of the n~ed        figures. Comparing Columns 1 and 2 we see
that the average value of all computer patents renewed through age three is just over four times the size
of the mean value of those lapsing in age three (0.017 versus 0.004). If a mhort were ody ten years old,
we could assign the weights from Column 1 to inventions whose lapse we actually observed, and the age
ten weight of 0.052 from Column 2 to all patents still in force in age ten.


        Columu 6 prments wrrmponding estimatm from       Pumam(1996) for patent families. ~me show
the relative mean value of patent families of different SU= .6 For example, the average patent family
with applications fled in four wuntria     was worth about one and a half times as much as one with
applications in three muntriw.     Th~e weights grow approximately log-linearly, again excepting the
weight for 18-country famili=.      Thwe are the largmt familim in his data, and are estimated to be
approximately twice as valuable, on average, as a 17-country family.


        We close this section by noting that the mmplementary data needed to fully exploit better indic~
of the value of innovation are largely available. For example the concordance in Kortum and Putnam
(1995) enabl= the mapping of patents from the technology classification used by the patent examiners




6 The true estimated values, and therefore the mrresponding weights, depend not ordy on the number of
patents in patent fdia    but also on the country composition of the patent applications. We have chosen
this aggregation to simpli~ the pr~entation.
                                                     12

to a standard industrial classification (both by industry of use and by industry of origin, of the patent)
and, therefor, the construction of patent value indic= by industry.       Together with publicly available
census and survey of manufacturing data available for the standard classification of industries, this allows
one to study innovation at the industry level of aggregation. Also the ownership information in patent
documents allows the matching of our patent value indic~ to input data by the source of funding (private,
government funded, and by agencim within the government finded category), and by the location of the
R&D activity (universities, national r~earch labs, private k,       joint ventures, and so on). This makm
it possible to examine the efficacy of different institutional arrangements for the production of innovation.
By combining weighted patent value indic~ with the citation information which is also included in the
patent documents (see Trajtenberg, 1991; Jaffe, Henderson, and Trajtenberg, 1993), valuti muld be
attached to the spillovers that lie at the heart of many of the public policy issues associated with R&D
policy.    Patent documents also indicate the number of International Patent Classification subclass~ to
which a patent is assigned. With patent value indices it is possible to examine whether this measure of
the breadth of an innovation is indeed related to its private or social value (Lemer, 1994).


          We now move on to a consideration of the use of the patent renewal and application data in
studim of the value of patent protection and IPR policy.




IV. The Value of Patent Protection and IPR Policy


          As discussed in the introduction, the estimation of patent renewal and applications models givm
us some of the few piec= of information avatiable on the value of protection itself, as distinct from the
value of the underlying imovation.    We now consider what has been learned about the distribution of the
value of patent protection and its evolution over the lifespan of a group of patents.        This evolution
generatm insights into the nature of the learning and obsolescence procws.       This section closes with a
discussion of how the r=ults from these models can be used to analyze tie effects of intellectual propefiy
policy reforms.


~   iUagninufeand Dism”butionof Value


          Currently, renewal model estimates of patent valu= are available for Germany, France, the U.K.
                                                       13

and India at an aggregate level (Schankerman and PakM, 1986; Pakes, 1986; Sullivan, 1994; Fikkert and
Luthria, 1996). For Germany and Fran& they are also available disaggregate           by the nationality of the
patentee and by the type of technology (Schankerman, 1991; Lanjouw, 1993). Estimating a deterministic
model, Schankerman and Pakes find that the average value of a patent from mhort 1970 appliedfor in
France and the U.K. was quite low at 11,250 DM (1975 Datchmarks).             In Germany the average value
of a pafem graruedwas about 27,300 DM. Oust over a third of the patents applied for in Germany were
granted).   In all muntries the distribution of valum was very skewed. One percent of applications in
France and the U.K. had values in excms of 112,5CNIDM, while in Germany one percent of granted
patents had values above 193,000 DM.       Disaggregate     value atimatw for the 1975 German cohort are
in Table 3 (from Lanjouw, 1993). Consistent with the results noted above, they indicate quite a wide
variation across technologim in the average value repr=ented by a single patent (from 17,500 to 49,700
1975 DM) and considerable skew in the distribution of value. Similar r~ults were obtained for France
by Schankerman (1991).


        Pumam (1996) ~timat~ an applications model to derive the first quantitative measure of the total
value of the patent rights obtained on an innovation (in contrast to the value obtained as a rwult of the
protection afforded by the patent laws in a given wuntry).        ~is   is particularly intermting because it
allows us, for the first time, to measure the flows of the value of patent rights across borders, and
therefore to answer the qu~tion of the extent to which different muntri~ benefit disproportionately from
the existence of the international patent system.


        Table 4 presenti estimat~ of the mean value of patents granted and held in each of the top five
OECD countrim. (Value is again calculated as the prment value of annual returns to patent protection,
net of application and renewal f=,   with renewal decisions made optimally.) The data are rmtricted to
include ody inventions for which patent applications were made in more than one muntry.         In 1974 this
was about 28% of all inventions reaching patent offlcm in the OECD.                 The selection of only
internationally-filed inventions eliminates the lowest valued patents from the analysis. As a r~ult, the
figures in Table 4 are not dir~y     comparable to those given above for renewal models (as the latter
include inventions protected in a single country).


        Column 1 of Table 4 shows the average value of a patent granted in each country.           Note that
although Germany and Japan have anomies             of similar size, there is a large disparity between the
                                                       14

expected value of protdon       in the two wuntrim.      The avwage internationally-filed patent granted by
Japan appears to have been worth 1=s than in other countries (about 164,000 1975 DM, while the
corr=ponding value in Germany is 277,~         DM). Although some of this muld be due to compositional
differences (for example, a higher share of chemical and pharmaceutical inventions in Germany),
Putnam’s rmults suggmt that inventors perceive Japanese patent protection to be worth less, holding the
‘quality’ of the invention constant, than a German patent.


           Column 2 of Table 4 provid~ the average value of a patent held by citizens of each country.
Japan is again an outlier, this time holding patents whose value is much higher, on average, than those
held by citizens of other major countri~.         This feature of Japanese patenting is associated with NO
factors: (1) a relatively large share of Japan~e inventions are filed abroad (particularly given its distance
from other auntries),    ti   (2) a disproportionately large fraction of their patents are filed in the U. S.,
a country which, with its large market, grants tie most valuable patents (see Column 1).


           Table 5 prments a subset of the patent ‘trade’ rwults from Putnam (1996). For each of three
patent granting countii~ the table pr=ents the following five columns of data: the numbers of patents
granted by the country to citizens of other specified ‘source’ countries; the percentag~ three numbers
represent of the total patents granted by the country to foreigners; the estimated mean value of the
associated patent rights; the total value of the patent rights granted to citizens of the source muntries; and
the share these represent of the total value of patents granted by the wuntry to foreigners. Each row of
the table represents a different source wuntry.     Thus, the table is a 3 x 3 matrix of 5-column blocks; the
i~a block of the matrix gives information about patents originating in country i and patented in country
j. Bause      the model applies ody to patents filed internationally, the diagonal blocks of the matrix are
omitted.



           The table shows, for example, that among inventions whose first filing occurred in 1974,
Japanme inventors obtained 5,239 patents in the United States, while U.S. inventors obtained 3,836
patents in Japan. The mean value of a Japanwe~rigin patent in the U.S. was about 325,0001975 DM,
while that of a U.S.-origin patent in Japan was about 148,~        DM.    The total value of patents granted
by the U.S. to Japan was ~timated to be about 1,703 million DM, while Japan granted about 569 million
DM worth of patents to U.S. inventors. Thus the U.S. ‘Eade deficit’ with Japan amounted to over 1,074
million DM in 1974 (which reprments almost 90% of its total deficit with the developed world). Note
                                                     15

that in contrast to the chang= in mmures       over time which were discussed in Section III, in this case
difference in numbers underestimatedifferences in value.



         Recall that one of the main motivations for maintaining an intellectual property rights system is
to increase the extent to which inventors can capturethe returns to inv~tments in R&D. me ratio of
the total private value of patent protection to R&D expenditures is one measure of the ‘implicit subsidy’
created by a patent system. This can be compared to other incentive policiw such as R&D tax breaks
or direct government funding of research.



         Using a disaggregated model of the rams      in France and Germany, respectively, Schtierman
(1991) and Lanjouw (1993) find subsidy rates on the order of 10-15% for most twhnologiw.          Similar
rates are found for aggregate data by Pak~ (1986) and Schankerman and Pak~ (1986). Putnam (19%),
on the other hand, calculat~ the ratio of the value of international patent rights held worldwide to total
R&D expenditur~ for each coun~.          Table 4, Column 3, shows the implicit subsidy rates he finds for
five muntriw.       They fall between 14 and 34 percent. Both Germany and the U.K. appear to benefit
significantly more than the other muntri~ from patenting abroad; they received an ‘implicit subsidy’
amounting to about 33% of their R&D. The figure for France and Japan was about 20%. The stock of
international patent rights held by U.S. inventors, dwpite being the largmt stock worldwide, was just
15% of the value of U.S. R&D expenditure.



         Estimatti derived from the renewal and application models are also informative about specific
features of the innovative process, such as the speed of learning, exploitation and obsolmcence of
innovations.      Gne of the early interests in wtimating models of the renewal decision was to obtain a
measure of the rate of obsolwcence on the private returns to innovations. This rate of obsolwcence is
n~ed    to weight R&D inv~tments in the instruction        of knowledge ‘stocks’ (analogous to physical
capital stocks) in the analysis of the private returns to R&D investments (see Griliches, 1979, for a
detailed explanation).    The wly    deterministic models of renewals with a single deprwiation rate find
rates considerably higher (on the order of 25%) than those typically used in the construction of physical
capital stocks.



        As noted in Section II, the later, stochastic, renewal models allow for greater variation in the
                                                    16

pattern of returns over time. In th~e models returns can actually increase over time as agents learn how
to utilize their patents effectively. From aggregate data, Pakes (1986) finds that most learning is over
by the fifth age of protection. With disaggregate data and a model which allows for zero returns in the
early ag=, Lanjouw (1993) obtains a similar result, with tie bulk of learning completed after four years
and all learning over after seven years. In the learning period, many patent=   discover that their patents
are worthlws, while others learn hat substantial r~ms      carI be earned from their patents.   After this
period returns dway more or less at a mmmon rate.




IPR Policy


        me value of the legal right to the exclusive use of an innovation and hence the incentives created
by a patent system depend on features of the system which can, and do, vary across wuntri~       and time.
For example, statutory patent terms range from zero years (excluded products, such as pharmaceuticals,
in many countries) to 20 years (EC; soon to be joined by signatori~ of the GATI’ treaty). Application
and renewal f=   have also varied widely-the latter from zero (the U.S. until recently) to over 3,300 DM
(for the twentieth year of protmion   in Germany). Since these variables affect the duration of patents,
not ody do they help determine the incentivw to inv~t in r~earch, they also affti      the social costs of
allowing patent monopolia.    To date f=   and term limits have been set in an d bc fashion, usually to
cover patent office costs. However, there is potential for these featurw to be designed so as to create
a given level of expected private returns at a lower social mst (for thmretical work on this issue see
Nordhaus, 1969, and, more recently, Comelli and Schankerman, 19%).              Estimatm from structural
renewal or applications models can be used to obtain empiricaI measur~ of one side of this tradmff how
changes in the fee schedule and the statutory term influence the private value of patent rights and hence
the incentives to do R&D.



        Enforcement and the wsts of enforcement dso have a bearing on the benefits of patent protection.
The lack of enforcement figures highly in discussions with developing muntry governments while the
high costs of prosecuting infringements is receiving a great deal of attention elsewhere.   The U.S. has
swn sweeping changes to its IPR law and practice since the early 1980s, including the wtablishment of
a new federal court of appeals to hear patent casw. Renewal data can be used to measure how sensitive
                                                   17

the returns to patenting are to various changes in the law or legal policy. Lanjouw (1996) embeds an
iufringernent/litigation model into a renewal model to take into acmunt the fact that patentees must be
willing to enforce their rights for protection to be meanin@l.    While in the absence of data related to
filed court cases this approach reli= heavily on structural assumptions, it provides the ordy measure to
date of the ‘hidden’ effects of legal policy changw on the number of patents and their duration - effects
which are over and above changes in direct legal rests. Morwver legal data is increasingly available and
is currently being matched to patent data.



         Tablw 6 and 7 present simulated estimata       of the impacts of specified changes in f=,    term
lengths and legal policy on the benefits of patent protection (for details on the construction of these
atimatm,    and further simulated policy experiments, sw Lanjouw, 19%).          Since we have not yet
wtimated a model which analyzm the application and subsequent renewal decisions jointly, the results
in th~e tables condition on the applications in a particular mhort, and then ask how the returns to
protection for those patents change under alternative institutional arrangements’.    The first mlumn in
each table shows the mean and percentil~ of the value distribution for the 1975 cohort of German
computer patents. Th=e are intimated with the actual parameters of the IPR system in Germany - with
legal fm paid by the losing party (the British Rule, BR) and a statutory term limit of 20 years. There
were 1,172 German computer patents in 1975. Table 6 shows how patent value and the average revenue
collected by the patent office change with the alterations in renewal fee schedule.    The reform being
considered is indicated in bold type at the top of each mlumn. Included in Column 3 of the table is the
simulated effw of switching to a schedule (denoted CS) which may correspond more closely to an
optimal dmign (based on the analysis in Comelli and Schankerman, 19%).



        In Table 7, each of Columns 2 through 7 shows the effect on patent value of legal policy reforms
(with the set of policy changm again indicted in bold at rhe top of the columns). Of particular intermt
is that both the move from the British Rule to the American Rule (with litigants paying their own legal
f=),   and the move from a 20 year to a 17 year statutory term limit have cause large chang~ in the
value of patent protection.




7 I.e. a more complete model would allow the quantity and quality of applications to also vary with
the institutional arrangement, but such a model has yet to be wtimated.
                                                      18

          There are many directions in which this type of analysis muld be developed further.         Current
theoretical work is making progr=s in spwifying more rdistic         models of the litigation and settlement
proc~s.     As our understanding progrwses on this front it will be possible to more accurately specify the
renewal rule.    The analysis can, and should, be tailored to the legal environment of the mmpacts on
untri~ and the t~ologies       under consideration.



          Concurrent with theoretical developments, the databas= relevant to this type of analysis are
improving in quality and size, and becoming more easily accwsible.              This because auntries     are
mmputerizing their patent offices and court systems. The emerging data bases include not ody data on
patent applications and renewals, but also legal data on the filing and the rmolution of litigation suits, and
hence will allow us to wtimate more mmplex models. me size of thwe data sets will also enable us to
intimate our models separately for more finely differentiated subclass~ of data (for eg. by technology
group, fm     size, type of inventor, WC.). The data appendix providw an overview of ways of acc~sing
the patent data needed to extend th=e studies.
                                                    19

                                              Data Appendix



           Application and renewal data are currently mllected and disseminated separately: renewal data
are wllected by national patent offic=, while patent family data are ordy assembled by private database
vendors.      The extent and the history of renewal data mmputerization varies widely by wuntry.a
Typically, computerization did not begin until the mid- 1970s, so complete cohort observations are ordy
now bmming        available .9 Most wuntries have a policy of charging for accms to these data on a per
patent basis, but have typically waived the fee for academic r~earchers seeking large samplm.



        The most mmprehensive source of wmputerized legal status data currently available is the
Inpadoc Legal Status file. This fle do= not allow one to link patents from the same family. Inpadoc
(formerly the International Patent Documentation Center) is now owned by the European Patent ~lce
(EPO). The EPO continua to market a wmmercial version of the Inpadoc file through ordine database
servic= like Orbit-Qu~tel and Dialog. The EPO also markets this file on tape, at a cost of 11,~     DM
for the backfile and 11,000 DM per year for monthly updatea. (Pric~ and d~criptions are quoted from
the Epidos catalog of products and servicm published by the EPO, Prices are current as of June 1995.)
The fle contains legal status information for Austria, Belgium, Switzerland, Germany, the former East
Germany, European patents, France, the United Kingdom, Hungary, Luxembourg, Monam, Netherlands,
Sweden, the United Statti, and Patent Cooperation Treaty       applications (which are filed in order to
mtablish novelty in all countries designated by the applicant). The commencement of coverage varies
by country.



        Separately, Inpadoc also producm patent family information covering about 50 countries. The
Inpadoc file is available from the EPO at a fee of 90,000 DM for the patent family information and an
additional 90,000 DM for the ‘bibliographic’ information, such as the firm identifier and the IPC




s It can also vary within a country. For example, computerized archives in Germany contain all patents
valid in 1978 or later and all patent applications filed in 1981 or later.
9 The manual collection of older renewal data is often infeasible. These data are recorded in a variety
of formats (archive volumes, lBM-style mmputer cards, microfiche) and with varying degrm of
mmpletenms in their mmplementary data (such as firm identifiers and WC codw).
                                                    20

classification. Th=e f=    are for the current year’s data 10-the
                                                            ,     cost of the two complete bactil~,   which
extend from 1%8, is a one-time payment of 90,000 DM each. me purchase of part of the files is also
possible.




‘0It should be rmgni.zed that, because a patent family’s composition is revealed over a multi-year period
(bwause of a long pendency between application and examination in countries that keep applications
secret), purchasing the ‘current year’ information dow not equate to purchasing the ‘current mhort,’
which will not be revealed for several years. Morwver, because patent examinations may, in some
jurisdictions, be delayed at the discretion of the applicant, the final outmme of the application process
will not be known, for some inventions, until ten years or more after their filing date, Thus, studies that
seek to rmtrict the sample to granted patents, rather than to applications, must be careful to avoid the
problems raised by sample truncation.
                                                   21




Comelli, Franc=ca and M. Schankerman (1996) “Optimal Patent Renewals,” The Economics of Industry
Group Discussion Paper no. EI/13. STICERD. The London School of Emnomics.


Evenson, Robert (1984) “International Invention: Implications for Technology Market Analysis” in R~,
P@enfs and Produm”tify,-Zvi Griliches (cd.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Fikkert, Brian and Manjula Luthria (1996) “Estimat~ of the Private Value of Patent Protection in India, ”
Mimm. University of Maryland.


Grilichm, Zvi (1979) “Issues in Ass=sing the Contribution of Research and Development to Productivity
Growth,” Bell Jouti o/EcoMmics. Vol. 10, no. 1 (Spring).


Grilich=,   Zvi (1990) “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey, ” Jouti        of Economic
Literufure. Vol. ~.      pp. 1661-1707,


Jaffe, Adam (1986) ‘T&hnological Opportunity and Spillovers of R&D: Evidence from Firms’ Patents,
Profits, and Market Value,” hrican Economic Review. Vol. 76, no. 5. pp. 984-1002.

Jaffe, Adam, Rebwca Henderson and Manuel Trajtenberg (1993) “Gw~aphic Localization of Knowledge
Spillovers As Evidenced By Patent Citations,” QuafierlyJouti of Economics, Vol. 108. pp. 577-598.


Jones, C. and J. Williams (1996) “Too Much of a Good ~ing?      The Emnomics of Investment In R&D, ”
Mimeo. Stanford University.


Kortum, Samuel (19%) “Research and Productivity Growth, Theory and Evidence from Patent Data, ”
Mimeo. Boston University.


Kmnets, Simon (1%2) “Inventive Activity: Problems of Definition and Maurement, ” pp. 19-53, in
R.R. Nelson (ed,), ~ Rafe and Direcfion of Inventive Advio. Universitim NBER Conference Series
No. 13, Princeton University pr~s.


Lath, Saul (1995) “Patents and Productivity Growth at the Industry Level: A First bok, ” Economics
Uzters. Vol. 49, pp. 101-108.

Lanjouw, Jean O. (1996) “Beyond Lawyers’ F=:        Measuring the Indira    Effects of U.S. Intellectual
Property Reforms,” Mima. Yale University.
                                                  22

Lanjouw, Jean O. (1993) “Patent Protection: Of What Value and for How hng?”     NBER Working Paper
no. 4475.


Lanjouw, Jean O. (1992) ~     Private Value of Patent Rights: A Dynamic Programming and Game
TheoreticA@sis     of West GermanPatent Renewal Data, 1953-1988. Ph.D thmis. bndon School of
Economics.


Lemer, Josh (1994) “Patenting in the Shadow of Competitors,” Journal of h    and Economics. Vol. 38,
no. 2, pp. 463-%.


Nordhaus, William D. (1969) Invention, Growth,and We~are:A ~eoretical Treatmentof Techmlogical
@nge. Cambridge: M.I.T. Pras,

Pakm, Ariel (1986) “Patents as Options: Some Estimat= of the Value of Holding European Patent
Stocks, mEconometrics. Vol. 54. pp. 755-784.


Pakm, Ariel and Zvi Griliches (1980) “Patents and R&D at the Firm Uvel: A First Report,H Economics
titters, Vol. 5, pp.377-81.

Pakes, Ariel and Mark Schankerman (1984) “The Rate of Obsolescence of Patents, Research G=tation
Lags, and the Private Rate of Return to Research R~ources, “ in Zvi Griliches (cd.), R&D, Patents and
Prtiuctitiry. NBER Conference Seri~. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.

Pakw, A. and Margaret Simpson (1989) “Patent Renewal Data, ” BrookingsPapers:Macroeconomics.pp.
331410.


Putnam, Jonathan (1991) ‘What Can We Really Learn from the ~nternational) Patent System?H Mimeo.
Yale Universi~.


Putnam, Jonathan (1996) Z’heValue of InternationalPatent Protem”on. Ph.D. Thesis. Yale University.


Sanders, Barkav (1962) “Some Difficulties in Measuring Inventive Activity, ” pp. 53-92, in R.R. Nelson
(cd.), l’he Rate and Direm-on of Inven”ve Acfivio. Universities NBER Conference Seriw No. 13,
Princeton University Press.


Schankerman, Mark (1991) “The Private Value of Patent Rights in France, 1969-87: An Empirical Study
of Patent Renewal Data, ” NBER Working Paper no. 3780, July.


Schankerman, Mark and Ariel Pakes (1986) “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in European
Countries during the Post-1950 Period,” ~ EconomicJournaZ. Vol. 96. pp. 1052-1076.
                                                23

Scherer, M. (1996) “me Size Distribution of Profifi from Innovation,” Mimeo. Harvard University.


Schmoolder, Jamb (1%2) ‘Comment, “ in R.R. Nelson (cd.), ~ Rafe and Direti”on of ’Znvenfive
Activizy, University= NBER Conference Seri~ No. 13, Princeton University Prws.

Sullivan, Richard (1994) “Estimat= of the Vtie       of Patent Rights in Great Britain and Ireland,
1852-1876,” Ecorwmica. Vol. 61, pp. 37-58.


Trajtenberg, Mmuel (1990) “A Penny for Your Quot~: Patent Citations and the VaIue of Innovation, ”
~ Rand Journul of Economics. Vol. 21, no. 1.
.
.’
b
h
    w
    w“
    m




8
%




    .
    G
    m
    m
    w




●
                    .s




                w




I
        o




            M




    I
    ,
                          c1exp(Jl)             CZexp(J2)




Figure 1: The density of initial returns corresponding to 1 or 2 periods of renewal




                                         1
