NBER WO~G

PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MOBILITY
IN HISTORY: PURCHASING-POWER
PARITY ~ THE LONG RUN

Alan M. Taylor

Working Paper 5742

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996

This work is related to a larger project with Maurice Obstfeld (Obstfeld and Taylor 1996) on the
historical evolution of international capital mobility. I am indebted to Michael Bordo, Hugh
Rockoff, and James Lothian for help with data enquiries, and to Peter Pedroni and Mark Watson for
advice on econometric practice. For their helpful comments I wish to thank James Lothian, Michael
Knetter, and participants at the NBER Conference on Exchange Rates (May 1996). Comments are
very welcome, All errors are mine. This paper is part of NBER’s project on International Capital
Flows and NBER’s research programs in the Development of the American Economy, and
International Finance and Macroeconomics. It was presented at the NBER conference “Universities
Research Conference on the Determination of Exchange Rates.” We are grateful to the Center for
International Political Economy for the support of this project. Any opinions expressed are those
of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Alan M. Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5742
September 1996

INTERNATIONAL CAPITAL MOBILITY
IN HISTORY: PURCHASING-POWER
PARITY IN THE LONG RUN

ABSTRACT

This paper investigates purchasing-power

parity (PPP) since the late nineteenth century for

a sample of twenty countries, a broader sample of pooled annual data than has been studied before.
Econometric

results for time-series and panel samples allows us to test the robustness of the PPP

hypothesis in different eras: the gold-standard,

interwar, Bretton Woods, and the recent float. The

evidence for PPP is mixed: Strong PPP, entailing stationaity
supported, and real-exchange-rate
not-much-weaker

of the real exchange rate, is not broadly

dispersion shows counterintuitive

historical patterns.

However,

forms of PPP can be supported, with evidence of cointegration between different

countries’ common-currency price levels. Residual variances here confirm the conventional wisdom
that the interwar period, particularly the Great Depression, represented the nadir of international
capital market integration in the modem era.

Alan M, Taylor
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
amt@nwu.edu

1

PPP in Historical Context

This paper is concerned with the long-run evolution of international capital
mobility in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and, as one dimension of
this problem, re-examines the question of long-run purchasing-power parity
(PPP). PPP can be identified as a necmsary condition for the most stringent of capital market integration trots, the international
equtization
of
real interest rates. Indeed, PPP in its Strong form, combined with speculative efficiency-uncovered
interest parity (UIP) md covered interest parity
(CIP)—is a sufficient condition for the equalization across countries of ex
ante real interest rates. 1 Thus, PPP is indeed a important building block in
any wsessment of the historical success or failure of capital market integration measured by the (exmting) standard of real interest rate equalization. 2
And even PPP in weaker forms remains a valid benchmark and widely used
criterion for judging the extent of successful international arbitrage, and a
durable yardstick in theoretical and empirical analysis of the equilibrium real
exchange rate (Isard 1995),
Of course, PPP remains a problematic concept for studies of capital marlFormally, fol]owlngIswd (1995),UIP entails that the forward-spot exchange ‘ate
differential equal the nominal interest rate difference between two currencies,
j~–et=rt–rj,

(1)

where ~t is the log forward exchange rate, et is the log spot rate, and Tt and r; are the
home and foreign interest rates. CIP requires that the forward rate equal the expectation
of the future spot rate,
Etet+l = j~,
(2)
where Et denotes the expectation at time t. Finally, (Strong-%lative)
PPP implies that
expected exchange rate changes will equal expected inflation different ials,
Etet+l – et = Etrt – Et~~,

(3)

where nt = Pt+l – pt md m; = p;+ ~ – p: are the inflation rates in the two currencies
baaed on price levels pt and p:. It is strtightforward to show that 1, 2, and 3 imply the
equalization real ez ante real interest rates,
Tt —Et~t = r: — Et~;

ZFor a h~torical study of real inter=t

(4)

rate convergencein a cross-section of countries

see Lothian (1995).

2

ket integration, since it may appear, at first sight, essentially a test of goodsThough critics have worried about this problem, I will
market arbitrage.
argue that the concern may be misplaced, especially in the longer run, both
Ln theoretical terms, violations of
on theoretical and historical grounds.
PPP are often seen as stemming from barriers to goods market integration,
whether due to transport costs or commercial policy. It is easy to see that
in a simple tw~good, general-equilibrium
model, the predictions that trade
barriers drive PPP deviations are not so clear cut. Small barriers to trade
will reduce the trade volume incrementally (consider movements along offer curves) and drive wedges between home and foreign prices. Thus, home
imports will be costlier than foreign exports—but
forei~ imports will be
costlier than home exports too. Thus any aggregate price is a composite of
import and export price indices, and will be subject to countervailing forces
in both countries. In a symmetric, two-coutry
world, with equal commodity weights in the price index, it is clear that overall valuations of PPP will
be unaffected by barriers. 3 The distinction is between the general absolute
price level and the structure of relative pricw. Thus, thinking in terms of
trade models, we are forced to confront goods-price determination in general
equilibrium, a legitimate long-rm concern. The same models also force us
to confront factor price convergence (or equalization in the pure HeckscherOhlin model). Here again, the convergence of fmtor prices, such as the cost
of capital, depends on the convergence of the relative price structure of traded
commodities.
These comiderations urge us to reflect on aggregate PPP as
an absolute price driven phenomenon.
PPP is therefore somewhat distinct
from the pure law-of-on~price concept applied to commodities, and, I argue,
more properly in the domain of monetary economics and the macroeconomic
theory of infiation.
On historical grounds, we would rapidly arrive the same conclusion. Conceiving of PPP in 1922, Cassel was motivated by the vast dispersion in
national price levels driven by wartime inflations in the various belligerent countriw.
Adjmting excha,nge rates to be consistent with PPP, so as
to reinstate the gold standard credibly, was quickly seen as a macroec~
3Explicitly, let the ad ualorem cost of the barrier be t, and symmetric on trade flowing in
both directions between two identical countries, A and B, which each produce two goods,
X and Y. Suppose A (B) exports X (Y). Then, P~X = PAX(l+t) and PAy = PBy(l+t).
Let the goods have equal weights in price indices Pi = P~x P~y for countries i = A, B.
Then, by symmetry, it is clew that PA = PB. Thus, for any barrier t,the absolute price
levels of the countries are equal.

3

nomic problem requiring monetary stringency. In the interim, convertibility
and disequilibrium exchange rates were sustainable only with strict controls
which appeared in the war, subsided through the 1920s, but rose to unprecedented heights in the 1930s and persisted into the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s
under the Bretton Woods system. And although overvaluations, say, might
be contained with indirect controls to stem capital outflows, such as import
rest rictions, inevitably such controls had a sting in the tail: Lerner symmetry promised a countervailing contraction of exports which wodd exacerbate
the initial balance-of-payments
problem (Einzig 1934; Nurkse 1944; Yeager
1976). Thus, exchange rate equilibration under gold standard “rules of the
game” was potentially fessible, but often blocked by political fear of the costs
of adjustment in countries which needed to deflate, or by lingering nightmares
of hyperinflation in countries which needed to reflate (Eichengreen 1992). In
such circumstances,
absent a willingness to devalue, the sustainability
of
deviant fixed exchange rate parities-albeit
only on the official market—
required an ever-more convoluted system of controls: the direct supervision
of exchange t ranswtions, the rationing of foreign exchange by transactions,
the creation of “blocked balances” to manage trade balances along bilateral
lines. The legacy of this implosion of the international monetary system was
a cautious approach under Bretton Woods to the “destabilizing” flows of
“hot” money which had wreaked havoc in the inter-war period, and the understandably slow removal of capital controls after 1945 (Obstfeld and Taylor
1996). Viewed in such terms, the historical success or failure of PPP can be
seen as intimately tied to the mobility of global financial capital in the course
of the twentieth century, and such is the starting point for the present paper.
What new bdings can this paper claim to offer? Prom a historical standpoint, there have been nurnerow studies of PPP for various countries over
the period in qumtion, some covering a particular era or monetary regime,
McCloskey and Zecher (1984) argued that PPP worked very well under
the Anglo-American gold standard before 1914, using this as a bssis for
a monetary theory of gold-standard adjustment. Diebold, Husted, and Rush
(1991) explored a very long run of nineteenth century data for six countries, and found support for PPP based on the low-frequency information
lacking in short-sample studies, Abauf and Jorion (1990) studied a century
of dollar-franc-sterling
exchange rate data and verified PPP; Lothian and
Taylor (1996) found the same for two centuries of dollar-franc-sterling
data,
Lothian (1990) also found evidence that real exchange rates were stationary
for Japan, the U. S., the U. K., and ~ance for the period 1875-1986, although
4

yen exchange rates exhibited only trend-stationarity—an
oft-repeated finding that the real yen exchage rate has appreciated over the long run against
all currencies. In full length monographs, both Lee (1978) and Officer (1982)
found strong evidence in favor of PPP based on analysis of long time-series
running from the pre 1914 gold standard to the managed float of the 1970s.
Obviously, this paper builds on a very strong fomdation of historical work
by a number of scholars, covering various countrim in different time periods.4
Here, I aim to consolidate and expand these approaches in a unified framework, and using the latest techniques, to examine the applicability of PPP
from circa 1880 to the pr=ent in a broad cross-section of countries.
Of late, new techniques have appeared in abundance. The idea of PPP
dates back to Cassel’s (1922) argument that, save for short run deviations,
well-functioning and integrated international markets should produce a tendency for the prices of baskets of goods denominated in a common currency
to converges
seemingly mundme extension of the law of one price across
countries, However, in their recent comprehensive review of the purchasingpower parity literature, Froot and Rogoff (1995) could declare that what was
a “fairly dull research topic” only a decade ago has recently been the focus
of substantial contrivers y and the subject of a growing body of literature.
Recent empirical research, mostly based on the time-series analysis of
short spof data for the floating-rate (post-Bretton-Woods)
era had led
many to conclude that PPP failed to hold, and that the real exchange rate
followed a random walk, with no mean-reversion property, However, more
recent studies have challenged this conventional wisdom, seeing it as a flawed
resdt arising from lack of statistical power, a consequence n~t only of the
small-sample short-run series employed, but also of the inherent weaknesses
of staudard tit-rmt
tests. A newly emerging literature exploits more data
and higher-powered techniques, and claims that, in the long run, PPP does
indeed hold: it appears from thwe studies that real exchange rates exhibit
mean reversion with a half-life of five years or so (M. P. Taylor 1995; Froot
and Rogoff 1995).
The newer findings use various steps to expand the size of samples used to
test PPP. As noted, it h= been possible to use much longer-run time series
for certain individual countria, spanning a century or more; typically such
exercises have concentrated on mor~developed countrim with good historical
aother studies of long run data are numerous (Frankel 1986; Edison 198’7;Johnson
1990; Glen 1992; Kim 1990).

5

data availability y (e.g., U.S., Britain, France). Alternatively, researchers have
expanded the data for the recent float or postwar periods cross-sectionally
to exploit the additional information in panel data (Wei and Parsley 1995;
Frankel and Rose 1995; Pedroni 1995).
It is still too early to say whether the revisionist PPP findings will prove
robust, and already challenges to this interpretation
have emerged.
One
may find fault with the ways in which cross-section information and panel
methodologies have been applied (O’Connell 1996). Some have noted that the
inferences b=ed on panel methods are sensitive to sample selection (Papell
1995). In particular, resdts appear sensitive to the choice of base country,
e.g. the U.S. versus Germany (Papell 1995; Wei and Parsley 1995; Edison,
Gagnon, and Melick 1995). Others caution that detecting a unit root in time
series may be complicated by the fut that price indices can be viewed as the
sum of a stationary tradable relativ~price component and a non-stationary
non-tradable relativ~price
component (Engel 1996)—a time-series finding
which echo~ the venerable Balassa-Samuelson
objection to the pure PPP
hypothesis based on differential rates of productivity growth in traded and
non-traded goods sectors (Balassa 1964; Sarnuelson 1964). The distinction
of the present study is to introduce the recent wave of empirical innovations
to a longer span of historical data, both to investigate the robustness of the
recent findings and to explore the historical evolution of PPP.
Can the quwtion of long-run PPP helptily inform, and be informed by,
a new historical study such as this? I believe so, First, history has a lot
to say about the robustness of the PPP hypothesis. We can use historical
evidence to expand the power of tests by enlarging both the sample size and
the variation in the data. To that end, I have comtructed a panel data set
covering mual
time series for twenty countries since 1880, a sample unlike
any other in length and breadth. I use this data to evaluate PPP using traditional approaches and the latest panel econometric techniques. By focusing
on various subsarnples-like
the classical gold standard, the interwar period,
Bretton Woods, and the recent float-I
can further explore the validity of
the PPP hypothesis under different monetary regimes.
Second, = already noted, the PPP hypothwis h= something to say about
history, specifically our understanding of the evolution of global capital market integration.
The textbook position on the fluctuations in international
capital mobility over the last century is well known: a presumption of a
high degree of integration before 1914, disintegration through the two world
wars and the Great Depr~sion, and a gradual reintegration
of the system
6

under Bretton Woods, with further integration (despite increased volatility)
under the recent float. This characterization of history, I argue, ought to be
manifested in empirical measures of market efficiency and integration, and
this PPP study forms one piece of evidence to either support or refute the
textbook view. In partictim,
we want to know whether empirical evidence
on PPP justifies the common view that the Great Depr-sion repr-ented
the
“low-water mark” of international capital mobility since the mid-nineteenth
century.
I proceed as follows. Section 2 briefly surveys the relevant theoretcial
and empirical literature. Section 3 attempts to find evidence in my long-rm
sample of “Strong” PPP , a relationship where, for ewh country, world and
domestic prices have a proportional relationship. The evidence here is unfavorable. Section 4 rel~es the restriction and tests for so-called “Weak” PPP.
The evidence here is more favorable, and an analysis of deviations from PPP
thus measured confirms the textbook characterization
of phases of integration and disintegration in the world capital market. Section 5 concludes.

2

Methodological

Perspectives

on PPP

A ftdl review of the methodological issues surrounding the investigation of
PPP is not warranted here, and the reader may consult, for example, the
recent comprehensive study by Proot and Rogoff (1995) on which I draw. 5
However, a basic frmework will be established in this section, with terminology laid down, and some complications considered.
A starting point is the notion of Absolute Consumption-Based
PPP, which
may be written several different ways,
et;

(5)

Pt

=

pi +

et

=

Pt –P;;

(6)

=

p;;

(7)

pt –et

where pt is the log domestic-currency
consumption-price
level, p; is the log
foreign-currency consumption-price
level, and et is the log of the exchange
rate (domestic-currency
price of foreign exchange),6
5Further survey material can be found in M. P. Taylor (1995) and Isard (1995).
‘Equation 5 says that domestic-currency pric~ should equal foreign-currency prices
wnverted at the exchange rate. Equation 6 says that the exchange rate should reflect dif-

7

However, it israreto
have absolute national pric~level data available.7
More commonly, PPPisstudied
using national pric~level indices measured
in arbitrary, non-commensurate
units. This usually enforces a retreat to the
testing of Relative Consumption-Based
PPP in various analogous forms

Apt

=

Ap~ + Act;

(8)

Ae~ =

Apt – APl;

(9)

Apt – Aet

=

Ap~;

(10)

where now only changes in relative price levels are linked to the change in
the exchange rate. An alternative to thwe formulations is to test equations
like 5 with the inclusion of a constant term,

pt–et

pt

=

C+p~+et;

et

=

–C+pt

=

C+p;

(11)
–p;;

(12)
(13)

.

Equations of this form, such m equation 12, invite time-series testing
using a simple estimating equation of the following form (e.g., Frenkel 1981),
et = a +

@(pt

– p;)

+ et.

(14)

A traditional early test of Relative PPP using 14 amounted to a test of the
restriction ~ = 1. Several pitfalls are apparent with this methodology. First,
the residuals et must be assumed to be stationary for standard inference to
be vfid. Second, the variables et and pt (if not also p;) might reasonably be
consid~d
endogenous, and simdtaneously
determined. There is no a priori
reason k hve exdange rates on the left-hand side and prices on the right.
Lastly, there are reasons to expect that, even if markets are well-integrated, it
may not be the case that @= 1. The Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis, as well
as other theories, note that countriw cannot buy each other’s consumption
basket. Rather, non-traded goods circumvent the exact pass-through of price
shocks from one market to mother, This might plausibly lead to a long-run
relationship of the form 14, but with a slope not equal to unity, The term
ferences in countries’ national price levels. Equation 7 says that prices should be equalized
when denominated in a common (here, the foreign) currency.
‘An exception is the ICP data of Heston, Summers, et al. (1994),

8

Weak PPP may be used to describe the case ~ # 1, as opposed to Strong
PPP, the case ~ = 1.
An alternative methodology imposes the restriction that ~ = 1 (Strong
PPP), in which case the residuals can be constructed, rather than estimated,
using equation 14. The residuals are then termed the real ezchange rate, the
log of which is written qt = et – pt +p~. In this methodology attention focuses
on whether this variable is stationary, or else obeys the ntil of a random walk.
Such tests often amount to a twt for mean reversion in the equation
Aqt

= a + @qt.1

+ ~t,

(15)

where HI : ~ < 0 is evidence of stationarity.
Failure to reject the null
Ho : ~ = O using the standard battery of unit root tests is viewed as a failure
of the PPP hypothesis because qt then exhibits no tendency toward mean
reversion, However, the weak power of unit-root tests gave rise to doubts,
despite the almost universal acceptance of the unit-root null in contemporary
data. Even if the alternative HI were true, with slow mean reversion it could
take over a century of data to reject the unit root null with conventional
tests (FrAel
1986; 1990). Purther, it seemed unwarrmted
to impose the
restriction ~ = 1 which, in effect, prespecified the cointegrating vector for
(et, pt, p:). Taken together th~e criticisms seemed to beg for the introduction
of a cointegration approach, and a search for incre~ed sample size. Such has
been the thrust of recent contributions to the literature .
In the cointegration approach an equation such as 14 could be estimated,
the raiduals could be examined for stationarity,
the cointegrating vector
(a, D) could be inferred, and the restrictions implied by Strong versus Weak
PPP cotid be t-ted rather than assumed. In fact, even looser specifications
of the fom
et = a + ~Ipt – ~zp~ + et
(16)
could be estimated, with no prior restriction on (a, ~1, ~z), Again, objections
such as Balassa-Samuelson,
or problems of mismeasurement
(bias) of price
indices, cotid lead to situatiom where ~1 # 1 or @z # 1. However, in this
respect the cointegration approach’s flexible specification is also its downfall,
as estimation of such equations on the recent float produce unlikely cointegrating vectors, with ~1 and ~z ranging wildly. Froot and Rogoff (1995)
~cribe this to poor-fit cointegration biases. But Kim (1990) shows that these
problem are diminished when historical data are used. I will later arrive at
a similar finding with broader Mstorical panel data.
9

One way to increase the power of the tests is to expand the sample size,
and the use of panel data was one obvious way to accomplish this aim.
However, this gives rise to further econometric problems, and the techniques
for the analysis of unit roots and cointegration in panel data are still in
their infancy. Rhel
and Rose (1996) attempted to form a panel version
of equation 15, using postwar data (during and after Bretton Woods) for a
very wide panel of more than 100 countries They construct the real exchange
rate so as to implicitly test the Strong-Relative variant of PPP, estimating
an equation of the form

Here, the critical values of@ are not the same as those in the univariate timeseries case. The appropriate critical valu~ for the “t-like” tests were derived
by Levin and Lin (1992). Unfortunately, here again the unit-root null cannot
be rejected. 8 Indeed, some now quwtion the newly emerging view that PPP
might hold after all. Papell (1995) has found that acceptance of mean reversion is very sensitive to the size of the panel comtructed.
O’Connell (1996)
notes various problems, including the benchmark issue previously noted,
In theory the choice of benchmark country (for p*) should be immaterial,
but this matters in practice (e.g., it is e~ier to reject the unit-root null
during the recent float when Germany is the benchmark rather than the
U. S., a finding possibly related to the unusual swings in the dollar in the
1980s). A solution to this problem in the panel context is, instead, to set the
benchmark relative to a world-average basket of currencies. Thus O’Connell
(1996) suggests atimating a variant of equation 13 with the “dollarized” price
index as the variable to be studied in country i, defined as rat = pit — eat~
which is mp~ed
to be following a mem-reverting
process with respect to
an unobserved ‘tiorld nominal nchor” at, so that

We can set the benchmark relative to the U.S. by subtracting equation
for the U.S. from equation 18 for country i, eliminating at to obtain

18

The benchmark-related
problems are clear. First, the term cus,t introduces
cross-sectional dependence in the panel estimation. Second, if p is not constant across countries then the benchmarking introduces serial correlation in
‘S=

O’Connell (1996).

10

the error terms of 19. O’Connell (1996) therefore
world average of 18 from itself, implying

advocates

subtracting

a

where a subscript W denotes a world average. g
Finally, we should again recall that the Strong PPP tests are really joint
hypothesis tests. Moreover, in a panel setting, the imposition of restrictions
on coefficients across many members of the panel might further encourage
rejection of a cointegrating relatiomhip.
Specifically, all the above panel
estimators assume that the panel is homogeneous in its slope parameters
(though not in its intercepts). This presupposes Strong PPP. If, instead, the
slope coefficients vary across countries, then a more flexible heterogeneous
panel estimator is called for, and appropriate tests for cointegration need to
be devised for this context. The residual h= to be -timated,
not constructed,
and one can no longer speak of qjt reverting to a target. Pedroni (1995) has
developed just such an approach, and has found the appropriate cointegration
tests needed for the heterogeneous c~e, illustrating them with an application
to PPP in the recent float. His estimating equation is
(21)
where the benchmark country is the U.S. (Note that a symmetry restriction
is imposed, in that domestic and foreign prices enter with the same coefficient.) An alternative heterogeneous panel-estimating
equation following
O’Conne]]’s (1996) “world benchmark”
method
would take the form

The latter approach will be important in our study, and its appeal is twofold.
First, it does not utilize a singl~country
benchmark, which is important if
certtin countries’ trade b~kets are unusual or if the benchmark country has
peculiar in-sample exchange rate movements, as suspected. Second, it allows
for Ml heterogeneity y in the individud-country
dynamics, an added flexibility
in form which may give greater power to reject the no-cointegration null. To
‘Here we me testing the relationship between country i‘s “dollarized” price index and
that of the world, This may make it e~ier to maintain an resumption of cross-sectional
independence since the term ~w,t only haa a,n impact on the disturbance covariance matrix
that is 0(1/~)
for a panel of cross-sectional width N.

11

see why this is important for the present study we will first need to examine
the shortcomings of the more restrictive Strong PPP specifications when
applied to long-rm historical experience.

3

Data

A brief word is in order about the database used in this study. It consists of time-series estimates of annual average exchange rates (relative to
the U.S. dollar) and price levels (consumer price deflators, or, when they
are not available, GDP deflators) for twenty countries covering the period
1880 to 1994. For its construction I have relied on standard sources, The
principal published sources are the statistical volumes of Brian Mitchell (international Historical Statistics). For the convenient provision of previously
electronically-compiled
data from these and other sources I am grateful to
Michael Bordo. Essentially, all such series build on the individual labors of
national statistical offices and individual scholars dedicated to the compilation and revision of national macroeconomic statistics. Like so many, I am
indebted to this devoted group of r-earchers.
A full doc~entation
of these
sources is provided in a data appendix at the end of this paper, and the
complete set of data is available from the author upon request.

4

Weaker Evidence for Strong PPP

I begin with the ~sumption
of Strong PPP, namely that the log real exchange rate q~ = et – pt + P; has a long-run tendency to revert toward some
equilibrium value. In my sample this should be roughly the sample mean
of the data. We can test for this first using standard unit-root tests on
individual country time series. For additional power we can employ panel
methods. In fact, it proves difficult to reject the null that qt has a unit root.
A direct examination of the long-run trends in the levels and dispersion of qt
for our sample of twent y countries since 1880 suggests that this conclusion is
unsurprising.

12

4.1

Time-series tests of a unit root in the real exchange
rate

I first perform tests for mean-reversion in the real exchange rate on a countryby-country basis. Table 1 presents a summary of unit root and cointegration
tests applied to the log real exchange rate qt. To maximize the power of the
tests I apply them to the longest timespan of data available for each country.
I apply the t=t to two variants of the log real exchange rate, one defined
with U.S. benchmarking, one with a “r-t-of-world
benchmark”
qit

=

—T~~+ Tus,t;

=

‘Tit

Row
qit

+

T~w,t

(23)
;

(24)

‘0 w is calctiated for a maximum-length
16-country rectangular subwhere qzt
panel (this benchmark could not be applied to all 20 countries because of
some missing data for certain countries before 1914). Here, ROW refers to
an average taken over all countries other than i.
The unit root tests reveal two important problems in the study of long-run
PPP. First, if strong PPP is the reference point, it is unlikely to be satisfied
for all countries at all times. Only a few of our sample countries exhibit
stationarity in the log real exchange rate as tested using the standard DickeyFuller (DF) trots, 10 Second, the benchmark choice matters: the results are
sensitive to whether the U.S. or the world is used as the reference for foreign
price levels. Based on either benchmark, however, only a handful of countries
satisfy the stationarity assumption.
Since standard unit root twts have been criticised in applications such
as ths, I also tried potentially mor~powerft.d cointegration tests: the errorcorrection model (ECM) test proposed by Kremers, Ericsson, and Dolado
(1992), and the Horvath-Watson (1995) test,ll In the ECM test, a restricted
ECM regression is formed with the cointegrating vector prespecified such
that the error-correction term is just the real exchange rate qt, namely
Arit = ~ + ~qi,t-l + ~A~*,t + ~i~.

(25)

In the present, I restrict attention to the single-lag case. The test depends on
the t-statistic of the error-correction coefficient ~. It can be seen that some
10Philipa-Perron tests gave similar results and are omitted.
1LBoth such tests were used by Engel (1996). Like him, I take critical values of the ECM
test from Hansen (1995), %imating a nuiamce parameter.

13

power is added to the test in Table 1, and more series appear cointegrated
with the ECM test. An even more general specification was attempted with
the Horvath-Watson
test, allowing the 3 x 1 vector yt = (pt, et, p; )’ to be
cointegrated according to a prespecified vector (1, —1, – 1), but otherwise
subject to a general vector autoregression process. Here I work only with the
U.S. benchmark data. I wtimate a vector error-correction model (VECM) of
the form
Ayit = ~ + ~ql,t-l + ~lAy.,t-l

+

~2Ay.,t-2

+

. “ ~+ TPAy.,t-P

+ ~it,

(26)

were, a, ~, and ~it are 3 x 1; ~j is 3 x 3; and the lag length p is chosen by
a stepdown procedure. 12 The test depends on the significance of the errorcorrection coefficient vector ~, evaluated by a Wald test. Looking at Table
1, this test proves a little more powerful, but still 6 out of 19 countries fail
the twt. Moreover, viewing all the tests of Strong PPP, there seems to be
no consistent pattern at the country level.

4.2

Panel tests of mean reversion in the real exchange
rate

An optimistic interpretation
could be that Strong PPP is sometimes verifiable, but not universally so, Yet based on a sceptical view of the results in
Table 1, a prmumption of the general validity of Strong PPP in the long run
probably cannot be justified. This may not be as damaging as at first ap
pears. Perhaps this failure merely results from my attempt to use “only” one
hundred years of annuyal time series data. For as we have seen, conventional
test may prove weak on such samples. Can more powerful panel techniques
overturn this negative conclusion?
Table 2 presents twts based on the panel methodology of Frankel and
Rose (1995), whereby I estimate equation 17 and seek a significant and negative coefficient ~ as evidence of mem reversion, and, hence, stationarity
in qat. Implicitly we are estimating a restricted panel equation, with homogeneous slopes (~ is the same for all countries i), but with heterogeneous
interceptsaince
in the Frankel and Rose (1995) methodology each series qit
has the country mean removed. The critical values are provided by Levin
and Lin (1992).
I*This again follows Engel (1996).

14

The results are disappointing and offer little support for the Strong PPP
hypothesis over the long run. To counteract concerns that these weak results
may follow from an unjustified pooling of the data across various regimes, I
also apply the test for various subsamples: the pre1914 gold standard (G),
the interwar period 1914-1945 (I), the Bretton-Woods
era 1946-1971 (B),
and the recent float post- 1971 (F). It is noticeable that splitting the sample
reveals much larger speeds of convergence (O.11 to 0.25 per annum) and raises
the significance level of the test statistics. This warns us that pooling mross
the sample might be unwarranted. In one c=e, mean reversion is supported,
namely under the gold standard using world benchmark data, and a ptioti
we might have suspected this to be the easiest case to verify, There is also
the marginal case of the recent float. The latter is an odd case to have: the
float is focused on by fiankel and Rose, and many other recent contributors
in the “pr~PPP”
revisionist school. It wotid be contrary to the received
wisdom, then, if the float were the sample in which PPP were relatively easy
to uphold, as most research has concluded that the PPP hypothesis ought to
be most easily validated under fied-exchmge
ratw, that is, in less volatile
monetary regimes other than the recent float (moot and Rogoff 1995),
So, again, based on a presumption that we should be testing for Strong
PPP, we cannot reject the hypothesis that there is no long-run equilibrium
level of the real exchange rate b~ed on historical experience since the late
nineteenth century. Why should this problematic finding appear?

4.3

Historical patterns of deviations horn Strong PPP

Figur~ 1 and 2, and Table 3, suggest some reasons why the restrictive requirements of Strong PPP might be an unre~onable standard for our tests.
Figure 1 shows a me~ure of the dispersion of the log real exchange rate
u:(t), defined as the variance in the log de-meaned real exchange rate across
all countries 2 at a given time t,
a:(t) = Var(qi$ – qi~ls = t)

(27)

where qi~ is the mean of qi~over all t. Thus, a:(t) is a measure of the extent
to which Strong PPP is violated in our sample at a given point in time t.
We would expect this to reflect phases of integration and disintegration on
world markets. When markets are perfectly integrated, the presumption is
that PPP will hold with perfect equality. In that case qi~= q~Tfor all i, t, and
15

dispersion is zero. Any deviation from qi~ = qiT will be rapidly eliminated
by arbitrage. Conversely, if markets are poorly integrated, there is reason to
expect deviations from PPP to arise and show persistence.
Figure 1 and Table 3 indicate that deviations from long-run mean real
exchange rat= have been most dramatic in the contemporary era, a finding
which clash= with conventional interpretations
of long-run market integration. We see no evidence of large real exchange rate dispersion around the
two wars or during the dislocation
of the interwar period. Three are odd
findings if accepted at face value. Is it time to tear up the textbook historical recounts of the evolution of international capital mobility? Was the
interwar period truly an era of historically low deviations from parity? Were
Cassel ad Keynw, or Poincar6, somehow mistaken in their perception of the
severity of parity dislocations after World War One? And did the many and
varied devaluations following the collapse of the gold standard in the 1930s
really have so little impact of the dispersion of real exchange rates? I would
say not. I will argue that the above evidence is of dubious value, for the simple re~on that tests of Strong PPP over the long run seem to fail. In such
cases the use of mean real exchange rat~ as if they were a target of mean reversion, and, hence, a relevant benchmark for dispersion calculations, seems
mwarranted.
As we will see below, when deviations are me~ured relative
to a Weak PPP benchmark, the long-run evidence on deviations from PPP
appears more credible.
Fi~e
2 helps us diagnose how these strange results arose. The charts
plot git (the black line) md qit‘w (the gray line) for all countries since 1880.
It is apparent that the real exchange rate is far from stationary
in several of
our sample countries over a hundred-year timespan. Ocular inference suggests that Stra~g PPP is likely to be violated for Japan, Switzerland, Brazil,
and Portugal. la In this mostly OECD sample, the first two countries are
noted for high productivity, the latter two for low productivity performance,
suggmting possible Balassa-Samuelson
effects. The inclusion of countries
with marked long-run real exchange rate trends almost inevitably leans to
mid-smple minima on measures of cross-sectional dispersion about the long13The long-run drift of the Japanese real exchange rate is well know (Lothian 199o).
The pr~nce
in our database of countriw such aa Argentina, Chile, Brazil, and Portugal
guards against the “survivorship” biaa in studies which focus only on exchange rates in
mor~developed
countries. The more-developed countri~ may provide stronger support
for PPP for structural reasons related to stable policies, market institutions, and other
structural differences (Proot and Rogoff 1995).

16

run mean. This explains the curious pattern of dispersion in Figure 2. The
mid-sample period is the interwar period, so such findings are forced to jar
with the conventional wisdom. The result follows from adherence to Strong
PPP, and the prespecification of what the long-run equilibrium target is for
each country. This approach sidesteps the problems of nontradables and
productivity, not to mention the incommensurability
of international price
indices-issues
which might e~ily produce long-run drift on theoretical or
empirical grounds. Thus confining attention to the Strong PPP cme is unlikely to produce positive support in all cases studied, md this implicit restriction could, as part of a joint hypothesis twt, be the reason for a failure
to reject the unit root null.

5

Stronger Evidence for Weak PPP

In this section I retreat to the Weak PPP specification since the above tests so
often reject Strong PPP in very long-run data, I begin with some univariate
time-series tests based on an error-correction model (ECM) which offer some
support for the cointegration property. I then exploit heterogeneous panel
methods to increase the power of the cointegration test, I find strong evidence
to support Weak PPP, with a good indication that the coefficients of domestic
and foreign pric~ do not enter the cointegrating vector symmetrically.

5.1

Time-series ECM tests of Weak PPP

For country z let us presume that equation 22 holds such that domestic and
foreign dollarized price indices are cointegrated according to an equation
ri~ = a; + ~irxt + ~it where ~i~ and rmt are 1(1) and ~it is 1(0), and where
* may repr~nt
US with benchmarking relative to the U.S. or ROW with
benchmarking relative to the rest of the countries in the sample.
If such a cointegrating relationship holds then the dynamic relationship
can also be expressed in error-correction form (Engle and Granger 1987).
The simplest such form is the first-order error-correction model (ECM), and
a feasible test for cointegration here is the ‘tt-like” test b~ed on the errorcorrection term (Kremers, Ericsson, and Dolado 1992). In this situation we
may posit an ECM relationship, form
Aqit = a +

@qi,t-l+ ~r.,t-l
17

+

~AT.,t + cit.

(28)

We need to assume that rxt is weakly exogenous for country Z, which may not
be unreasonable (at least for a small open economy). It is then the case that
this relatively simple form for the structural dynamics allows much greater
flexibility than a pure mean-reversion or cointegration test, whilst still allowing us to test for both Weak and Strong PPP. Cointegration holds when ~
is significantly less than zero. It can be shown that the OLSt-statistic
of ~
(tEC~) is ~ymptotically
distributed as a normal N(O, 1) random variable.
Moreover, the power of this t=t is superior to the standard univariate tests
(e.g., Dickey-Nler)
because information in the covariate term Ar.,~ is not
discarded. If cointegration holds then either Weak or Strong PPP may hold.
In the special case where y = O Strong PPP holds ad the long run cointegrating vector for (rit, r.t) is (1, – 1), If ~ # O then Weak PPP holds and the
cointegrating vector is not symmetric in pric~. The coefficient q introduces
richer short-run dynamics and has a natural interpretation.
If q = O then
short-run p~s-through
from foreign price shocks to domestic price shocks
is one-for-one, If q > 0 then there is overshooting, and if q < 0 there is
undershooting.
Table 4 shows estimatm of thae equations. Several implications follow.
First, the global restriction that the cointegrating vector be (1, – 1), implicit
in Strong PPP analysis, appears to be unjustified, as ~ varies considerably
and is often nonzero. Second, the more flexible form captures interesting
short-run dynarnim: in the several cases studied we can examine q and find
evidence of both undershooting and overshooting,
Third, and very importantly, the cointegration t~ts b=ed on t~c~ provide much stronger support
for a long-run equilibrium relationship between Tit and Txt. Fourth, from an
ex-tion
of the ~ -timatw
we see that the speed of convergence to equilibrium varim considerably from country to country, further illustrating the
extent of cross-country hekrogeneit y in the panel. In the cases where ~ is
significant, however, the half life of deviations is wually less than five years
(~ < –O. 13), in keeping with recent findings.
Lastly, it is worth noting that the cointegration finding is consistent with
the general result that weakening the proportionality
and symmetry restrictions makw it easier to find stationary residuals (Root and Rogoff 1995).
However, Froot and Rogoff also caution that this finding usually comes at
a heavy cost: in the literature, the unrestricted cointegrating vector usually
deviates markedly from symmetry and proportionality,
defying easy interpretation and therefore casting doubt on the empirical framework. Here, we
have not had to pay so heavy a price. The size of the coefficient ~ mea18

sures the deviation from proportionality
between home and domestic prices
in the annual time series. It can be seen that ~ mostly lies in the range
[-0.05,0.05] meaning a proportionality coefficient between prices in the range
[0.95,1 .05] .14 Such modest deviations seem entirely re~onable given the various definitions of price indices across countries, the certain non-homogeneity
of price indices across time in any one country, and the plausible supposition
that non-tradable components may suffer from the Balassa-Samuelson effects
already noted. Thus, although Strong PPP is ultimately rejected in favor of
Weak PPP in this study, the distinction is not so large.

5.2

Panel cointegration tests of Weak PPP

If cross-country heterogeneity must be admitted to the analysis of panel dynamics, then attempts to raise the power of cointegrat ion tests by using a
panel instead of individual time series must take into account the modifications necessary to construct valid test statistics and finite sample distributions for such special cases. The Levin and Lin (1992) study only provides
cointegration twts for panels with homogeneous slopes. Here, in the case of
heterogeneous slopes I appeal to the work of Pedroni (1995), and estimate
an equation of the form 22 where Tit = ai + ~~r~w,t + ~i~.
Table 5 reports the resdts for our balanced panel of sixteen countries
using the “rest-of-world” benchmark for the foreign price index. With the
increased sample size we are able to perform this test not only for the entire
sample period, but also for the four subperiods (G, I, B, F) and sequential
groupings thereof (GI, IB, etc.). The r=ults are favorable to the hypothesis
of Weak PPP. They are consistent with Pedroni’s (1995) findings for the
recent float, and extend his r~ults to earlier epochs. Only in the interwar
period do we fail to reject the null of no cointegration, and this may be due
to small sample size (few observation in the time dimension), In every other
case, including periods which overlap the interwar period, the null is rejected.
Table 6, finally, shows estimates of the heterogeneous panel equation 22 for
the Ml sample in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Intercept terms
have no interpretation,
and are omitted for clarity, The slope terms are
indeed heterogeneous. The slopes which differ most from unit y are the four
cases we identified from the long-rm trends in real exchange rates: Japan,
14There are only two exceptions:
(-0.07) using the ROW bentiark.

Chile (-O.11) using the U.S. benchmark,

19

and Brazil

Switzerland, Brazil, and Portugal.
Clearly, by this reckoning, we again find that world price indices do not
feed onefor-one into domwtic price indices. But again, as in the previous
section, we should note that deviations from Strong PPP are not marked by
the standards of the literature, = the proportionality of domestic and world
pricm falls in the range [0.88,1.20] for all but four countries. 15 For the same
reasons as above, deviation from pure symmetry (Strong PPP) are anticipated here too. The deviations are stronger than those me=ured using the
univariate ECM framework, possibly as a rwu.lt of the additional restrictions
on the error structure imposed by the panel methodology, a price we pay
for the additional power of this method to identify cointegration. The ECM
framework also differs in focusing on the adjustment process for changes in
r rather than an equilibrium relationship in the levels of r. Understandably,
the results differ in the two appromhes.

5.3

Historical patterns of deviations from Weak PPP

Thus, we favor Weak PPP, but find the relationship not qualitatively so
different from Strong PPP: the above estimates of the slope coefficients,
the differences (@i – 1) are not unusually large in most cases. Historical
interpret ation has never turned on such criteria. Indeed, McCloskey and
Zecher’s (1984) arWe that significant difference from unity are not the true
criterion for judging PPP: significance only reflects defeat of the sampling
problem. We can still accept these r~tits as evidence of long-run arbitrage
and market integration maintaining an equilibri urn link between prices in
spatially separate markets: it may not matter quantitatively or qualitatively
whether (statistically)
we can say that ~i equals 0.9 or 0.99, or 0.999999.
Indeed, the confidence interval around pi may not be the prime focus of
historical interest.
Rather, we tight profitably ask, given the cointegrating regression as a
best-fit estimate of the (Weak PPP) equilibrium relationship, how far from
this relationship did the international system deviate at certain times? That
is, what do the residuals of the regression tell us about the size and persistence
of PPP deviations? This evidence on the adjustment process embodies both
concerns about the speed of reversion to equilibrium (propagation) and about
the size of shocks to the system (irnpdses).
And it recognizes the need to
15Theae four are Switzerland

(1.64), Japan (1.50), Brazil (0.49), and Portugal

20

(0,65)

not only examine the estimated speeds of adjustment (cf. ~ convergence
in the language of growth models) but also the dispersion of the deviations
themselves (cf. o convergence). I now turn to examine the dispersion of the
panel regression residuals as a me~ure of diseqilibriurn: can they tell a more
reasonable story than the dispersion of the real exchange rate?
Table 7 and Figure 3 offer a basis for evaluating deviations from Weak
PPP. The residuals Citestimated in equation 22 now provide a me~ure of the
deviation of log “dollarized” price levels from their equilibrium value. Hence,
we may usetily study the dispersion of these residuals over time to get some
sense of the extent to which deviations from Weak PPP equilibrium waxed
and waned in different eras. Figure 3 shows a me~ure of the dispersion of
the residuals a:(t), defined as

O?(t)=

Var(Ei,lS

= t).

(29)

This variance is presented in two forms, one of which includes in the regression additional interecpt terms for each subperiod (G,I,B ,F), to correct for
the possible temporal inconsistency of the price seriw—although
I will focus
on the upper line in the chart, the uncorrected measure. 16
Urdike the earlier measure of real exchange rate dispersion, o;(t) shown
in Figure 3, this me~ure of deviations from parity produces record of international market integration that is at once credible, yet useful in its quantitative foundation and capable of providing new insights. PPP deviations
were extremely small in the pre 1914 era, as is well appreciated from our
knowledge of the gold standard.
Dispersion grew dramatically after 1914
with the collapse of the cl~sical gold standard and the disparate inflationary experiences of the several economiw. Dispersion fell in the late 1920s, as
a new gold standard was rebuilt, but when this experiment failed dispersion
grew again in the 1930s following wid~pread deflatiom and various devaluations and depreciations. Dispersion was again high immediately after 1945,
lGThis matters ]ltt]e [or interpretation.

However, it is reasonable to try

the correction.

We know that historical price series often show pronounced breaks at some points in time,
typically wars ad inflations. The accuracy of attempts to bridge price series across such
jumps is often questionable, and may be accurate to only m order of magnitude or less,
Such effects are common in my sample, especially before and after the two wars, including
the bridge over early- 1920s hyperinflations in Europe, some 1940s experience in Europe,
and the 1980s in Latin America (Figure 2 shows occasional spikes where severe inflations
may have distorted annual averaging too). Allowing the rd exchange rate to be rebased
(take a redefined mean) before and after such shocks is one way to correct the dispersion
measure for such problems.

21

but fell steadily during the postwar era, both during and after the Bretton
Woods regime. Convergence toward equilibrium was tentative during the
l~s-than-strict
early years of Bretton Woods before 1960, when pervasive
capital controls were the norm. Thereafter, in the (brief) heyday of the
postwar fixed-exchange rate system, deviations from equilibrium dipped to
historically low levels. Even a modest incre~e in dispersion in the floating
rate era cannot undo the conclmion that from the 1960s to the present we
have seen a degree of integration (measured by PPP) not lmown since the
end of the classical gold standard in 1914.

6

Conclusion

This paper has tested a variety of PPP criteria on historical data for twenty
countries covering the period after 1880. Overall, the stringent requirements
for the Strong PPP criterion cannot be met, at least not across the entire
sample of countries. In the long run the real exchange rate is not everywhere
stationary. On the other hand, once we allow for a looser specification, it is
possible to find support for the Weak PPP hypoth~is.
With thee adjustments, residuals from the Weak PPP equation give a measure of deviations
from parity. When dispersion is so calculated, the interwar period emerges as
an importmt watershed, marking an era of increased deviations from parity.
Within that window, the Deprwsion emerges as the era when deviations from
parity reached historic maxima prior to a sustained decline after 1945 under
13retton Woods. We may also note that the final fracture of the gold standard k the 1930s led to sharp deviations from parity, whereas the collapse
of the Br&ton Woods fixed-exchang~rate
system led to no such sustained
departures from parity k the 1970s, even ~ deviations from parity did incre~e markedly in their short-run (monthly or quarterly) volatility (Isard
1995, chap. 1).
These findings emerge as a mark against the efficiency and resiliency
of the international system at the time of the Depression.
Such findings
also have broader implications for the debate over globalization and convergence (Williamson 1996). Seminal studiw by Abramovitz (1986) and Baumol
(1986) noted the long-run patterns of convergence in income per capita in a
cross-section of countries. Thwe authors used the historical national income
data af Maddison (1991 and hls previous studies), Abramovitz noted that
not only technological convergence, but also “trade and its rivalria” might

22

have played a part in this historical convergence process, the latter including
factor mobility. The convergence findings were corroborated by Williamson
(1995) for real wages: divergence was pronounced in the interwar period, and
rising through the 1930s. Williamson and his collaborators (see Williamson
1996) have linked these patterns to the evolution and integration of global
labor and commodity markets. Of course, in a trade-theoretic
framework,
there may be substmtial complementarities
between labor and capital mobilit y, M in the factor price convergence literatue,
and as historical experience
shows (0’Rourke, Taylor, and Williamson 1996).
Thus, the pr~ent paper is certainly consistent with a larger literature
on factor mobility, and can help us gauge the importance long-run capital
mobility to the historical convergence processaertainly,
further reserach is
called for on this importmt
subject, especially the interwar experience. 17
The interwar system appears as a terrible aberration, as other studies based
on interest rate deviations, saving-inv~tment
correlations, and other quantitative criteria are beginning to suggest. 16 Complementing these studies, the
prment paper strengthens the case that the Great Depression stands as the
nadir of international capital market integration in the modern era.

17A study which highlights capital mobility and divergence for a single case-study is
Taylor (1992) for Argentina. For a cross-sectional study which examines labor and capital
mobility, md convergence before 1914, see Taylor and Williamson (1994).
18See Eichengreen (1990); Lothia,n (1995); A. M. Taylor (1996); Obstfeld and Taylor
(1996).

23

Data Appendix
Notation
E = exchange

rate; PC =

consumption price deflator; PY = GDP deflator.

Sources
Bordo, M. D., and L. Jonung. 1996, Monetary Regimes, Ifiation, and Monetary
Reform: An Essay in Honor of kel Leijonhufvud. In Inflation, Institutions, and
Information: Essays in Honor of Azel Leijonhufvud, edited by D. F. Vaz and K.
Vellapillai. London: Macmillan.
Bordo, M. D., and H. Rockoff. 1996. The Gold Standard as a “Good Housekeeping
Seal of Approval,” Journal of Economic Htitory 56 (June): 389428.
Bordo, M. D., and A. J. Schwarz. 1996. The Operation of the Specie Standard:
Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990. In Htitorical Perspectives
on the Gold Standard:
J. B. d. Macedo.
Maddison,

A. 1991.

Comparative
Mitchell,

Portugal

London:

Dynamic

View. Oxford:

B. R. 1992.

and the World, edited

by B. J. Eichengreen

and

Routledge.
Forces

Oxford

International

in Capitalist

University

Development:

A Long-Run

Press.

Historical Statistics:

Europe,

1750-1988.

New

York: Stockton Press.
World Bank, 1994. World Data 1994:
Washington, D. C.: The World Bank.

World Bank Indicators

on CD-ROM.

Argentina
E: 1884–1959, Bord~Schwarz,
PC:

1960-92, World Bank.
1884–1960, Bord~Schwarz (PY: 1884-1913). 1960-92, World Bank.

Australia
E: 1870–79, Bord@Rockoff,
PC:

1880-83, Bord@Schwarz. 1984–92, World Bank,
1870-80, Bord&hckoff.
1880-1959, Bord~Schwarz. 196&92, World Bank.

Belgium
E: 1880-1940, 1944-91: Bord~Jonung.
1870-1989, Maddison.

PC:

24

Brazil
E: 1889–1991, BordoJonung.
PC: 1880-1991, Bord@Jonung(PY:

1880-1912).

Canada
E: 1870-79, Bord~Rockoff.
1870-80, Bord~~ckoff.

PC:

1880-59, Bord~Schwarz. 196&92, World Bank.
1880-1959, Bord~Schwarz. 1960-92, World Bank.

Chile
E: 1895–1990, Bord~Jonung.
PC: 1913–91, Bord~Jonung.
Denmark
E: 1880-1986, Bord~Jonung. 1987-92, World Bank.
PC: 1850-80, Mitchell. 1880-1960, Bord~Jonung. 1960-92, World Bank.
Finland
E: 1911-89, Bord~Jonung,
1880-1992, Bord~Jonung.

PC:

France
E: 1880-1940, 1948–59, Bord~Jonung. 1960-92, World Bank.
PC: 1-1913,
1921-38, 1948-60, Bord&Jonung. 1960-92, World Bank.
Germany
E: 1880-1914, 1924-39, 1948–89, Bord~Jonung.
PC: 187&1989, Maddison
Italy
E: 1880-1959, Bord~Jonung. 1960-92, World Bank.
PC: 1880-1959, Bord~Jonung. 196W92, World Bank.

25

Japan
E: 1880-1990, Bord&Jonung.
PC: 1950–89, Bord~Jonung.
PY: 1885–1950, Bord*Jonung.
Netherlands
E: 1913–41, 1945–91, Bord~Jonung.
PC:

1870-1989, Maddison.

Norway
E: 1899-1939, 1946-59, Bord~Jonung.
PC:

1960-92, World Bank.
1880-1939, 1946-59, Bord&Jonung, 1960-92, World Bank.

Portugal
E: 1890-1991, Bord&Jonung.
PC:

1880-1988, Bordo-Jonung (PY:

1880-1929).

Spain
E, PC:

1880-1959, Bord~Schwarz.

1960-92, World Bank.

Sweden
E: 1899-1959, Bord&Jonung.
PC:

1880-1959, Bord~Jonung.

1960-92, World Bank,
1960-92, World Bank.

Switzerland
E: 1880-lW1,
PC:

Bord~Jonung.
1892-1989, Maddison.

United

Kingdom

E, PC:

1870-79, Bord~Wckoff.

1880-1959, Bord~Jonung.

1960-92, World

Bank.
United

States

PC: 1870-79, Bord&Rockoff.

1880-1959, Bord~Jonung.

26

1960-92, World Bank.

References
Abauf, N., and P. Jorion. 1990. Purchasing Power Parity in the Long Run. Journal
of Finance 45 (March): 157–74.
Abramovitz, M. 1986. Catching Up, Forging Ahead, and Falling Behind. Journal
of Economic

H&tory 46

(June): 385-406.

Balsssa, B. 1964. The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine.
Economy

Journal

of Political

72: 584-96.

Baumol, W. 1986. Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the
Long-Run Data Show. Ametimn Economic Retiew 76 (December): 1072-85.
Cassel, G. 1922. Money and Foreign Exchange Afier 1914. New York: Macmillan,
Diebold, F. X., S. Husted, and M. Rush, 1991. Wal Exchange Rates under the
Gold Stmdard. Journal of Political Economy 99 (December): 1252-71,
Edison, H. J,, J. E. Gagnon, and W. R. Melick. 1994. Understanding the Empirical
Literature on Purch=ing Power Parity in the kng Run: The Post-Bretton Woods
Era. International Finance Discussion Papers no. 465, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System.
Edison, H. J. 1987. Purchasing Power Parity in the kng Run: A Test of the
Dollar/Pound Exchange Rate, 1890-1978. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
19: 376–87.

Eichengreen, B. J. 1990, Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending. In Capital Flows
in the World Ewnomy, edited by H. Siebert. Tubingen: Mohr.
Eichengreen, B. J. 1992. Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and The Great Depression, 1919–1 939. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Engel, C. 1996, Long-Run PPP May Not Hold After All. University of Washington
(Janq).
Photocopy.
Engle, R, and C. Granger. 1987. Cointegration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation and Testing, Economettica 55: 251–276.
Frankel, J. A. 1986. International Capital Mobility and Crowding Out in the
U.S. Economy: Imperfect Integration of Financial Markets and Goods Markets?
In How Open is the U.S. Economy?, edited by R. Hafer. Lexington: Lexington
Books.
~ankel, J. A. 1990. Zen and the Art of Modern Macroeconomics: The Search for
Policy for a Volatile Global Economy, edited
Perfect Nothingne~. In Monetaq
by W. Haraf and T. Willet. W~hington, D. C.: Americm Enterprise Institute.
Frankel, J. A., and A. K, Rose. 1996. A Panel Project on Purchasing Power
Parity: Mean Reversion Within and Between Countries. Journal of International

27

Economics

40:

209-224.

Frenkel, J. 1981. The Collapse of Purchasing Power Parity During the 1970s.
European Economic

Retiew

16: 145-65.

Froot, K. A., and K. Rogoff. 1995. Perspectives on PPP and Long-Run Real
Exchange Rates. In Handbook of International Economics, vol. 3, edited by G.
Grossman and K. Rogoff. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Glen, J. 1992. Real Exchange Rates in the Short, Medium, and Long Run. Journal
of International Economics 33: 147–66.
Hansen, B. E. 1995. Wthinking the Univariate Approach to Unit Root Testing:
Theory 11 (December): 1148Using CoVariates to Increase Power. Econometric
1171.
Heston, A. et al. 1994. The Penn World Table, Version 5.6. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. (November). Internet <http: //nber.harvard. edu>.
Horvath, M. T. K., and M. W. Watson. 1995. Testing for Cointegration When
Theory 11 (DeSome of the Cointegrating Vectors Are Prespecified, Econometric
cember): 984–1014.
Isard, P. 1995. Exchange

Rate Economics.

Cambridge:

Cambridge University

Press.
Johnson, D. R. 1990. Cointegration, Error Correction, and Purchasing Power
Parity Between Canada and the United States. Canadian Journal of Economics
23:839-55.

Kim, H. 1990, Purch~ing Power Parity in the Long Run: A Cointegration Approach. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 22: 491–503.
Kremers, J., N. Ericsson, and J. Dolado. 1992. The Power of Cointegration Tests,
Ozford Bulletin of Economics and Stattitics 54: 325-348.
Lee, M. H. 1978. Purchasing

Power

Patity.

New York: Marcel Dekker.

Levin, A., and C.-F. Lin. 1992. Unit Root Tests in Panel Data: Asymptotic and
Finite Sample Properties. Discussion Paper no. 92-23, University of California at
San Diego, Department of Economics (May),
Lothian, J. R. 1990. A Century Plus of Yen Exchange Rate Behavior. Japan and
the World Economy

2 : 47–70.

Lothian, J, R. Capital Market Integration and Exchange Rate Regimes in Historical Perspective. Fordham University, December 1995. Photocopy.
Lothian, J. R., and M. P. Taylor. 1996. ~al Exchange Rate Behavior: The
&ent Float From the Perspective of the Past Two Centuries, Journal of Political
Economy.

28

Maddison, A. 1991. Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development:
Comparative View. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

A Long-Run

McCloskey, D. N., and J. R. Zecher. 1984. The Success of Purchasing Power
Parity: Historical Evidence and its Implications for M=roeconomics. In A Retrospective on the Glassical Gold Standard, 1880–1913, edited by M. D. Bordo and

A. J. Schwartz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Nurkse, R. 1944. International
Petiod.

Currency Experience: Lessons of the Inter-War
Geneva: League of Nations.

Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. Internationrd Capital Market Integration in the
Long Run: The Great Depression as a Watershed. University of California at
Berkeley, 1996. Photocopy.
O’Connell, P. G. J. 1996. The Overvaluation of Purchasing Power Parity. Harvard
University (January). Photocopy.
Officer, L. H. 1982. Purchasing Power Parity and Exchange
dence and Relevance. Greenwich, Corm.: JAI Press,

Rates:

Theory,

Evi-

ORourke, K. H., A. M. Taylor, and J, G. Williamson. 1996, Factor Price Convergence in the Late Nineteenth Century. International Economic Review. Forthcoming.
Papell, D. H. 1995. Searching for Stationarity: Purch~ing Power Parity Under
the Current Float. University of Houston (October), Photocopy.
Pedroni, P. Panel Cointegration: Asymptotic and Finite Sample Properties of
Pooled Time Series with an Application to the PPP Hypothesis. Working Papers
in Economics no. 95-013, Indiana University, June 1995.
Samuelson, P. A. 1964. Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems.
nomics

Review

of Eco-

and Statistics 46: 145-64.

Taylor, A. M. 1992. External Dependence, Demographic Burdens and Argentine
Journal of Ewnomic
Htitory 52 (DeEconomic Deche After the Belle $pque.
cember): 907–36.
International Capital Mobility in History: The Savingin the Long Run, Working Paper Series, National Bureau
of Economic Research, Forthcoming,
Taylor, A. M. 1996.

hvestment

Relationship

Taylor, A. M., and J. G. Williamson. 1994. Convergence in the Age of Mws
Migration. Working Paper Series no. 4711, National Bureau of Economic Research
(April).
Taylor, M. P. The Economics of Exchange ~tes.
33 (March 1995): 13-47,
Wei, S.-J., and D. C. Parsley. 1995. Purch~ing

29

Journal of Economic

Literature

Power Dis-parity During the

Floating Rate Period: Exchange Rate Volatility, Trade Barriers, and Other Culprits. Working Paper Series no. 5032, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Williamson, J. G. 1995. The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Backin Economic HtitoW 32 (April):
ground Evidence and Hypotheses. Eqlorations
141-96.
Williamson, J. G. 1996. Globalization, Convergence, and History.
Economic History 56 (June): 277-306.
Yeager, L. B, 1976, International Monetaq
icy. 2d ed, New York: Harper and Row.

30

Relations:

Theory,

Htitoq,

Journal of
and Pol-

Table 1
Unit root and colntegratlon

Country
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Denmark
Finland
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdor
United States

tests for the real exchange

Using q relative to ROW
DF
DF
ECM
Tt
t
P
70 -2.59 -12.15 -2.61*
70 -2.25
-9.19 -2.44”
70 -1.79
-3.63 -2.39’
70 -0.30
-0.57 -0.73
70 -1.09
-3.02 -3.93*
70

-2.78

-12.43

-1.09

70

-1.72

-6.05

-1.41
1.40
-2.77*
0.17

70 1.44
70 -2.90
70 0.60

70

-0.62

70
70

-3.58*

-1.10
70 3.19
70 -1.79
70 -1.71

5.16
-9.71
0.79

-0.74
-16.60’

-2.66
2,54
-6.29
-5.32

-0.56
-4.22*
-1.29
2.83*
-1.64
-5.99*

Tt
109
114
102
103
116
78
113
80
94
91
113
99
73
87
99
101
113
98
114

rate

Using q relative to U.S.
ECM
HW
DF
DF
t
w
P
-2.71 -14.22” -2.71 13.33*
7.58
-2.69 -12.34 -2.54*
-3.36” -19.94* -3.94* 23.81
4.32 -1,48
-1,40
3.64
-3.55* -17.96* -3.53*
9.55
-1.06
3.47 -1.05
8.84
-1.82
8.53 -1.30 26.81*
-3.68* -24.07’ -6.21* 62.95*
-2.80 -13.15 -2.80’ 23.00’
-1.35
5,13 -0.68 17.09’
-3.059 -18.34* -1.87 26.30’
0.16
0.33 -0.64 13.56*
4.60
-1.32
0.13 18.27*
7.65 -2.32*
-1.86
4.43
-1.87
5.30 -1.89
0.53
-1.80
7.82 -2.61 32.72*
-2.17 -10.77’ -2.25’ 44.59’
1.06
1.70 18.51*
1.89
-2.53 -13.90’ -2.48* 15.95’
●

●

●

Notes:
significant at the 5% level. T is sample size. q is log real exchange rate. DF:
Dickey-Fuller test for unit root; no trend, no lags; see text. ECM: Error-Correction
Model test for cointegration; see text. HW: Horvath-Watson test for cointegration;
constant term, no trend; see text.
●

Table 2
Panel tests for mean reversion of the real exchange

Sample
G
I
B
F
GI
IB
BF
GIB
IBF
GIBF

NT
336
176
336
272
512
512
608
848
784
1120

Using q relative
N T Rsq.
16 21
.14
16 11
.15
16 21
.13
16 17
.15
16 32
.04
16 32
.09
16 38
.07
16 53
.03
16 49
.05
16 70
.02

to ROW
P
-0.25”
-0.16
-0.11
-0.24
-0.06
-0.10
-0.09
-0.04
-0.07
-0.03

t
(6.74)
(3.22)
(4,80)
(5.96)
(3.92)
(5.79)
(5.04)
(4.33)
(4.99)
(3.39)

NT
315
165
315
255
480
480
570
795
735
1050

rate

Using q relative
N T Rsq.
.11
15 21
15 11
.14
.13
15 21
15 17
.15
15 32
.04
15 32
.09
15 38
.06
15 53
.04
15 49
.05
15 70
.03

to US.
P
-0.18
-0.23
-0.11
-0.25
-0.07
-0.13
-0.08
-0.05
-0.07
-0.04

Notes:
significant at the 5% level. G=Gold Standard, I=lntemar, B=Bretton Woods,
F=Float. Sample is a panel of 16 countries. U.S. is excluded for q relative to
US. NT is the number of observations, N is individuals, T is periods. Critical
values from Levin and Lin, approximately: 5%, t= -6,5.
●

t
(5.51)
(3.90)
(4.95)
(6.08)
(4.14)
(6.01)
(4.79)
(4.76)
(4.97)
(4.1 1)

Table 3
Dispersion of the real exchange

Period
1880-1884
1885-1889
1890-1894
1895-1899
1900-1904
1905-1909
1910-1914
1915-1919
1920-1924
1925-1929
1930-1934
1935-1939
1940-1944
1945-1949
1950-1954
1955-1959
1960-1964
1965-1969
1970-1974
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989

N
11
14
16
17
17
17
20
18
20
20
20
20
13
19
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

rate

V(q,N)
0.016
0.056
0.094
0.098
0.088
0.089
0.065
0.070
0.041
0.030
0.018
0.030
0.044
0.064
0.088
0.066
0,071
0.044
0.033
0.130
0.152
0.316

V(q,l 6)

V(qW,l 6)

0.094
0.105
0,093
0.094
0.077

0.125
0.111
0.110
0.096

0.051
0.036
0.019
0.032

0.058
0.044
0.025
0.054

0.078
0.047
0.025
0.024
0.038
0.096
0.134
0.239

0.082
0.049
0.026
0.026
0.039
0.101
0.144

Notes:
q (qW) is the log real exchange rate relative to U.S. (ROW).
Quinquennial averages of q or qW in all periods. N is the
cross-section width. V(q,N) is the full-sample vaiance. V(q,l 6)
and V(qW, 16) are for the panel of 16.

Table 4
Error correction

model

T

Using q relative to U.S.
R sq. q(t-1) DrUS(t) rUS(t-1)

T

Using q relative to ROW
Rsq. qW(t-1) DrW(t) rW(t- 1)

Argentina

108

.07 -0.15*
(-2.70)

0.21
(0.46)

-0.02
(-0.60)

70

.13 -0.22’
(-3.07)

0.07
(0.17)

-0.06
(-1.63)

Australia

113

.11 -0.13”
(-2.58)

-0.29
(-1.54)

-0,01
(-0.90)

70

.20 -0.36”
(-3.97)

-0.16
(-1.11)

-0.05
(-3.03)

Belgium

101

.16 -0.40*
(-4.03)

1.73
(2.28)

0.02
(0.85)

70

.10

-0.10’
(-2.34)

0.21
(1,65)

0.01
(0.77)

Brazil

102

.07

-0,11’
(-2.50)

-0.07
(-0.25)

-0.05
(-2,01)

70

.10 -0.12”
(-2.22)

-0.22
(-1.00)

-0.07
(-2.14)

Canada

115

.16

-0.21’
(-4,12)

-0.06
(-0.84)

-0.01
(-2.07)

70

.53

-Omlo*
(-3.02)

-0.61
(-8.40)

0.00
(0.41)

77

.07 -0,11’
(-2.13)

0.31
(0.57)

-0.11
(-2.16)

112

,12 -0.11*
(-2.39)

-0.52
(-2,68)

0.04
(2.75)

70

.43 -0.13*
(-2.14)

-0.95
(-5.78)

0.05
(3.48)

Finland

79

.35 -0.58*
(-6.16)

2.22
(4.75)

0.01
(0.20)

France

93

.10

-0.19*
(-2.84)

0.09
(0.28)

-0.02
(-1.11)

70

.21 -0.34’
(-3.85)

0.15
(1.38)

-0.05
(-3.61)

Germany

90

.04

-0,03
(-0.69)

-0.33
(-1.18)

0.01
(0.53)

70

.07

0.05
(0.60)

-0.01
(-1.78)

Italy

112

.12

-O,lw
(-1.69)

-0.79
(-2.32)

0.02
(1.15)

70

.15 -0.14*
(-2.77)

-0.12
(-1.30)

0.00
(-0.51)

Japan

98

.05 -0,09’
(-1.70)

0.46
(2.02)

0.05
(1.58)

70

.14

-0.13’
(-2.66)

0.11
(0.85)

0.08
(2.94)

Netherlands

74

.07

-0.02
(-0.27)

-0.45
(-1.72)

0.01
(0.36)

Norway

86

.06 -O.14*
(-2.31)

0.39
(1.34)

0,00
(0.01)

Portugal

98

.05

-0.08”
(-2.17)

0.25
(0.79)

-0.03
(-1.10)

70

.01

-0,02
(-0.85)

0.05
(0.41)

-0.01
(-0.65)

Chile
Denmark

O.1O*
(1.79)

Spain

100

.08 -0.13*
(-2.65)

0.53
(1.79)

0.01
(0.59)

70

.29

-0.31
(-4.36)

0.35
(2.53)

0.02
(1.35)

Sweden

112

.07

-0.18*
(-2.70)

0.23
(1.04)

0.02
(1.50)

70

.04

-0.04
(-1.02)

0.08
(1.09)

0.00
(0.09)

97

.05

0.00
(0.02)

-0.29
(-1.31)

0.03
(0.82)

70

.14

0.01
(-0.14)

0.04
(0.37)

0.02
(0.69)

.06 -0.12*
(-2.36)

0.01
(0.04)

0.00
(0.06)

70

.05

-0.11
(-1.61)

-0.03
(-0.29)

0.00
(0.39)

70

.84 -0.1O*
-0.79
(-5.16) (-17.78)

0.02
(4.70)

Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States

Notes:
ECM t-test:

●

113

●

signtiicant at 5% level, one-tailed, asymptotic N(O,1). Constant terms not shown.

Table 5
Panel tests for Weak PPP

N
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16
16

Samt)le
G
I
B
F
GI
IB
BF
GIB
IBF
GIBF

Notes:
‘ significant at the

Using q relative to ROW
T
VSTAT RHOSTAT
21
47.75
-85.27’
11
12.92
-38.99*
21
37.83
-94.62*
16
33.61
-65.63*
32
18.50 -155.35*
32
24.82 -158.62*
38
57.32* -185.38*
53
27.55 -277.92”
49
51.71* -248.1 6*
70
40.06 -374.88*

TSTAT
-14.02’
-9.11
-14.33*
-11.94’
-17.34’
-18.07”
-19.57*
-23.56*
-22.43”
-27.43*

level. G=Gold Standard, I=lntemar, B=Bretton Woods,
F=Float. Sample is a panel of 16 countries. N is the number of countries, T is
number of periods. All statistics are for the case of demeaned variables. Critical
values and definitions from Pedroni (1995). RHOSTAT is the heterogeneous
panel rho statistic. TSTAT is the heterogeneous panel rho-t statistic. VSTAT is
the heterogeneous panel variance ratio statistic,
5%

Table 6
Panel test for Weak PPP: Cointegratlng

Sample
NT
N
T
Country
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Denmark
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
Poflugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom
United States
Notes:
See text. Intercept terms omitted.

regression

GIBF
1168
16
73
Slope coefficient
0.82
0.86
1.20
0.49
0.88
1.09
0.86
1.03
0.96
1.50
0.65
1.08
1.08
1.64
0.93
0.94

.

Table 7
Dispersion of Weak PPP residuals

‘eriod
880-1884
885-1889
890-1894
895-1899
900-1904
1905-1909
1910-1914
1915-1919
1920-1924
1925-1929
1930-1934
1935-1939
1940-1944
1945-1949
1950-1954
1955-1959
1960-1964
1965-1969
1970-1974
1975-1979
1980-1984
1985-1989

v

V(qW resids,N)

V(resids,16,R)

5
6
6
16
16

0.0191
0.0106
0.0133
0.0251
0.0234

0.0012
0.0005
0.0009
0.0005

16
16
16
16

0.0631

0.0359
0.0494
0.0758

16
16
16
16
16
16
16
15

0.0795
0.0475
0.0180
0.0098
0.0156
0.0114
0.0151
0,0200

0.0161
0.0015
0.0004
0.0362

0.0032
0.0024
0.0096
0.0007
0.0013
0.0068
0.0051

Notes:
qWisthe logreal exchange rate relative to ROW. Quinquennial averages ofqorqW in all
periods. N is the cross-section width. V(qWresids,N) is the full-sample variance for resdiuals
from the heterogeneous panel OLS regression. In the last columns, R denotes a rebasing
relative to mans in each period G-l-B-F. V(qWresids, 16,R) is the panel-of-16 variance for
resdiuals from h heterogeneous panel OLS regression with dummies added for G-l-B-F
periods.

Figure 1: Dlsperslon

0.350 -

0.300 –

0.250 +

(

0,200 +

0.050 T P
‘1

of real exchange

rate

.

Figure 2: Real Exchange Rates, 185&1990
Argentina
0.75 “
0.500.250.00 “
-0.25-0.50-0.75-l.oo -

Chile
1.05
0.70
0.35
0.00
-0.35
-0.70
-1.05
-1.40
-1.75

.

1855 18-83 19il

1939 1967 1995

1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

Austra/ia
0.36
0.24
0.12
0.00
-0.12
-0.24
-0.36
-0.48
-0.60

Denmark
0.641
0.480.320.160,00

/

-0.16-0.321

1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

t

‘0”48 1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

Belgium
1.75)

Finland
[

●

1.401.050.700.350.00-0.35.~
J
‘0”70 1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

1.200.800.40 “
0.00

T

-0.40I

‘0”80 1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

Brazil
—

France

0.800.40-0.00
-0.40 “
-0.80-

I

J

‘1”20 1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

0.4 ~
0.30.20.1 “
-0.0-0.1 “
-0.2-0.3-

J

.

‘0”5 1855 1882 1909 1936 1963 1990

m

J

‘0”4 1855 1882 1909 1936 1963 1990

Canada
0.20.1-0.0
-0.1-0.2-0.3-0.4 “

n

I

0,54
0.45
0.36
0.27
0.18
0.09
-0.00
-0.09
-0.18
-0.27

Germanv.

,.
,.’

~

*

4

,
,

‘,

#

1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

Figure 2 (continued): Real Exchange Rates, 185&1990
SDain

Italy
1.25
1.oo0.75 “
0.500.25 “
0.00-0.25-0.50-0.75-

0.500.250.00- ‘

.

-0.251

‘1”00 1855

1883 1911

1939

-0.50.0.75 ~
1855

1967 1995

1883 1911

Japan

1967 1995

Sweden

1.25>
1.oo0.750.500.250.00
-0.25-0.50-0.75-

0.64-

I

0.480.320.16-

1.

0.00

!

f

-0.16-

““m

1855

1883 1911

1939

1967 1995

‘0”32

1855

1883 1911

Netherlands
1.60 I

o.4-

1.20-

&,...,

0.40a

0.00-

-0.2-

-0.40I

1

‘0”4 1855 1882

1909 1936

1963 1990

‘0”80 1855

Norway
0.30.2-

0.25a A

0.00-

T

-0.25I

J

‘0”50 1855

1939

1967 1995

1
1

0.50-

1883 ;911

United Kingdom

1.00>
0.75-

1967 1995

4

0.80-

0.20.0

1939

Switzerland

0.6 P

1.00
0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00

1939

1883 1911

1939

1967 1995

4
,,
a

-:::
-0.1-0.2-0.3-

d

.

J

‘0”4

1855 1882

0.361

1909 1936

I
1963 1990

United States
.

I

0.240.12 “
0.00

A

J .’...
,,..

a

1

-o.12-0.241

1

1855 1883 1911 1939 1967 1995

I

‘0”36 1855

1883 1911

1939

1967 1995

Figure 3: Dlsperslon

of Weak PPP residuals

0.0800
I

I

0.0700

0.0600

0.0500

0.0400

0.0300

0.0200

0.0100

0,0000

~—

V(qWresids,N)

~——

V(resids,16,R)

