                                NBER WO~G            PAPER SERIES




                            INTERNATIONAL         CAPITAL MOBILITY
                          IN HISTORY:     THE SAVING-INVESTMENT
                                          RELATIONSHIP




                                           Alan M. Taylor




                                        Working Paper 5743



                      NATIONAL      BUREAU OF ECONOMIC            RESEARCH
                                    1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                       Cambridge, MA 02138
                                          September 1996


This work is related to a larger project with Maurice Obstfeld (Obstfeld and Taylor 1996) on the
historical evolution of international capital mobility. I am indebted to Pierre Sicsic, Matthew Jones,
Maurice Obstfeld, and Barry Eichengreen for help with data enquiries. For their helpful comments
I wish to thank Joel Mokyr, Timothy Hatton, Nicholas Crafts, and participants in seminars at
Queen’s University, the University of Toronto, the NBER program meeting on the Development of
the American Economy      (March 1996), and the Econometric       Society Seventh World Congress
(Tokyo, August 1995). Comments are very welcome. All errors are mine. This paper is part of
NBER’s research programs in the Development of the American Economy, and International
Finance and Macroeconomics.     Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Alan M. Taylor, All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fill credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                         NBER Working Paper 5743
                                                                                      September 1996



                            INTERNATIONAL         CAPITAL MOBILITY
                          IN HISTORY:      THE SAVING-~VESTMENT
                                          RELATIONSHIP



                                            ABSTRACT




       Economic historims have been concerned with the evolution of international capital markets


over the long run, but empirical testing of market integration has been limited. This paper augments


the literature by investigating long- and short-run criteria for capital mobility using time-series and


cross-section analysis of saving-investment correlation for twelve countries since 1850. The results

present a nuanced picture of capital market evolution. The sample shows considerable cross-country


heterogeneity. Broadly speaking, the inter-war period, and especially the Great Depression, emerge


as an era of diminishing capital mobility, and only recently can we observe a tentative return to the


degree of capital mobility witnessed during the late nineteenth century.




Alan M, Taylor
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
2003 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2600
and NBER
amt@nwu.edu
1     Introduction
Although economic historians have long been concerned with the evolution of
international capital markets over the long run, empirical testing of market
integration criteria has been limited. The conventional wisdom suggests that
latenineteenth century capital markets were relatively well integrated under
the classic gold standard centered on London; that the inter-war period was
one of disintegration and imperfect capital mobility, wpecially after 1929;
and that the postwar period h= been characterized by gradually increasing
capital market integration. This paper seeks to confront and test such hy-
potheses using quantity criteria on the saving-investment relationship applied
to the longest and broadest panel data sets assembled for this purpose.
    The evolution of international capital mobility is, in principle, closely
tied to the trends and cycles in foreign lending. Yet the presence of flows, is
neither a necessary nor sufficient condition for market integration: a small
autarkic country with capital scarcity no different from the “world” market
will exhibit no incipient flows upon opening itself to capital flows. Conversely,
countries with substantial barriers to capital mobility may nonetheless ex-
perience capital flows of some sort provided international     rate-of-return   dif-
ferentials are sufficiently large, Here, then, is the handicap of using quantity
rather than price criteria as yardsticks of market integration.
    Is there any logic to wing quantity criteria at all? First, price criteria are
not without problems. They are intense in data requirements, and studies
need to focus on identzwl wets in different markets, such as the onshore-
offshore price differential on a given asset-and,      in practice, such data se-
ries are few (Obstfeld 1994). Second, quantity criteria do bear on certain
predictions of economic theory. For example, presumptions of consumption-
smoothing preferences can be twted by looking at quantity data on consump-
tion and income across time, to see whether income shocks are adequately
smoothed away: that is, whether international risk-sharing functions sat is-
factorily. Of course, income minus comurnption is equal to saving, so this is
not unrelated to the saving-investment criterion, which instead =ks whether
shocks to investment are constrained by local saving supply, or whether they
are met by the global pool of capital. Thus, despite shortcomings, a sub-
stantial literatme has evolved using quantity criteria for evaluating capital
mobility. A seminal contribution was that of Feldstein and Horioka (FH)
(1980) which used data for the 1960s and 1970s on savings and investment
rates to assess whether incremental savings were retained in the home coun-


                                        2
try or else entered the global capital market seeking out the highest return.
This paper develops and extends the historical application of the FH ap-
proach (and its subsequent refinements), and seeks to extend the empirical
framework and historical scope of the analysis in several ways.
    It is natural to ask what exogenous or endogenous changes in policy,
institutions or market structure might have implied for capital mobility.
By applying the criteria in different time periods, corresponding to major
changes in policy regimes, I can begin to attack the question. I also re~sess
the methodology applied to evaluate capital mobility criteria, subjecting the
Feldstein-Horioka t-t in historical application to further scrutiny. I am able
to apply not just the traditional FH estimator, but also panel tests of pooling,
and comparisons with time-series wtimates derived from a recently proposed
error-correction model of the saving-investment relationship. My tests have
enhanced power compared to other historical studies, since I increase the
sample size: I use annual data for the Ml period 1850 to the present, and
I increase the cross-section size from the usual nine or ten up to twelve, by
including an important capital receiving region of the late nineteenth cen-
tury, Argentina, an important capital exporter of the late nineteenth century,
France, and a major recent capital exporter, Japan. 1
    I contrast the results of standard tests of long-run capital mobilit y (saving-
invwtment correlations in cross section) and alternative tests of short-run
capital mobility (saving-investment correlations in time series), and conclude
that the two approaches offer helpful and complementary insights into the
evolution of the “world” capital market, In the end, a consistent story of
international capital market evolution can be told. The results present a
more nuanced picture of capital market evolution: in the Feldstein-Horioka
sense, the long-run capital-mobility parameters exhibit considerable fluctua-
tion across time; and the short-run parameters evolve very differently in the
several sample countries studied.

    1As noted eLsewhere, on a relative scale, Argentina was the New World region most
dependent on capital imports under the classic gold standard, with about half the capital
stock foreign-owned cira 1914, a figure far in excess of any other country before or since,
and a situation which made sustained growth extremely vulnerable to international   capital
market disruption (Diaz-Alejandro    1970; Taylor 1992; Taylor 1994b).




                                             3
2     Capital Flows in the Nineteenth and Twen-
      tieth Centuries
As noted, analysis of the saving-investment         relationship is closely tied to the
study of the pattern of capital flows, by dint of the saving-investment            identity.
Some definitions and notation will now prove useful. To simplify, we may
define gross national product Q as the sum of goods produced, which, with
imports M, may be allocated to private comurnption C, public comumption
G, invwtment 1, or export X, so that Q + M = C+ 1 + G + X. Rearranging,
GNP is given by
                      GNP EQ=C+I+G+NX,                                (1)

where NX = X – M is net exports.            If the country’s net credit (debt) position
vis-h-vis the rest of the world is B (– B), and these claims (debts) earn (pay)
interest at a world interest rate r, then gross domestic product is GNP plus
(minus) this net factor income from (to) the rest of the world,

                GDP=      Y=     Q+rB=C+l+G+NX+rB.                                       (2)

It is then straightforward     to show that the net balance on the current account
CA satisfies

                  CA=    NX+TB=(Y             –C–    G)–    I=   S–1,                    (3)

where S s Y – C – G is gross national saving, 2 Finally, the dynamic structure
of the current account and the credit position is given by the equality of the
current account (CA) and the capital account (KA), so that

                               Bt+l – Bt - KAt = CAt.                                    (4)

Thus, for example,      an export    creates a current account          credit,   a related
capital account    inflow as the trading partner finances the purchase,              and a
corresponding change in the net credit position of the country.
    This study will focus on the patterns of saving (S), investment (1), and
the current account (CA) as defined above. The buic identity CA = S – I
is central to my analysis. In terms of historical data collection, it proves
essential to utilize the identity to measure saving residually, as S = 1 + CA,

   2S is thus equal to the sum of private    saving Spriv s Y – T – C and public saving
Spub = T – G, where T is tax revenue.


                                             4
because no national accounts before the 1940s present independent saving
estimates, only investment and current-account data. In terms of econ~
metrics, however, this procedure may also introduce biases (via errors in
variables) in the traditional cross-section correlation analysis which must be
considered, In terms of theory, the long-run constraints on current-account
balance (a “n~Ponzi-game”      condition) have suggested to numerous scholars
the inevitability of an equilibrium level of CA, inviting the innovative use
of a dynamic   time-series model of saving and investment in the historical
setting with the present sample.
    Since the current account is so central to the analysis it is worth spending
a moment to look at the long-run behavior of capital flows in my sample. A
sense of the changing patterns of international financial flows can be gleaned
by examining their trends and cycles. This could be taken to mean the
absolute quantity of the capital flows themselves, but it is more informative
to normalize by country size. Measurement traditionally focusw on the size of
the current account balance CA, equal to net foreign investment, ~ a fraction
of national income Y. Thus (CA/ Y)it becomes the variable of interest, for
country i in period t.
    Table 1 and Figure 1 prwent the basic trends in foreign capital flows.
Two measures of the extent of capital flows are used, both of which measure
the cross-sectional dispersion of (CA/Y)it for fixed t. First, the variance
u~~/Y,t; second, the mean absolute value PICA/Yl,t. Quinquennially averaged
data are wed throughout, and the years covered for each country are shown
in Table 2.
    Both measura show similar patterm mross time. Consider #l~A/Yl. The
average size of capital flows in this sample was often x high as 4Y0–570 of
national income before World War I. At its first peak it reached 4.670 in the
overseas investment boom of the late 1880s. This dropped back to around 3%
in the depression of the 1890s. The figure approached 4% again in 19 10–14,
and wartime lending pushed the figure over 570 in 1915–19. Flows diminished
in size in the 1920s, however, and international capital flows were less than
1.5% of national income in the late 1930s, Again, wartime loans raised the
figure in the 1940s, but in the 1950s and 1960s, the size of international
capital flows in this sample reached an all time low, around 1YOof national
income. Only in the late 1970s and 1980s have flows incre~ed, though not
to levels above those of a century ago.
    Of course, mere flow data, as a quantity criterion, servm only as weak
evidence of changing market integration. The presence of flows may be guar-


                                       5
anteed despite considerable barriers to mobility, if return differentials are
sufficiently large; conversely, the absence of flows may just reflect similarities
in rates of return, even in the context of two perfectly integrated markets.
However, these basic descriptive tables and figures do illustrate the record
of capital flows, and offer ptima facie evidence that the globalization of the
capital market has been subject to major dislocations, most notably the
inter-war period, with a dramatic contraction of flows seen in the Depr-sion
of the 1930s. Moreover, this low level in the volume of flows persisted long
into the postwar era. We now turn to more formal tests to see whether this
description, and the conventional history of world markets that points to the
Depr~sion as an era of disintegration, has broader support.



3     The Saving-Investment Relationship in His-
      tory
The starting point for the quantity-based criteria used to assess capital mo-
bility in this paper is the seminal paper by Feldstein and Horioka (1980),
which proposed saving-investment correlations as a me~ure of international
capital mobility. Feldstein and Horioka reasoned that, in a world of perfectly
mobile capital, domestic savings would seek out the highest returns in the
world capital market independent of local investment demand, and by the
same token the world capital market would cater to domestic investment
needs independent of domestic savings supply.
    Thus, Feldstein and Horioka expected to find low correlations of domestic
saving and investment rates among developed countries given the conven-
tional wisdom that international capital markets were well integrated by the
1960s and 1970s. In a surprising and provocative result, they discovered a
high and significant investment-saving correlation in regressions of the form
(l/Y)i  = a+ b(S/Y)i + u;, with b typically close to unity (the samples being
a cross section of OECD countries with 5-year period averaging). It appeared
that changes in domestic saving p~sed through almost fully into domestic
investment, suggesting imperfect international capital mobility.
    Feldstein and Horioka coined the term “savings-retention coefficient” to
describe the regression coefficient b. Their finding of a large and significant
coefficient has been replicated many times for various cross-section and time-
series sampl~ wing post-World War Two and historical data, so much so as



                                        6
to be now considered a robust result-a stylized fact, as it were (Dornbusch
1991; Feldstein and Bacchetta 1991; Frankel 1991; Obstfeld 1991; Tesar 1991;
Sinn 1992).
   Cm such results be replicated for longer historical periods of a century
or more? Are the rmdts semitive to the period or countries studied? And
how can one interpret the result an~ay?    In this section, I begin with a
discussion of the antecedent empirical literature, and then move on to the
many methodological controversies surrounding this test. I then briefly dis-
cuss my data sources. In a new section I apply the traditional FH test, and
subject the specification to various empirical checks. In another section I
then explore an alternative time-series approach.


3.1     Antecedent Historical Literature
Some applications of the Feldstein-Horioka approach in economic history,
the natural antecedents of this paper, therefore warrant mention. Bayoumi
(1989) applied the Feldstein-Horioka approach to the classic gold-standard
period before 1914 for a sample of eight countries. His finding that the fit was
poorer, and the correlation lower, than for contemporary data, suggested that
capital markets might well have been better integrated in the latenineteenth
century than today. Similar findings were also shown by Zevin (1992), using
data for eight countries, in a study which merged price and quantity crite-
ria to evaluate financial openness in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Zevin’s b was no higher than 0,51 for decades from the 1870s to the 1920s,
certainly no higher than the me~urements            of the same coefficient     for the
1960s and 1970s.3
    Of course, such samples only included eight countries, with imperfect
data in many c~es, a reflection of the scant historical statistics on national
accounts and balance of payments for more than a handful of countries,
Bayoumi’s data excluded the United States for what seemed like arbitrary
reasons, drawing criticism from, and prompting a reevaluation by, Eichen-
green (1990). Eichengreen concluded that Bayoumi’s conclusions were not
so robust: the long-run correlations were typically different from zero at con-
ventional significance levels, except for the 1902–1913 period. However, the

   3Bayoumi’s sample included Australia,  Canada,    Denmark, Germany, Italy, Norway,
Sweden, U.K and used data from Mitchell. Zevin’s     sample included Australia, Canada,
France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, U.K. and    used data horn Green and Urquhart
(Green and Urquhart 1976; Mitchell 1983; Bayoumi    1989; Mitchell 1992; Zevin 1992).


                                         7
size of the coefficient did seem markedly smaller during the pre-1914 period
(in the range 0.5-0.7), smaller than the near-unity coefficients of the 1920s
and 1930s, the 1960s and 1970s.4
     However, the conventional view that the inter-war period marked a sig-
nificant curtaihnent in capital mobility was not overturned.      Eichengreen
suggested that it was not the gold standard per se that facilitated high cap
ital mobility, arguing that the restored gold standard was not qualitatively
different from its classic predecessor.          Rather, government policy was possibly
responsible: the restored gold standard was overseen by governments with
radically changed objectives: discouraging overseas lending and intervening
in the capital market to an extent not seen before 1914. It remains to be
seen how this conclusion holds for a broader sample of countries and a longer
span of data.


3.2      Methodological Controversies
Still, we might ask, what does the FH coefficient mean and how do we mea-
sure it accurately? As noted in the survey by Obstfeld (1994), the Feldstein-
Horioka criterion, despite the attention it has commmded and its widespread
use, is handicapped by two distinct sets of problems: First, do the regres-
sions of invwtment on saving measure true and unbiased “savings retention”?
Second, even if estimated accurately, what does the coefficient say about in-
ternational capital mobility? These problems may be thought of as issues of
implementation and interpretation.
   On implementation, several issues arise. First, the b~ic choice of econo-
metric specification for estimating b: should one adopt annual time-series
estimation for one country, or cross-section estimation for several countries
during a set period (or should one even employ the occasionally attempted
panel estimation)? This particular implementation question is also an inter-
pretation question: given differences in sampling frequency, the time-series
estimates of b are thought to have a “natural” interpretation as measures
of short-run capital mobility, whilst the cross-section estimates of b, if for a
sufficiently long period (usually five to ten years in the literature), are given

   AEi~engr~n    ~ded    the United   States,   incr~ing   sample size to nine, addressedsome
data inconsistencies, and drew out the comparison for his set of nine countries for a century,
1880 through 1981, allowing a consistent comparison for the same group of countries over
a very long period. He also applied variety of period averaging appromhes.




                                                 8
a “natural”     interpretation     as measures of long-run capital mobility. 5 Sec-
ond, what of the possibility of omitted variable bias? For the cross-section
specifications, several plausible theoretical models suggest that growth, de-
mographic structure, relative prices, taxes, government behavior, produc-
tivityy shocks, and other variables might simultaneously affect both saving
and investment and produce a spurious correlation in the simple Feldstein-
Horiob bivariate regrwsion (Obstfeld 1986; Summers 1988; Bayoumi 1990;
Tesar 1991; Obstfeld 1994; Taylor 1994a). In the tim~series specifications,
variables like real interest rates might be important, given the failure of the
stringent interest parity and other assumptions which theory suggests as pre-
requisites for the Feldstein-Horioka criterion to be satisfied (Frankel 1992).
Third, what about the fundamental macroeconomic intertemporal identities,
which assert that, in the long run, permment investment must equal per-
manent saving plus some constat    (initial wealth)? In this context, period
averaging, if the periods are long enough, may lead to a misspecification
in the cross-section approach by creating the estimation of an identity (or
an approximation thereof), and one with b ipso facto equal to one (Sinn
1992; Obstfeld 1994). Sinn (1992) advocates using a pure (one-period) cross-
section estimator, which yields smaller estimates of b. This may not cure the
problem altogether if countries are close to equilibrium, and does nothing to
address cross-section heterogeneityy (including omitted variable biases). Sev-
eral authors raise these issues as crippling problems with the cross-section
methodology, preferring instead to estimate the time-series specification only;
some work in this vein has used a cointegration approach that incorporates
a long-run equilibrium relationship between saving and investment and ad-
mits short-run disequilibrium dynamics (Miller 1988; Vik@ren 1991; Jansen
and Schulze 1996). The general criticism is essentially an argument against
the “pooling”     of time-seria     data, inherent in the “between”          estimator used
by Feldstein-Horioka, an approach which assumes away cross-country het-
erogeneity in the coefficients; timeseries analysis provides a test for these
   sob~tfeld   (1994) discmws   thew interpretation   in the light of a thought   experiment:   a
sample of countries with pairwiae uncorrelated timeseries shocks to saving and investment
but with mean saving and investment rates equal for each country would generate, for
sufficiently large T (sample periods) and N (sample individuals),      a near zero b in time
series and a near unit b in cross section. Such a scenario indeed equates to one of long-
term capital mobility but short-term independence of saving and investment.       Conversely,
one could easily envisage a hypot het iul sample wit b zero cross-sectional  correlation, but
highly correlated tim~aeries shocks to saving ad investment.



                                                9
restrictions, as shown by Fujiki and Kitamura (1995).
    In this paper, an agnostic attitude is adopted concerning   the choice be-
tween time-series and cross-section   methods:   both will be estimated    for a
sample of ten countries with annual data from 1850 to 1988. Why? The
two methodologies have different interpretations, both potentially interest-
ing. The implications of these approaches might usetily be examined for
the first time in a historical context where we have the opportunity to use a
complete stretch of data spanning almost a century and a half for a consis-
tent sample. Further, the results from one of the estimation strategies might
usefully inform interpretations of the results from the other estimation strat-
egy, and vice versa: trivially, long-rm capital mobility is built from a series
of short-run capital movements, after all.
    On interpretation, the Feldstein-Horioka approach, it is argued, provides
no intrinsic absolute yardstick for measuring capital mobility. In short, even
when we do estimate b, and even when we think we have estimated correctly,
we still have no prior basis for judging how big is big, or how small is small,
Hence, the imperative of employing comparative analysis: b may have some
meaning when compared for cross-sections at different points in time, or for
time-series studies of different countries. Thus, Obstfeld’s findings that b
appears very high (around 0,7) for the gold standard, period before 1914,
a time of supposedly undisputed capital mobility, should perhaps moderate
our initial puzzlement on being exposed to Feldstein-Horioka coefficient in
the rmge 0.8-1.0 in the modern EC and OECD samples (Obstfeld 1986;
1994). This pragmatic, purely relative attitude to the interpretation of b is
tily embraced in the present study, where our data is ideally suited to such
m approach: we have about 140 sample periods for 12 individual countries,
which we may slice in a variety of cross-sections (every 10 or every 5 years)
or consider as Ml-length time series on a country-by-country     basis. The
resulting samples will yield a multiplicity of cross-section and time-series
estimates which can be compared across time and space to assess variations
in international capital mobility from one country to the next, and from one
period to the next. Hence, we have a methodological plan for this paper.


3.3    Data
What data might usefully be employed to apply the various saving-investment
criteria for capital mobility in a historical context? The appendix documents
the sources used in this paper, which yielded a set of annual timeseries    ob-


                                      10
servations for a group of twelve countries over the period 1850-1992. Some
countries have incomplete or discontinuous data coverage, however: some
do not enter the sample until several decades after 1850, and some drop
out temporarily in the inter-war and wartime periods.    However, reason-
ably comprehensive coverage was possible for the sample of countries which
comprises Argentina, Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy,
Japan, Norway, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United Stat=.
   The principal published sources are the statistical volumes of Brian Mitchell
(International Historical Statistics, 1983, 1992) and the World Bank ( World-
Data on CD-ROM, 1994) and various national sourca. For the provision of
compiled data for the pre 1914 period adjusted for international gold flows
and changes in stocks I am grateful to Matthew Jonm and Maurice Obstfeld
(Jones md Obstfeld 1994). All such series build on the individual labors
of national statistical offices and individual scholars dedicated to the com-
pilation and revision of national macroeconomic statistics. Like so many, I
am indebted to this devoted group of researchers. A Ml documentation of
these sources is provided in a data appendix at the end of this paper, and
the complete set of data is available from the author upon request.



4     “Long-Run” Capital Mobility Since 1850:
      Cross-Section Correlations and The Tradi-
      tional FH Test
4.1    Evidence from the FH Test
The standard technique employed for estimating long-run capital mobility
is the generic FH regression of average investment rates on a constant and
average saving rates. The regression is performed on a cross section of coun-
triw indexed by i, where we use a “short” averaging period T (say, five or
ten years):
                       (J/Y)~     = aFH + bFH(S/Y)~ + ~~,                         (5)
where (l/Y)i   =   $ ~~(l/Y)i~)     (S/Y)i        = ~ ~~(s/Y)i~.   The cross-section
coefficient bFH h= the conventional interpretation of a long-run savings-
retention coefficient for the sample of countries. In a sense, bFH is mea-
suring the extent to which the sample of countries deviates, on average over
the sample period, from the closed-economy             property whereby saving rates


                                             11
equal investment rates by identity. Since period averaging is employed the
procedure attempts to abstract from business cycle fluctuations that simul-
taneously affect both saving and investment. The averaging also implies that
this procedure has nothing to say about year-t~year (short-run) capital mo-
bility: the ability of countries to temporarily run current-account surpluses
or deficits in response to shocks at high frequencies (meaing approximately
annual frequencies, or higher).
     The restits are shown in Table 3 and Figure 2. The table displays the
econometric results and the fi~e     displays the coefficient b‘H for both 5-year
and ten-year averaging patterns. The table includes the estimated coefficient
bFH and various statistics for each cross-section regression: the R2, plus the
t-statistic and standard error of bFH. After 1870 the sample always includes
between 9 md 12 countri=-not       a huge sample, but comparable in size to
Feldstein md Baccheta’s (Feldstein and Bacchetta 1991) sample of nine EC
countries.
   What do the results show? As noted earlier, before FH-type coefficients
can be interpreted we reqtire a benchmark for what constitutes a “high” or
a “low” bFH. Put another way, bFH comes equipped with no intrinsic ab-
solute yardstick: we need to find a period we consider one of undisputed
capital mobility and then compare other bFH observations to this bench-
mark. Alternatively, we might search for movements in bFH as indicators
of whether saving-invwtment interdependence was relatively high or low for
a given period. In this regard, ou results present an ideal picture of the
relative movements in bFH over a centu.ry or more. Comparisons between
subperiods should allow us to infer whether long-run capital mobility        has
been unusually high or low during certain epochs.


4.2    Interpretation of the FH Test
For the present, what does the evolution of the bivariate b‘H for our sample
say about long-run international capital mobility over the last century or
more? Table 3 indicates that the estimated coefficient is significant in most
periods, and usually positive. It occ~ionally exceeds unity. Still, to reiterate,
absent a meaningful absolute scale for interpreting b‘H, this paper will take
the more conservative route, and consider only relative movements in the
coefficient. The restits reveal considerable fluctuation in the magnitude of
bFHover the long run. Relatively low values (“high mobility”) are associated
with the following periods: the 1880s, 1905–15 md the 1920s, and the 1980s


                                       12
(I exclude the 1860s which have few data points).
    On reflection, I believe, the results, and the trends from period to period,
can be re~onably interpreted. First, international capital market integra-
tion, = measured by b‘H for this admittedly small sample, has shown no
marked trend over the last hundred or so years: we can say that, in this nar-
row sense, saving-investment disassociation has been no stronger in the 1980s
for these countries than it was circa 1900. Second, the Feldstein-Horioka
savings-retention coefficient b‘H has not evolved uniformly or monotonically
over time. A story might be told m follows, considering Figure 2. Capi-
tal mobility was relatively high (low bFH) during the 1880s, when financial
markets were engaged in a frenzy of foreign investment. The crash of the
early 1890s brought this phase to a halt (higher bFH), and capital mobility
diminished markedly. Gradually, closer to World War One, capital mobil-
ity again increased (falling bFH) in the last great foreign investment boom
during the age of high imperialism, propelled largely by British capital flows
(Edelstein 1982). This episode was halted by the war, but only temporarily,
and, somewhat surprisingly, evidence of continued capital mobility is still
apparent after World War One, right up to 1929 (falling bFH), a sign of eas-
ing capital mobility during the boom of the roaring twenties (Kindleberger
1986). The Great Depression ushered in a time of increased autarky (Temin
1989; Eichengreen 1990; Eichengreen 1992). This phase W= associated with
increased capital controls and other impediments to capital mobility (Nurkse
1944; Einzig 1935). The structural change is also reflected in other measures
of capital mobility, marking the Deprwsion as a watershed in international
capital mobility (Taylor 1996; Taylor and Obstfeld 1996), The regime switch
effectively limited international capital mobility for several decades (rising
bFH), as capital controls persisted under Bretton Woods, The postwar pe-
riod witnwsed an era of relatively weak international capital mobility, only
beginning to be overcome in the late 1970s and 1980s when bFH begins to
decline, albeit to a limited degree (Feldstein and Bacchetta 1991; Obstfeld
1994; Taylor 1994a). The evolution not only of the coefficient estimate of
b, but also of other me=ures of fit based on R2 and the t-ratio, follows a
similar pattern, as can be seen clearly in Figure 2. Finally we may note the
remarkable relationship between the rmults of the FH test and the historical
patterns of institutional change, monetary experiments, and policy regimes,
Note the dramatic, but not entirely unsurprising, correlation between pe-
riods of tight saving-investment correlation and periods of crisis: the fit of
the regrmsion is much stronger in the 1870s and 1890s depressions, around


                                      13
World War One, during the Great Depression (with especially tight correla-
tions), and again in the 1970s crisis (oil shocks, collpase of Bretton Woods,
stagflation). This would be expected if autarkic policy responses and or just
greater uncertainty in such episodes acted as barriers to the free movement
of capital.


4.3       Caveats
Can the results on the FH test be taken at face value, especially given the
numerous criticisms of this approach? In this brief sections I confront some
potential problems.
    First, let us note the difficulties with historical data on saving rates.
These are constructed residually from estimates of investment and saving,
using the identity S/Y = 1/Y + CA/Y.         There is little reason to expect
that historical investment data (1, usually from macroeconomic     accounts)
and current-account data (CA, principally from trade records) will have cor-
related errors, but they certainly will have measurement error of some sort.
Since, by construction, 1/Y appears on both sides of the FH regression, this
will impart upward bias into the atimate of bFH. There is no way around this
absent independent saving data, which we simply do not have. One check for
bi= arising from errors in variables is to run the reverse regression of S/Y
on 1/Y (Maddala 1977, 293). This regression estimates how much domestic
investment demand spills into domestic saving and the result is also reported
in Table 3.6 In theory, plim(~siy,~ly) < b < (plirn(L~/Y,S/Y) )-l. ln practice,
the results are inconclusive and very confusing, at least before 1930. How-
ever, after 1930 both regressions point to b being very close to 1, typically
in the 0.8 to 1.2 range with standard errors around 0.1 to 0.2. The small
sample    size is a weakness here, as the reverse regression method is only really
helpful   in large samples.
    An    alternative check to the reverse regrwsion is to implement the FH
test in   a different form. The traditional test looks for a high correlation of
S/Y and 1/Y.      Corr(S/Y, 1/ Y) close to one implies near closure, close to
zero implies a fully flexible current wcount. An alternative is to look at the
relationship between our two trtiy observed data series, CA and 1: a fully
flexible current account with investment and saving independent and uncorre-

    61 only report b and its standard error, since in this bivariate   regression,   the R2 and t
stay the same when regressor and regressand Me interchanged.



                                              14
lated, Corr(S/Y, 1/Y) = O, would be equivalent to Corr(CA/Y,   I/Y) = –1;
investment shocks would pass through fully into current account debits, as
the economy absorbs capital directly from the “world market. ” Conversely,
under a fixed, inflexible, near zero, or unresponsive current account we would
expect Corr(CA/ Y, 1/Y) close to zero. This method now has eliminated the
problem of correlated errors on left- and right-hind side variables-though
it cannot, of course, like any OLS system, be guaranteed to be free of sim-
ple me~urement errors in the right-hand side variable. The results are also
shown in Table 3 md in Figure 3 for comparison with the traditional FH
regression. The regr=sion (CA/ Y)i = a + b(I/Y)i + Ui yields a b estimate
significant and negative before World War One for many periods, but rarely
thereafter. In the 1880s, the coefficient approaches –0.6 and just before
1914 approaches – 1.0. This parallels our earlier ~count of the gold stan-
dard experience. However, after 1915 the coefficient is close to zero, and of
low significance. Thus, this alternate measure confirms the belief that     the
pre-1914 gold standard was a period of relatively good capital mobility,    but
provides little evidence for pronounced market integration thereafter.
    Notwithstanding the technical difficulties, the interpretation is not   un-
controversial.   The story told may seem to depart from conventional        ac-
counts. For example, the evidence of 1920s capital mobility seems implausi-
ble given that World War One disrupted international capital markets and
given the many qualitative interpretations of the decline in capital mobil-
ity during the collapse and fleeting restoration of the gold standard, and
the disappearance of the “hegemonic” stability formerly provided by London
and only half- heartedly emulated by New York. In the subsequent discus-
sion of short-run capital mobility I will try to offer additional evidence that
might provide some reasonable grounds for interpreting the new findings:
there the evidence suggests that individual country experience showed con-
siderable heterogeneityy in the various eras, from pre 1914, to inter-war, to
post- 1945. If the short-run capital mobility results have any connection to
long-run capital mobility properties, they might reasonably inform us that
whilst some countries almost certainly did experience a tightening of saving-
investment correlation after 1914, still some others experience a loosening,
In short, the evidence that follows suggests that capital-mobility experience
has been marked by great variety across time and space, with some countries
experiencing increased integration just when others experienced increased
disintegration—whilst all along an “average” me~ure over the cross-section
remained remarkably stable.


                                      15
    However, a simple test of the FH approach offers one more motivation
for a more flexible specification which admits cross-sectional heterogeneity.
Specifically, we can implement the test proposed by Fujiki and Kitamura
(1995), to see whether the implicit pooling in the FH approach is justified.
In this test, we recognize that the conventional FH regr~sion (equation 5)
is in fact a form of panel “between” estimator. In detail, we may comider a
time -seties estimator

           (l/Y)~t = a=s + bTs(S/Y)~t + u~t,z = fied,          t = 1,...   ,T;    (6)

a (true) cross-section     estimator

           (l/Y)it    =   acs
                            +bcs(S/Y)it     +ZLit,Z = 1,...   ,N, t = fixed;      (7)

a between estimator

                (l/Y)i     = abe’w + bbe’w(I/Y)i   + Ui, i = 1,,..,N;             (8)

and a pooling estimator

        (1/Y) if, =   ~p””’
                         + POO’(S/Y)~* + Ui~,Z=       1,...   ,N, t = 1,...,2’.   (9)

    By inspection, the FH approach (equation 5) is not a “pure” cross-section
estimator. By using tim~averaged data it may escape some of the short-run
cyclical variations which contaminate annual data at business-cycle frequen-
cies, and this may be more pertinent for me~uring “long-ru”      capital mo-
bility (Obstfeld 1994), Do= this averaging make a difference? To check,
we can follow Sinn (1992) and report the true bcs, as above, using one-year
“snapshots” of data throughout the whole sample. The results are shown
in Table 4 and Figure 4, Focusing on the figure, however, it is clear that
the timeaveraging   has not changed the qualitative rwult. Like bFH, Sinn’s
measure bcs exhibits a structural jump in the 1930s; it is usually small and
insignificant under the pre1914 gold standard except for the 1890s; and it
is large and significant after 1930, though declining in the 1960s, 1970s, and
1980, suggesting some mild and gradual improvements in capital mobility in
the postwar period (as Sinn has show).
    In f~t, the FH approach is a between estimator for 5- or 10-year samples,
and ~FH= &OOlas above. However, some simple and standard econometric
algebra for panels demonstrate that the pooling estimator is a weighted sum


                                           16
of the time-series and between estimators.7 Thus, if we accept the between
(FH) estimator, ought we to be willing to accept the pooling estimator?
Is such pooling justified? This amounts to a test of the restricted pooling
estimator against the unrestricted time-series estimator.  A simple F-test
proposed by F’ujiki and Kitamura (1995) allows us to discriminate between
the two, and thus explore the possibilityy of cross-section heterogeneit y in
the saving-investment relationship, The results of this test are also shown
in Table 3, and in all cases the pooling restrictions are rejected at standard
significance levels, in favor of individual-country             time-series ~timators.
    Obviously more work is needed on the cross-section titivation   in other
respects. It would be desirable, given the evidence on heterogeneity, to in-
troduce appropriate controls that might be necessary to alleviate potential
omitted-variable bias in the Feldstein-Horioka estimation procedure. 8 Efforts
might also be made to construct long-run time series of measures of financial
development, such as the ratio of financial assets to GDP, since such de-
velopment almost certainly fmilitated the mobilization of capital and might
well have given simultaneous saving and investment incentives by reducing
transaction costs, Such concerns remain the target of ongoing work, 9

   ‘Explicitly,
             following Fujiki and Kitamura (1995), ~POO1= O~[1           ~i&Ts + (1 – 13)kbetw,
                 ?_ wsr(i)
where O =                       t~ = ~             WSS(i) = ~f=~((S/y)it          – (s/y)i)2!
          ~~~~~.(~)+~~ss      ‘      ~,=, wss(~) ‘
W,{(i)   = ~~=~((S/Y)~*    – (S/Y) i)((l/Y)a~   – (1/Y) ~), Bss(i)   = ~&~((S/Y)i      – (S/Y) )2,
and (S/Y) = & ~:1           ~:=l(S/Y)it.
    ‘A study by Taylor (1994a) discus=          some especially important      cent rols needed for
a very wide (104 muntry) post-1950 sample, namely demographic structure, growth and
relative prices. Tesar (1991) had previously emph~ized         the importance of controls for de-
mographic structure.     It will be almost surely impossible to extend relative price controls
back to the nineteenth       century, since in many cases we simply do not have the requi-
site aggregate demand disaggregate ion md price levels in extensive detail. However, it is
reasonable to suppose that national income tim~series and census records of population
structure might allow us to control for serious potential biases arising from differential
growth environments      (high growth via productivity    shocks might be associated with high
saving and high investment) and differential demographic structurm            (an expansion in the
working-age share of population might simultaneously          raise derived investment demand
and raise saving via dependency effects).
    ‘Such variables have been shown to cloud the interpretation          of the Feldstein-Horioka
coefficient (Tesar 1991; Kose 1994; Taylor 1994a). b a historical setting, it has oft been
rogued that demographic structure and financial development might have played important
md simultaneous     roles as determinants    of saving, inv~t ment and, hence, foreign lending
(Green and Urquhart        1976; Edelstein 1982; Eichengrmn        1990; Taylor ad Williamson



                                                17
    These findings caution against the loose characterization of capital mobil-
ity in cross-section samples assumed to be representative of the “world” capi-
tal market. Recent historical rwearch in international labor market mobility
has revealed evidence of marked segmentation in some c~es (Williamson
1995). Similarly, it might be worth refining our nations of international cap-
ital mobility to allow for different market segments: groups of countries, not
of uniform or stable membership over time, some of which have relatively
open capital market characterizations, some relatively closed. The individ-
ual country time-series perspective         allows us these nuances and it is to that
analysis that we next turn.



5      “Short-Run” Capital Mobility Since 1850:
       An Error Correction Model
As already noted, an alternative approach to estimating the Feldstein-Horioka
savings-retention coefficient is to employ time-series analysis for an individual
country, with an atimating equation of the form 6. However, for technical
re~ons, there is no reason to expect bcs and bTs to bear any relation to each
other since the time-series and cross-section properties of the estimators dif-
fer dramatically, Moreover, the natural interpretation of the two coefficients
differs substantially-typically bcs is considered an indicator of long-run in-
ternational capital mobility in a sample group of countries, whereas bTs is
seen u a measure of short-run, year-to year international capital mobility in
a single country (Obstfeld 1986; Obstfeld 1994).
    The time-series wtimation of the coefficient also raises additional                   con-
cerns. Equation 6, if it is to be properly estimated, embodies an assumption
of stationarity in the series (1/ Y)it and (S/ Y)i~. Such an assumption may
indeed be valid, especially for short time frames. However, over longer hori-
zons, several studies have cast doubt on the assumption that saving and
investment rates are truly stationary,

1994). Eichengreen reports Goldsmith’s data on the dramatic increase in the financial
asset to GDP ratio in several countries in the nineteenth       century, offering support for
the view that such structural   change in the operation of markets must be incorporated
in any coherent analysis of long-run international    capital market development.      Kose h=
recently introduced such variables in an a,nalysis of the Feldatein-Horioka     results for the
contemporary    period using the variables instructed      by King and Levine (Eichengreen
1990; King and Levine 1993; Kose 1994).



                                              18
   This result will come as no surprise to economic historians: the notion of
saving and investment shifts as important features of growth and structural
transformation in the long run is embodied in many national histories, in-
cluding the famous “grand traverse” described by the United States economy
in the nineteenth century (Abramovitz and David 1973; David 1977). A sim-
ilar upward shift in the investment rate has been documented in nineteenth
century Britain (Crafts 1985, chapter 4, for example). The stationarity of
some settler-economy                  saving and investment rate series cotid also be called
into question b~ed upon an examination of long-run trends in the Australia
and Canadian data since 1870 (McLean 1994 illustrates the patterns), All
of the above observations impinge on this analysis since all four countries
are part of our sample. Of course, the same idea is seen elsewhere, and the
proposition that a structural shift in the level of saving and investment rel-
ative to GDP represents a key transition was at the heart of Arthur Lewis’s
description of the development                        process:

      The central           problem      in the theory          of economic        development          is to un-
      derstand        the     process        by which        a community           which      was    previously
      saving       and     investing      4 or 5 per          cent     of its national        income       or less,
      converts       itself    into    an economy          where       voluntary     saving     is running         at
      about        12 to      15 per     cent     of national          income      or more.         This    is the
      central      problem,        because       the central         fact of economic         development          is
      rapid     capital       accumulation            (including       knowledge       and skills with       capi-
      tal).     We cannot          explain      any     “industrial”      revolution       (as the economic
      historians         pretend       to do) until        we can explain          why     saving      increased
      relatively         to national     income.         (Lewis      1954, 155)


    We can use routine Dickey-Wler twts to check on the stationarity of the
series, and the resdts are shown in Table 2 for the series (S/ Y)i~, (l/ Y)a~,
and (CA/ Y)at. The current-account ratio appears stationary in most cases,
encouraging the view that it may be subject to equilibrium tendencies as
theory suggests.   However, the saving and investment series may not be
stationary in all c=es. Thus, the new strand of cointegration research into
the properties of saving and investment correlation may have a particular
resonance in long-run historical applications. It is this line of enquiry that
will now be pursued.
    The cointegration approach to the estimation of equation 6 has been much
discussed in the literature, and the details need not be repeated at length


                                                             19
here (Miller 1988; Leachman 1991; Vikgren 1991; Jansen and Schulze 1996).
If the series (S/ Y)it and (1/Y)l~ are nonstationary, but rather integrated,
say 1(1), then 6 is improperly         specified unless the series are cointegrated
so that the error term uit is still a stationary 1(0) series. A battery of
standard diagnostic procedures may be used to twt for this property of ui~.
In the case of cointegration, moreover, the Engle-Granger (1987) result shows
that a two-step procedure can reveal an error-correction representation of 6.
The simplest such representation, commonly adopted in the literature, is the
first-order error-correction model (ECM), written as follows (suppressing the
index for country z henceforth),

                   A(J/Y)~     = W. + wlA(S/Y)t         + w2z~.1 + U~,                   (lo)

where zt = (1/Y)~      — 00 — 01(S/ Y)t is the s~called            error correction     term,
equal to the residual from the first-step time-series regression in levels,

                             (1/Y),   = eo + o~(s/Y),      + z,.                         (11)

    By a redefinition of parameters, 10 may be rewritten as,

      A(l/Y)~      =   aEcM + bEcMA(S/Y)~           +
                       cEcM((s/Y),_,      - (1/Y),_,)+        dEcM(s/Y)t_,      + u,.    (12)

    Following Jansen and Schulze (1996), I adopt 12 as a convenient estimat-
ing equation for implementing a well-specified test of the saving-investment
correlation.  It is immediately obvious that equation 12 embodies a long-
run equilibrium relationship between saving and investment prescribed by
theory, where, in the steady-state equilibrium (denoted *, where A(l/Y)~      =
A(S/Y)t    = O), the implied relationship in levels is given by aEcM+#cM ((S/ Y, * —
(l/Y)*)   + dEcM(S/Y)*     = O.’O Parameter restrictions may be used to test
various natural hypotheses concerning the nature of this long-run equilib-
rium: if dEcM = O then the long-run equilibrium current account is equal
to a constmt, CA* = (S/Y)* – (1/Y)* = –aEcM/&cM; furthermore, if
aEcM = dEcM = O, then this constant is zero.
    It warrmts    mention that most other econometric              specifications   used in
the literature on time-series estimation of the Feldstein-Horioka                coefficient
   1°On average, considering the permanent level    of saving and investment, we expect the
difference between the present values of the two     variables to be equal to initial wealth,
assuming the usual tr~versality    condition that   no national Ponzi schemes are possible,
whereby national assets holdings are bounded in     the long run.


                                            20
also constitute special cases of 12, and, hence, their validity may be tested
by tests of parameter restrictions. The basic time series specification, which
assumes no cointegration, and which h= been considered by studies including
Frankel (1992) and Obstfeld (1986; 1994), takes the form 6 corresponding to
the restrictions bEcM – dEcM = 1 and &cM = 1 in 12. I will label this
restriction RI. The difference    form of 6, which admits no long run steady
state, and which has been used by various studies (Obstfeld 1986; Feldstein
and Bacchetta     1991; Obstfeld 1994, for example),         takes the form

                       A(l/Y)~     = aDTs + bDTsA(S/Y)t         + Ut,                   (13)

corresponding to the restrictions dECM = &CM = () in 12. I will label this
restriction R2. A third alternative specification is a partial adjustment form
used by Feldstein and Bacchetta          (1991) which assumes a long run equality
of saving and investment, and which takes the form

                A(l/Y)~    = apA + bpA((S/Y)t-l        – (l/Y)t-l)      + U~,           (14)

corresponding to the rwtrictions d‘CM = bEcM = O in 12. I will label this
restriction R3. All thwe r=trictions place certtin prior constraints on the dy-
namic and (or) equilibrium specification, and since the general specification
12 subsumw such possibilities, it represents an appropriate starting point for
empirical investigation. We should also remember that recent econometric
advances suggest that the estimation of the error correction model 12 di-
rect ly, without recourse to the tw~step Engle-Granger procedure, provides a
compact analytical methodology           and a direct, and arguably more powerful,
test for cointegration than the conventional tests such as Dickey-Fuller and
Phillips-Perron. Following the test outlined by Kremers, Ericsson and Dolado
(1992) and used by J-en    and Schulze (1996), we may interpret a hypothesis
test of #cM being non-zero as equivalent to a test of cointegration. 11
    The coefficient bEcM will have the natural interpretation: even given a
long-run equilibrium relatiomhip         between saving and investment, bEcM mea-
sures to what extent a temporary           annual shock to domestic saving passes

   llKremers et al. show that the t-statistic of CECM is asymptotically  normal N(O, 1). Of
course, when &cM and dEcM are zero, equation 12 simplifies to look like equation 13,
the difference   form of 6, which is then the analogous and appropriate      estimating equa-
tion when (S/Y)t and (l/Y)t      are 1(1) but not cointegrated.    Conversely, however, the
presence of cointegration would imply that the simple differencing of 6 to produce an esti-
mating equation 13 would yield a miaspecified estimating equation: that is, m unjustified
imposition of the r~triction  &cM = dEcM = O in the error-comection       reprmentation.


                                             21
through (fully? partially? not at all?) into domestic investment. In the
present analysis, the specification 12 will be estimated for the long-run time-
series data for each country. The coefficient #cM also h= a natural interpre-
tation: it measures the speed of convergence of the system toward equilib-
rium. Converted into a “half-life” measure, this providw an indication of the
sustainability of current-account disequilibria for each country in the sample
period under study.
    The availability of very long time series permits us to estimate the equa-
tion separately for different sample periods. I exogenously   imposed “natural”
break points at 1914, 1945 and 1973. This method will         allow us to detect
structural breaks in all the parameters, in particular the    short-run savings-
retention coefficient bEcM, and the speed of convergence       #cM.   This is an
appropriate test given the strong priors in the historical literature concerning
the changes in international capital mobility from the pre-1914 and inter-war
periods, to the two postwar periods, before-ad-after   the collapse of Bretton
Woods,     A restriction test may be applied to test for the stability of the
regression coefficients in the long run, where, as an alternative, we pool all
four time periods and impose non-varying coefficients from 1850 to 1992. I
will label this rwtriction R4.
    The specification is now complete and the various hypothesis tests estab-
lished, The coefficient bEcM is interpreted ~ the short-run savings-retention
coefficient in the various subperiods examined. The size of the coefficient
&cM is a measure of the sustainability of current-account imbalances. The
significance of the coefficient #cM is used as a test for cointegration,   The co-
efficients aEcM and dEcM indicate the nature of the long-rm saving-investment
equilibrium. Various F-t~ts of restrictions (RI, R2, R3) compare the ECM
specification 12 with restricted alternatives commonly used in the literature,
and an F-t-t for structural stability (R4) detects whether the four-subperiod
sample split is justified.
   The results, presented by country, appear in Tables 5 and 6, and Figure
5, The evidence suggests a wealth of contrasts between individual country
experiences with short-run international capital mobility over the last cen-
tury or more. A discussion of the econometric specification in Table 5 is in
order. In most c~es the cointegration approach is justified, since the coef-
ficient #cM is wually significant, and there is no country for which #cM is
never significant. Frequently, the weakest significance is for the post-1972
sample, which might be attributed to small smple size. The restriction
tats RI through R3 usually fail, suggesting that in most circumstances the


                                        22
specification 12 dominates the alternatives commonly used in the literature.
Again, the small post-1972 sample usually generates the weakest tests. The
restriction test R4 usually fails, indicating that the regression coefficients
do not exhibit long-run stability, a result suggesting temporal heterogeneity
in individual countries’ capital mobility experience; the exceptions are Swe-
den and the United States, where the results are consistent with coefficients
which do not vary across the four sample periods. In most cases (all but
about a dozen cases out of 40 in the table), the implied long-run equilibrium
saving-investment relationship is indeed characterized by the property that
the steady-state current account (CA/Y)* = (S/Y)* – (1/Y)* equals a con-
stant, as prescribed by theory (the restriction d‘CM = O holds); and in all
those cases the constant appears to be not significantly different from zero
(the restriction a ECM= O also holds).
   Concerning the short-run savings-retention coefficients bEcM wtimated in
Table 2, we might turn to Figure 5 for a succinct presentation of the main
short-run capital mobility trends revealed by this analysis. The countries
are sorted alphabetically, with six in each chart for clarity. It appears that
many countries exhibit a coefficient trend consistent with the notion of in-
creasing capital mobility over time: the serious exceptions to this proposition
are Argentina, Australia, Denmark and the United States. In the case of Ar-
gentina, the rising size and significance of the coefficient might be considered
an intelligible result given the grossly simplified (but not entirely inaccurate)
characterization of Argentina as a country with increasingly autarkic stance
in external markets over the course of the century. The Danish result is of
borderline significance, and this and the Australian restit may be possibly
due to the small sample size after 1974. In the c~e of the United States, the
result is less puzzling, since it cofirms earlier findings such as the large coef-
ficient found by Frankel (1992) using levels and differences; the result is quite
plausibly a “large country” aberration—since the U.S. is such a large player
in world capital markets, shocks to saving rate might quite plausibly         spill
over into the world interest rate, md hence into domestic investment. All
of these distinct country experiences certainly warrant further study. How
robust are the resdts? How do they conform to qualitative evaluations of
capital-market performance over time and the conventional historical treat-
ments of national experience with international     capital markets?    Are there
specific institutional or historical experiences that can explain the very dif-
ferent trends and peaks across countries?
   The coefficient &cM also reveals interesting patterns of heterogeneity.    For


                                       23
example, the countries with the most-sustainable current-account imbalances
before 1914 were Argentina, Australia, Canada, and the United States—a re-
sult entirely comistent with the status of these four settler economies as the
principal importers of British capital. A marked shift occurs after 1914 for
this group. In the inter-war period, however, Germmy stands out = a coun-
try facing sever financing constraints in the form of a very fast adjustment
speed (exceeding one! ): itiows were very quickly offset by countervailing
outflows, and vice versa, reflecting the very unstable capital market of the
time. Across all periods, the main financial centers, the U.K. and U. S., show
relatively low speeds of convergence, as expected. After 1974, Norway shows
a very sustainable deficit, a well-known consequence of oil discoveries.
    We might also ponder to what extent the variety of country experience
indicated by bEcM and &cM can help us understand the fluctuations in the
bcs (or b~~) measure of long-run capital mobility discussed earlier in this
paper. In a tritial sense, the long-run is just a concatenation of short-runs, so
although the methodologi~      may have different natural interpretations they
may helpfully inform each other. A natural qu=tion to ask is whether the
savings-retention coefficient differs in the long and short run. For example,
in the ten-country sample, the average value of bEcM in Table 5, averaged
across countries, by period, is as shown in Table 6: rising from 0.48 before
1914 to 0,59 in the inter-war period, and continuing to rise to 0.61 during
Bretton Woods and to 0.69 in the recent float. Looking at #cM we see an
initial rise in the inter-war period from 0.28 to 0.47, then a leveling off after
1946 at 0.55, falling after 1974 to 0.39.
    We may view these coefficient populations u a draw from a heterogeneous
panel of countries and examine the distribution of coefficients for any changes
across sampl~, Obviously, it cannot be argued that any subsequent period
has improved on the degree of capital mobility seen before 1914. The short-
run pass-through coefficient bEcM is always higher in later periods. However,
in terms of sustainability of capital flows measured by &cM, some improve-
ment is seen after the setbacks of the inter-war period. The half-life duration
is cut almost in half after 1914, but by the 1970s and 1980s it is rising once
again.
    The findings are fairly consistent with the conventional wisdom: capital
mobility h= changed little over the long run, but suffered a setback in the
inter-war period. If this bears any relation at all to average long-run capital
mobility in the ten countries we wotid have some framework for interpreting
the cross-sectional results: the constacy   of bcs over time may not reflect so


                                       24
much a lack of global capital market integration, but the sometime entrance
and departure of various countries from the “club” of well-integrated coun-
tries, as evidenced by the very different paths taken by bEcM and &cM in
different countries. Here, then, the time-series results offer some perspective
on the evolving segmentation in the world capital market, and possibly some
insight into the “puzzling” persistence of a high bcs over time.
     Another averaging experiment produces another reasonable r~tit, where
we view the coefficients as a draw from a heterogeneous panel of countries,
The average value of b‘H from Table 3 is about 0.7 for the sample over all
periods (0.70 for lo-year periods in the top panel; 0.69 for 5-year periods
in the bottom panel); the average value of bEcM from Table 6 is about 0.6
for the sample over all periods (0.59 for for the four subperiods).    By this
reckoning, the average “long-m   savings-retention” coefficient (O.7) has been
higher than the “short-run savings-retention” coefficient (0.6) over the last
century or more, suggesting a plausible interpretation: that capital mobility
has always been greater in the short run than in the long. Such is a result we
would expect given the shorter time-horizon and commensurately lower costs
and risks of temporary shifts in national =sets across national boundaries,
and also given the likelihood that borrowing constraints bind less severely
in an “incremental fashion” in the short run (for example, the need for a
temporary funding facility through a current account deficit to deal with
transitory circumstances) compared with the manner in which they bind in
the full portfolio sense in the long run (as in the persistent running of current
account imbalances entailing a structural shift asset distribution). This view
also accords with conventional wisdom, and the view that “hot money” flows
of short-term capital have always been more mobile than the “cold-money”
flows of long-term capital.



6     Conclusion
This study has presented a number of new r=ults using one widely applied
criterion for short- and long-run capital mobility, the Feldstein-Horioka test.
The results offer some support for the conventional qualitative accounts of
long-run developments in the international capital market. In cross section,
the results show a marked tightening of the saving-investment correlation in
periods of global economic crisis, symptomatic of diminishing capital mobility
in such periods. In time series the r~dts show considerable heterogeneity


                                       25
in individual country experience that warrants further study. The study
advances debate by refining our “yardstick” of measurement for the Feldstein-
Horioka coefficient; since the coefficient embodies no absolute standard, its
interpretation must rest on comparative studies of the coefficient and its
variation across time and space. Thus, the estimates of cross-section and
time-series (error-correction) coefficients for a ten-country sample over almost
150 years offer a sounder basis for historical interpretation                     of the long-run
evolution of international capital mobility.
    Nonetheless, the work offers scope for further research to address remain-
ing concerns, some of them intrinsic to the Feldstein-Horioka methodology,
some of them a consequence of the incompleteness of our historical data
sources. Concerning data, much remains to be explored in further work, It
would be desirable to extend the sample to more countri=, say 15 or 20 in
total, and a more detailed examination of other national accounts data might
yield further sample points, although the mtimum                        cross-section     sample of
currently reliable time-series sources before 1914 is almost surely bonded
below 20. In addition, the cross-section heterogeneity will prompt a search
for additional control variables. Such work is planned for the future.
    For the present the results offer a consistent qumtitative perspective on
the long-run evolution of international capital market integration in the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries, For interpretative purposes I have been strict
on the structure of the analysis: for meaningful results, care has to be taken to
gather data in a uniform way over time for all countries, and apply exactly
the same methodology over time and space in the estimations.            We have
previously      seen various cross-section           “snapshots”     of the saving-investment
correlations: for example, in the studies of Obstfeld (1986; 1994), Bayoumi
(1989), Zevin (1992), and Eichengreen (1990). We have also seen various
studies that have used individual country time-series over the very long run,
as in Frankel’s (1992) study of United States experience. Others, like Zevin
(1992), have appropriated these quantity-b=ed       criteria and melded them
with price-based criteria for market integration. 12

   12To complement    the present paper, then, extensive use of price criteria           would be a
desirable direction for r=arch on the period ad countriescovered her~but    the difficu-
ltiesMe considerable. As Obstfeld (1994) not=, the price approach requiresthe study of
identicalfinancialinstrumentsin differentmarkets(e.g., the offshor~onshore price differ-
ential); in contrwt, the study of othernon-commensurateassetprices,such as bonds prices
or inter~t rat=, cm be wholly misleading. The historical use of asset price criteria for
international   capital   market   integration   h= been limited,   but successful,   where the data



                                                   26
    Presently, the quantity-based    criteria remain a staple approach for histor-
ical studies, and, as this paper tries to show, might still reveal provocative
insights. The findings also have broader implications for the debate over
globalization and convergence (Williamson 1996). Abrarnovitz (1986) and
Baumol (1986) noted the long-run patterns of convergence in income per
capita in a cross-section of countries, using the historical national income
data of Maddison (1991 and his previous studies). Abramovitz noted that
not only technological convergence, but also “trade and its rivalries” might
have played a part in this historical convergence process, the latter including
factor mobility. The convergence findings were corroborated by Williamson
(1995) for real wages, and these patterm maybe linked to the evolution and
integration of global labor and commodity markets (see Williamson 1996).
Of course, there may be substantial complementaritiea between labor and
capital mobility, as in the theory of factor price convergence, and as histori-
cal experience shows (0’ Rourke, Taylor, and Williamson 1996).
    The pr-ent paper complements a larger literature on factor mobility, and
can help us gauge the importance long-run capital mobility to the historical
convergence process. The inter-war period, and the Great Depression in par-
ticular, are highlighted = a major structural shift in capital mobility, as other
studies b~ed on interest rate deviations, saving-inv~tment        correlations, and
other qumtitative criteria are beginning to suggest. 13




permitted(Neal 1990). But the collectionof a 120-yearpaneldata set on offshore-onshore
pric~ for 10 or more countriesremainsa distanttarget.
  13See Eichengreen(1990); Lothian (1995); Taylor (1996); Obatfeldand Taylor (1996).


                                         27
Data Appendix
The   data   used   in the   paper   consists   of annual   saving    and   investment    rates    for
each of the 12 countries      in the sample.    Data   ww collected     for every   available     year
between 1850 and 1992. The data is shown in Appendix Tables 1 and 2, with the
following abbreviations used for each country:
      ARG      Argentina
      AUS      Australia
      CAN      Canada
      DNK Denmark
      FRA      France
      DEU Germany
      ITA      Italy
      JPN      Japan
      NOR Norway
      SWE Sweden
      GBR      United Kingdom
      USA      United States
     1850-1914: The investment rate measure (1/Y)~ is the ratio of gross invest-
ment It to national income Yt at current local prices; the saving rate (S/ Y)~
was usually calculated implicitly, via the current account identity, as the invest-
ment rate (1/ Y)t plus the ratio of the current account CAt to national income:
(l/Y)t = lt/~, (S/Y)t = (lt/~) + (CAt/~).        Except ss otherwise indicated this
data is taken from Jones and Obstfeld (1994), who revised the standard sources
to correct for flows of gold and changes in stocks.
     1915–1959: The investment and saving rates are defines as above: saving rates
are still calculated residually from the current account. Except as otherwise indi-
cated this data is taken from Mitchell (1983,1992) using his national income and
overall current balance series at current prices. The overall current balance series
are converted from U.S dollars using his exchange rate series as necessary.
     1960-1992: Estimates of gross domestic saving, gross domestic investment, and
gross domestic saving at current prices from World Bank (1994).


Argentina

1885-1913: Nominal investment constructed from Di Tella and Zymelman’s (1967)
real investment index and Della Paolera’s (1988) price level, linked to the IEERAL
(1986) value for 1913. Nominal income from Della Pmlera’s (1988) output index
and price level, linked to the IEERAL (1986) value for 1913 (similar results obtain
using Cort6s Conde’s (1994) estimates). Exports, imports, and debt service from
Williams (1920), Ford (1962), and Della Paolera (1988) in gold pesos, converted to


                                                28
paper pesos using Della Paolera’s (1988) price series. Missing data on debt service
for 1892–94 approximated at total balance of borrowings according to Williams
plus $7 million gold pesos, the approximate annual new borrowings (very small)
in the Baring crisis years 1891–95. Missing data on debt service between Williams’
1900 and Ford’s 1912 observations (the latter from Phelps 1938)) is approximated
by interpolation along an exponential trend, since there were no defaults in this
period, and debt probably grew relatively smoothly.
    1914–59: Inv-tment, and the current account (exports and imports) in current
prices from IEERAL (1986).


Australia

1861-1988: Derived from the previously compiled estimates of N. Butlin (1962),
M. Butlin (1977), and McLean (1994), as described in Taylor and Williamson
(1994).


Canada

1870–1984: Investment rate and residually-calculated saving rate from Urquhart
(1988).


France

1922–38: The overall current balance is taken from Mitchell, but is converted
from gold francs to (current) paper france using series on the value of the franc
relative to parity taken from the League of Nations, Annuaire Statistigue (various
issues).    The investment   share   of national    income   is taken   from Carr4,   Dubois,   and
Malinvaud      (1975).


Germany

1925-35, 1950-59: Based on Mitchell, but refers to West Germany only after 1945.
Before 1945, Mitchell gives data on net capital formation. This is inflated to an
approximation of gTosscapital formation using an assumed capital-output ratio of
3 and an sssumed depreciation rate of 3%.




                                                   29
References
Abramovitz, M. “Catching Up, Forging Ahead, and Falling Behind,”           Journal     of
Economic History 46 (June 1986): 385-406.
Abramovitz, M., and P. A. David. “Reinterpreting American Economic Growth:
Parables and Realities.” American Economic Review 63 (May 1973): 428-37.
Baumol, W. “Productivity Growth, Convergence and Welfare: What the Long-
Run Data Show.” Ametican Economic Review 76 (December 1986): 1072-85.
Bayoumi, T. “Saving-Investment Correlations: Immobile Capital, Government
Policy or Endogenous Behavior?” IMF Working Paper no. 89/66, Washington,
D. C., August 1989.
Butlin, M. W. “A Preliminary Annual Database 1900/01 to 1973/74.” Research
Discussion Paper no. 7701, Reserve Bank of Australia, Canberra, May 1977.
Butlin, N. G. Australian Domestic Product, Investment and Foreign Borrowing
1861-1 938/39. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962.
Carr6, J.-J., P. Dubois, and P. Malinvaud. fiench Economic Growth. Translated
by John P. Hatfield. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 1975.
Cort6s Conde, R. “Estimaciones del PBI en la Argentina 1875–1935.” Ciclos de
seminmios no. 3/94, Departamento de Economia, Universidad de San Andr6s,
1994.
Crafts, N. F. R. Btitish Economic   Growth during the Industrial   Revolution.       Ox-
ford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
David, P. A. “Invention and Accumulation in America’s Economic Growth: A
Nineteenth-Century Parable.” In International Organization, National Policies
and Economic Development, edited by K. Brunner and A. Metzler. Amsterdam:
North Holland, 1977.
Della Paolera, G. “How the Argentine Economy Performed During the Interna-
tional Gold Standard: A Reexamination.” Ph. D. dissertation, University of
Chicago, December 1988.
Diaz-Alejandro, C. F. Essays on the Economic Histo~     of the Argentine    Republic.
New Haven, Corm.: Yale University Press, 1970.
Di Tella, G., and M. Zymelman. Las etapas del desarrolio econ6miw argentino,
Buenos Aires: Editorial Universitaria de Buenos Aires, 1967.
Dornbusch, R. “Comment on Martin Feldstein and Phillipe Bacchetta.” In Na-
tional Saving and Economic Performance, edited by B. D. Bernheim and J. B.
Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Edelatein, M. Overseas Investment   in the Age of High Imperialism.        New York:


                                       30
Columbia University Press, 1982.
Eichengreen, B. “Trends and Cycles in Foreign Lending.” In Capital Flows in the
World Economy, edited by H. Siebert, Tubingen: Mohr, 1990.
Eichengreen, B. Golden Fetters.   Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Engle, R., and C. Granger. “Cointegration and Error Correction: Representation,
Estimation and Testing.” Econometrics 55 (1987): 251-276.
Feldstein, M., and P. Bacchetta. “National Savings and International Investment .“
In Natzonai Saving and Economic Performance, edited by B, D. Bernheim and J.
B. Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Feldstein, M., and C. Horioka. “Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows.”
Economic Journal 90 (June 1980): 314-29.
Ford, A. G. The Gold Standard,       1880-191~:    Btitain     and Argentina.   Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1962.
Frankel, J. A. “Quantifying International Capital Mobility in the 1980s.” In Na-
tional Saving and Economic Performance, edited by B, D. Bernheim and J. B.
Shoven. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991.
Frankel, J, A. “Messuring International Capital Mobility: A Review,” Ametican
Economic Review 82 (May 1992): 197-202.
Fujiki, H., and Y. Kitamura.      “Feldstein-Horioka Paradoz Revisited.”        Bank of
Japan Moneta~ and Economic        Studies 13 (July 1995): 1-15.
Green, A., and M. C. Urquhart. ‘Factor and Commodity Flows in the Interna-
tional Economy of 1870-1914: A Multi-Country View.” Bank of Japan Monetary
and Economic Studies 36 (March 1976): 217–52.
IEERAL (Instituto de Estudios Econ6micos sobre la Realidad Argentina y Lati-
noamericma). “Estadistic= de la evoluci6n econ6mica de Argentina 1913–1984 ,“
Estudios 9 (July/September 1986): 103-184.
Jansen, W. J., and G. G, Schulm, “Theory-Based Measurement of the Saving-
Investment Correlation with an Application to Norway.” Economic lnqui~ 34
(January 1996): 116-132.
Jones, M. T., and M. Obstfeld. “Saving and Investment Under the Gold Stan-
dard.” University of California at Berkeley, November 1994. Photocopy.
Kindleberger, C. P. The World in Depression,      1929-1939.    Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1986.
King, R. G., and R. Levine. “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth.”            Journal
of Moneta~ Economics 32 (1993): 513–42.
Kose, M. A. “Financial Development and Saving-Investment Correlations.” Uni-



                                         31
versity of Iowa, November 1994. Photocopy.
Kremers, J., N. Ericsson, and J. Dolado. “The Power of Cointegration Tests.”
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 54 (1992): 325-348.
Leachman, L. “Saving, Investment and Capital Mobility among OECD Countries.”
Open Economies Review 2 (1991): 137-63.
Lewis, W. A. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour.”                  The
Manchester School 22 (May 1954): 13%91.
Lothian, J. R. “Capital Market Integration and Exchange-Rate Regimes in His-
torical Perspective.” Fordham University, December 1995. Photocopy.
Maddala, G. S. Econometrics.      New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Maddison, A. Dynamic Forces in Capitalist Development: A Long-Run Comparat-
ive View, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991.
McLean, I. W. ‘(Saving in Settler Economies: Australian and North American
Comparisons.” E~loratzons  in Economic Histo~ 31 (October 1994): 432-52.
Miller, S. “Are Saving and Investment Cointegrated?” Economic            Letters 27 (1988):
31-34.
Mitchell, B, R. International Historical    Statistics:   The Americas    and Australasia.
Detroit: Gale Research, 1983.
Mitchell, B. R. International   Historical Stattitics:    Europe, 1750-1988.    New York:
Stockton Press, 1992.
Neal, L. The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets             in the
Age of Reason. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990.
Obstfeld, M. “Capital Mobility in the World Ronomy: Theory and Me~urement.”
Carnegie-Rochester  Conference Series on Public Policy no. 24, 1986.
Obstfeld, M. “Comment   on Rankel.”  In National Sating and Economic Per-
formance, edited by B. D. Bernheim and J. B. Shoven. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1991.
Obstfeld, M. “International Capital Mobility in the 1990s.” International Finance
Discussion Papers no. 472, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Washington, D. C., June 1994.
Obstfeld, M., and A. M. Taylor. “International Capital Market Integration in the
Long Run: The Great Depression as a Watershed.” University of California at
Berkeley, 1996. Photocopy.
O’Rourke, K. H., A. M. Taylor, and J. G. Williamson. “Fxtor Price Conver-
gence in the Late Nineteenth Century.” International Economic Review (1996).
Forthcoming.



                                            32
Phelps, V. L. The International  Economic Position of Argentina.          Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press, 1938.
Sinn, S. “Saving-Investment Correlations and Capital Mobility: On the Evidence
from Annual Data.” Economic Journal 102 (September 1992): 1171-83.
Summers,   L. H. “Tax Policy   and International   Competitiveness.”   In International
Aspects of Financial   Policies, edited by J. Renkel. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1988.
Taylor, A. M. ‘Xxternal Dependence, Demographic Burdens and Argentine Eco-
nomic Decline After the Belle jpoque.” Journal of Economic History 52 (December
1992): 907-36.
Taylor, A. M. ‘Domestic Saving and International Capital Flows Reconsidered.”
Working Paper Series no. 4892, National Bureau of Economic Research, 1994a.
Taylor, A. M. “Tres fases del crecimiento econ6mico Argentina.” Revista     de Historia
Econ6mica 12 (Fall 1994b): 64%83.
Taylor, A. M. ‘International Capital Mobility in History: Purchasing-Power Parity
in the bng Run. ” Working Paper Series, National Bureau of Economic Research,
August 1996. Forthcoming.
Taylor, A. M., and J. G. Williamson. “capital F1OWSto the New World w an
Intergenerational ~ansfer.” Journal of Political Economy 102 (April 1994): 348-
371.
Temin, P. Lessons from The Great Depression.          Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1989.
Tesar, L. L. “Savings, Investment and International Capital Flows,”          Journal      of
International Economics 31 (August 1991): 55-78.
Urquhart, M. C. “Canadian Economic Growth 1870–1980.” Discussion Paper no.
734, Institute for Economic Research, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, 1988.
Vik@ren, B. “The Saving-Investment Correlation in the Short and in the Long
Run.” Working Paper no. 91/7, Norges Bank, 1991.
Williams, J. H. Argentine International Trade Under Inconvertible Paper Cur-
rency, 1880–1 900. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1920.
Williamson, J. G. “The Evolution of Global Labor Markets since 1830: Background
Evidence and Hypotheses.” Explorations     in Economic History 32 (April 1995):
141-96.
Wllliarnson, J. G. “Globalization, Convergence, and History.”          Journai   of Eco-
mmic His-tory 56 (June 1996): 277–306.
World Bank. World Data 1994: World Bank Indicators           on CD-ROM.   Washington,
D. C.: The World Bank, 1994,


                                            33
Zevin, R. B. “Are World Financial Markets More Open? If So, Why and With
What Effects?” In Financial Openness and National Autonomy : Opportunities
and Constraints, edited by T. Banuri and J. B. Schor. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1992.




                                     34
Table 1
Current Account Relatlve to GDP:
Summary Statistics

Period                        N              Variance(C~)              Mean(lC~l)
1870-1874                    10                   .00148                   .02951
1875-1879                    10                   .00102                   .02662
1880-1884                    10                   .00154                   .03220
1885-1889                    12                   .00324                   .04581
1890-1894                    12                   .00173                   .03442
1895-1899                    12                   .00108                   .03236
1900-1904                    12                   .00077                   .02569
1905-1909                    12                   .00160                   .03501
1910-1914                    12                   .00262                   .03786
1915-1919                     9                   .00415                   .05539
1920-1924                    11                   .00202                   .03973
1925-1929                    12                   .00118                   .02461
1930-1934                    12                   .00013                   .01710
1935-1939                    12                   .00022                   .01414
1940-1944                     9                   .00160                   .03097
1945-1949                    11                   .00125                   .03427
1950-1954                    12                   .00010                   .01770
1955-1959                    12                   .00024                   .01551
1960-1964                    12                   .00021                   .01345
1965-1969                    12                   .00022                   .01327
1970-1974                    12                   .00016                   .01402
1975-1979                    12                   .00044                   .01878
1980-1984                    12                   .00058                   .01958
1985-1989                    12                   .00056                   .02316

Notes:
Mean and variance calculated for cross section in each period. See text.
Sources:
See data appendix.
Table 2
Samples and Unit Root Tests

                                                                Dickey-Fuller t
Country          Obsewations                                  s/Y     l/Y    cm
Argentina        1885-1992                                    -3.02   -1.98   -4.66
Australia        1861-1992                                    -3.15       -3.57   -5.89
Canada           1870-1992                                    -2.54       -2.26   -2.70
Denmark          1874-1914, 1921-1992                         -1.89       -1.99   -3.92
France           1850-1913, 1922-1938,     1949-1992          -2.06       -2.19   -5.55
Germany          1860-1913,   1925-1935,   1950-1992          -1.57       -2.25   -4.01
Italy            1861-1992                                    -3.05       -3.29   -3.64
Japan            1885-1944,   1946-1992                       -1.60       -1.58   -4.53
Norway           1865-1939,   1946-1992                       -2.57       -2.67   -4.10
Sweden           1861-1992                                    -2.70       -2.23   -4.79
U.K.             1850-1992                                    -3.31       -2.52   -3.24
U.S.A.           1874-1992                                    -2.66       -2.53   -3.05

Notes and sources:
See text. The critical values for the Dickey-Fuller t-test when N=l 00:
        p=o.lo             t = -2.58
        p = 0.05           t = -2.89
        p = 0.01           t = -3.51

Sources:
See data appendix.
Table 3
Feldstein-Horloka   and Related Tests

                                           (IN)   =                 (s/Y) =
                                        a+ b(S/Y)+e              a+ b(l~)+e
                      N          R sq.    b       t       se       b       se
1860-1869             8             .02   0.12    0.40    0.31     0,02    0.52
1870-1879            10             .36   0.60    2,12    0.28     0.36    0.28
1880-1889            11             .14   0.38    1.25    0.31     0,14    0.31
1890-1899            12             .60   0.58    3.89    0.15     0.60    0.26
1900-1909            12             .43   0.72    2,78    0.26    0.43     0.22
1910-1919            12             .58   0.72     3.73   0.19    0.58     0.22
1920-1929            12             .44   0.48     2.83   0.17    0.44     0.32
1930-1939            12             .88   0.90     8.91   0.10    0.88     0.11
1940-1949            12             .85   1.02     7.82   0.13    0.85     0.11
1950-1959            12             .94   1.01    13.05   0.08    0.94     0.07
1960-1969            12             .92   0.92    10.75   0.09    0,92     0.09
1970-1979            12             .91   0.92    10.44   0.09    0.91     0.09
1980-1989            12             .79   0.71     6.24   0.11    0.79     0.18
1860-1864             6             .10   0.14     0.67   0.22    0.10     1.03
1865-1869             7             .16   0.26     0.99   0.27    0.16     0.62
1870-1874            10             .24   0.49     1.63   0.31    0.24     0.31
1875-1879            10             .41   0.75     2.38   0.31    0.41    0.23
1880-1884            10             .24   0.52     1.61   0.33    0.24    0.29
1885-1889            12             .14   0.27     1.30   0.21    0.14    0.40
1890-1894            12             .47   0.53     3.02   0.18    0.47    0.30
1895-1899            12             .65   0.64     4.36   0.15    0.65    0.23
1900-1904            12             .61   0.74     3.99   0.19    0.61    0.21
1905-1909            12             .27   0.66     1.93   0.34    0.27    0.21
1910-1914            12             .15   0.72     1.35   0.54    0.15    0.16
1915-1919             9            .75    0.52     4.63   0.11    0.75    0,31
1920-1924            11            .36    0.49     2.28   0.21    0.36    0.33
1925-1929            12            .50    0.47     3.18   0.15    0.50    0.33
1930-1934            12            .93    1.00    11.83   0.08    0.93    0.08
1935-1939            12            .87    0,97     8.26   0.12    0.87    0.11
1940-1944             9            .73    0.62     4.45   0.14    0.73    0.26
1945-1949            11            .78    1.13     5.64   0.20    0.78    0.12
1950-1954            12            .97    1.04    18.64   0.06    0.97    0.05
1955-1959            12            ,90    0.96     9.60   0.10    0.90    0.10
1960-1964            12            .90    0.96     9.68   0.10    0.90    0.10
1965-1969            12            .88    0.88     8.72   0.10    0,88    0.11
1970-1974            12            .94    0.90    12.54   0.07    0.94    0.08
1975-1979            12            .79    0.87     6.14   0.14    0.79    0,15
1980-1984            12            .76    0.69     5.78   0.12    0.76    0.19
1985-1989            12            .70    0.68     4.92   0.14    0.70    0.21
Table 3 (continued)
Feldstein-Horloks     and Related Tests

                               (cm)     =                        Fujiki-Kitamura
                             a+ b(l/Y)+e                           Pooling Test
                    R sq.      b         t     se     F-value                      p-value
1860-1869              .27    -0.78    -1.50   0.52   F(14,48)     =      641.05       .00
1870-1879              .20    -0.40    -1.43   0.28   F(18,72)     =       12.59       .00
1880-1889              .31    -0.61    -2.02   0.31   F(20,88)     =       46.31       .00
1890-1899              .00     0.02     0.10   0.26   F(20,98)     =       15.48       .00
1900-1909              .25    -0.40    -1.86   0.22   F(20,98) =           16.96       .00
1910-1919              .07    -0.19    -0.91   0.22   F(20,81 ) =           7.04       .00
1920-1929              .00    -0.08    -0.27   0.32   F(20,90) =            9.91       .00
1930-1939              .00    -0.01    -0.14   0.11   F(20,93) =            5.73       .00
1940-1949              .18    -0.16    -1.52   0.11   F(l 7,75)=            9.94       .00
1950-1959              .08    -0.06    -0.94   0.07   F(20,98) =           10.88       .00
1960-1969              ,00     0.00    -0.08   0.09   F(20,98) =            8.16       .00
1970-1979              .00     0.00    -0.10   0.09   F(20,98) =            7.70       .00
1980-1989              .04     0.11     0.65   0.18   F(20,98) =            9.91       .00
1860-1864              .02    -0.30    -0.29   1.03   F(l 2,15)=          225.63       .00
1865-1869              .07    -0.38    -0.62   0.62   F(l 4,21)=          465.84       .00
1870-1874              .25    -0.50    -1.63   0.31   F(l 7,24)=            7.99       .00
1875-1879              .31    -0.44    -1.92   0.23   F(l 8,30)=           19.06       .00
1880-1884              .29    -0.53    -1.83   0.29   F(l 8,30)=           35.79       .00
1885-1889              .12    -0.47    -1.19   0.40   F(20,38) =           57.74       .00
1890-1894              .01    -0.10    -0.34   0.30   F(20,38) =            9.98       .00
1895-1899              .00     0.01     0.07   0.23   F(20,38) =           12,00       .00
1900-1904              .06    -0.17    -0.82   0.21   F(20,38) =           17,56       .00
1905-1909              .43    -0.58    -2,76   0.21   F(20,38) =           20.50       .00
1910-1914              .71    -0.78    -4.98   0.16   F(20,36) =           31.45       .00
1915-1919              .21     0.43     1.40   0.31   F(14,29) =            8.20       .00
1920-1924              .06    -0.25   -0.76    0.33   F(18,32) =            5.77       .00
1925-1929              .00     0.05    0.15    0.33   F(20,38) =           11.61       .00
1930-1934              .06    -0.06   -0.85    0.08   F(20,38) =            8.21       .00
1935-1939              .08    -Omlo   -0.97    0.11   F(l 9,34)=            5.36       ,00
1940-1944              .06     0.17    0.66    0.26   F(14,29) =            6,01       .00
1945-1949              .41    -0.30   -2.53    0.12   F(I 7,30)=            9.30       .00
1950-1954              .17    -0.07   -1.46    0.05   F(20,38)   =          6.19       ,00
1955-1959              .04    -0.06   -0.68    0.10   F(20,38)   =          9.11       .00
1960-1964              .04    -0.06   -0.68    0.10   F(20,38)   =          4.69       .00
1965-1969              .00     0.00    0.01    0.11   F(20,38)   =          9.36       .00
1970-1974              .01     0.03    0.41    0.08   F(20,38)   =          2.59       .01
1975-1979              ,04    -0.09   -0.65    0.15   F(20,38)   =          6.90       .00
1980-1984             .03      0.11    0.58    0.19   F(20,38)   =          5,99       .00
1985-1989             .00      0.02    0.14    0.21   F(20,38)   =         10.41       .00

Notesandsources:
Seetext anddata appendix.
Table 4
Sinn’s Cross-Section       Coefflclent

Year         b     se.       (N)     Year      b      se.      (N)    Year       b      s,e.     (N)
1860        0.63    0.50     (3)       1905   0.31     0.25    [12)     1950     1.04    0,13    (12)
1861        0.43    0.22     (6j       1906   0.55     0.24    (12j     1951    0.77     0.06    (12)
1862        0.21    0.16     (6)       1907   0.32     0.39    (12)     1952    0.79     0.23    (12)
1863        0.17    0.25     (6)       1908   1.02     0.31    (12)     1953    1.03     0.15    (12)
1864       -0.02    0.23     (6)       1909   0.85     0.36    (12)     1954    1.17     0.09    (12)
1865        0.10    0.19     (7)       1910   0.83     0.47    (12)     1955    0.93     0.13    (12)
1866        0.07    0.17     (7)       1911   0.25     0.40    (12)     1956    0.91     0.10    (12)
1867        0.58    0.31     (7)       1912   0.67     0.54    (12)     1957    0.88     0.13    (12)
1868        0.74    0.22     (7)       1913   0.48     0.40    (12)     1958    0.97     0.15    (12)
1869        0.28    0.24    (7)        1914   0.25     0,80   (10)      1959    0.94     0.11    (12)
1870       -0.16    0.31    (8)        1915   0.43     0.17   (9)       1960    0.86     0.11    (12)
1871       -0.19    0.31    (8)        1916   0,48     0.10   (9)       1961    0.92     0.13    (12)
1872        0.16    0.36    (8)        1917   0.45     0.10   (9)       1962    0.97     0.10    (12)
1873       -0.15    0.36    (8)        1918   0.45     0.09   (9)       1963    1.07     0.10    (12)
1874        0.36    0.24    (1 O)      1919   0.75     0.18   (9)       1964    0,91     0.14    (12)
1875        0.51    0.44    (1 o)      1920   0.60     0.29   (9)       1965    0,85     0.15    (12)
1876        0.82    0.26    (10)       1921   0.50     0.23   (10)      1966    0.90     0.16    (12)
1877        0.61    0.29    (10)       1922   0.52     0.20   (11)      1967    0.93     0.14    (12)
1878        0.54    0.30    (lo)       1923   0.30     0.18   (11)      1968    0.87     0.09    (12)
1879        0.90    0.27    (10)       1924   0.62     0.21   (11)      1969    0.85     0.07    (12)
1880        0.77    0.19    (lo)       1925   0.41     0.13   (12)      1970    0.91     0.08   (12)
1881        0.85    0.33    (1 o)      1926   0.31     0.10   (12)      1971    0.89     0.10   (12)
1882        0.35    0.28    (1 O)      1927   0.42     0.18   (12)      1972    0.83     0,06   (12)
1883        0.53    0.34    (1o)       1928   1.11     0.19   (12)      1973    0.94     0,12   (12)
1884        0.35    0.30    (lo)       1929   0.61     0.22   (12)      1974    0.91     0.15   (12)
1885        0.19    0.25    (12)        930   0.60     0.18   (12)       975    1.00     0.17   (12)
1886        0.25    0.26    (12)        931   1.07     0.16   (12)       976    0.79     0.20   (12)
1887        0.48    0.22    (12)        932   0.81     0,16   (12)       977    0.78     0.22   (12)
1888        0.28    0.22    (12)        933   0.92     0.07   (12)       978    0.78     0.11   (12)
1889        0.23    0.15    (12)        934   0.96     0.11   (12)       979    0.79     0.09   (12)
1890        0.07    0.14    (12)        935   0.97     0.12   (12)       980    0,76     0.13   (12)
1891        0.83    0.27    (12)        936   0.80     0.14   (11)       981    0,75     0.16   (12)
1892        0.70    0.19    (12)       1937   0.84     0.17   (11)      1982    0.74     0.11   (12)
1893        0.61    0.15    (12)       1938   0.93     0.09   (11)      1983    0.62     0.12   (12)
1894        0.55    0.13    (12)       1939   0.90     0.12   (lo)      1984    0.53     0.12   (12)
1895        0.62    0.14    (12)       1940   0.51     0.14   (9)       1985    0.49     0.15   (12)
1896        0.57    0.16    (12)       1941   0.47     0.14   (9)       1986    0.70     0.18   (12)
1897        0.60    0.13    (12)       1942   0.65     0.13   (9)       1987    0.69     0.15   (12)
1898        0.57    0.17    (12)       1943   0.68     0.13   (9)       1988    0.69     0.17   (12)
1899        0.71    0.22    (12)       194    0.69     0.15   (9)       1989    0.65     0.19   (12)
1900        0.70    0.14    (12)       1945   0.49     0.10   (8)       1990    0.67     0.19   (12)
1901        0.70    0.18    (12)       1946   0.83     0.33   (lo)      1991    0.65     0.14   (12)
1902        0.78    0.20    (12)       1947   1.27     0.28   (10)      1992    0.59     0.14   (12)
1903        0.83    0.19    (12)       1948   1.11     0.10   (lo)
1904        0.66    0.21    (12j       1949   1.11     0.15   (11)

Notes and Sources:
b is the estimated coefficient, se. is the standard error, and N is the sample size.
1850-1859 omitted, since N=2 before 1860. See teti and data appendix.
Table 5
Error Correction   Model of Saving-Investment   Relationship

                              T    R sq.              b                       d      RI R2 R3 R4
Araentina   1880-1913        28     .12       :.02   -0.06        ;.16       -0.18   ,00 .35 ,29 .00
                                            (1 .38) (0.84)      (1 .32)    (1 .45)
Argentina   1914-1945        32     .19       0.03   -0.05        0.25       -0.29   .00   .10   .05
                                            (2.08)  (0.98)      (1 .86)    (2.13)
Argentina   1946-1971        26     .59       0.03    0.55        0,43       -0.15   .00   .03   ,00
                                            (1 .50) (4.90)      (2.87)     (1 .56)
Argentina   1972-1992        21     .40       0.00    0.56        0.38       -0.06   .03   .24   .01
                                            (0.18)  (3.18)      (1 .68)    (0.60)
Australia   1880-1913        34     .61       0.01    0.58        0.16       -0.05   .00   .26   .00   .00
                                           (0.81)   (5.95)      (1 .51)    (0.41)
Australia   1914-1945        32     .48      -Omol    0.63        0.70        0.19   .00   .00   .00
                                            (0.42)  (3.80)      (4.07)     (1 .26)
Australia   1946-1971        26     .81       0.07   -0.11        0.89      -0.25    .00   .00   .11
                                            (2.25)  (0.65)     (7.74)      (1 .87)
Australia   1972-1992        21     .59       0,04    0.88        0.60      -0.14    .23   .05   .00
                                           (0.83)   (3.74)     (2.57)     (0.73)
Canada      1880-1913        34     .62      -0.01    0.85        0.08        0.16   .00   .04   .00   .00
                                           (1 .32)  (6.74)     (1 .09)    (2.68)
Canada      1914-1945       32      .63      -0.02    0.49        0.39        0.09   .00   .00   .00
                                           (1 .10)  (4.30)     (5.27)     (0,79)
Canada      1946-1971       26      .64       0.04    0.29        0.38      -0.14    .00   .00   .01
                                           (1 .37)  (2.03)     (4.50)     (1 .09)
Canada      1972-1992       21      .39       0.02    0.67        0.32      -0.08    .03   .35   .02
                                           (0.60)   (2.98)     (1 .40)    (0.51 )
Denmark     1880-1913       34      .30       0.01    0.22        0.46        0.06   .00   ,00   .34   .00
                                           (0.59)   (1 .41)    (3.56)     (0.92)
Denmark     1914-1945       25      .31       0.05    0.33        0.72      -0.32    .41   .03   .07
                                           (1.20)   (1 .55)    (2.90)     (1.29)
Denmark     1946-1971       26      .79       0.13    0.48        1,07      -0.48    .70   .00   .00
                                           (6.52)   (4.20)     (7.33)     (6.07)
Denmark     1972-1992       21      .25      -0.01    0.73        0.06        0,01   .00   ,91   .15
                                           (0.19)   (1 .94)    (0.37)     (0.06)
France      188&1913        34      .60       0,08    0.35        0.52      -0,56    .00   .00   .00   .00
                                           (3.99)   (3.34)     (3.82)     (3.99)
France      1914-1945       16      .82      -0.02    0.76        0.07        0.13   .00   .20   ,00
                                           (0.87)   (5.98)     (0.36)     (0.84)
France      1946-1971       22      .45       0.01    0.39        0.44      -0.05    .01   .01   .02
                                           (0.22)   (2.44)     (2.86)     (0.24)
France      1972–1992       21      .68       0.01    0.67       0.95       -0.04    .40   .01   .02
                                           (0.38)   (2.46)     (3.36)     (0.50)
Germany     1880-1913       34      .88      -0.02    0.93       0,69         0.04   ,05   .00   ,00   .00
                                           (2.21) (13.07)      (4.18)     (0.75)
Germany     1914-1945       10      .98      -0.06    1.43        1.61        0.41   .08   .00   .00
                                           (3.61) (14.86)      (6.19)     (3.54)
Germany     1946-1971       21      .80      -0.05    1.07       0.69         0.12   .24   .00   .00
                                           (1 .93)  (6.75)     (3.77)     (1 .31)
Germany     1972-1992       21      .56       0.03    0.64       0.18       -0.15    .00   .38   .00
                                           (1.04)   (3,14)     (1 .30)    (1 .24)
Table 5 (continued)
Error CorrectIon Model of Saving-investment    Relatlonshlp

                            T    R sq.               b                      d      RI    R2    R3 R4
Italv
    .       1880-1913      34     .93      -:.01     0.93       ;.15        0.06   .00   .07   .00 .00
                                          (1.16) (17.15)      (1 .29)    (1.02)
Italy       1914-1945      32     .74       0.05     0.66       0.56       -0.31   .00   .00   .00
                                          (3.61)   (8.17)     (3.39)     (3.84)
Italy       1946-1971      26     .90      -0.01     1.05       0.56        0.02   .00   .00   .00
                                          (0.25)   (8.82)     (3.56)     (0.1 7)
Italy       1972-1992      21     .56      -0.02     1.18       0.68        0.10   .39   .03   .03
                                          (0.50)   (2.97)     (2.93)     (0.55)
Japan       1880-1913      28     .19       0.06     0.03       0.30       -0.35   .00   .08   .09   .00
                                          (2.25)   (0.20)     (1 ,88)    (2,09)
Japan       1914-1945      31     .66       0.01     0,58       0.20       -0.03   .00   .16   .00
                                          (0.37)   (6.70)     (1 .63)    (0.39)
Japan       1946-1971      25     .76                                       0.00   .07   .04   .00
                                          (:4%      (;.4       (:3       (0.10)
Japan       1972–1 992     21     .64      -0.06      0.94       0.37       0.17   .00   .03   ,01
                                          (1 .89)   (3.60)    (2.09)     (1 .70)
Norway      188&1913       34     .18       0.00      0.25       0.10       0.00   .00   .25   ,15   .00
                                          (0.15)    (1 .98)   (1 .05)    (0.03)
Norway      1914-1945      26     .71      -0.02      0.71       0.39       0.13   .01   .01   .00
                                          (0.54)    (4.83)    (1 .92)    (0,71)
Norway      1946-1971      25     .58       0.08      0.72       0.51     -0.22    .05   .04   .00
                                          (1 .52)   (4.05)    (2.60)     (1 .37)
Norway      1972-1992      21     .22      -0.08     -0.36       0.02       0.25   .00   .48   .27
                                          (0.91)    (1 .24)   (0.18)    (0.82)
Sweden      1880-1913      34     .52       0.02      0.39       0.31     -0,10    .00   .03   .00   .10
                                          (1.64)    (4.52)    (2.47)    (1 .16)
Sweden      1914-1945      32     .72       0.02      0.37       0.30     -0.12    .00   .04   .00
                                          (1 .48)   (8.00)    (2.46)    (1 .55)
Sweden      1946-1971      26     .37       0.02      0.44       0.53     -0.10    .03   .02   .01
                                          (1 .02)   (3.09)    (3.00)    (0.98)
Sweden      1972-1992      21     .52      -0.02      0.58       0.54       0.06   .02   .03   .10
                                          (0.52)    (2.20)    (2.54)    (0.36)
U.K.        188&1913      34      .92       0.08      0.58       0.36     -0.76    .00   .00   .00   .00
                                          (5.12)    (6.28)    (4.35)    (5.48)
U.K.        1914-1945      32     .65       0.01      0.30       0,19     -0.08    .00   ,04   .00
                                          (1 .24)   (6.71)    (1.98)    (1.11)
U.K.        1946-1971     26      .59       0.03      0.27       0.19     -0.14    .00   .09   .01
                                          (2.52)    (1 .66)   (0.91)    (2.32)
U.K.        1972-1992     21      .33       0.03      0.67       0.34     -0.17    .01   .21   .07
                                          (0.74)    (2.25)    (1 .86)   (0.69)
U.S.A.      1880-1913     34      .51       0.01      0.68       0.09     -0.03    .00   .54   .00   .05
                                          (0.41)    (5.55)    (1.1 1)   (0.45)
U.S.A.      1914-1945     32      .94       0.01      0.92       0.25     -0.07    .00   .07   .00
                                          (1 .30) (18.54)     (2.20)    (1 .99)
U.S.A.      1946-1971     26      .94                                       0.00   .01   .02   .00
                                          (:0:   (1 :g        (;;       (0,05)
U.S.A.      1972-1992     21      .81       0,01     1.09       0.19      -0.03    .00   .40   .00
                                          (0.44)   (7.98)     (1.31)    (0.30)

Notes:
See text and appendix.
Table 6
Error Correction Model of Savlng-lnvestment    Relationship:
Pass Through and Adjustment Spaeds

                         b                b             b                b
Country        1880-1913      1914-1945       1946-1971        1972–1992
Argentina            -0.06        -0.05              0.55             0.56
Australia             0.58         0.63             -0.11             0.88
Canada                0.85         0.49              0.29             0.67
Denmark               0.22         0.33              0.48             0.73
France                0.35         0.76              0.39             0.67
Germany               0.93         1.43              1.07             0.64
Italy                 0.93         0.66              1.05             1.18
Japan                 0.03         0.58              1.14             0.94
Norway                0.25         0.71              0.72            -0.36
Sweden                0.39         0.37              0.44             0.58
U.K.                  0.58         0.30              0.27             0.67
U.S.A.                0.68         0.92              0.87             1.09
Average               0,48         0.59              0.60             0.69
s.d.                  0.32         0.35              0.37             0.37

                          c         c                    c                c
Countfy        1880-1913       1914-1945      1946-1971        1972-1992
Argentina             0.16        0.25               0.43             0.38
Australia             0.16        0.70               0.89             0.60
Canada                0.08        0.39               0.38             0.32
Denmark               0.46        0.72               1.07             0.06
France                0.52        0.07               0.44             0.95
Germany               0.69        1.61               0.69             0.18
italy                 0.15        0.56               0.56             0.68
Japan                 0.30        0.20               0.54             0.37
Norway                0.10        0.39               0.51             0.02
Sweden                0.31        0.30               0.53             0.54
U.K.                 0.36         0.19               0.19             0.34
U.S.A.               0.09         0.25               0.52             0.19
Average              0.28         0.47               0.56             0.39
s.d. -               0.19         0.39               0.22            0.26
CA half-life            1.8        1.1                0.9               1.3

Notes:
See text.

Source:
Table 5.
Appendix Table 1
Saving Rates

        ARG     AUS    CAN     DNK    FRA    DEU    ITA    JPN NOR       SWE    GBR    USA
1850       ——             —      —    ,150     —     —      ——             —    .095     —
1851       ——             —     —     .161     —     —      ——             —    .100     —
1852       ——             —     —     .157     —     —      ——             —    .115     —
1853       ——             —     —     .153     —     —       ——            —    .105     —
1854       ——             —     —     .157     —     —       ——            —    .104     —
1855       ——             —     —     .133     —     —       ——            —    .114     —
1856       ——             —     —     .153     —     —      ——             —    .111     —
1857       ——             —     —     .176     —     —      ——             —    .095     —
1858       ——             —     —     .182     —     —      ——             —    .110     —
1859       ——             —     —     .177     —     —      ——             —    .125     —
1860       ——             —     —     .168   .122    —       ——            —    .096     —
1661       —  .069        —     —     .113   .072   .032    ——           .027   .100     —
1862      —     .014      —     —     .166   .123   .074    ——           .077   .101     —
1863      —     .055      —     —     .170   .135   .054    ——           .074   .137     —
1864      —     .069      —     —     .174   .112   .061    ——           .084   .127     —
1865      —     .054      —     —     .181   .096   .075    —   .110     .077   ,149     —
1866      —     .035      —     —     ,167   .094   .080    —     .114   .076   .134     —
1867      —     .113      —     —     .134   .071   .073    —     .129   .057   .125     —
1868      —     .124      —     —     ,147   .140   .102    —     .113   .014   .116     —
1869      —     .064      —     —     .157   .071   .105    —     .151   .063   .128     —
1870      —     .098    .094    —     .127   .119   .082    —     .149   .119   .158     —
1871      —     .104    .069    —     .086   .104   .105    —     .155   .104   .150     —
1872      —     ,189    .079    —     .162   .154   .088    —     .177   .116   ,152     —
1873      —     .133    .080    —     .155   ,146   .114    —     .184   .102   .164     —
1874      —     .119    .087   .134   .172   .164   .076    —     .173   .102   .198   .213
1875      —     .147    .107   .135   .167   ,134   .100    —     .147   .107   .152   .200
1876      —     .126    .103   .132   .110   .135   .069    —     .175   .092   .125   .199
1877      —     .085    .085   .106   .138   .110   .071    —     .133   .076   .083   .204
1878      —     .107    .077   .117   .099   .115   .095    —     .156   .087   .146   .206
1879      —     .112    .092   .111   .085   .086   .099    —     .153   .087   .069   .206
1080      —     .171    .102   .123   .115   .088   .142    —     .158   .079   .163   .217
1881      —     .137    .088   .107   .138   .104   .069    —     .149   .060   .128   .210
1882      —     .046    .109   .119   .131   .105   .148    —     .176   .063   .123   .202
1883      —     .109    .124   .104   .118   .106   .131    —     .156   .051   .143   .196
1E184     —     .052    .154   .100   .128   .122   .115    —     .153   .052   .148   .198
1885     .059   .041    .089   .096   .120   .121   .113   .117   .143   .036   .125   .200
1886     .005   .069    .074   .126   .109   .120   .144   .134   .150   .057   .139   .203
1887    -.017   .139    .086   ,117   .130   .127   .103   .112   .165   .043   .142   .205
1888    -.020   .083    .089   .090   .121   .137   .122   .147   .172   .063   .131   ,218
1889    -.136   .085    .082   .094   .142   .146   .035   .148   .182   .059   .144   .218
1890    -.149   .080    .059   .119   .139   .148   ,087   .115   .167   .056   .155   .230
1891     .136   .126    .080   .112   .112   .098   .076   .152   .131   .053   .125   .232
1892     .067   .059    .075   .115   .133   .127   .116   .148   .140   .060   ,122   .234
1893    -.039   .074    .077   .112   .134   .125   .069   ,135   .145   .097   .106   .231
1894    -.059   .075    .062   .115   .132   .120   .086   ,153   .136   .083   .135   .228
1895     .031   .00060,076     .122   .154   .116   .098   ,157   .126   .119   .122   .217
1896    -.002   .036    .079   .144   .149   .143   .069   ,141   .118   .141   .134   .224
1897    -.010   .00050.109     .177   ,143   .155   ,149   ,154   .133   .134   ,108   .228
1898     .040   .006    .128   .173   .137   .183   ,121   ,116   .127   .098   .131   .235
1899     .081   .083    .116   .186   .174   .167   .184   .168   .126   .092   .148   .239
Appendix Table 1 (continued)
Saving Rataa

        ARG      AUS    CAN     DNK  FRA      DEU      ITA     JPN    NOR     SWE      GBR      USA
1900    .055     .053    .130   ,172 .167     .157    .189     .131    .125    .100      .112    .238
1901    .059     .112    .152   .177 .150     .126    .148     .155    .104    .089      .135    .236
1902    .082     .149    .157   .188 .156     .116    .182     .138    .110    .079      .120    .231
1903    .003     .090    .170   .201 .148     .145    .161     .131    .105    .110      .118    .227
1904    .080     .164    .162   .186 .164     .159    .169     .074    ,123    .090      .127    .226
1905    .145     .123    .162   .182 .169     .175    .198     .058    .117    .101      .150    .228
1906      .077   .165    .162   .171 .141     .163    .274     .153   .139     .109      .151    .225
1907      .068   .197    .167   .163 .159     .167    .177     .165    ,141    .107      .150    .226
1908      .103   .148    .187   .169 .154     .134     .220    .153   .137     .095      .135    .219
1909      .112   .163    .177   .154 .155     .134     .138    .153    .130    .074      .146    .208
1910      .065   .177    .180   .165 .133     .138     .153    .158   .161     .105      .149    .207
1911      .032   .166    ,164   .163 .128     .152    .186     .171   .165     ,142      .162    .212
1912      .052   .149    ,163   .153 .149     .161    .175     .156   .180     .136      .152    .199
1913      .034   .182    .177   .159 .142     .160    .191     .150   .204     .150      .181    ,195
1914      .193   .165    .162   .202   —        —     .139     .167   .189     .193      .148    .204
1915      .244   .064    .149     ——            —     .019     .205   .247     .238      .023    .165
1916      .101   .097    .144     ——            —    -.103     .272   .294     .321      .054    .183
1917      .060   .067    ,180     ——            —    -.168     .325   .223     .316      .042    .166
1918      ,074   .075    .133     —_            —    -.161     .300   .177     .200    -.021     .088
1919      .127   .082    ,147     ——            —    -.029     .216   .347     .078      .031    .117
1920    -.029    .144    ,135     ——            —     .044    .224    .191     .077     .132     .136
1921    -.097    .150   .138    .176      —     —     .058    .177    .137     .119     .123    .096
1922      .004   .201   .128    .155   .155     —     .123    .181    .134     .154     .122    .131
1923    -.041    .162   .202    .146   .157     —     .169    ,133    .139     .136     .113    .155
1924     .056    .151   .166    ,167   .203     —     .207    .147    .147    .136      .098    .147
1925    -.045    .207   .192    .184   .182   .188    .210    .151    .174    .152      .097    .157
1926    -.044    .120   .189    .181   .213   ,173    .183    .158    .170     .157     .083    ,156
1927     .000    .119   .183    .169   .175   .209    .152    .170    .147    .183      .108    ,150
1928     .113    .151   .198    .165   .193   .206    .188    .158    .159    .155      .111    .131
1929     .083    .127   .177    .190   .197   .161    .162    .178    ,186    .196      .108    .153
1930     .038    .061   ,147    .199   .209   .142    .144    .088    .214    .181      .096    ,124
1931     .138    .096   .138    .187   .162   .071    .164    .064    .162    .140      .067    .062
1932     .167    .113   .091    .163   ,142   .058    .160    .109    .182    .123      .067    .007
1933     .068    .103   .086    .168   .146   .129    .140    .129    .191    .166      .079    .011
1934     .146    .134   .114    .180   .141   .155    .147    .144    .199    .184      .087    .044
1935     .153    .112   .137    .201   ,145   .193    ,194    .160    .217    .178      .098    .087
1936     .171    .121   .168    .184   .142     —     .185    .160    .238    .190      .096    .083
1937     .167    .160   ,180    .196   .136     —     .201    .145    .261    .203      .096    .129
1938     .106    .164   .157    .202   .133    —      .184    .177    .262    .204      .093    .081
1939     .139    .137   .146    .204     —     —      .206    .229    .251    .186      .047    .097
1940     .137    .161   .152    .194     —     —      .150    .210      —     ,157    -.036     .135
1941     .159    .090   .191    .167     —     —      .143    .184      —     .184    -.038     .150
1942     .179    .064   .107    .162     —     —      .093    .168      —     .210    -.022     ,069
1943     .219    ,020   .129    .180     —     —      .041    .209      —     .217    -.031     .030
1944     .184    .095   .080    .159     —     —     -.040    .236      —     .199    -.037     .014
1945     .196    .087   .159    .160     —     —     -.076      —       —     .286    -.052     .028
1946     .206    .169   .177    .128     —     —      .163    .162    .261    .209      .069    .168
1947     ,172    .198   .179    .197     —     —      .211    .202    ,275    .173      .076    .181
1948     .135    .215   .225    .239     —     —      .191    .198    .328    .192      .121    .194
1949     .119    .212   .214    .233   .202    —      .201    .205    .339    .234      .125    .140
Appendix Table 1 (continued)
Seving Ratee

        ARG     AUS    CAN     DNK    FRA     DEU      ITA   JPN     NOR     SWE     GBR     USA
1950     .149   .211   ,191    .234   .239    .219    .212   .205    .370     .220   .151    .182
1951     .171   .282   .180    .261    .270    .240   .218    .222    .369    .219    .104   .176
1952     .147   .171   .215    .254    .241    .246   .169    .218    .346    .198    .144   .149
1953     .190   .255   .205    .272    .229    .239   .185    .210    .312    .217    .149   .137
1954     .160   .247   .205    .249    .250    .248   .196    .215    .320    .210    .150   .139
1955     .151   .217   .203    .250   .268     .267   .215    .208    .268    .200    ,141    .169
1956     .141   .228   .209    .258   .297     .267   .211    .235    .367    .206    .161    .180
1957     .140   .255   .218    .283    .258    .267   .225   .246    .293     .202   .166     .171
1958     ,146   .225   .217    .278   .253     .261   .232    .264   .283     .209   .169    .141
1959     .168   .237   .198    .297    .259    .265   .242    .276   .278     .221   .165    .162
1960     .230   .248   .193    .248    .257    .299   .290   .333    .280     .245   .172    .194
1961     .317   .249   .196    .235   .255     .294   .303   .353    .281     .251   .180    .187
1962     .228   .254   .194    .229   .253     .286   .294   .344    .270     .249   .168    .194
1963     .201   .272   .202    .231   .248     .278   .269   .329    .271     .245   .170    .197
1964     .260   .271   .220    .242   .259     .296   .263   .344    .277     .266   .187    .202
1965     .264   .254   .222    .248   .266    .287    .255   .333    .290    .261    .189    .210
1966     .252   .265   .234    .233   .268     .282   .246   .340    .290     .250   .191    .208
1967     .249   .244   .232    .222   .267     .266   .250   .356    .288     .248   .188    .197
1968     .225   .273   .219    .226   .259    .281    .253   .379    .282     .239   .197    .195
1969     .242   .273   .209    .237   .263    .290    .266   .392    .267     .240   .204    .198
1970     .231   .272   .227    .227   .274    .296    .275   .403    .292     .248   .205    .184
1971     .238   .269   .227    .229   .273    .285    .256   .385    .283     .240   .206    ,193
1972     .236   .276   .218    .254   .274    .280    .248   .378    .284    .234    .185    .195
1973     .235   .263   .230    .242   .281    .282    ,251   .381    .297    .239    .195    .209
1974     .235   .245   .227    .223   ,271    .264    .260   .366    .307    .229    .172    .196
1975     .308   .246   .218    .199   .247    .227    .239   .328    .285    .239    .169    .182
1976     .346   .246   .217    .193   .247    .238    .258   .326    .276    .216    ,192    .187
1977     .333   .223   .214    .192   .246    .233    .260   .325    .256    .186    .206    .193
1978     .308   .242   .211    .193   .245    .237    .264   .326    .276    .185    ,209    .207
1979     .259   ,248   .216    .185   .243    .240    .258   .316    .302    .189    .201    .208
1980     .238   .236   .232    .175   .230    .229    .243   .313    .338    .193    .191    .193
1981     .223   ,238   .228    .162   .209    .217    .228   .319    .335    .179    .180    .204
1982     .243   .204   .229    .167   .200    .218    .224   .307    .322    .170    .175    .176
1983     .247   .221   .211    .180   .197    .223    .225   .298    .326    .193    .173    .168
1984     .226   .221   .202    .197   .196    .228    .227   .308    .348    .213    .171    .184
1985     .235   .221   .198    .199   .195    .231    .221   .315    .324    .209    .182    .172
1986     .193   .221   .193    .211   .207    .247    .225   .318    .259    .211    .164    .162
1987     .199   .233   .193    .208   .203    .244    .217   .318    ,262    .207    .169    .157
1988     .220   .244   .198    .211   .215    .253    .217   .329    .263    .215    .167    .161
1989     .220   .235   .229    .217   .224    .263    .213   .332    ,287    .225    .169    .167
1990     .195   .211   .206    .229   .223    .273    .211   .335    .281    .217    .165    .157
1991     .162   .194   .188    .230   .215    .281    .207   .342    .276    .195    .148    .147
1992     .151   ,190   .181    .228   .209    .280    .196   .336    .256    .183    .137    .148

Sources:
See data appendix.
Appendix Table 2
Investment Rates

        ARG    AUS    CAN    DNK    FRA     DEU     ITA   JPN  NOR      SWE    GBR     USA
1850      ——            —      —     .109     —      —      ——            —     .076     —
1851      ——            —      —     .108     —      —      —      —      —     .083     —
1852      ——            —      —    .117      —      —      —      —      —     .091     —
1853      ——            —      —     .109     —      —      —      —      —     .091     —
1854      ——            —      —     .130     —      —      —      —      —     .091     —
1855      ——            —      —     .117     —      —      —      —      —     .086     —
1856      ——            —      —     .140     —      —      —      —      —     .082     —
1857      ——            —      —     .157     —      —      —      —      —     .070     —
1858      ——            —      —     .141     —      —      —      —      —     .068     —
1859      ——            —      —    .115      —      —      —      —      —     .060     —
1860      ——            —      —    .122    .121     —      —      —      —     .070     —
1861      —  .110       —      —    .117    .071   .074     —      —    .064    .086     —
1862      —    .108     —      —    .139    .121   .104     —      —    .093    .085     —
1863      —    .147     —      —    .133    .133   .088     —      —    .083    .105     —
1864      —    .146     —      —    .124    .110   .114     —      —    .090    .100     —
1865      —    .126     —      —    .129    .094   .124     —    .129   .078    .110     —
1866      —    .111     —      —    .120    .091   .110     —    .134   .092    .092     —
1867      —    .143     —      —    ,115    .068   .092     —    .129   .074    .077     —
1868      —    .154     —      —    ,144    .137   ,114     —    .130   .046    .076     —
1869      —    .122     —      —    .131    .068   .118     —    .121   .088    .081     —
1870      —    .140   .157     —    .102    .114   .092     —    .122   .115    ,110     —
1871      —    .088   .152     —    .092    .097   .089     —    .125   .098    .067     —
1872      —    .163   .174     —    .121    .144   .084     —    .150   .110    .075     —
1873      —    .176   .173     —    .112    .122   .117     —    .169   ,121   .100      —
1874      —    .166   .191   .145   .133    .159   .092     —    .184   .139   .142    .226
1875      —    .206   .188   .146   .120    ,125   .102     —    .182   .136   .109    .211
1876      —    ,177   .166   .137   .098    ,123   .063     —    .170   ,122   .100    .199
1877      —    .178   .141   .125   .120    .097   .078     —    .171   .123   .075    .196
1878      —    .202   .135   .111   .116    .084   .086     —    .157   .114   .128    .193
1879      —    .188   .126   .111   .121    .067   .102     —    .148   .102   .042    .196
1880      —    .200   .137   .111   .15e    .073   .134     —    .147   .098   .139    .199
1881      —    .234   .136   .125   .165    .085   .060     —    .146   .102   .082    .200
1882      —    .166   .173   .131   .154    .081   .142     —    .150   .091   .077    .200
1883      —    .199   .198   .138   .146    .093   ,124     —    .151   .096   .108    .197
1884      —    .168   .222   .142   .147    .098   .123     —    ,147   .108   .097    .201
1885    .112   .193   .157   .133   ,137    .097   .146   .120   .143   .101   .078    .204
1866    .089   .217   .152   .114   .124    .096   .171   .126   .138   .112   .080    .208
1887    .082   .234   .163   .123   .135    .107   .146   .122   .143   .084   .077    .210
1888    .110   .208   .168   .126   .128    .107   .135   .154   .146   .096   .065    .224
1889    .113   .196   .170   .133   .134    .122   .053   ,148   .164   ,105   .086    .227
1890    .159   .199   .144   .135   .137    .131   .104   ,145   .178   ,103   .082    .237
1891    .118   .220   .150   .132   .134    .085   .074   ,140   .172   .080   .077    .237
1892    .071   .137   .139   .130   .136    .120   .110   .136   .163   .082   .080    .240
1893    .069   .108   .135   .132   .134    .111   .085   .138   .163   .092   .067    .236
1894    .063   .121   .115   .131   .140    .096   .087   .164   .164   .089   .102    232
1895    .066   .081   .123   .142   .140    .103   .083   .162   .168   .116   .087    ,220
1896    .076   .119   ,115   .170   .138    .123   .050   .182   .163   .126   .103    ,215
1897    .076   .063   .126   .190   .130    .133   .122   .205   ,176   .131   .083    ,212
1898    .077   .102   .154   .226   .149    .158   .099   .194   .189   .126   .114    ,210
1899    .063   .091   .153   .230   .160    .157   .146   .162   .207   .135   .122    .213
Appendix Teble 2 (continued)
Investment Rates

        ARG     AUS    CAN     DNK    FRA    DEU     ITA     JPN    NOR    SWE     GBR     USA
1900     .082   .094    .155   .218   .160   .145   .174     .162   .187    .133   .094    .216
1901     .079   .131    .182   .201   .136   .114   .119     .153   .176    .120    .125   .218
1902     .079   .182    .186   .216   .135   .102   .145     .132   .168    .117    .106   .215
1903     .076   ,126    .217   .211   .141   .133   .131     ,136   .159    .133   .096    .215
1904    .100    .163    .230   .210   .138   .143   .137     .120   .168    .139    .101   .218
1905    .136    .106    .229   .196   .137   .144   .147     .168   .157    .132   .108    .219
1906    .155    .136    .236   .224   .121   .152   .238     .164   .174    .138   .093    .212
1907    .187    ,165    .259   .222   .147   .163   .170     .169   .192    .138   .074    .216
1908     .145   ,132    .265   .204   .142   .122    .226    .176   .191    ,117   .065    .216
1909     .156   .161    .259   .195   .138   .126    .150    .158   .172    .106   .082    .208
1910    .174    .175    .295   .188   .128   .123    .152    .176   .182    .111   .070    .204
1911    .168    .167    .311   .182   .151   .139   .185     ,193   .205    .132   .075    .209
1912    .127    .168   .341    .191   .156   .153   .180     .180   .211    .128   .066    .197
1913    .127    .216   .328    .193   .147   .144   .186     .172   .204    .142   .088    .165
1914    .100    .193   .270    ,151     —      —    .125    .170    .205    .165   .095    .163
1915    .073    .116   .174      —      —      —    .058    .159    .198    .177   .039    ,125
1916    .071    .164   .153      —      —      —    .018    .168    .210    .217   .030    .122
1917    .067    .102   .147      —      —      —    .037    .211    .242    .222   .031    .112
1918    .049    .102   .127      —      —      —    .039    .228    .157    .163   .030    .060
1919    .058    .136   .151      —      —      —    .087    .190    .358    .134   .039    .072
1920    .076    .125   .166      —      —      —    .158    .226    .306    .136   .077    .105
1921    .063    .263   .179    .177     —      —    .110    .193    .237    .125   .086    .072
1922    .100    .205   .158    .183   .139     —    .146    .191    .193    .139   .080    .122
1923    ,125    .207   .189    .179   .140     —    .183    .168    .192    .136   .073    .151
1924    .115    .205   .169    .174   .167     —    .203    .188    .183    .135   .081    .135
1925    .115    .217   .154    .181   .152   .218   .218    .166    .187    .143   .086    .149
1926    .113    ,167   .158    .178   .174   .155   .189    ,179    .172    .143   .087    .151
1927    .120    .193   .179    .167   ,147   .242   .157    ,177    .162   .156    .088    .143
1928    .126    .186   .198    .161   .175   .221   .211    .166    .188   .146    .086    .121
1929    .141    .180   .222    .184   .183   ,163   .199    .173    .195   .168    .089    .146
1930    .129    .164   .201    .208   .208   ,127   .156    .085    .230   .171    .089    .116
1931    .099    .127   .172    .205   .191   .036   .148    .071    .193   .155    .090    .059
1932    .081    .097   .113    .160   .164   .049   .153    .106    .168   .134    .079    .004
1933    .079    .109   .086    .168   .157   ,124   .145    .125    ,169   .141    .081    .008
1934    .107    .122   .096    .186   .146   .163   .153    .143    .190   .161    .091    .041
1935    .123    .135   .106    .190   .147   .194   ,208    .145    .212   .172    .093    .087
1936    .130    .135   .115    .183   .153   .204   .182    .147    .223   .178    .101    .084
1937    .113    .149   .144    ,180   .156   .245   .215    .169    .253   .187    .104    .129
1938    .125    .190   .136    .187   .134   .234   .188    .198    .253   .197    .103    .068
1939    .106    .163   .122    .193    —      —     .207    .225    .256   .207    .088    .088
1940    .105    .105   .124    .160    —      —     .165    .211     —     .178    .068    .120
1941     .097   .123   ,132    .162    —      —     .137    .207     —     .169    .054    .140
1942     ,114   .090   .103    .172    —      —     .093    .187     —     .195    .046    .068
1943     .115   .032   .082    .165    —      —     .048    ,222     —     .207    .035    .040
1944     .084   .029   .081    .140    —      —     .012    .233     —     .208    .029    .022
1945     .122   .039   .104    .141    —      —     .032      —      —     .224    .035    .033
1946     .117   .128   .141    .189    —      —     .211    .165    .310   .213    .092    .142
1947     .159   .195   .174    .223    —      —     .270    .201    .372   .231    .111    .142
1948     .154   .210   .197    .251    —      —     .190    .193    .365   .207    .119    .167
1949     .131   .194   .205    .247   .276    —     .108    .185    .380   .218    .125    .137
Appendix Tabla 2 (continued)
Investment Rates

        ARG     AUS     CAN     DNK     FRA     DEU      ITA    JPN     NOR     SWE     GBR     USA
1950     .127    ,219    .209    .272    .267    .223    .195    .162    .354   .215     .128    .109
1951     .169    .243    .204    .249    .260    .218    .213    .201    .347   .197     .129    .175
1952     .172    .319    .207    .248    .256    .226    .188    .205    ,346   .194     .134    .149
1953     .172    .199    .222    .267    .238    .211    .195    .221    .352   .209     .140    ,142
1954     .160    .248    .221    .267    .247   .225     .199    .218    .369   .214     .144    ,139
1955     .166    .262    .225    .243    .252   .255     .218    .198    .305   .209     .149    .169
1956     .154    .269    .249    .260    .276   .245     .215    .236    .366   .208     .151    .176
1957     .166    .231    .259    .273    .274   .240     .224    .266    .289    .202    .156    .163
1958     .166    .251    .245    .252    .283   .234     .213    .255    .322    .213    ,154    .141
1959     .164    .263    .235    .294    .263   .248     .218    .266    .294    .221    .158    .167
1960     .229    .276    .221    .260    .237   .273     .295    .329    .298    .251    .185    .187
1961     .271    .231    .218    .251    .237   .272     .305    .369    .311    .247    .183    .179
1962     .212    .260    .212   .261     .244   .273     .301    .342    .295    .246    .170    .188
1963     .178    .255    .212    .228    .244   .262     .294    .338    .293    .243    .174    .190
1964     .209    .290    .228   .262     .261   .281     .264    .346    .279    .263    .204    .192
1965     .219    .276   .242    .264     .257   .284     .234    .319    .299    .269   .197     .203
1966     ,197    .274   .252    .249     ,265   .265     .230    .324    .305    .257    .192    .203
1967     .209    .266   .240    .242    .265    .230     .242   .354    .306     .248   .198     .193
1968     .218    .286   .222    .240     .260   .245     .234   .368    .262     .241   .205     .194
1969    .239     .272   .222    .258    .269    ,262     .254   .376    .245     .243   .199     .197
1970    .252     .273   .217    .257    .269    .276    .274    .390    .305     .254   .196     .181
1971    .240     .258   .225    ,248    .262    .268     .249   .358    .316    .229    .191     .193
1972    .241     .239   .223    .248    .264    .259    .240    .355    .277    .220    .166     .199
1973    .207    .263    .230    .261    .272    .253    .272    .381    .301    .212    .219    .207
1974    .221    .249    .239    .252    .261    .220    .301    .373    .336    .237    .222    .198
1975    .288    .242    .246    .209    .235    .198    .239    .328    .352    .241    .186    .173
1976    .304    .252    ,240    .240    .254    .215    .269    .318    .371    .233    .203    .188
1977    .309    .233    .235    .229    .244    .209    .249    .308    .363    .203    .198    .206
1978    .27     .252    .232    .215    .232    .212    .241    .309    .285    .175    .195    .220
1979    .259    .241    .236    .213    .237    .234    .247    .325    .275    .199    .198    .219
1980    .253    .254    .239    .185    .242    .234    .270    .322    .277    .212    ,169    .199
1981    .227    .272    .250    .155    .219    .209    .247    .311    .256    .181    .152    .209
1982    .218    .225    .225    .163    .219    .194    .235    .299    .265    .176    .157    .164
1983    .208    ,234    .207    .160    .199    .203    .218    .281    .246    .171    .165    .185
1984    .200    .241    .196    .184    .190    .203    .229    .280    .257    .177    .174    .212
1985    .175    .252    .201    .196    .189    .196    .225    .282    .242    .192    .173    .202
1986    .175    .238    .208    .215    .196    ,196    .209    .278    .295    .179    .171    .194
1967    .196    .238    .214    .190    .202    .194    .210    .287    .282    .189    .181    .190
1988    .186    .263    .222    .179    .214    .200    .215    .306    .271    .199    .204    ,184
1989    .155    .255    .232    ,184    .223    .209    .213    .318    ,243    .219    .210    .184
1990    .140    .212    .209    .175    .223    .214    .210    .328    .205    .213    .192    .171
1991    .146    .191    .198    .165    .212    .217    .205    .324    ,188    .179    .160    .152
1992    .167    .195    .187    .152    .197    .211    .194    .311    .182    .166    ,153    .155

Sources:
See data appendix.
—.
Figure 1
Current Account Relatlve to GDP:
Summary Statistics




     .00450                                                     .06000



     .00400

                                                                .05000

     .00350



                                                                .04000


 I
     .00250

                                                                .03000

     .00200



     .00150                                                     .02000



     .00100

                                                                .01000

     .00050



     .00000     -                                               .00000




        I   ~        Vanance(C~)   ~   Mean(lC~l)   [right scale]
        I



Notes and sources:
See Table 1.
Figure 2
The FH Correlation in History:
FH Coefficient*  2 standard errors




              J   1         1   1   1   1       (         1   !   I   1   I   1   L   1       1   1   !   1   1        1
     2.00         1   1 I   1               [       ,!’                               1   I                       ,,       1   ‘,!
                                                                                                                                     .+
                                                                                                                                          2.00



     1.50                                                                                                                                 1.50



     1.00 –                                                                                                                               1.00



     0.50 -
                                                              +(                                                                          0.50



     0.00 -                                                                                                                               0,00
                                                1“----”””’-
    -0.50                                                                                                                                 -0.50



    -1.00                                                                                                                                 -1.00


                  —

IVotesandsources:
SeeTable3.
Figure 3
The FH Correlation                In Hlsto~:
Alternative          Measures



                                               (UY)=a+b(S/Y)+e

        .20 ;                                                                              20.00
                                                                                           18.00
        ,00:                                                                               16.00
                I
                                                                                           14.00
        .80 +
                                                                                           12.00
        .60 ~                                                                              10.00
                                                                                        8.00
        .40 +                                                                           6.00
                                                                                        4.00
                ,.
                ,/     ..-’---         ,                                              t 2.00
        .00




                         ––Rsq.                 ~b                 ---   t[rightscale]      i
                                                                                            I
    .



                                               (CA/Y)=a+b(l/Y)+e

        1.00 T                                                                             6.00



         .404                                       /’
         .20+           /’       –-\            /


                                                                                           -4.00
                                                         d
                                                                                           -6.00



          I
          i—————                  R Sq.         ~-           b           t [right scale]
          I——.




NotesandSources:
SeeTable3.
Figure 4
Slnn’s Cross-SectIon      Coefflclent   * 2 standard errors




     2.00    -



     1.50 -
                                                      I




             I
     0.50
                   ‘ 1(
                                                              I   1    I   I
     0.00                                                 i       II           +-+-+



                 ~i
                 ,’,
                 II

    -0.50    ~



    -1.00    +

                                             I
    -1.50    –




Notes andsources:
SeeTable4.
Figure 5
Error CorrectIon Model of Saving-investment         Relationship:
Pass Through and Adjustment Speeds

     —


          1.60-



                                                                           ~––               Argentina


          1.00-                                                            ‘~—               Australia
                          /
          0.80-                                                            ~                 Canada

                                                                           ~                 Denmark

                                                                           ‘~                France

          0.20 +
                                                                           ~                 Germany
          0.00    ~
                  I       ■
         -0.20 L
                      1880-1913   1914-1945   1946-1971     1972–1 992




          1.20

          1.00

         0.80                                                                  ~        ‘     Japan

         0.60                                                                  ‘-+~           Norway

         0.40                                                                  ~-–-           Sweden

         0,20                                                                  ~              U.K.

                                                                               -–.-+   ---    u.~.A.
         0,00 –
                                                                           ————
 1       -0.20 –                                              \
                                                                     ~
                                                                     —
         -0.40-
 I                       0.93        0.66         1.05              1.18
 L

Notes and Sources:
See Table 5.
