                             NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          AUCTION DESIGN AND THE MARKET
                           FOR SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSIONS




                                         Paul L. Joskow
                                     Richard Schmalensee
                                      Elizabeth M. Bailey




                                     Working Paper 5745




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1996



The authors are indebted to the MIT Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research and to
the National Acidic Precipitation Assessment Program for financial support and to the Acid Rain
Division of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency @particularly Brian McLean and Larry
Montgomery) for continuing cooperation. We also thank Denny Ellerrnan, Richard Morgenstern,
and participants in the 1996 NBER Summer Institute for useful comments. This paper is part of
NBER’s research program in Industrial Organization. Any opinions expressed are those of the
authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Paul L. Joskow, Richard Schrnalensee and Elizabeth M. Bailey. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5745
                                                                                 September 1996



                            AUCTION DESIGN AND THE MARKET
                             FOR SULFUR DIOXIDE EMISSIONS



                                            ABSTRACT

       Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments        of 1990 created a market for electric utility

emissions of sulfur dioxide (SOZ), Recent papers have argued that flaws in the design of the auctions

that are part of this market have adversely affected its performance. These papers incorrectly assume

that trade can only occur at auctions, however. Our empirical analysis of the S02 emissions market

shows that the auctions have become a small part of a relatively efficient market and that the auction

design problems that have attracted the most attention have had no effect on actual market prices.



Paul L. Joskow                                                 Richard Schrnalensee
Department of Economics                                        Department of Economics
E52-373A                                                       E52-456
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                          Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139                                            Cambridge, MA 02139
and NBER                                                       and NBER
pjoskow@mitvma. init. edu                                      rschrnal@sloan, mit.edu



Elimbeth M, Bailey
Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
                                                           1


1. Introduction

         Title IV of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 (CAAA) created a tradable emissions

allowance system to control emissions of sulfar dioxide (S02) produced when coal and oil are

burned in electric utility boilers. 1        S02 is the primary precursor of acid rain and other acidic

depositions,    and the S02 emissions          control policy provided         for by Title IV was designed

specifically to effect a substantial reduction in those depositions.2           The program relies on a market-

based approach to controlling emissions, rather than the traditional command-and-control                    approach

of specifying source-specific standards.3           This mechanism involves the specification of de facto

property rights for emissions that can be freely traded, and it gives electric utilities complete

flexibility in determining how they will comply with their obligations under the law.                        Largely

because it relies on an innovative market-based mechanism for controlling emissions, the SOZ

allowance trading program has attracted considerable interest.

         This paper examines how the market for S02 allowances has evolved since Title IV was

passed in 1990 and evaluates criticisms of the allowance trading institutions created by Title IV that

have been advanced by Cason (1993, 1995), Cason and Plott (1996), and Hausker (1992).                          These

critiques are based on theoretical analysis and experimental evidence which deal with auctions




‘ The 1990 CAAA is Public Law 101-549.

2The asserted target was a 10 million ton per year (about 50%) reduction from 1980 emissions levels by the year 2000.

3High ambient concentrations of S02 have long been thought to have adverse effects on human health, and National
 Ambient Air Quality Standards (NAAQS) for gaseous SOZ have been in effect since the early 1970s. Ambient
 concentrations have declined significantly since that time because of state and federal command-and-control
 regulation, and most of the population now lives in areas that meet the NAAQS for S02. Recent work has suggested
 that acid aerosols, to which SOZ emissions give rise, have significant adverse health effects, but no regulatory
 program currently addresses this issue directly, See, generally, EPA (1995).
                                                           2


operating in isolation; other opportunities to trade are assumed away.                 Cason (1993, p. 178-179)

recognizes the issue:

         “The EPA auction will interact with other private markets that may be developed for

         permit trading... and that with sufficient activity they can help mitigate the negative

         features of the EPA auction.          We view the interaction of these different market

         institutions as an open empirical question that can only be resolved afier observing

         several years of organized trading .,.,“

Our analysis heeds this counsel and relies on the considerable information now available on actual

transactions (as well as offers to buy and sell) in the market for SOZ allowances.                 Overall, we find

that the design flaws emphasized by the critics have not had significant adverse effects on market

performance, largely because the market institutions on which the critics have focused have not

played -- and were never intended to play -- central roles in the actual trading process.4

         Although     SOZ emissions control obligations of the first group of electricity generators

affected by Title IV did not take effect until 1995, the first allowance trades were reported in May,

1992. There are two very different venues in which allowance trading takes place. As we discuss

in more detail below, the vast majority of allowance trading has involved bilateral private trades

between utilities that own electric generators or between those utilities and third parties.5              The third

parties include allowance         brokers, acting for their own account or on behalf of electricity

generators, as well as fiel suppliers who bundle the sales of allowances with the sale of fiel to



4 The flaws in the auction design could be more empirically important if the EPA auctions were the only way that
  allowances could be traded, Thus we are not arguing that the auction design issues that have been raised would
  not be significant in other contexts. Similarly, we are not arguing that other auction designs might not have done
  more to hasten the development of the overall market,

5We exclude fi-om this discussion (and horn Table 1 below) “intra-utility” trades, such as reallocations of allowances
 between generating units owned by the same company and transactions between affiliates of the same holding
 company.
                                                     3


electric utilities.   Although these transactions    are generally confidential,    some information   on

individual transactions is available in the trade press.     More importantly, there are three major

private market-making      organizations   that regularly publish information      on allowance prices in

consummated transactions as well as on bids to buy and offers to sell. The information published

by these market-makers     can be used to define “the market price” for allowances at any particular

point in time.

         The second way that allowances have been traded is through a set of annual auctions that

Section 416(d)(2) of the CAAA requires the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to hold. The

auctions were first held in March 1993 and have taken place every March since then.            As this is

written, we have data on four years of auctions, covering a total of eleven separate auctions.

         The structure of these auctions has been criticized by Cason (1993, 1995), Cason and Plott

(1996), and Hausker (1992). As we shall discuss below, the positive conclusions reached in these

papers are, at best, only weakly consistent with the data. This seems to reflect the fact that the EPA

auctions have been only a small part of the overall allowance market, while Cason (1993, 1995) and

Cason and Plott (1996), in particular, proceed as if the auctions were the whole market.          For the

same reason, the critics substantially over-state the potential adverse effects of defects in auction

design on overall market efficiency. With the possible exception of the initial EPA auctions, which

took place as the private market was just beginning to develop, the EPA auctions that have attracted

so much attention in the academic literature have been of minimal relevance for the overall

performance of the market.      Auction prices and associated bidding behavior and private market

prices are now closely linked with one another.
                                                       4


        The paper proceeds in the following way. The next section provides a brief discussion of

Title IV of the CAAA, the associated allowance trading system, and how it is being phased in.

Section 3 outlines the critiques referred to above.           Section 4 examines the time patterns of

allowance prices that have been observed so far, drawing on observation of both private market

transactions and the EPA’s annual auctions.        Section 5 examines the auction results in more detail

and compares them with the predictions drawn by critics from previous theoretical analyses and

laboratory experiments.       Section 6 presents our conclusions.




2. Title IV and Allowance Trading

        The basic approach to emissions control embodied in Title IV is simple. Aggregate annual

caps on national SOZ emissions from certain electric generating units are specified by the statute.

These caps define the number of emissions allowances issued for use in each year. An emissions

allowance is the right to emit one ton of S02 into the atmosphere.     In order legally to emit S02 into

the atmosphere during a particular year, an electricity generator covered by the statute (called an

“affected source” in the Act) must have enough allowances that are good for use in that year to

cover all of its emissions.     The CAAA requires each affected source to have continuous emissions

monitoring equipment on each stack to measure actaal S02 emissions and to report those emissions

to the EPA.    At the end of each year, each source must have deposited enough allowances in an

account maintained     for it by the EPA to cover all of the recorded emissions or be subject to

significant financial (and legal) penalties.

        The restrictions on S02 emissions are applied in two phases. Phase I covers the 263 dirtiest

large generating units in the country and requires them, in the aggregate, to reduce their emissions
                                                         5


substantially, to about 5.7 million tons per year, during the period 1995- 1999.6 Phase II, which

begins in 2000, tightens the emissions cap ~er               and extends it to virtually all electric generating

units. About 9 million allowances will be issued annually during Phase II.

        Title IV also specifies the initial allocation of SOZ allowances.             Allowances are given to

existing electric generating units and those under construction according to fairly complicated rules

that are discussed in detail by Joskow and Schmalensee (1996). For our purposes here it suffices to

note that essentially all of the allowances available to cover S02 emissions were allocated “free” to

incumbent sources.      Each allowance specifies a particular year, its “vintage,” in which it is first

available to be used to cover S02 emissions; an allowance can also be “banked” and used in any

future year. Thus, for instance, a” 1996 vintage” allowance can be used to cover emissions in 1996

or held for use in any later year, but it cannot be used to cover 1995 emissions.             Most importantly,

all allowances are fully tradable. That is, a source that has been allocated allowances is free to sell

them to any other source, including to a third party such as brokers and individuals.              Moreover, an

affected source can buy allowances to cover its present emissions or its future emissions from any

type of trading partner. There are no limitations on how often parties can trade allowances or on the

trading mechanisms that buyers and sellers may use to trade them.

        Finally, Title IV created two mechanisms intended to help “jump-start” the market.                    The

more important is a set of small annual revenue neutral allowance auctions that are administered by

the EPA. Each year, roughly 2.8% of the allowances that have been allocated to utilities are held




GIn fact, an additional 182 generating units that were not otherwise due to become “affected sources” until Phase 11
 became affected in Phase I through special (substitution unit or compensating unit) provisions of a compliance plan
 for one or more of the original 263 Phase I units. See EPA (1996) for statistics and Joskow and Schmalensee (1 996)
 for summaries of these provisions.
                                                         6


back and auctioned in annual “spot” and “advance” auctions.                 In the 1993, 1994, and 1995 spot

auctions, 50,000 vintage 1995 allowances were offered for sale. In 1996, 150,000 vintage 1996

allowances were sold. In 1997, 1998, and 1999, 150,000 allowances with vintages matching each

of those years will also be sold. In 2000 and later years, 100,000 allowances will be sold in the

annual spot auction.         In 1993 and all later years, 100,000 allowances are offered for sale in the

seven-year advance auction.         Allowances sold in the advance auction are first usable seven years

afier the auction.    Thus, vintage 2000 allowances were sold in 1993, vintage 2001 allowances in

1994, and so on. The revenues from these sales are returned to the sources in proportion to their

share of the allowances that were held back for the auctions.                 In addition, private parties are

permitted but not required to offer allowances for sale in either EPA auction.7                   Each voluntary

offer to sell allowances in the EPA auctions involves both a quantity and a minimum acceptable

(i.e., reservation) price.

         Much attention has been paid to the specific auction mechanism that was implemented by

the EPA’s regulations.       Title IV [Section 41 6(d)(2)] provides that:

         “..the auctioned allowances shall be allocated and sold on the basis of bid price,

         starting with the highest-priced bid and continuing until all allowances for sale at

         auction have been allocated. ”

The EPA has thus far interpreted             this statutory    language     as requiring    it to implement        a

“discriminatory” auction in which the allowances withheld for auction by the EPA are allocated to

the highest bidders and the winning bidders must pay the price they have bid rather than a uniform




7Allowances may also be voluntarily offered for sale in the six-year advance auction described below.   There are no
 restrictions on sales of allowances outside of the EPA auctions.
                                                            7


market clearing price.g        Allowances submitted voluntarily by private parties for sale in the EPA

auction are allocated afier the supply of withheld allowances have been fully allocated.                     At that

point, the seller with the lowest reservation price is matched with the remaining buyer with the

highest bid, the seller with the second lowest reservation price is matched with the remaining buyer

with the second highest bid, etc., until there are no more bids to buy that exceed the reservation

prices submitted by sellers.9 When private allowances are sold in this way, the seller receives the

buyer’s bid price.

           In addition to the annual auctions, 25,000 allowances per year are allocated to a “Direct

Sales Reserve” beginning in 1993.              These allowances are available for purchase at a price of

$1,500,    adjusted
                  for post- 1990 inflation;       they are first valid seven years from the date they are made

available for purchase. Beginning in the year 2000, the Reserve also makes 25,000 spot allowances

per year available for purchase at $1,500 (adjusted for post-1990 inflation).                       In the event the

Reserve      is over-subscribed,      the statute     gives preference        to independent       power   producers

constructing new capacity. In the event some allowances in the Reserve are not purchased within a

year, the remaining       allowances are auctioned in a separate “six-year advance” auction in the

following year at the same time the other two auctions take place.                    Thus, for instance, the 1993

Reserve made available vintage 2000 allowances for $1500 each. As none were sold by the time of

the 1994 auctions, 25,000 vintage 2000 allowances were auctioned in a 1994 six-year advance

auction.     Since allowance prices have always been far below $1500, all of the allowances made



6The EPA has recently solicited comments on whether it has the statutory authority to switch to single-price
 auctions and whether such a switch would be desirable, as well as on whether it would be desirable to move the
 auctions from March to October of each year. See Federal Register, June 6, 1996 (Volume 61, Number 11O), pp.
 28996-28997.

9Note that this amounts to selling the allowances withheld by the EPA at a reservation price of zero.
                                                         8


available in the Direct Sales Reserve have so far been auctioned off in the subsequent year. Section

416(c)(7) requires EPA to terminate this program if it is under-subscribed,              and add the allowances

from the Direct Sales Reserve to the annual advance auctions,                EPA has recently announced its

intention to do this after the 1996 set-aside. 10

        It is important to understmd that these mechanisms do not determine the initial allocation of

allowances, nor do they represent the only market mechanism through which sales and purchases of

allowances take place.      Buyers and sellers can employ any trading arrangement they choose, and

intermediaries    are free to establish any brokerage, auction or trading mechanism that they wish.

Indeed the initial version of Title IV as proposed by the Bush Administration                    did not contain

provisions either for the mandatory EPA auctions or the Direct Sales Reserve.                   These provisions

were added to the bill as it worked its way through Congress in response to concerns raised by

independent      power producers and utilities in rapidly-growing           states that market imperfections,

which might include irrational hoarding by utilities or anti-market behavior by state public utility

regulators, 1] might make it impossible for them to acquire the allowances necessary to construct

and operate new generating capacity. The auctions were intended to start the market by effectively

forcing trades, while the Direct Sales Reserve was intended to provide some measure of insurance

against major market failure. It was the intention of the Bush Administration, the proponents of the

legislation in Congress, and the EPA in drafting the regulations implementing                    the CAAA that




‘0Federal Register, June 6, 1996 (Volume 61, Number 11O), pp. 28761-28763. Section 416(f) allows EPA to terminate
  the amual auction, but only if less than 20% of withheld allowances are unsold for two years in a row, Since these
  allowances are offered with zero reservation prices, as noted above, this is extremely unlikely to occur.

11As Fullerton, McDermott, and Caulkins (1996) argue, the potential cost-increasing impact of state regulatory
  behavior could be substantial. Bailey (1996) finds, however, that regulators have in fact generally accommodated
  utilities with interests in trading.
                                                     9


private trading arrangements, not the EPA auctions, would be the primary mechanisms            through

which    allowances   would      be traded.   Accordingly,   neither the CAAA      nor the regulations

implementing it place any restrictions on the kinds of bilateral arrangements, brokering, and private

auction institutions that private parties can turn to in order to mediate allowance trades.




3. Critiques of Allowance Trading Institutions

        Even though the annual statutory auctions were designed primarily to ‘\ump-start”           the

market, not to be the primary venue for trading allowances, they have attracted a significant amount

of attention and criticism in the literature.     Indeed, one would think from the discussion in the

literature that the EPA auctions are the main, or even the only, mechanism               through which

allowances can be traded.

        Hausker (1992) provides an illuminating discussion of the origins of the auction design

specified in Section 416.     He describes this design as a triumph of House staff, representing the

interests of Midwestern states likely to be substantial net sellers of allowances, over Senate staff,

without ties to states with major interests in Title IV. He argues that House staff were primarily

concerned with maximizing         seller revenue, while the Senate staff were free to focus on market

efficiency.

        Senate staff proposed that multi-year streams of allowances be auctioned off to facilitate

planning for new capacity. (Such a stream might consist of 100 allowances each of vintages 1995,

1996, ....2015, for instance.)     House staff, on the other hand, sought to provoke a “feeding frenzy”

by forcing those who wanted to acquire at auction the allowances needed for the life of a new plant

to buy large quantities of single-vintage allowances. The Bush Administration generally sided with
                                                            10


the simpler House design, which prevailed. 12 The Administration’s view was that if the market

developed properly, the Senate regime would represent an unnecessary intrusion into the private

trading process, while the “feeding frenzy” sought by the House would not materialize because of

the existence of private sources of supply.              If the market did not develop properly, the Senate

scheme would not help much.             In fact, since buyers and sellers clearly had interests in trading

streams of allowances, one could argue that excluding streams from the EPA auctions hastened the

development of usefil private market institutions.

         Similarly, Hausker notes that the idea of having a discriminatory auction came from House

staff. As he observes, it is not clear in theory that this design will produce more revenue than a

uniform-price auction, though the House staff were unshakably convinced that it would. *3 Senate

staff and the Administration          preferred a single-price          auction.      Both were concerned      that a

discriminatory     auction    would     be a less transparent            price     discovery   mechanism,    and the

Administration     argued that a discriminatory           auction would likely discourage participation            by

regulated utilities and/or lead them to under-bid. ]4 Nonetheless, Administration economists did not

consider this a major issue. Their view was that if there were no serious obstacles preventing the

development      of an allowance        market,      a discriminatory        auction could, at worst,       slow that

development somewhat, while if there were serious obstacles, fixing the auction design would not

suffice to create a viable market.



12The second author participated in Administration   policy-making   on this issue.

13The second author spent hours trying unsuccessfully to persuade the House staff involved that buyers would not
  simply bid their reservation prices in this auction. He was accused of not understanding basic economics. For a
  recent discussion of the relevant theoretical and empirical literature, see Laffont ( 1995), pp. 24-25.

14The problem is that state utility regulators can disallow utility costs that they find to have been “imprudently”
  incurred, and if utility A pays more for allowances than utility B at the same auction, A becomes potentially
  vukerable to such a tinding. This potential vulnerability can only discourage aggressive bidding.
                                                             11


         Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and Plott (1996) argue that voluntary sellers in the EPA

auctions have incentives to set reservation prices too low. Cason (1993, 1995) models sellers as

engaged in a private value auction: The gain from sales of an allowance at the auction equals the

price less the seller’s individual marginal cost of reducing SOZ emissions by a ton.                         The central

argument is that in the EPA auction, lowering one’s reservation price both increases the likelihood

of a sale and, conditional on a sale occurring, increases the expected price received as long as

buyers’ bids are not identical. Thus, lower reservation prices will be set by rational sellers than in a

single-price auction, all else equal.          It may even be optimal to set a reservation price below the

marginal    cost of emissions        reduction,     even though this creates a positive probability                  of an

unprofitable trade. Cason (1995) finds some experimental support for this downward bias in seller

                      15
reservation prices.

         In addition, Cason and Plott (1996) argue informally that buyers in the EPA auctions,

whose gain from purchase is assumed to be the marginal control cost avoided minus the price paid,

have an incentive not to bid above the expected market-clearing price. lb While this is plausible

behavior, it is not clear either that it is optimal or that by itself such bidding would tend to bias

down prices.        Cason and Plott (1996) find experimentally                 that “compared        to more standard

uniform-price     call auctions, the EPA auction generates lower market-clearing                    prices and extracts

less gains from exchange” (p. 157).




‘5Cason’s (1995) paper is a little confising at first blush because his theoretical analysis and the laboratory experiments
  invert the structure of the EPA’s auction so that the sellers are buyers and the buyers are sellers.

16~ey do not offer a formal characterization of an equilibrium in the EPA auction in which both buyers and sellers
  behave strategically. Cason (1993) discusses some of the complexities involved.
                                                  12


         As we noted above, Cason (1993, p. 178) acknowledges that other venues for allowance

trading will interact with the EPA auctions, and “should these alternative trading mechanisms

develop, the additional trading opportunities will place opportunity cost bounds on the allowance

values for EPA auction participants.”   In the extreme case, in which the outside market is pefiectly

competitive   and without frictions, the “opportunity     cost bounds” serve to transform the EPA

auction into a common value auction. The universally known market price of allowances, call it P*,

replaces individual marginal control costs in buyers’ and sellers’ strategic calculations,       and the

equilibrium auction price must equal P*. Given the competitive market alternative, no buyer will

pay more than P*, and no seller will take less.        Only if the non-auction part of the market is

seriously imperfect -- or, in the limiting case assumed by Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and Plott

(1996), nonexistent -- can auction prices depart substantially from competitive market prices. More

generally, if buyers’ bids are all close to P* (or any other number), sellers’ incentives to quote low

reservation prices in order to be matched with high bids will be essentially eliminated.

        Cason and Plott (1996) assert that through early 1994 the allowance market did not impose

tight “opportunity cost bounds” on the EPA auction, but they present only anecdotal evidence to

support this assertion.   In what follows we attempt a systematic examination         of the evidence

available through mid- 1996. We find that as private trading institutions have matured, the prices

and bidding behavior in the EPA auctions have become closely linked to trading opportunities            in

the private market. Thus, if the critics’ analyses have any implications at all for the SOZ allowance

market, they are likely to be relevant only to the earliest auctions, which took place early in the

development    of an active private market and associated trading institutions.            Moreover,   the
                                                          13


behavior of volunt~        sellers, who have had at most a trivial impact on the market, suggests over-

statement, not under-statement, of reservation prices.




4. Market Prices and Quantities

        At the time Title IV was passed a number of projections of fiture allowance prices were

made available to the EPA and published in the trade press. These projections were based on cost-

minimizing    optimization     models for the electric power sector that embodied assumptions                   about

future fuel prices, electricity demand growth, utility trading behavior, and the costs of reducing SOZ

emissions    through     fuel-switching,     coal-cleaning,     and flue-gas      desulfurization     (scrubbing).

Allowance prices during Phase I were generally projected to be in the $250-$350 range and prices

for allowances     in Phase II in the $500-$700            range. 17     These projections      were the primary

information available to buyers and sellers when allowances began to be traded, first through a few

bilateral trades and then in the EPA’s first set of mandatory auctions in March 1993.

        In fact, prices have turned out to be much lower than those early projections.                Indeed, prices

for spot market Phase I allowances have gone as low as $63 per ton and are about $80 per ton as

this is written.   It seems that post-1990 developments in markets for coal from the Powder River

basin in Wyoming are central to the large differences between projected and actual prices (see

Ellerrnan andMontero(1996)).          In any case, these large differences counsel humility about both the

accuracy of the models available for analyzing policies of this sort and, more generally, about our



17See, for instance, ICF (1990) and Braine (1991). The large difference in price projections for Phase I and Phase 11
  does not make a lot of economic sense, since Phase 1 allowances can be banked for use in Phase 11. However, the
  models used to make these projections did not take intertemporal arbitrage opportunities into account. The $1,500
  price set for the Direct Sales Reserve was designed to be significantly above the range of price projections that were
  being relied upon when the CAAA was being debated.
                                                      14


ability to estimate the cost of complying with new environmental restrictions when polluters are

allowed to employ the most economical compliance strategies they can devise. While these issues

are important, pursuing them firther would carry us beyond the bounds of this study.

        Figure 1 displays information on vintage 1995 allowance prices between May 1992, when

the first bilateral trade was reported, and June 1996, the last month for which we have information.

Figure 1 is based on three different types of sources.         First, we have information on the prices at

which some private trades took place that were reported in the trade press. By and large, however,

buyers and sellers keep the details of their allowance transactions confidential, so there are few

observations    of this sort available to us.     Moreover,       we cannot verifi    the accuracy of the

information on price or on associated terms and conditions reported in the trade press.

        The second source is price information             published   by one or more of three private

organizations   that act as intermediaries   between transacting parties, accept bids to buy and sell

allowances, sometimes trade for their own account, and publish allowance price information for

clients without identi~ing    specific parties to the transactions.       These organizations   are Cantor

Fitzgerald (CF), the Emission Exchange Corporation (EX), and Fieldston (EATX).               The EX price

index begins in July 1993, the EATX price index in June 1994, and the CF price index in August

1994.   These indices are available to us only on a monthly basis, but they were available

continuously to the clients of these organizations.        These indices are the best information available

on allowance prices associated with private trading activity.           All three indices are a cash, spot

market price of a 1995 vintage allowance expressed in current dollars, and each is determined from

private information the organization has on recent and pending transactions, market activity from

previous weeks, offers to buy and sell, and prices buyers and sellers have indicated a willingness to
                                                           15


accept. Figure 1 displays the reported prices for each of these proprietary indices for vintage 1995

allowances. 18 Since August 1994 the allowance prices reported by the three organizations                             are

almost identical.

           Finally, we have extensive information reported on the EPA’s annual March auctions from

1993 through 1996. This information includes bid prices and quantities submitted by each buyer,

the prices at which allowances and associated quantities were offered voluntarily                          for sale by

individual sellers, the bid price that cleared the EPA’s mandatory sales auctions, and the bid price

that cleared the associated voluntary private sales auction. We also have the trading names used by

each of the winning bidders and the associated prices and quantities that each bid. These names

usually allow a meaningful identification of the winning bidders, though some bidders trade under

special “trading names” (which is petiectly legal) to maintain confidentiality.                      Moreover, some

buyers rely on intermediaries to bid for them in the auction for the same reason.                    We will explore

this information in more detail in the next section.

           Figure 1 simply reports the market clearing price in the EPA’s mandato~                  “spot” auction for

comparison with the other information on prices for 1995 vintage allowances.                       We defer until the

next section a discussion of the results of the voluntary sales component                      of the EPA’s annual

auction.     Here we note only that few allowances have been offered for sale in the voluntary

“private” portion of the EPA’s annual auction, and very few of those had reservation prices low

enough to be sold.



18As noted above, the 1995 vintage is the first vintage of allowances that exists since that is the year Phase I begins. A
  substantial number of 1995 vintage allowances were not used to cover emissions in 1995 because emissions were
  below the cap. These allowances were banked and are available to cover emissions in 1996 or any future year. Thus,
  in 1996 the remaining 1995 vintage allowances are perfect substitutes for 1996 vintage allowances. It is the latter that
  were auctioned in the EPA’s March 1996 spot auction,
                                                         16


          Reports of electric utilities and financial intermediaries actively seeking buyers and sellers

for SOZ allowances appeared in the trade press as early as 1991.19                     The first bilateral trades

appeared in the press in May and July 1992.20 The first announced trade was a sale of 10,000

allowances (vintage information was not revealed) by Wisconsin Power and Light Company to the

Tennessee Valley Authority at $265 per allowance.21                  The second was a purchase of 25,000

allowances by Ohio Edison from the ALCOA Corporation, a joint owner of a Phase 1 affected

plant, for $300 per allowance.        Allowance prices in both of the first two trades were close to initial

estimates of Phase I allowance prices referred to above.              No additional information on prices in

private transactions appeared before the EPA’s first auction in March 1993, although trade press

reports indicated that other bilateral trading activity was taking place.

          The market-clearing price in the March 1993 spot auction was $131 and the market clearing

price in the 1993 advance auction (for vintage 2000 allowances) was $122. Trade press reports at

the time suggested that utilities and intermediaries were surprised by the low prices that emerged in

the auction and generally that “the auction had more participants and sold more allowances at lower

prices than expected.”22          One utility executive characterized his company’s purchase of 10,000

                                                                                           ,,23
allowances at $150 per allowance in the 1993 spot auction as “quite a bargain.




19Ener~   Dai~.   May 15, 1991.

20Early reports of trades can be found in the Wall Street Journal (May 11, 1992 and July 1, 1992), the New York Times
  (May 11, 1992), Ener~ Dai$ (May 13, 1992 and July 1, 1992) and various issues of Cotnpliance Strate~ Review.

21At the same time as the TVA trade, Wisconsin Power and Light announced it sold 15,000 allowances to Duquesne
  Light Company.    Both parties declined to release information on vintage(s), price, and other terms of trade.
  Duquesne even declined to confm the number of allowances it had purchased.

22Electric Power and Light. May 1993. p 1.

23Ibid. p3.
                                                           17


          In mid-1993, the trade press reported price data on two additional private transactions at

$178 and $205.24         At about the same time EX began to report information                      on vintage 1995

allowance prices gathered confidentially from private parties.               The first reported price was $170.

The EX price remained at, or slightly above, the $170 per ton level until May 1994. In November

1993, a trade press report identified another private trade at $205,25 significantly above both the EX

price and the earlier auction price.           This is our last trade observation           for a specific bilateral

transaction.    Clearly, up through the end of 1993 it would have been difficult to define a clear

uniform market price from the information then available, as recent transactions were all over the

map.

          The EPA’s second auction took place in March 1994. The spot auction price that cleared

the market was $150 and the immediate settlement prices were $140 for vintage 2000 allowances

(25,000 allowances left over from the previous year’s Direct Sales Reserve) and $140 for vintage

2001 allowances.      The auction prices were higher than the 1993 auction prices, a bit more than 10%

lower than the prevailing EX prices, and still f~ below earlier projections of Phase I allowance

prices.

          In mid-1994, following the EPA’s second auction, EATX and then CF begin to publish

information on allowance prices associated with confidential private transactions and offers to buy




24Compliance Strate~ Review (June21, 1993 and July 19, 1993) reports that Big Rivers Electric Cooperative engaged
  in two sales of allowances of undisclosed vintages. In June, Big Rivers sold 150,000 allowances to Centre Financial
  at $178 per allowance, and in July, sold 4,384 allowances to American Municipal Power at $205 per allowance.
  Unlike earlier allowance trades, these and most future allowance transactions, go unnoticed in the national press.

25Compliance Strate~ Review (November 8, 1993) reports that Wisconsin Electric Power Company sold 37,000
  allowances of an undisclosed vintage to PSI Energy at a price of $205 per ton for allowances received in 1995.
  Terms of the trade released indicate that the allowances were to be supplied by Wisconsin Electric Power Company
  over an 8 year period beginning in 1995, and that the price, $205 per ton, is to be escalated over the remainder of the
  contract at an undisclosed rate.
                                                    18


and sell. As is evident from Figure 1, the prices reported by the three organizations for allowances

sold and offered for sale or purchase in the private market were almost identical by late 1994.

Moreover, the March 1995 and March 1996 EPA auctions yielded market clearing prices that were

virtually identical to the prices reported for the three price indices.    (We can’t match the prices

precisely because we only have monthly observation for the three private market indices).

        Let us now turn from prices to quantities.        Table 1 reports information on the number of

allowances     that appear to have been traded through both the EPA’s auctions and in private

transactions   through the first quarter of 1996.        The first column reports the total number of

allowances, withheld and privately offered, sold in each of the EPA’s annual auctions.          In total,

fewer than 800,000 allowances have been traded through the EPA’s mandatory               and voluntary

private auctions.   The volume of private market transactions is more difficult to determine since

there is no source that reports the precise quantity of allowances covered by purchase and sale

agreements.     We have made use of the data contained in the EPA’s allowance tracking system to

make a lower bound estimate of the volume of trades that took place during various time periods

between 1992 when the first trades took place and the latest EPA auction in March 1996.               To

understand how we have made these estimates we must explain briefly how the EPA’s allowance

tracking system works.

        The EPA established a computerized allowance tracking system to keep track of allowance

allocations, to record reallocations of allowances between generating units over time (via banking),

and to match emissions from a specific source in each year with the allowances it possesses.

Initially, all generating units that were allocated allowances through the statutory provisions of Title

IV were given an individual allowance account in the EPA’s computer system. Their allocations of
                                                        19


allowances for each future year (through the year 2025) were placed in these accounts.                      Third

parties that are involved in trading allowances can also establish accounts in the EPA’s allowance

tracking system, and those that bid in the EPA auctions must establish such accounts to receive any

allowances that they may purchase through the auctions.

        At the end of each year, each affected generating unit must have enough allowances of

appropriate vintages (the current year’s vintage or earlier) in its account to cover its emissions for

that year. Utilities that own multiple generating units may shift allowances between accounts to

cover their emissions.     When allowances are bought or sold through private transactions, the trades

must eventually be recorded in the EPA’s allowance tracking system in order for the allowances to

be used to cover emissions, but parties are under no obligation to record private trades with the

EPA within any particular period afier they have been consummated.                    (The EPA automatically

records allowances traded in its annual auctions as soon as the results from the auction are made

publicly available.)     Our understanding is that prompt recording of private trades is the rule rather

than the exception, however.2b        Nonetheless, since there is no doubt some lag between the time a

deal is struck and the time allowances are moved between accounts in the EPA’s allowance tracking

system, the recorded data must lag behind actual commercial transactions to some extent.27

        We have accessed the EPA’s allowance tracking system to identifi commercial trades based

on the recorded movement of allowances between accounts.                We first identified all movements of




26Telephone   interview with Eugene Casey, Acid Rain Division, U.S. Environmental   Protection Agency, June 1996.

27To record an allowance transfer with EPA, the parties have had to submit a form signed by authorized
  representatives of both accounts involved, and EPA has undertaken to record the transfer within five business
  days, To speed up this process, EPA has recently announced that it is considering the development of a system to
  allow electronic submittal of allowance transfers. See Federal Register, June 6, 1996 (Volume 61, Number 11O),
  pp. 28996-28997.
                                                        20


allowances between accounts. We then deducted allowances that were associated with special EPA

allocations (e.g. bonus allowances made available for scrubbers; see Joskow and Schmalensee

(1996)), EPA auctions, reallocations, and intra-utility trades to identi~             all changes in allowance

allocations   between unaffiliated      entities.   We believe that this provides a good lower bound

estimate of private allowance transactions because it measures all private trades that the parties

have chosen to record in the EPA’s allowance tracking system.                  It may not measure all private

trading activity, because there is no obligation to record trades for allowances until the holder

desires to use the allowances for compliance purposes.           In addition, this number represents a lower

bound estimate of private trading activity since any trading pursuant to option agreements would

not be recorded until options are actually exercised.2B

         The second column of data in Table 1 reports private allowance trades that were recorded in

the year proceeding each of the EPA’s auctions, including the month of the auction, except for the

first auction for which the period covers all private trades (as defined above) recorded by EPA

before the auction took place.        All together, by March 1996 about 6.7 million allowances were

traded through private transactions, as compared to 0.8 million through the EPA auctions.29                      It is

also evident from Table 1 that there was very little private trading activity prior to the second

quarter of 1994. About 6.4 of the 6.7 million allowances that were privately traded up through

March 1996 were traded afier March 1994.




28In June 1993, Compliance Strategies Review reported that AMAX Energy purchased from Long Island Lighting
  Company an option to purchase Phase I allowances (quantity and prices were not disclosed). To date this option has
  not been exercised and consequently this trading activity does not show up in the EPA’s allowance tracking system.

29Only 4.3 percent of the 6.7 million privately traded allowances through the end of March 1996 represent non-
  utility to non-utility transactions.
                                                  21


        Figure 1 and Table 1 suggest that in the early stages of the development of the allowance

market, buyers and sellers had little information about market-clearing     allowance prices.   Initial

transactions prices appear to have been influenced by earlier allowance price projections.   The first

two EPA auctions represented just under half (48Yo) of the allowance trading activity occurring as

of those dates, and helped to establish visible market values. Looking at Figure 1, one could argue

that the data through May 1994 are consistent with the sort of downward bias in EPA auction prices

stressed by Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and Plott (1996). As we discuss in more detail below,

however, almost no privately-offered     allowances were sold in the first two EPA auctions, so that

the seller-side bias stressed by Cason (1993, 1995) can have had no effect. Any downward bias

must reflect a bias in buyers’ bids, for which the theoretical case is not strong.   In any case, the

coupling between the EPA auctions and the rest of the market does not appear particularly tight in

the early period.

        Beginning around May 1994, however, Figure 1 shows that private market prices come

almost exactly into line with the results of the March 1994 EPA auction.        This casts significant

doubt on the downward bias hypothesis.      It seems at least as plausible that non-auction prices had

been held up artificially by the earlier projections of higher prices. The early auctions suggested,

correctly as it turned out, that those projections were too high. These suggestions may well have

deterred some investments (in scrubbers, for instance) that were attractive at projected allowance

prices but would have been uneconomic at the prices prevailing in the market afier mid- 1994.

        By the March 1995 auction, market values in all trading venues were essentially the same.

In Cason’s (1993) language, the “opportunity       cost bounds” placed on auction participants      by

“additional   trading opportunities”   had plainly become tight.    As uncertainty   about allowance
                                                  22


market values at a particular point in time were resolved, trading activity increased enormously.   To

the extent that the auctions brought parties to the market and helped to establish a range of market

valuations, they fulfilled their primary objective of stimulating the development of private market

trading activity of all kinds,   Other auction designs might have performed this finction better, of

course, but it seems clear that the EPA auctions did perform it.




5. Results of the EPA Auctions

        Figures 2-5 present detailed results for each of EPA’s auctions, using a format similar to

those typically employed to report laboratory experiments.     We construct a stairstep buyers’ ofler

curve by drawing, at a height corresponding       to each bid price, a horizontal    line with length

corresponding the associated bid quantity.    The buyers’ offer curve is constructed by joining these

lines end-to-end, starting with the highest bid price and working down to the lowest. On the supply

side of the market, the number of allowances offered for sale in the mandatory (as required by Title

IV) auction is represented by a vertical line at the relevant quantity on the horizontal axis.      We

complete the sellers’ offer curve to include voluntary       offers to sell allowances    by drawing

horizontal lines at heights corresponding     to the associated reservation prices and with lengths

corresponding to the quantities voluntarily offered at those prices. These are joined to the top of the

vertical line just discussed, begiming    with the lowest reservation price and working up to the

highest, since volunta~   offers to sell do not get matched with buyers’ offers to buy until the EPA’s

mandatory sales offering is filly subscribed.    The intersection of the buyers’ offer curve and the

sellers’ offer curve defines the market clearing price; it is the price of the lowest bid at which

allowances were purchased.
                                                   23


        Figure 2 displays the results for the 1993 spot and advance auctions.      Figures 3, 4, and 5

display the results for the spot and the two advance auctions conducted in 1994, 1995 and 1996

respectively.   The dots on each figure represent bid prices and associated quantities. Note that there

are frequently a number of dots that appear to be on the vertical axis. These are bids for very small

numbers of allowances (ofien one allowance) submitted by individuals, environmental groups, law

schools, and other organizations.   For example, in the 1993 advance auction (Figure 2b) Resources

for the Future bid $310 for one allowance, when the market clearing price was $122.            Student

environmental groups at law schools were the eight highest bidders (for one allowance in seven of

the cases and five allowances in the other case) in the 1995 spot auction (Table 4a) paying between

$150 and $350 per allowance when the market clearing price was $130.

        Figures 2a and 2b show that the buyers’ offer curves have considerable dispersion in both

the spot and advance auctions held in March 1993. Thus a significant volume of the allowances

sold traded at prices significantly higher than the market clearing price. A significant number of

“low ball” bids at very low prices are also observed.    Since there is no fee required to submit a bid

and minimal requirements to do so, there is little to lose from submitting a low bid, especially in

1993 when there was relatively little information available to predict the market-clearing price for

allowances.

        Figures 3a, 3b, and 3C report the results for the second set of EPA auctions, which occurred

in March 1994. It is evident that the 1994 buyers’ offer curves are much flatter than those for 1993

and that the number of allowance sales that took place at prices significantly higher than the market

clearing price declined considerabley. The few bids to buy at prices far above the clearing price are

from individuals or groups typically purchasing one allowance for non-commercial         reasons.   The
                                                    24


change from Figures 2 to Figures 3 is consistent with the discussion in the previous section:      The

development    of the outside market significantly tightened the “opportunity      cost bounds” on the

behavior of auction participants.

         Finally, Figures 4 and 5 report the auction results for 1995 and 1996 respectively.      The

buyers’ offer curves now become quite flat and few allowances are traded at prices much above the

market clearing price. A few individual buyers continue to pay high prices, but these are clearly not

standard commercial transactions that have any implications for S02 emissions mitigation,       These

are novelty purchases or purchases by groups attempting to make a statement.           If one wants to

purchase a small quantity of allowances for whatever reason, the EPA’s auction is the place to do so

because utilities and intermediaries     will not deal in such small quantities.   The fact that some

environmental groups and law student associations bid such high prices once abundant information

about prices have become available suggests that they were either uninformed about the state of the

market, or were so eager to obtain an allowance that they bid a price high enough to ensure that

they would get one, or that they attached some positive value to purchase at a high price.

         Table 2 provides some numerical evidence on the behavior of successful bidders in the EPA

auctions. The Table shows the percentage difference between the average price paid and the lowest

price paid (the market-clearing     price) in each auction.   As we noted above, if the private market

were frictionless and perfectly competitive, all serious commercial bidders in the EPA auctions

would simply bid the market price. The smaller the differences shown in Table 2, the more closely

buyer behavior in the EPA auction conforms to this ideal. Consistent with the discussion so far, it

would be hard to argue that bidders in the 1993 auctions had a good idea of the market-clearing

price.   It would be a good deal easier to make this argument for the 1994 auctions, despite the
                                                     25


paucity of trades before March 1994.       In the 1995 and 1996 auctions, it seems clear that the

fi-ictionless, perfectly competitive ideal isagood        approximation to reality, despite the continued

presence of a few non-commercial high bidders.

       At the other end of the price spectrum, while by 1995 the very “low ball” bids that would

clearly be out of the money have largely disappeared, there continues to remain a long tail of offers

to buy at prices that are up to around 10OAbelow the best available information about market prices.

Putting in bids slightly below expected market price makes perfectly good sense for a regulated

electric utility seeking to purchase allowances.      First, the price that will clear the market is not

known with certainty and, in an auction with essentially no transactions costs, there is nothing to

lose by throwing in bids at prices slightly lower than those being quoted in the private market,

especially since there are likely to be transactions costs associated with substitutable private market

sales. If the buyer gets nothing in the annual EPA auction and needs allowances, the private market

will be open for business the next day and every day thereafter, so there are no opportunity costs

associated with putting in a low bid. This, of course, would not be the case if the EPA’s auction

were the only way to acquire allowances.     Second, regulated electric utilities may prefer to acquire

allowances through confidential private market transactions that provide flexibility to arrange the

ideal portfolio of allowance quantities and vintages rather than through the EPA auction. However,

the prices the utility negotiates may be subject to scrutiny by their state regulatory commissions.

By submitting bids to the EPA auctions at prices slightly below the prevailing private market

values, the utility has a response to the regulator’s question “How do we know that you paid the

lowest reasonable price for the allowances?”
                                                   26


        Finally, let us turn to the offers to sell allowances through the voluntary “private” sellers

component of the EPA’s auction on which Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and Plott (1996) focus.

Table 3 summarizes the relevant statistics from Figures 2-5. Particularly afier 1994, relatively few

allowances were voluntarily offered for sale in the EPA auctions.          Those allowances that were

offered for sale were typically offered at prices significantly higher than the market-clearing price.

As a result, less than one percent of the allowances offered were sold, and only about a third of a

percent of the allowances sold in the EPA auctions were voluntarily offered (as opposed to the

allowances withheld by law by EPA).         In all, only 2,610 allowances have been sold using the

private seller mechanism out of almost 780,000 that have been sold in EPA auctions and almost 7.5

million that have been traded overall.

        This suggests that rather than reservation prices of voluntarily offered allowances being

under-stated in the EPA auctions, the possibility that concerns Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and

Plott (1996), reservation prices are in fact over-stated relative to the alternative of private sales. The

evidence on buyer behavior in Table 2 makes it clear that this pattern cannot be explained by a lack

of information in the market. The most plausible explanation seems to be that some utilities use the

EPA auction process to demonstrate to regulators that they could not sell their allowances at prices

above those prevailing in the private market. In addition, as we noted above in connection with the

persistence of “low-ball” bids, there is no cost to offer to sell at a high reservation price.     Such a

sale would be found money to the utility.

        Most importantly, Table 3 makes clear that, if the EPA auctions have become a sideshow to

the private allowance market, the private sale component of those auctions has always been a very

minor act in that sideshow.     However serious the flaws in the auctions’ provisions for voluntary
                                                  27


allowance sales, they clearly cannot have had a discernible effect on the performance            of the

allowance market as a whole.




6. Summary and Conclusions

        It was clear to its proponents that the success of Title IV’s innovative tradable allowance

program for reducing sulfir dioxide emissions depended critically on the emergence of an effective

private allowance market.      At the insistence of some affected interests concerned that a robust

market would not develop, an EPA-administered          allowance auction and a provision for direct

allowance   sales at a high price were added to Title IV.          Critics have pointed to apparent

shortcomings in these mechanisms, particularly in the design of the annual allowance auctions that

EPA is required to hold.

        Our analysis of actual experience in the sulfur dioxide allowance market indicates that an

effective private market has in fact developed.   While it is impossible to say if an alternate auction

mechanism would have hastened that development noticeably, it is clear that since mid-1994, the

EPA auctions have been driven by the private market rather than vice versa. It does not appear that

the aspects of those auctions that have attracted critical academic attention have had any effect at all

on the actual operation of the market for S02 allowances in recent years. And it seems absolutely

clear that the incentive for strategic seller behavior advanced by Cason (1993, 1995) and Cason and

Plott (1996) has exerted absolutely no downward pressure on allowance prices in the real world.

        While the EPA auction design might very well have led to substantial inefficiencies ~~the

auctions were the only venue for allowance trading, the fact that buyers and sellers have relied

primarily on other trading mechanisms has made the EPA auctions largely irrelevant to market
                                                 28


performance.   Similarly, while other auction designs might have lead to more rapid development of

the allowance market as a whole, the fact is that a relatively efficient market has developed in a few

years’ time.
                                                   29


                                        REFERENCES

Allen, Frank Edward (1992). “Tennessee Valley Authority Is Buying Pollution Rights From

       Wisconsin Power,”    Wall Street Journal,    May 11, p. A12.

Bailey, Elizabeth M. (1996). “Allowance Trading Activity and State Regulatory Rulings:

       Evidence From the U.S. Acid Rain Program.” MIT Center for Energy and Environmental

       Policy Research, MIT-CEEPR      96-002 WP, March.

Braine, Bruce H. (1991). “Allowance Market Implications of Acid Rain Regulation.” Pp. 88-105

       in R. Locke and D. P. Harkawik, eds., The New Clean Air Act. Compliance and

       Opportune@. Arlington, VA: Public Utilities Reports.

Cason, Timothy N. (1993). “Seller Incentive Properties of EPA’s Emission Trading Auction.”

       Journal of Environmental   Economics and Management, 25 (September):      177-195.

Cason, Timothy N. (1995). “An Experimental Investigation of the Seller Incentives in EPA’s

       Emission Trading Auction.” American Economic Review, 85 (September): 905-922.

Cason, Timothy N., and Charles R. Plott (1996). “EPA’s New Emissions Trading Mechanism: A

       Laboratory Evaluation.” Journal of Environmental     Economics and Management,       30

       (March): 133-160.

Compliance Strategy Review. (selected issues, 1992-6), Fieldston Publications,   Washington DC.

Ellerman, A. Denny and Juan Pablo Montero (1996). “Why Are Allowance Prices So Low? An

       Analysis of the SOZ Emissions Trading Program.” MIT Center for Energy and

       Environmental   Policy Research, MIT-CEEPR       96-001 WP, February.

Energy Daily. Selected issues 1991, 1992, and 1993.
                                                   30


Fullerton, Don, Shaun P. McDermott, and Jonathan P. Caulkins (1 996). “Sulfur Dioxide

       Compliance of a Regulated Utility.” Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research,

       Working Paper 5542, April.

Hausker, Karl (1992). “The Politics and Economics of Auction Design in the Market for Sulfur

       Dioxide Pollution.” Journal ofPolicy Analysis and Management,        11   (Fall): 553-572.

Hoske, Mark T. (1993). “S02 Allowance Cost Falls to $122/ton in First EPA Auction”            Electric

       Power and Light, 71(5), pl.

ICF Resources Incorporated (ICF, 1990). “Comparison of the Economic Impacts of the Acid

       Rain Provisions of the Senate Bill (S. 1630) and the House Bill (S. 1630).” Draft Report

       Prepared for the U.S. Environmental      Protection Agency, July.

Joskow, Paul L. and Richard Schmalensee (1996). “The Political Economy of Market-Based

       Environmental     Policy: The U.S. Acid Rain Program.” MIT Center for Energy and

       Environmental     Policy Research, MIT-CEEPR 96-003 WP, March.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques (1995). “Game Theory and Empirical Economics: The Case of Auction

       Data,” IDEI Document de Travail 55, Toulouse, December.

Rigdon, Joan E. (1992). “ALCOA Unit Arranges $7.5 Million Sale of Pollution Allowances to

       Ohio Edison.”     Wall Street Journal.   July 1. A6.

U.S. Environmental     Protection Agency (EPA, 1995). Human Health Benefitsfiom        Sulfate

       Reductions    Under Title IV of the 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments.   Office of Air and

       Radiation, November.

    U.S. Enviromnental     Protection Agency (EPA, 1996). Acid Rain Program Update No, 3:

           Technology and Innovation. Acid Rain Division, EPA 430-R-96-004,           May.
                                                       Table 1

                    Allowances Sold In EPA Auctions And In The Private Market




                                 Number Allowances              Number of Allowances                    Total
                                 Sold in EPA Auction              Sold in the Private                Allowances
                                                                       Market*                           Sold



 Through March 1993                       150,010                           130,000                     280,010

April 1993-March 1994                     176,200                           226,384                     402,584

April 1994-March 1995                     176,400                        1,466,996                    1,643,396

April 1995-March 1996                     275,000                        4,917,560                    5,292,560




           Total:                         777,610                          6,740,940                  7,518,550




* The number of allowances sold in the private market includes inter-utility trades, trades between utilities and third
  parties, and trades between two non-utility parties. This number excludes intra-utility trades (including intra-holding
  company trades), reallocations, and options to trade which have not been exercised.
                                  32




                                Table 2

       Percentage Differences Between Average Winning Bids
            and Lowest Winning Bids in EPA Auctions




                                       6-Year Advance   7-Year Advance
Year             Spot Auction              Auction          Auction

1993                 20.6                                    11.5

1994                  6.0                    5.7              6.4

1995                  1.5                   2.3               1.6

1996                  3.2                    1.9              1.9
                                    33




                                  Table 3

         Allowances Privately Offered For Sale In EPA Auctions




                       Allowances        Percentage      Total     Percentage of
         Allowances      Offered           Offered    Allowances    Total Sales
Year       Offered      That Sold        That Sold        Sold        Offered

1993       125,510          10              0.01        150,010        0.01

1994      155,001         1,200             0.77        176,200        0.68

1995       22,306         1,400             6.28        176,400        0.79

1996       22,000            0              0.00       275,000         0.00



Total:    324,817        2,610              0.80       777,610         0.34
                           Price   (current   $/ton)
                                        .              N   N   u
                      in   o            0              0   m   o
             0        0    0            0              0   0   0



   JuI-92
             ]
   Sep-92

  Nov-92

   Jan-93

   Mar-93                          ●


  May-93

    Jul-93

   Sep-G3

   Nov-93

   Jan-94

   Mar-94

~. May-94
3                                                                  -,
(u                                                                 E“
    JuI-94                                                         c
                                                                   $
   Sep-94

   Nov-94

    Jan-95

    Mar-95

   May-95

    Jul-95

    Sep-95




                 1(
   Nov-95

    Jan-96       --

    Mar-96

    May-96
     o




I00000




150000




200000




250000




350iloo
     o




 50000




I00000        u




              .-




200000
          J
250000




300000




3500CM3
          Price




     o




50000




I 00000




1500U0




250000




300000




350QOC




            #
            WI
            o
                     Price




                       u     m
             0         o     o
         0   0         0     0
             I




                                 m




75000                            +
                                 c
                                 n
                                 -.
                                 0
                                 3




100000




125000




                 u
                              Price




          1   1
                  I   I   1     I     I   1   1   I   1
     o




                  I
I Ooooo




                                                          4

200000




30MO0




400000




500000
                        Price



                  r-l           A
                  o             o
          o       0             0

     o

              I

50000




100000




I 50000




200000




250000




300000




35000u
           Price




       o




25000




5OQoo

                   n-.
                   m
                   c
                   -
                    n


75000




IOoooo




125M
         Price




    o




50000




I Omo




30#oo




350000




           .
                   Price




           o



     I 00000



    2MOO0



    300000



    4moo


                           m
                           c
                           3
w


    600000



    700000



    800QO0



    900000



    I 000000




                   0
                   WI
               v
               o
         o
                 I   I   I
     0




25000




50000




                             >
I Omoo                       c
                             E
                             .
                             -.
                             e



125000




150000




             u
             o
                                Price




           I            I   I           I   1   I
       a
               [




               I


I 00000




2WO0




:00000




400000




5oi)ooo




                                c
                   ‘o
                   o
                   0
