                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              ISSUES IN KOREAN EXCHANGE
                                      RATE POLICY




                                       StanleyW. Black




                                     Working Paper 5747




                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 MassachusettsAvenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                  September 1996




This paper was presentedattheNBER EastAsian Seminaron Economics in Hong Kong, June 19-
22, 1996, This work is part of the NBER’s project on InternationalCapital Flows which receives
support from the Center for InternationalPolitical Economy. An earlierversion was presented at
the KDI Symposium on Prospectsof Yen-Dollar ExchangeRate andKorea’s ExchangeRate Policy,
Seoul, December 12, 1995. Revised 8/26/96. Any opinions expressed are those of the authorand
not those of the National Bureauof Economic Research,

O 1996 by Stanley W. Black. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs,may be quoted withoutexplicit permissionprovided thatfull credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                      NBER Working Paper 5747
                                                                              September 1996



                               ISSUES IN KOREAN EXCHANGE
                                       R4TE POLICY



                                          ABSTRACT

       Korea faces a numberof uniqueproblems thataffect its exchangeratepolicy. Among these

are its asymmetriccompetitive position vis-~-vis Japan,which is both its major supplier of machine

tools and a leading competitorin thirdmarkets;the currentpolicy of financialliberalizationthatgoes

along with democratic liberalization; and the implications of the potential futureunification of the

Korean peninsula. This paper considers the question of exchange ratepolicy for Korea in the face

of fluctuations in the yen/dollar rate, increasingcompetition from lower cost Asian countries, and

financial liberalization, The paper deals with external vs. internal targets, choice of external

comparison basket,and the effects of financialliberalization. The Korean choice of an independent

exchange rate policy is analyzed in terms of the trade-off between external shocks and inflation-

fighting credibility of the central bank. Financial liberalization brings with it increased capital

mobility. The paper also considers the possibility of a regional currency area, Korean unification,

and long run equilibrium.



Stanley W. Black
CB#3305 GardnerHall
Departmentof Economics
University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
                Issues in Korean Exchange Rate Policy

                              by Stanley W. Black
                            Department of Economics
                         University of North Carolina

I. Introduction

     As a medium-sized, rapidly industrializing country

approaching membership in the Organization of Economic

Cooperation and Development, Korea faces a number of unique

problems that affect its exchange rate policy. Among these are

its asymmetric competitive position vis-a-vis Japan, which is

both its major supplier of machine tools and a leading competitor

in third markets; the current policy of financial liberalization

that goes along with democratic liberalization; and the

implications of the potential future unification of the Korean

peninsula. The role of Japan as supplier and competitor makes the

widely fluctuating yen/dollar exchange rate a key determinant of

Korean competitiveness and terms of trade. Financial

liberalization is introducing capital flows as a major factor in

exchange rate determination. And the impact of German unification

on the European Monetary System has raised many questions about

the potential future effects of Korean unification. This paper

will seek to   explore     these   issues.



This paper was presented at the NBER East Asian Seminar on
Economics in Hong Kong, June 19-22, 1996. This work is part of
the NBER’s project on International Capital Flows which receives
support from the Center for International Political Economy. An
earlier version was presented at the KDI Symposium on Prospects
of Yen-Dollar Exchange Rate and Korea’s Exchange Rate Policy,
Seoul, December 12, 1995. Revised 8/26/96.

                                             1
                                                                                       2

        In the late 1980s, Korean exchange rate policy faced a

situation called the “three blessings” or “three lows” of the low

yen/dollar rate, low oil prices and low world interest rates. The

first of these gave Korea an export stimulus, the second reduced

the cost of energy imports, while the third lowered the cost of

servicing external debt. The major issue at the time was how to

avoid this windfall causing an unsustainable inflationary boom

and whether to allow the won to appreciate or to repay external

debt.

        In a controversial move, the Korean government adopted a

policy to repay much of its external debt, based on the

assumption     that the “three lows” were a temporary windfall.

Balassa and Williamson          [1987] argued at the time that

appreciation of the won to reduce the external surplus was a more

appropriate response, since it would permit additional domestic

investment. Cho [1995] has supported this position with

simulations indicating a much higher                investment path if external

debt had not been repaid.

        Korea must live a charmed life, since recently the world

environment again wore some of the same beneficial aspects,

including a low yen/dollar rate, low oil prices, and low interest

rates. On the other hand, the low yen/dollar rate was one of a

number of factors depressing the Japanese economy, an important

market for Korea. Since mid-1995 however, the yen/dollar rate has

risen significantly, removing some of the export stimulus.                       And

oil   prices   have   also   risen   from   their   lows   of   late   1995,   while
                                                                                                                             3

long term        interest          rates      have     rebounded             from      their     lows        of     early

1996.     And differently               from       1988,        competition            from     China        and other

Asian     competitor          nations         is    beginning           to     raise      concerns           for

Korean       policy-makers.             Financial           market       liberalization                 is    a new

factor       affecting        both      the    value        of    the    won and the             Korean            balance

of   payments.

         This    paper      will       consider        the       question         of     the   appropriate

exchange        rate     policy        for    Korea        in    the    face      of     fluctuations               in   the

yen/dollar         rate,      increasing            competition              from      lower     cost        Asian

countries,         and     financial          liberalization.                  Section         II discusses the

main exchange rate policy issues for Korea, dealing with external

Vs . internal targets, choice of external comparison basket, and

the effects of financial liberalization. Section III considers

the issue of regional currency areas. Section IV discusses Korean

unification, and Section V concludes with long run equilibrium.



II. Fundamentals of Exchange Rate Policy

A. Internal vs. External Objectives

         The exchange rate defines the external purchasing power of a

nation’s currency. It is essential that this external purchasing

power be consistent in the long run with the currency’s internal

purchasing power. Maintenance of the purchasing power of the

nation’s currency is the fundamental responsibility of the

central bank or monetary authority. As is well known, there are

two approaches to this fundamental problem.
                                                                                                                                  4

         The internal                     target      approach consists in the central bank

defining and maintaining a rate of growth of the money supply

that      is      consistent               with     price     stability,             defined        as    a low        and

stable         rate         of    inflation.           The exchange            rate        is     not    in    this      case     a

target         for     monetary             policy,         but   simply an instrument that is

controlled to ensure the consistency between the internal and

external purchasing power of the currency. This ensures the

competitiveness of domestic exporters in international markets.

         The external                     target      approach involves setting a fixed

exchange rate with a relatively stable currency, usually that of

a large trading partner, and using the external price level to

anchor domestic prices. In this case monetary policymakers must

act     to     keep         domestic         interest         rates        aligned         with     foreign           rates

and orient             all        policy          instruments         to    maintaining             the       exchange

rate.        In      case        domestic          inflationary            factors         cause        the    exchange

rate     to       become          overvalued,           devaluation            to     restore           competitiveness

is     required.

         The choice                 between         these     two methods             of    monetary           control          and

exchange             rate        policy      depends         on the        relative         importance            of

flexibility                 in the exchange rate and credibility                                    gained by

anchoring the domestic price level to world prices through a

fixed exchange rate. This problem has been formalized by

Deverajan and Rodrik [1991] in the context of a Barre-Gordon

model [1983] of an open economy subject to terms of trade shocks.

The central bank’s credibility is in question because it has an

output target that exceeds the level consistent with stable
                                                                                                                5

prices. Price and wage setters must choose their behavior before

knowing the terms of trade shock or the current exchange rate.

The central bank has two choices. It may commit itself to a fixed

exchange rate, which prevents it from offsetting the terms of

trade shock and from               inflating        to   exploit        the    prior    setting           of

wages    and prices        so     as to   achieve        a lower        unemployment        rate.          Or

it    may adopt      a flexible        rate    to    offset        terms of trade shocks,

which then allows it to indulge in inflationary behavior as well.

        If the central bank has relatively strong anti-inflation

credibility, then it will not be tempted to inflate when given

the option by flexibility. In this case, the flexible rate option

will allow use of the exchange rate to offset terms of trade

shocks without paying a cost in terms of higher inflation.

However, if the central bank’s credibility is low, this option is

best foregone, in order to avoid the inflationary consequences.

        What is the empirical evidence on the choice between pegged

and flexible rates? Edwards [1993] has shown that countries with

previous experience of low inflation may be able to use a fixed

exchange rate to keep their inflation low. But those with high

inflation may not be able to gain credibility simply by fixing

the exchange rate.

        Edwards [1996, this volume] argues that political

instability shortens the time horizon of the authorities and

reduces their willingness                 to   undertake           necessary       devaluations.

The    second     factor    makes      a peg    less      attractive,           while    the      first

has ambiguous effects. His regressions incorporate political
                                                                                                               6

instability          (measured as change in government) , the variability

of external shocks, central bank credibility, and the ability to

sustain a peg with reserves. The findings confirm the importance

of the economic and political factors.

          It appears that high credibility and high variance of

external shocks both contribute to a choice in favor of

flexibility, as Deverajan                   and Rodrik         argue.       Political           instability

also      contributes      to   the    choice       of     a flexible        rate,       suggesting

that     the   unwillingness          to    devalue        may be       important.

         Considering        a different           aspect     of     credibility,           countries

with      independent      central         banks    are     found      to   have     better        records

in     controlling       inflation         than    countries         with    central           banks   under

direct      government       control [Cukierman, et al 1993]. But Japan and

Korea are both exceptions to these findings, since they have

managed to achieve relatively low inflation without requiring

their central banks to be formally independent.

         The implications of these conclusions for Korea point in the

direction of flexibility, it seems to me. One may argue that

external shocks coming from the fluctuating yen/dollar rate will

remain important. The central bank has established a significant

degree of credibility. Governments are more likely to change in

the future than they have in the past.



Korea’s Choices

         For Korea, the choice among these options has evolved

gradually        (see Table 1). During                the    Bretton        Woods       era,     the
                                                                   7

external target approach was the universally chosen option. When

floating exchange rates began, Korea continued to peg its

exchange rate to the US dollar during much of the 1970s. Since

domestic inflation was not under control, occasional devaluations

were necessary to keep the external purchasing power of the won

in line with its falling internal purchasing power. But when the

dollar began its radical appreciation during the 1980s, Korea

shifted to a managed basket peg to avoid the won being pulled up

with the dollar.

     According to Oum and Cho [1995], in the 1980s Korea followed

a policy of changing the exchange rate to adjust the current

account, which is influenced by the exchange rate with a

substantial lag, as in most countries. Since the Korean current

account is heavily influenced by fluctuations in the yen/dollar

rate, this set up a lagged feedback from the cycle in the

yen/dollar rate to the won which caused the current account to

fluctuate widely.

     As the yen appreciated in the late 1980s after the Plaza

Agreement, Korea’s surplus grew, leading to appreciation of the

won. By 1988 the yen peaked and began to depreciate, while the

won kept appreciating as the surplus continued, despite the

worsening of the underlying competitive position. Domestic

investment increased moderately at first, but then took off in an

unsustainable boom in 1990-91, as the current account shifted

into deficit.
                                                                   8

     In response to the exaggerated fluctuations of the won, the

government in 1990 adopted a new exchange rate policy called the
I!MarketAverage Rate   sySteln”   .   It seems to have achieved

stabilization of the real exchange rate, or maintenance of

equilibrium between the external and internal values of the won.

     During the early 1980s, Korea along with several other

dynamic Asian economies took advantage of the sharp reduction of

inflation in industrialized countries to bring its own inflation

rate under control. As a result, since that time Korea has had

the option to use the internal target approach to control the

purchasing power of its currency. The liberalization of financial

markets that took place in the 1980s has changed the environment

in which monetary policy is made in Korea. Despite an

inflationary boom period in 1990-91 and continued strong growth

of the economy, the Bank of Korea has managed to hold the

inflation rate in the neighborhood of 5-6 percent per year.

     In conjunction with the liberalized financial system, Korea

moved in the direction of a market-based exchange rate policy in

1990, currently allowing market factors to move the won-dollar

exchange rate by up to 2.25 percent per day. At the same time,

banks and other participants in the market have been allowed to

hold foreign currency balances to enable them to create an

interbank market for foreign exchange.
                                                                       9

B. Choice of External Relationship

     In a multiple currency world, “the” foreign exchange rate

must be defined relative to each trading partner whose currency

is used in external transactions. For Korea, the primary trading

partners are North America, Japan, Europe, and Other Asia. The

major currencies involved would thus be the US dollar, Japanese

yen, and the deutsche mark (as a proxy for other European

currencies) . Since these exchange rates have fluctuated sharply

in recent years, Korea has been forced to accept significant

fluctuations in traded goods prices.

     The main issue can be illustrated by the following

hypothetical example. Assume that Korea exports only to the

United States in dollars and imports only from Japan in yen. If

e~ is the won/yen exchange rate and e$ is the won/dollar exchange

rate, then export prices are p$ e$ and import prices are PI ex. The

terms of trade will then be p$ e$ /pl eY = p$ /pX eY,$, where eY,$is

the yen/dollar exchange rate. If dollar prices and yen prices

remain relatively stable, the terms of trade will fluctuate with

the yen/dollar exchange rate, no matter what happens to ex or e$.

This is the key problem for Korea. Only if the yen/dollar rate

follows purchasing power parity will Korea be unaffected by its

fluctuations.

     If Korea pegs to the dollar, her import prices will then

fluctuate with the yen/dollar rate, while export prices are

stable. If she pegs to the yen, her export prices will fluctuate

with the yen/dollar rate, while import prices are stable.
                                                                        10

     Choosing a basket   peg enables Korea to balance its competing

interests and minimize the fluctuation of traded goods prices.

Define the basket as e~ =e$”$eI”Yeti”ti.Then pegging to the basket

sets @k = a$ ~$ + ax @x + cc~ ~~ = O, where as , ay, and ati are the

weights applied to the dollar, the yen, and the deutsche mark (or

ecu) exchange rates.

     The weights are normally chosen to minimize the impact of

the resulting fluctuations on the foreign currency value of the

balance of trade. Assume that the export and import shares of the

dollar, yen, and dm are wi and vi for i = $, Y, dm. Using the

traditional model for exports and imports would put ai = [c(qf-

1)/(6+qf)] wi + vi ~, where ~ and qf are the domestic and foreign

elasticities of demand for imports and c is the domestic

elasticity of supply of exports (assuming ~f is infinite for a

small country). If qf = 2.5, q = .7, and   ●   = 2 for Korea [Kwack,

1986], this would give weights approximately equal to the trade

shares of the dollar, yen, and mark, or (using 1994 trade shares)

39 percent for the dollar, 36 percent for the yen, 25 percent for

the mark.

     On the other hand, with $30 billion worth of foreign

exchange reserves, Korea no longer has to worry about the

availability of foreign currency. Weights that would minimize the

impact on the domestic currency value of the balance of trade

would limit effects on domestic output and employment. In this

case, the weights should be ai = [(l+~)~f/(~+~f)]Wi   +   (1-~)   vi,

which would imply weights of 43 percent for the dollar, 32
                                                                                                11

percent for the yen, and 25 percent for the dm. The larger role

for the dollar under the domestic currency criterion reflects the

greater importance of dollar markets for domestic                          currency       export

receipts, which have a higher elasticity than                        domestic     currency

import payments.

        What this analysis omits is the impact of competing

suppliers in the export market, which for Korea would be Japan

and the other Asian industrializing countries, mainly                            Taiwan      and

Hong Kong. Including competitors would increase the weight on the

yen and add Taiwan and Hong Kong to the basket. For the past ten

years, Hong Kong and Taiwan have both pegged their currencies

very closely to the US dollar. So the result would be to add to

the weights of both the yen and the dollar in the basket, with

perhaps little effect on the overall proportions.                          [See

Williamson, 1995].

        Even if Korea chooses not to peg its currency, the basket

represents the appropriate basis for comparison of the movements

of    the    external   and domestic        purchasing       power   of   the   won.   Chart        1

shows       the   OECD’S measures      of   nominal      effective    exchange     rates       of

the    won and related       currencies.       An inverse correlation will be

noticed for most of the currencies relative to the movements of

the Japanese yen. This reflects the degree to which their dollar

pegs, especially during the 1980s, moved their currencies

relative to the yen.

        Chart 2 shows the corresponding real effective exchange

rates, including my calculations for the bilateral Chinese yuan/
                                                                  12

dollar rate. During the 1980s most of the East Asian currencies

moved inversely to the yen in real as well as nominal terms. In

the 90s, however, the Hong Kong and Singapore dollars have

appreciated more in real terms than the Taiwan dollar, the won,

or the yuan. which except for the latter have been relatively

stable in real terms.

     Chart 3 indicates the behavior of the won, in real and

nominal terms, along with prices, as measured relative to

consumer prices in industrial countries. From the perspective of

stability in the real exchange rate, the “Market Average Rate

Systemt’ appears to be performing rather well. Put differently,

the external value of the won is conforming more closely to its

internal value.



C. Financial Liberalization

     In July 1993 the Government of Korea announced a seven-year

plan for liberalization of the financial sector of the economy

[Park, 1993].     The major factors include gradual deregulation of

all interest rates except deposit rates by 1997, eliminating

government influence over bank lending operations, encouraging

the development of competition and new financial instruments, and

liberalization of the foreign exchange market and of capital

flows. The purpose of this program is to use the financial

markets to improve the efficiency with which financial resources

are channeled to investment. In conjunction with this reform, the

“real name” system was implemented in 1993, requiring all
                                                                        13

accounts to bear the real name of the holder. These major reforms

are having important repercussions on the Korean economy and

society. The tight network of personal relationships which has

characterized the partnership between business and government is

being replaced with more impersonal market-based relationships

and explicit regulations.

     The impact of financial liberalization on the foreign

exchange market is significant. Kenen [1993] argues that the

primary external effect of a credible liberalization of domestic

financial markets in a developing country will be substantial

capital inflow, leading to appreciation of the real exchange

rate. He treats the existence of capital controls as equivalent

to a tax on exporting capital. Liberalization eliminates the tax

now and in the future. Thus capital inflow comes in response to

the removal of the threat of future taxation of domestic

financial assets. If the exchange rate is pegged, such capital

inflows   Will   reqUire   sterilization of large reserve inflows. If

the exchange rate is floating, substantial nominal appreciation

will occur.

     But appreciation in response to capital inflow is only one

possibility. Suppose that the capital controls limit both

foreigners who wish to import capital and Koreans who wish to

invest abroad. Their removal then leads to substantial portfolio

diversification by both foreigners and domestic residents and a

sharp increase in both capital inflows and outflows, with little

impact on the exchange rate. According to Korean balance of
                                                                  14

payments data, both capital inflows and capital outflows have

increased sharply since the liberalization of the financial

sector in 1993. In the Korean context, the adoption of the “real

name” system could itself lead to capital outflow. If formerly

confidential transactions are now exposed to the authorities, in

future such transactions would have to be carried out offshore to

remain unknown to the authorities.

     In actuality, the real (and nominal) exchange rate of the

Korean won has appreciated since the beginning of the 1993-97

liberalization of financial markets. The reasons for this

behavior are probably found more in the capital account than the

current account. During the period 1987-89, the influence of the

current account on exchange rate policy was so strong that

Korea’s exchange rate appreciated strongly at the same time that

reserves grew sharply and external debt was repaid. Then the

external windfall temporarily disappeared with the rise in

petroleum prices, interest rates, and the yen value of the dollar

during the Gulf War crisis in 1989-90. Strong real wage growth

during an inflationary boom provided internal stimulus. Korea’s

current account turned quickly negative, and the exchange rate

depreciated in real terms during the period 1991-93. Thus the

capital inflows, far from being a problem for monetary

management, were welcome financing for the current account

deficit [Folkerts-Landau, et al, 1995].

     Associated with the program of financial liberalization is a

substantial liberalization of the foreign exchange market itself,
                                                                  15

permitting banks, firms, and individuals to hold foreign

currencies more freely and to make transactions more freely [Kim,

1994]. Also, the permitted daily fluctuation of the won has been

gradually increased, moving in the direction of a freely floating

system. This does not mean, however, that intervention will be

avoided, as foreign exchange reserves have increased by $14.5

billion since July 1993, in response to strong net capital

inflows.

D. Limiting the Rate of Capital Inflow

     A range of policies may be considered in the effort to keep

capital inflows from overwhelming domestic exchange rate and

monetary policies   (IMF, 1995) . Keeping the exchange rate flexible

will impose some costs on risk-averse investors and thereby limit

capital mobility. Taxing the interest earnings of foreign

investors will also limit the inflow of capital. Equivalently,

the authorities may impose reserve requirements on foreign

capital inflows. Intervention in the foreign exchange market will

limit the impact of capital inflows on the exchange rate, which

if unsterilized will lead to an increase in the domestic money

supply . Some amount of sterilized intervention can also be used,

at the cost of the interest paid on the bonds issued to soak up

the increase in liquidity. Finally, the authorities could simply

set limits on the allowed amount of capital inflows of various

types. This last tactic, like the taxes and reserve requirements,

may be subject to evasion. More seriously, it will create rents

and may lead to rent-seeking behavior, bribery, and so on. In
                                                                  16

summary, the best policy to limit capital inflows will be some

judicious combination of all of the above, together with allowing

some non-predictable amount of exchange rate appreciation.

III. Should Korea Join a Currency Area?

     One solution to some of the problems of exchange rate policy

is the formation of a currency bloc. By pegging to a single

currency standard, whether that of a large country or of a group

of like-minded countries (as in the case of the European Monetary

System) , a country can reduce the exchange-rate-induced

fluctuation in its traded goods prices relative to the members of

the bloc. Needless to say, this makes sense only if the partner

or partners have a stable economy and inflation rate.

     For Korea, there are only two choices here, either pegging

to a basket including her major markets such as Japan, the United

States, and Europe or pegging together with a group of

competitors such as Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Thailand, and

Malaysia. The first possibility would essentially require Korea

to choose between stability of traded goods prices and the

ability to respond to external shocks, as discussed above. While

this option could minimize the variability of traded goods

prices, it would not eliminate the terms of trade fluctuations

noted earlier.

     The second possibility would require a group of diverse

competitors at different levels of development to agree on

exchange rate policy and therefore on monetary policy over an

extended period of time. It is already clear that these countries
                                                                   17

face significantly different economic policy problems and have

chosen different exchange rate policies in the past. The Hong

Kong dollar has been pegged to the US dollar since 1984, while

both Taiwan and Singapore have steadily appreciated, Singapore

much faster. In addition, Korea’s financial liberalization is

proceeding on its own schedule, independently of the other Asian

industrializing countries.

     The feasibility of a currency area also depends on the

degree of symmetry of the shocks expected to hit the various

member countries. Contemplating the potential members is not

reassuring on this score. South Korea will someday have to adjust

to reunification with North Korea. Hong Kong is facing

reintegration with China and its own entirely different set of

structural adjustments. Taiwan continues to face the threat of

attempts to reintegrate it into China. Thailand and Malaysia are

at different stages in the development process from Korea.

Reviewing these issues indicates the advantages of an independent

exchange rate policy for Korea, for the foreseeable future.

     This does not, however, rule out the usefulness of increased

monetary cooperation in East Asia. With growing capital mobility

and the potential for external financial shocks spilling over

into Asian markets, coordinated strategies for responding to

external shocks could be attractive. Coordinated responses to

wide fluctuations in the yen/dollar rate could help avoid the

extent of fluctuations in real exchange rates that took place in

the late 1980s.
                                                                         18

IV. Implications of Korean Unification

      When and if Korea reunites, it will face major structural

readjustment problems. The example of German unification suggests

that such a large real shock may be more easily adjusted to with

a flexible rate. While the full implications of reunification are

beyond the scope of this paper, it is at least clear that there

would be a large demand for new investment to enlarge the capital

stock of North Korea, both public and private. Such a large

demand shock might also be accompanied by a negative supply

shock , if Korea were to follow Germany’s example and raise wages

in the North without any corresponding increase in productivity.

The net excess demand shock would require a contractionary fiscal

response. If this were not provided, as it was not in Germany,

then tight monetary policy would be needed to prevent inflation.

The real interest rate would rise, and the real exchange rate

would appreciate at once, then depreciate gradually over time in

keeping with uncovered interest rate parity. The size of the net

excess demand shock and the implied   exchange   rate   effect   could   be

reduced   by more appropriate fiscal policy and wage policy.



V. Long Run Equilibria

      In an economy like Korea, where per capita incomes and real

wages are rising strongly over time, one major factor affecting

the equilibrium real exchange rate is the rising relative price

of nontraded goods, as domestic labor becomes more expensive.
                                                                                                                                   19

Thus the real exchange rate would be expected to appreciate over

time as traded goods become relatively cheaper.

         The other major factor is the increased attractiveness of

Korean real and financial assets, both to foreigners and to

Koreans themselves, as rates of return continue to be high and

the economy becomes increasingly integrated with the rest of the

world. This will also tend to appreciate the real value of the

currency, offset to some degree as Korean firms and individuals

diversify their asset holdings abroad. Particularly evident here

is the drive of Korean chaebol                                     to establish             overseas          operations

as     part        of    the     process           of    globalization.

         However,              structural               weaknesses         can      limit      the     rate     of    real

appreciation,                  because         of       the    negative          effect       it     has    on the     Korean

current            account.           Currently,              Korea      has     been      losing      market        share         in

the     United           States        to    Asian           developing          countries,           offsetting            this

with     sales           gains        in    rapidly           growing      Asian          markets.         Among several

problems            with       this        process           are   the    increasing           tendency         of    Korean

firms         to    move       production               to    other      Asian      markets          and the       continued

reliance            of    Korean           firms        on    imports      of     Japanese           machinery        for

expansion.               Unless        Korea         can overcome these weaknesses, her

ability to resume a healthy path of gradual real appreciation

will be in question.
Table 1. Korean Exchange Rate Regimes

 Period          Regime
                                           I Characteristics
 1955-1972       Bretton Woods Era          Inflation/Devaluations

 1973-1979       Pegged to US dollar        Inflation/Devaluations

 1980-1989       Managed Basket Peg         Current Balance Target

 1990-present
                I “Market Rate   System”
                                           I Stable Real   Exchange Rate
                                                                                            21

                                      References

Balassa, Bela, and John Williamson. 1987. Adjusting                           to Success:

      Balance     of Payments     Policy    in the East         Asian   NICS,

      Washington, Institute for International Economics, Policy

      Analysis No. 17.



Barro, Robert J., and David B. Gordon. 1983. “A Positive Theory

      of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model,’! Journal                         of

      Political     Economy,     August, pp. 589-610.



Cho , Jae Ho. 1995. “External Debt and Policy Controversy in

      Korea,!! Southern        Economic    Journal,         62:1,   pp. 467-480.



Cukierman, Alex, Steven B. Webb, and Bilin Neyapti. 1993.

      “Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect

      on Policy Outcomes, “ World           Bank     Economic       Review,     6, pp. 353-

      398.



Deverajan,   S.    and Dani     Rodrik.    1991.     llDo    the Benefits of Flexible

      Exchange Rates Outweigh Their Costs?” Working Paper No. 561,

      Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.



Edwards, Sebastian. 1993. ItTheExchange Rate as a Nominal

      Anchor,” Weltwirtschaftliches                Archiv,     pp. 1-32.
                                                                              22

Edwards, Sebastian. 1996. ‘lExchangeRates and the Political

     Economy of Macroeconomic Discipline,” ~erican                Economic

     Review,     86:2, pp. 159-163.



Edwards, Sebastian. this volume. I!TheDeterminants of the Choice

     Between Fixed or Flexible Exchange-Rate Regimes.’!



Folkerts-Landau, David, et al. 1995. l~Effect of Capital Flows on

     the Domestic Financial Sectors in APEC Developing

     Countries,” in Mohsin S. Khan and Carmen M. Reinhart                (eds.),

     Capital     Flows   in the APEC Region,      Occasional Paper No. 122,

     Washington, International Monetary Fund.



International Monetary Fund. 1995. Capital Account

     Convertibility: Review of Experiences and Implications for

     IMF Policies. Occasional Paper No. 131, Washington.

Kenen, Peter B. 1993. “Financial Opening and the Exchange Rate

     Regime,” in Financial         Opening:   Policy   Issues   and Experiences

     in Developing       Countries,      OECD, Paris, pp. 237-251.



Kim, Young-Soo. 1994.        llForeign    Exchange Market in Korea”

     Quarterly     Review,    Korea Exchange Bank, 3rd Quarter, pp. 3-

     13.



Kwack, Sung Y. 1986. “Policy Analysis with a Macroeconomic Model

     of Korea,” Economic        Modelling,    July, pp. 175-196.
                                                                      23

Oum, Bong-Sum and Cho, Dong-Chul. 1995. “Korea’s Exchange Rate

     Movements in the 1990s: Evaluation and Policy Implications,fr

     Republic of Korea Economic Bulletin,      December, pp. 2-16.



Park, Pyeong Kyu. 1993. ‘lKorea~s Five-Year (1993-97) Financial

     Reform Planrl’ Quarterly   Review,   Korea Exchange Bank, 2nd

     Quarter, pp. 3-15.



Williamson, John. 1995.   llExchange   Rate Policies for East Asian

     Countries in a World of Fluctuating Rates,” KDI Symposium on

     Prospects of Yen-Dollar Exchange Rates and Korea’s Exhange

     Rate Policy.
 Chart 1. Asian Effective Exchange Rates
150

140

130

120

110

100

 90
                    a
 80                     .


 70

 60

 50
      1982   1984           1986              1988                1990         1992   1994
                                   Source:   OECD    Economic   Outlook   58
      Chart 2. Real Effective Exchange Rates
130
         4

120


110


100


 90
        “’””””””””””””””7”””z”””””’
                       Am

 80


                                                                                                                   b      A
 70      I    [     I        I       I             1           I            I          I           I      I    I

       1982       1984            1986                   1988                      1990                 1992       1994
                                         Source:       OECD,       IMF, author’s   calculation




                         ~       Chiny         ~               HK$                 ~             Kwon

                         ~       Sing$         +               Taiw$               +             JapYen
Chart 3. Korea Exchange Rate and Prices
140


 30


 20


 10


 00


 90


 80


 70
      1982   ‘   1984   1986    1988                   1990   1992   ‘   1994   “
                               Source:   OECD,   IMF
