NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH TO
EXCHANGE RATES: THEORY
AND TESTS

Prakash Apte
Piet Sercu
Raman Uppal

Working Paper 5748

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996
The authors are grateful for suggestions and comments to Richard Baillie, Anton Barten, Geert
Bekaert, Martin Boileau, Paul De Grauwe, Mick Devereux, Harris Dellas, Geert Gielen, Ronald
MacDonald, Gonzalo Rubio, Frans Spinnewyn, Rend Stulz, and workshop participants at
Universidad del Pais Vasco, K.U. Leuven, Center for European Policy Research, and the 1995
meetings of the European Finance Association. The usual disclaimer applies. This paper was
presented at the NBER conference “Universities Research Conference on the Determination of
Exchange Rates” and is part of NBER’s project on International Capital Flows. We are grateful to
the Center for International Political Economy for the support of this project. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
01996 by Prakash Apte, Piet Sercu and Raman Uppal. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5748
September 1996

THE EQUILIBRIUM APPROACH TO
EXCHANGE R4TES: THEORY
AND TESTS

ABSTRACT

We characterize the equilibrium exchange rate in a general equilibrium economy without
imposing

strong

imperfections.

restrictions

on the output

processes,

preferences,

or commodity

market

The nominal exchange rate is determined by differences in initial wealths–the

currencies of richer countries tend to be overvalued by PPP standards-and by differences of marginal
indirect utilities of total nominal spending.

Changes in the exchange rate mirror differences in

growth rates of real spending weighted by relative risk-aversion (which can be time-varying and can
differ across countries), and in the case of non-homothetic
rates computed from marginal spending weights.

utility functions, differences in inflation

Thus, standard regression or cointegration tests

of PPP suffer from missing-variables biases and ignore variations in risk aversions across countries
and over time, We also present cointegration tests of the version of the model with constant relative
risk aversion (CRRA) and homothetic preferences. When nominal spending is given an independent
role (next to prices) in the short-term dynamics, both PPP and the CRRA model become acceptable.

Prakash Apte
I.I.M. Bangalore
Bannerghatta Road
Bangalore 560076
INDIA
apte@iimb.emet. in
Raman Uppal
Faculty of Commerce
University of British Columbia
2053 Main Mall
Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z2
CANADA
uppal@finance, commerce.ubc .ca

Piet Sercu
D. T.E.W.
K.U. Leuven
Naamsestraat 69
3000 Leuven
BELGIUM
piet,sercu@econ.kuleuven.ac.be

The Equilibrium Approach to Exchange Rates:
Theory and Tests

Relative to the monetary models of the exchange rate, “equilibrium” models offer the advantage of
being based on mainstream
equilibrium

micro-economics

and general-equilibrium

analysis. 1 Still, these

models of the exchange rate often depend on very specific assumptions

number of goods and countries, the utility functions and production
friction in the international
general equilibrium
of the Purchasing

processes,

about the

and the type of

goods markets. Our objective is to characterize the exchange rate in a

setting without imposing strong restrictions on the model. In contrast to most
Power Parity (PPP) literature, where the relation between exchange rates and

prices is derived rather informally, we show under what alternative sets of assumptions the general
equilibrium

model reduces to PPP, and, especially, how exchange rates are determined when PPP

does not hold. We also formulate and implement a new test of PPP against a specific alternative.

On the theoretical front, we characterize the equilibrium exchange rate in a multi-country
and multi-commodity

economy

where

there may be fixed and/or

proportional

costs

for

reallocating goods across countries, and where agents’ utility functions need not be homothetic,

or

of the HARA class, or identical across countries, Our main findings are the following:
(a) In general, the nominal exchange rate mirrors differences

in initial wealths and marginal

indirect utilities of nominal spending. The effect of initial wealths is that, by PPP standards,
the currencies of richer countries tend to be overvalued. Necessary conditions for differences
in marginal
antior

indirect utilities,

differences

on the other hand, are (a) commodity

in consumption

preferences,

and (b), perhaps

market imperfections
less predictably,

lSee, for example, Stockman (1980), Lucas (1982), Domowitz and Hakkio (1985), Svensson (1985 a, b),
Hodrick and Srivastava
(1986), Stulz (1987), Stockman
and Dellas (1989), Dumas (1992), Engel
( 1992a, b), Backus and Smith (1993), Bekaert (1994), and Sercu, Van Hulle, and Uppal (1995).

risk-

The Equilibrium

Approach

pa~e 2

to Exchange Rates

aversion.
(b) The popular
implications.

case of risk-neutrality

and homothetic

First, under these assumptions

market imperfections

preferences

has rather exceptional

relative PPP holds irrespective

of commodity

and differences in consumption preferences. Second, initial wealth does

not affect the equilibrium

if (and only i~ the assumptions

of perfect goods markets

and

identical preferences are added.
(c) In another special case—with
functions—we
Specifically,

homothetic,

constant relative risk aversion (CRRA) utility

obtain a tractable and testable generalization
according

of the traditional PPP equation.

to the CRRA model there are two missing variables

equation (the two countries’ nominal spending);

moreover, the elasticities

rate with respect to the price indices need not be identical across countries,

in the PPP

of the exchange
and their sign

differs from what PPP predicts.
(d) In a (more realistic)

model with non-homothetic

preferences,

the nominal exchange

rate

change depends not only on the standard (“average”) inflation differential across countries (as
in the PPP model) but also on the inflation differential

computed on the basis of marginal

consumption weights, growth in real spending, and the (generally time-v~ing)

degree of risk

aversion in the two countries.
(e) From items (b) and (d), we infer that standard regression or cointegration
from missing-variables

tests of PPP suffer

biases and ignore variations in risk aversions across countries and

over time. In hyperinflation

samples, relative PPP may seem to hold fairly well because the

missing variables then behave quite similarly and because the elasticities of the exchange rate
with respect to all variables sum to unity,

We complement

our theoretical

analysis of the exchange

rate with empirical

version of the model with constant relative risk aversion and homothetic

preferences,

test of a
using the

Johansen and Juselius (1990) cointegration framework. We find, first, that the outcome of the tests

crucially depends on whether (and how) nominal spending is allowed to enter into the short-term
dynamics

of the exchange

rate: If nominal

spending

is entirely

absent from the short-term

dynamics, or when only real spending is included in the vector autoregessions

(VARS), we reject

both PPP and the CRRA model. Second, when nominal spending is given an independent

role

(next to prices) in the short-term dynamics, both PPP and the CRRA model become acceptable.
We provide a theoretical explanation

for the inability to distinguish between the PPP and CRRA

models in samples where nominal spending and price data have sirnil~ time paths.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section I, we present a generalized version
of the Stockman (1980) equilibrium

model, In Section II, we analyze deviations from Absolute

PPP under homothetic

for the general case, and then for the special cases of risk

utility—first

neutrality and constant relative risk aversion. We also discuss the implications of the CRRA model
for cointegration

tests of exchange rate models. In Section III, we test this special version of the

model. As mentioned

before, the results are ambiguous,

In Section IV, we therefore return to

theory, We derive a general model for changes in the exchange rate and we use this model to reinterpret regression
concludes, A glossa~

tests of relative PPP and cointegration
summarizing

tests of the CRRA model, Section V

the mathematical notation used in the paper is included at the

end of Section V.

I.

The Economy and the Equilibrium Exchange Rate

In this section, we first describe a model of a multi-country,
commodity

markets. We impose only a few (very standard) restrictions on preferences,

on production
imperfections.
setting.

multi-good economy with imperfect

or endowment

processes

or on the degree

or type of commodity

and none
market

In the second part of this section, we chmacterize the exchange rate in this general

The economy that we consider consists of M 22 countries. We focus on two arbitrarily
selected countries that are referred to as the home country (subscript k = 1) and the foreign country
(k= 2). Each country has a representative

consumer with a standard, strictly quasi-concave

utility

function defined over N 21 goods. Across countries these representative individuals may differ in
terms of risk-aversion, consumption preferences, and initial wealths.

The outputs of each of the N goods can be stochastic over time. The economies could be
exchange economies where output is given by exogenous endowment processes (as in Stockman
(1980) and Lucas (1982)) or production economies with endogenous
Dumas (1992) and Stulz (1987)). The specification

investment decisions (as in

of the production or endowment processes is

quite general: some goods may be produced everywhere, while other goods maybe produced only
in some countries.

International

shipment of these goods may be costly for some or even all of

these goods ; these costs are assumed to be purely variable costs (as in Dumas ( 1992) and Sercu et
al. (1995)). Given these costs for transferring goods across countries, some goods may be traded
all the time, some may be tradable in the strict sense (that is, traded only if the price difference is
sufficient] y large to justify incurring the shipment costs), and some goods may be de facto nontradable.z For simplicity, money is introduced into the model via the Lucas (1982) cash-in-advance
constraint.3

We assume
decentralized

that financial

consumption

markets

and investment

are complete
decisions

and perfect.

is identical

Thus, the outcome

to the solution

of

of a central

20ther frictions could be introduced, like shipment lags (goods sent from one country at time t arrive only
at time t+]) and transaction lags (a trade arranged at time t is implemented
at time t+ 1 only). It can be
shown that neither transaction lags nor shipment lags affect any of our conclusions.
3Essentia11y the same results would be obtained if real money balances were introduced as an argument in
the utility function, except that the price index will contain the interest cost of money balances—see,
for
instance, Stulz (1987).

planner’s problem of the form
M

T

Max Et[ ~ ul(~l(S))

ds] + ~

T

(1.1)

ek Et[ ~ uk(~k(s)) ds] .

k=2

This optimization

is constrained

outputs, the production

by an opportunity

functions,

set that depends on the currently

and the shipping technology.

available

We do not need to specify the

opportunity set explicitly. In (1.1), ~(t) is the vector of consumption quantities Ckj(t) of good j (=1,
. . .. N) consumed by the representative
function of the representative

individual in country k (= 1, . . .. M) and Uk is the utility

investor in country k. The relative weight assigned by the central

planner to each of the other countries, ek, generally is a function the initial distribution of wealth in
the equivalent

decentralized

endowments,

the characteristics

the frictions

in the international

functions.s

problem.d

In turn, these initial wealths

depend

on the initial

of the (stochastic) investment functions or endowment processes,
markets

for consumption

and capital goods, and the utility

For example, one sufficient (but not necessary) set of assumptions

when the utility functions, the initial endowments,

to obtain gk = 1 is

and the parameters of the output process of all

countries are identical.

Given the above assumptions, we now derive the exchange rate. Define the net endowment
of each good in each country as the amount available for consumption.
the net endowments

In an exchange economy,

are, of course, identical to the gross endowments,

while in a production

economy we need to set aside the resources needed for the optimal investments identified from the

41n a decentralized
economy with a complete capital market, there exists a portfolio strategy that allows
investors to implement the central planner’s solution. For example, consider the case where t3~ = 1, utility
functions are equal, and shipmen[ costs are zero. The central planner’s solution then is to give each of the
M countries an equal amount of consumption, The portfolio strategy that implements this plan is that each
country holds 1~-th
of the shares of each productive asset, so that each country can obtain 1~-th
of
world output.
5When commodity preferences are not equal, t32 obviously depends also on the (arbitrarily
the reference bundle in which each country’s real wealth is expressed.

chosen)

size of

The Equilibrium

Approach

solution of ( 1.1). If ( 1.1) is maximized,
current consumption
investments.

page 6

to ExchanKe Rates

it must be impossible

to further increase the utility from

in one country without reducing either consumption

in another country or

Denote the aggregate utility of the central planner from immediate consumption

by

(boldface) U(.):
U(q(t)) = ul(Ql(t))

M
+ ~.2ek uk(a(t)).

(1.2)

Thus, in the optimum identified from ( 1.1), U(q(t)) must be at its maximum subject to the feasible
set implied by the net endowments
consumption,

and the transaction technology. From this Pareto-optimality

of

it follows that the relative price for any pair of goods can be read off as the marginal

rate of substitution (MRS), along U(~(t)), in the optimum.
Let us chose, as the pair of goods, one unit of good j located in country 1 and one unit of
the same good j located in coun~

2. The local-currency prices of these goods are denoted by plj(t)

and pzj(t). Because the relative price has to be computed
common

numeraire,

we need a reference

numeraire

from nominal prices expressed

and an exchange

rate. Without

in a

loss of

generality, we select currency 1 as the numeraire, and use the symbol S(t) to denote the exchange
rate (units of country-1 currency per unit of currency 2). Below, we write the condition that equates
the relative price to the MRS:
dU(t)/~Czi(t)
= dU(t)/~Clj(t)
“

_

In Proposition

(1.3)

1, below, we now link the nominal exchange rate to the marginal indirect utility

function.6 The indirect utility function, V(Mk(t), Pk(t)), is defined as

V(Mk(t), pk(t)) ~ ~~,

{Uk(gk(t)) - Ak(t) [j~lckj(t)

Pkj(t)

- Mk(t)]

}J

(1 .4)

where Mk(t) is the amount of nominal spending, expressed in units of currency k. The marginal

6Proposition

1 is a familiar

result in the Unbiased

Expectations

literature;

see, for instance,

Lewis (1995).

The Equilibrium

page 7

App roach to Exchange Rates

indirect utility of nominal spending in country k is the multiplier, A(t), in the above optimization
problem:
~v(Mk(t), ~(t))
Ak(t) =

Proposition

1: The nominal exchange

dMk(t)

‘

rate, S(t), is proportional

to the ratio of the marginal

indirect utility of total nominal spending in the two countries:
A2(t)
= ‘2 Al(t) I

‘(t)

(1.5)

Proof Substitute (1.2) into (1.3) to relate the central planner’s MRS to the marginal utilities of the
two countries:
= e2 ~Uz(t)/~Czi(t)
dUl(t)/dClj(t)
“

y

Then solve for the exchange rate:
~Uz(~z(t)) / ~C2i(t)
P2j(t)
s(t) = ez ~u~(~~(t)) / aclj(t) c
plj(t)
To obtain (1.5), we substitute

dUk(t)/dckj(t)

= Ak(t) pjk(t), which is the first-order

condition

obtained from the optimization problem defined in (1.4). +

We wish to study the implications
deviations

of Proposition

1 for the real exchange

rate and

from PPP. In Section II, the focus is on the level of the exchange rate. Most of this

discussion is confined to the special case of homothetic utility functions. h this section we obtain a
new sufficient condition for PPP, and a testable generalized equation that contains PPP as a special
case. We test this model in Section III. In the non-homothetic
to obtain a tractable characterization

preferences case, it is rarely possible

of the level of the exchange rate from ( 1.5); however, as

shown in Section IV, an interesting general characterization of changes in exchange rates is always
possible,

II. Characterizing

the tivel

of the Exchange Rate

In this section, we consider the special case of homothetic preferences. We first discuss the general
implications of homothetic preferences for the exchange rate equation (1.5). We then consider two
alternative

special cases that both imply PPP, artd we derive the CRRA exchange rate model of

which PPP is a special case. Lastly, we discuss the implications

of our theoretical

results for

empirical tests of PPP.

11.A

Implications

By definition,

of the Assumption

a homothetic

preferences

The function

in the consumption

@(.), reflects

quantities

LIk(Lk(t)) can be thought

(which are independent

transformation,

Utility Functions

utility function can be written as uk(~(t))

Uk(Qk(t)) is linear homogeneous
transformation.

of Homothetic

= @[Uk(Qk(t))], where

and where @k is a positive

of as summarizing

of wealth or total spending),

the degree of risk aversion,

the consumption

while the curvature

This separation

of the

of consumption

preferences from risk aversion makes it possible to obtain simple statements about the level of the
exchange rate in terms of the level of nominal spending, the level price and relative risk aversion.v

If the function
constraint,

@[uk(~k(t))]

value given a consumption

budget

then Uk(Qk(t)) must also be at its maximum value subject to the same Constraint. It iS

well known (see, for instance,
homogenous

is at its maximum

Samuelson

and Swamy (1974)) that the solution of the linear-

problem,
Vk(Mk(t),Qk(t)) E Max {uk(~k(t)) – ~k(t) [~ckj(t)

Pkj(t) – Mk(t)]

(2.1)

} ,

Ckj(t)

7With non-homothetic

utility, similar results can be obtained

tractable non-homothetic function is u(t) = [Hjfll
and the optimal consumption

pattern depends

(Cj (t) –

mj

only in very special cases. One example
) ~’
J ] l-n,

on total spending

where risk aversion

is a

of a

constant (q)

and prices in a very straightforward

way,

iS Of the fO~ Vk(t) = Mk(t)~k(pk(t)).

The fUnCtiOn~k(~k(t)) is independent Of nOfind

Mk(t), and is linear homogeneous in the prices. Accordingly,
level, and vk(t) = Mk(t)/~k(~(t))
fictions

~k(W(t))

spending,

is interpreted as the price

is interpreted as real spending. These properties of homothetic

lead to the following restit:

Proposition

2: If utility functions

are homothetic,

the nominal exchange rate, S(t), and the real

exchange rate, Wt), are given by
d@2(t)/dv2(t) Hi(t)
S(t) = ‘2 d@l(t)/dvl(t) H2(t) ‘

(2.2)

and
d@2(t)/dvz(t)
= ‘2 d@l(t)/dvl(t)

l-I’2(t)

z(t) = s(t) —
l-f](t)

Proof Using the relations Vk[Mk(t), ~(t)] = ~(vk(t))

(2.3)

“

and vk(t) = Mk(t)/TIk(t), we can specify the

marginal indirect utility of nominal spending as follows:
dvk(Mk(t), ~(t))

dMk(t)

= d@k(Vk(t)) ~Vk(t)
dvk(t)
dMk(t)
=

d@k(v(t))
1
dvk(t)
~k(~(t))

(2.4)

“

Substituting (2.4) into (1.5) we obtain (2.2) and (2,3). +

Corollary

1: The real exchange

rate for countq

k relative to country

1 is the MRS of that

countq’s real spending, v~t), relative to vi(t).
Proof This result follows immediately

from (2.3) and U() = @l(vl(t)) + ~k,z @(vk(t)). +

Corolfury 2: If there are transaction costs or fconsumption

preferences

dl~er, then for given net

endowments the currencies of wealthier countries tend be overvalued by PPP standards.
Proof: From Corollary

1, we need to show that at the optimum, the MRS of vz(t) relative to v] (t)

tends to be higher when (3zis higher. The optimum is jointly determined by the indifference curves
and the opportunity

set. First consider

the effect of initial wealths

on the central planner’s

indifference curves. A higher initial wealth for country 2 generally implies a higher value for ez,s
which means that, in the (v2, VI) plane, the indifference curves are more to the right, reflecting the
bias in favor of country-2

consumption.

For instance,

in Figure

1 the curve

through

V’

corresponds

to a higher value of 82 than is the case for the cume through V. Thus, for given

endowments

a higher initial wealth for country 2 will produce a higher MRS provided that the

opportunity

set is convex. We now show that the opportunity

set is convex if (a) there are

transaction costs or (b) consumption preferences differ across countries.
(a) The graph on the left in Figure 1 illustrates the case of one good and a proportional
cost equal to ~, as in Dumas (1992). The bound on the consumption

opportunity

transaction

set is piece-wise

linear: its slope is <1 +~) when country 2 is importing (that is, when the consumption

point V =

(v2, VI) is to the right and below the net endowment point Q = (qz, ql)), and its slope is -1/(1+~)
when county 2 is exporting. Thus, the opportunity

set is convex, and equilibria more to the right

(like V’ relative to V) correspond to a higher MRS and, therefore, a higher real exchange rate.
(b) The graph on the right illustrates
consumption

preferences,

real spending,

the case of many commodities,

Uk(gk(t)). The problem of deriving the opportunity

(v1, v2), is isomorphic

opportunity set in the Heckscher-Ohlin

to the problem

of deriving

functions

with different

factor intensities

preference

functions

uk(~) with different consumption

set for international

a country’s

model: the role of the Heckscher-Ohlin

production

endowments

no frictions, and different

production

linear homogeneous

is taken over by the linear homogeneous

is taken over by the aggregate endowments,

preferences;

and the role of the factor

~ = qlj + q2j, for each of the goods.

Thus, with different consumption preferences the opportunity set is strictly convex. Therefore, the
solution for a higher value of ez, V’, again results in a higher MRS than the solution for lower (32,

‘The one exception

is discussed

in Proposition

3(c).

v. #

The second corollary fits in with the stylized fact that currencies of richer countries tend to
have higher real values. Thus, the effect of relative wealth (via 92) complements
(1964)-Samuelson

11.B.

(1964) productivity-based

Purchasing

the Balmsa

explanation of the same empirical regularity.

Power Parity

Much of the theory of exchange rates is based on PPP, In this section we discuss PPP as a special
case of (2,2)-(2.3). In the next section we then derive a more general theory of the exchange rate
that will provide an alternative hypothesis to PPP in our empirical tests,

The general model of the exchange rate in the case of homothetic preferences, (2.2)-(2.3),
simplifies to relative PPP if the ratio of the marginal utilities of real spending is a constant. This
will be the case under the alternative assumptions
(a) in the proposition

corresponds

to the standard (commodity-market

for PPP, Case (b), being purely utility-based,
(b)+esenes

(a) and (b) listed in Proposition

3, below. Case

based) set of assumptions

is less familiar. Case (c)—the intersection of (a) and

special attention because this represents the sole case where relative wealths are not

a determinant of the exchange rate.

Proposition
(a)

3.

Ifcommodi~

markets are frictionless

and agents have identical, homothetic utility finctions,

then Absolute PPP holds.
(b)

If agents have linear homogeneous utilipfinctions,
62,—that is, Relative

PPP holds—irrespective

the real exchange rate equa[s a constant,
of market impeflections

and dl~erences

in

consumption preferences.
(c)

02 is independent of the initial wealths if and only if agents huve identical linear homogeneous
utili~fimctions

and markets are pe~ect. Then 02 = 1.

The Equilibrium

Approach

Proof: To derive Proposition
markets and identical

page 12

lo Exchange Rates

3(a) from (2.3), note that under the assumptions

homothetic

utility functions,

the relative consumption

of friction less
bundles

will be

identical across countries. That is, at any time t there is but one composite good in the world (with
time-varying

composition

proportional

to the aggregate consumption

goods). It follows that at any moment the central planner’s opportunity
bounded by a minus 45-degree

amounts of the individual
set in the (VZ,VI) plane is

line. Thus, if the optimum is an interior one, the MRS in that

optimum always equals unity.
The proof of proposition

3(b) immediately

follows upon specifying ~k(vk(t)) = vk(t) in

(2.2):9
(risk-neutral model:)

l-1](t)
s(t) = e2 ~2(t) .

(2.5)

To reconcile the if-part of Proposition 3(c) with Proposition 3(b), we need to show that 62
must be equal to unity when preferences are identical and frictions are absent. This can be shown
by contradiction. 10Under the assumptions of Proposition 3(c), the central planner’s opportunity set
is again bounded by a minus 45-degree line. However, with risk neutrality—that

is, U(t) = VI(t) +

ez vz(t))—the central planner’s indifference curves degenerate to straight lines with slope –Oz. This
geometry immediately means that, if Oz were different from unity, there would always be a comer
solution: one country would never consume anything, which is incompatible with the existence of
two countries. To see why the irrelevance of initial wealths for the detetination
holds only under the highly stylized assumptions
r

there are transaction

9This ignores possible
See also footnote 5.

in part (c) of Proposition

of exchange rates

3, just note that when

costs or when preferences differ across countries, the opportunity

constants

(like @k(vk(t)) = ak Vk(t)); such constants

are assumed

set is no

to be part of ek,

10An alternative line of proof is as follows. Assume that there is one (composite) good, no friction, and
that @k(vk(t)) = vk(t)]’~
where q (#o) is relative risk aversion. It follows easily that the consumption
ratio,

v2(t)/vl

W2(0)/Wl(0),

(t), will

be constant

and equal

to (32 1/~ . As

a result,

must be t321/’l, too. This then means that 62 equals

towards unity as q approaches

zero,

the

ratio

[W2(0)/Wl(0)]~,

of initial
which

wealths,
converges

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 13

to Exchange Rates

longer linear (see Figure 1), while the indifference

curves become non-linear when there is risk

aversion. Either is sufficient to produce an interior solution. Thus, any value of OZthen implies a
well-defined

sharing rule for consumption

and, therefore, corresponds

to a specific division of

initial wealth. *

We finish this section with two comments on Proposition
the perhaps puzzling indeterminacy
case discussed in Proposition
under the assumptions
and, therefore,
indetetinacy,

of the central planner’s consumption

3(c). Mathematically,

in Proposition

parallel

3. Our first comment relates to

this indeterminacy

allocation problem in the
stems from the result that,

3(c), all indifference curves must be minus 45-degree lines

to the budget line. To better understand

the economics

consider the portfolio decisions in the underlying decentralized

behind

this

economy. While,

with identical preferences and perfect markets, consumption decisions are similar across countries,
the portfolios

held by the (risk-neutral)

representative

countries, This is because, in equilibrium,

are equally acceptable

of consumption

dividends

will finance a consumption

investor.

across countries at any given point in time. All we know is that the
plan that clears the commodity

the central planner’s indifference

clearing consumption

to a risk-neutral

of the portfolios chosen in the past, very little can be said about the

allocation

indeterminacy,

across

all assets provide the same expected real return, which

then implies that all fully invested portfolios
Because of the indeterminacy

agents will differ unpredictably

markets. To reflect this

curves U(V1 (t),v2(t)) must rank all market-

patterns (V1(t), vz(t)) as equally desirable, regardless of the initial wealths.

This means that the slope of the indifference cume, 62, is equal to (minus) unity everywhere.

Second, note that Proposition
Unbiased

Expectations

Hypothesis

3 allows us to clear up some confusion that exists about the
(UEH) and the Siegel Paradox.

Paradox seems to suggest that no equilibrium

Specifically,

can be obtained in a risk-neutral

the Siegel

world unless the

The Equilibrium

Approach

pa~e 14

to Exchange Rates

exchange rate is non-random. 11 To resolve the issue, we note first that risk-neutrality
defined in real terms, not in nominal

terms (as the UEH does). Stated differently,

implicitly assumes that inflation is deterministic.
known, the future spot rate automatically
the UEH—risk-neutrality

But Proposition

becomes non-random.

and no inflation risk-the

ought to be
the UEH

3(b) tells us that, if inflation is
Thus, under the assumptions

of

Siegel Paradox does not arise, and there is no

problem with obtaining equilibrium.

One implication
variations

of Proposition

in the real exchange

consumption

preferences

3 is that, within the logic of standard micro-economics,

rate are prima facie evidence of risk aversion when, at least,

are homothetic.

We shall address the implications

of non-homothetic

preferences in Section IV. Before that, we derive a testable equation for the level of the exchange
rate in the homothetic/CRR4

II. C

case, and present some empirical results.

Models with Constant Relutive Risk A version

Backus and Smith (1993), Dumas (1992), Stulz (1987), and Sercu et al. (1995) discuss models of
the real exchange rate with one or two goods (whereof at least one good is tradable only at a cost),
and constant relative risk aversion. These models are special cases of the general, homotheticutility model (2.2). To see this, we first consider the case where relative risk aversion is constant
and not equal to unity; that 1S, we specify (2.2) fOr @k(vk(t)) = Vk(t) I“qk, where ~k is the prattArrow measure of relative risk aversion, With this definition of ~(vk(t)),

(CRRA model:)

S(t)=

1‘2

&

we obtain:

2 vz(t)-~z nl(t)
v~(t) -n] nz(t)

11Denote the forward rate, set at time t for delivery at time t+n, by F(t, t+n), and denote a conditional
expectation about the future spot rate by Et(S([+n)), The Siegel paradox is that, when exchange rates are
uncertain, the UEH from country 1‘s point of view is incompatible with the UEH from country 2’s point of
view: F(t, t+l) = E[(S(t+n)) precludes l~(t, t+l) = E1(l/S(t+n))
unless S(t+n) is non-random.

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 15

to Exchange Rates

=62

The last line follows after substituting

1 -qz
l-~1

Ml(t)~l
M2(t)

~l(t)l-~l

n2 ~2(t)l-112

vk(t) = Mk(t)~k(t).

(2.6)

“

In the log-utility case (q= 1), equation

(1.5) immediately leads to

(Log-utility model:)

Ml(t)
S(t) = ez M2(t) .

(2.7)

Assuming two countries and identical relative risk aversions across countries, Sercu et al.
(1995) derive (2.6) and (2.7) for the special case of one (imperfectly tradable) good, while Backus
and Smith (1993) derive (2.6) for the case of CES consumption

preferences

defined over one

perfectly tradable good and one non-tradable good. Stulz (1987) derives (2.7) from a two-country
production economy with log investors that have identical, Cobb-Douglas

preferences defined over

a perfect] y tradable good and a non-traded good. Iz Thus, we see that these special versions are
easily generalized to cases where there are N goods (regardless of their degree of tradability)

and

M countries, and where the degrees of relative risk aversion and the commodity preferences differ
across countries.

From Proposition

3(a), equations (2.6)-(2.7) collapse to Absolute PPP in the special case

of identical consumption

preferences and perfect commodity markets. Thus, unlike standard PPP

theory, the CRRA model offers a specific equilibrium
frictions in the commodity
equilibrium

value for the exchange rate when there are

markets or when consumption

one needs just two additional

(observable)

preferences differ. To characterize this
variables,

the nominal spendings.

This

means that we now have a specific alternative when we test for PPP. An additional advantage of
the CRRA model is that it can be linearized
stationarity

of the right-hand-side

by taking logs. Given the well-documented

variables, this log-linearity

non-

of equations (2.6)-(2,7) also allows

12Stulz’ exchange rate equation also contains interest rate terms: this is because
the utility function rather than through a cash-in-advance
constraint.

he introduces

money

via

us to use a cointegration

framework

rather than the less powerful

techniques

that rely on

differencing the data. In the next section we discuss how one can test the alternative exchange rate
models (PPP versus CRRA).

11.D

Testuble Distinctions

between the PPP and CRRA Models of the Exchange Rate

In Sections 11.B and 11.C, both the CRRA and PPP models have been derived as exact
relations. In practice, no proponent of PPP would reject that theory just because it does not hold
perfectly at all times. Instead, the hypothesis is said to hold “in the long run”. Once one admits
deviations

in the short run, the term “long-run PPP” obviously

cannot mean that there are no

deviations over long horizons; instead, “long-run PPP” can only mean that the ex ante variance of
future deviations

increases less than proportionally

with the time horizon. Or, more precisely,

“long-run PPP” is commonly equated with stationarity of the real exchange rate.

Tests of long-run PPP (in the above sense of the term) include time series analysis of real
exchange rates and cointegration tests. The empirical evidence is mixed. AutoCorrelation tests often
cannot reject the hypothesis

of a non-stationary

real exchange rate (see, for instance, Adler and

Lehman (1983)), However, the more powerful augmented Dickey-Fuller
reversion in real exchange rates (Abuaf and Jorion (1991)). Cointegration

test does reveal mean
tests, on the other hand,

tend to strongly reject PPP (see, for instance, Ness&n (1994) and the references therein).

In light of our theoretical analysis, we offer the following comments on these tests of PPP.
First, the presence of mean-reversion
between the PPP and Cm

in the real exchange rate does not allow us to distinguish

models because the real exchange rate implied by (2,6)-(2,7) is likely

to be stationary, too. To see this, re-cast model (2.6) in real terms:

z(t) =

‘2

1- qz
1 -Tll

vz(t)-~z
Vi(t)-lll “

(2.8)

It is quite likely that the real spending ratio on the right-hand side of (2.8) has finite variance. For

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 17

to Exchange Rates

instance, when all goods are tradable at a positive but finite cost and consumption
identical

across countries,

then the relative

real spending

preferences are

ratio in (2.8) is clearly bounded.

Differences in spending patterns may lead to deviations from Relative PPP if, within each country,
relative prices change over time. However, when productive resources can be redeployed

across

sectors, one would not expect relative prices to wander off to infinity or zero, within a country.
Thus, relative price effects are not likely to imply martingale-behavior

In light of the probable boundedness

of the consumption

in the exchange rate either.

ratio, stationarity

of the real

exchange rate is not a good criterion if the purpose is to distinguish between the PPP and CRRA
models. Rather, the appropriate question is whether deviations from PPP are correlated with real
spending

data, with the direction

of the correlation

being consistent

positive (and, almost always larger than unity). 1s Alternatively,
whether, after controlling

for nominal spending,

with our prior that ~k is

the question to be answered is

the nominal exchange

rate depreciates

when

domestic prices rise faster than foreign prices, rather than the inverse (as PPP predicts). This type
of question is better addressed

in a cointegration

analysis rather than a univariate

time series

investigation of real exchange rates.

This then brings us to our second comment on empirical tests on PPP. True to their main
purpose, standard cointegration

tests have focused exclusively on the long-term relation between

exchange rates and prices, and have simply taken for granted that no other variables are relevant in
the VARs—the
equation,

first stage of a cointegration

analysisar

in the short-run dynamics in the final

Yet, PPP can also be obtained by setting q k = O in the CRRA model, (2.6); and this

13Following Lucas (1982), many have tested the CRRA model in the special case of
equation (2.5), we see that there is no need to impose this restriction. For example, in a
standard deviations of log real rates against means or standard deviations of log ratios
ratios, Backus and Smith (1993) find no linear pattern. Such a finding, being consisten[
in q’s across countries, is not evidence against the general CRRA model, and a fortiori
equilibrium approach to the exchange rate.

equal q’s. From
plot of means or
of real spending
with differences
not against the

The Equilibrium

Approach

pa~e 18

to Exchange Rates

CRRA model predicts a long-run relationship between not just exchange rates and prices but also
nominal spendings:
1-111
logs(t) = log e2 l_~2
+ TI1 logM] (t) – T2 10gM2(t))

()

+ (1-~1)

log~l(t)

– (1–T2)

10g~2(t)

.

(2.9)

In estimating (2.9) in its general form (without a priori restricting the q’s to be zero), both nominal
spendings

and prices are allowed to play independent

roles in the short-term

dynamics.

when testing for PPP as a special case of (2.9), the first-pass VARS and the short-tern

Thus,

fluctuations

are not the same as in the standard cointegration test of PPP (where spending is not allowed to play
any role). We provide evidence, in the next section, that such differences in the modeling do affect
the conclusions

regarding PPP. As a theory of exchange rates, PPP of course cannot answer the

question which variables should enter the short-term model, because PPP is utterly agnostic about
what variables
imperfections

explain

movements

of the real rate within

the leeway provided

by market

or differences in consumption preferences.

Note that a similar VAR-modeling

decision has to be made when the Cm

analyzed. Again, theory has no suggestions

about what explains short-tern

model is to be

deviations from the

equilibrium because theory derives (2.8)-(2.9) as an exact relation. The pragmatic solution again is
to assume that the short-term fluctuations
cointegration

are driven only by the variables entering the long-term

relation. But even within this assumption

two approaches

are possible. First, one

could work with (2,9), which lists five nominal variables; then the assumption is that the nominal
prices and spendings are allowed to independently affect the short-run fluctuations of the exchange
rate. Alternatively, one could re-cast (2.9) into real terms, as follows:

s2(t)

In estimating

rIl(t)
—
=
~2(t)

the cointegration

()

log 62 -l–~2

Mz(t)
+ n2 log —
I-Iz(t) -nl

Ml(t)
log ~l(t) “

(2.10)

vector(s) between the real exchange rate and the real spending

variables in (2.10), one then assumes that also for the first-pass VARS and the short-run dynamics

The Equilibrium

Approach

the real consumption

page 19

LOExchange Rates

data suffice; that is, unlike in tests of model (2.9) one now constrains

coefficients of logMJ(t) and lognj(t)

the

to be the same (up to the sign) in the long-run cointegration

relationship, and likewise in the short-run fluctuations. Again, it is not a priori obvious which way
of specifying the VARS and the short-run dynamics is the correct one.

To summarize:

univariate tests of stationarity of the red exchange rate do not allow us to

distinguish between the PPP and CRRA models of the exchange rate. As to cointegration

tests, we

can test the following hypotheses:
●

Hypothesis

PPP( 1)—the standard cointegration

test of PPP: the data are compatible

with the

hypothesis ?lk = O for all countries k, and the short-term dynamics involve only inflation rates.
●

Hypothesis PPP(2): the data are compatible with the hypothesis qk = O for all countries k, and
the short-term dynamics involve both inflation rates and changes in nominal spending.

●

Hypothesis

PPP(3): in the long run, the real exchange rate is unrelated to real spending data,

and the short-term dynamics involve only changes in real spending.
●

Hypothesis

CRRA( 1): the data are compatible with the hypothesis qk >0 for all countries k,

and the short-term dynamics involve both inflation rates and changes in nominal spending.
“

Hypothesis

CRRA(2): the data are compatible with the hypothesis qk >0 for all countries k,

and the short-term dynamics involve only changes in real spending.

Note, lastly, that the power of such cointegration

tests may be low, Assume, for instance,

that the CRRA model is true, and that one tests Hypothesis

PPP( 1), which omits the nominal

spending variables. One could still observe a PPP-lilce relation between the exchange rate and the
domestic
positively

and foreign price level if each of the omitted nominal-spending
correlated

hyperinflation

with the price level of the corresponding

circumstances,

country.

variables

is highly

For instance,

under

the log of a country’s nominal spending closely tracks the log of that

country’s price level; thus, under those circumstances

the estimated coefficient for the price level

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 20

to Exchange Rates

can be expected to be close to unity because this coefficient is likely to add (most o~ the effect of
nominal spending, ~k, to the ceteris paribus effect of the price level, which equals l–~k, This
argument

also implies that, when the CRRA model holds and the sample paths of prices and

nominal spendings are sufficiently similar, it can be quite hard to distinguish between Hypothesis
PPP(2) and Hypothesis

III

Empirical

CRRA(l).

Tests of the Model

with Homothetic

Utility and Constant

Rehtive Risk Aversion

In this section,

we test the CRRA

model

(in its log form, equations

(2.9)-(2. 10)) using

cointegration analysis. 14 The original Engle and Granger (1987) cointegration

approach adopts a

bivariate framework, while the more recent and more powerful approach developed in Johansen
(1991) uses a multivariate

framework

that allows for the existence

of multiple

cointegrating

vectors and a richer specification of short-run dynamics. We have used the latter approach, and in
particular the type of tests described in Johansen and Juselius (1992), to implement the empirical
tests of the PPP and CRRA models.

III. A.

Data, Model Setup, and Estimation Procedure

One problem with (2.9)-(2. 10) is that, for many countries, real consumption
in high-frequency

form. As the VAR procedure used in cointegration

number of observations,
cointegrated

we introduce

another restriction:

data are not available

analysis requires a large

nominal spending is assumed to be

with the money supply. One case where this is trivially true is the cash-in-advance

14Cointegration
analysis was pioneered by Granger(1981)
and developed by, among others, Engle and
Granger (1987), Phillips (1990), Stock and Watson (1988) and more recently by Johansen (1988,1991)
and Johansen and Juselius (1990,1992). A lucid and relatively non-technical exposition of the main ideas
can be found in Dickey and Rossana(1994).

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 21

to Exchange Rates

world, where a country’s nominal spending simply equals the country’s money supply. Consumer
price indices being available on a monthly basis, the substitution
consumption

data allows us to use monthly data.

Thus,
relationship

of money supplies for nominal

our main purpose

is to test (a) whether

there exists

a long-run

equilibrium

between nominal exchange rate, price levels and money supplies, and (b) whether

such a relationship, if any, is of the form specified in equation (2.9)-(2.10) with acceptable positive
values for the risk aversion parameters q 1 and T12.We will contrast this test of the CRRA model
against the classical PPP alternative, the special case of (2.9)-(2.10) with zero risk aversions.

We have selected six countries. The US serves as the reference country. Germany (GE),
the United Kingdom (UK) and Japan (JP) are chosen so as to represent the most heavily traded
currencies.

Lastly, we added two smaller European countries,

Belgium

(BE) and Switzerland

(SW), on the basis that they (a) had an exchange rate that moved sufficiently independently
the DEM, (b) did not no exchange
complete data in the International

controls

during the post-Bretton-Woods

from

era, and (c) had

Financial Statistics tape published by the IMF: . The data set

consists of seventeen series of monthly data on nominal exchange rates of these five countries’
currencies against the US dollar, the consumer price indices (CPIS) of the six countries, and their
nominal

money

December 1992.

stocks

(Mo; M3 for the UK). The sample period is from January

1973 to

-

The data are arranged into a matrix that depends on which model is being tested. Denoting
logs of Sk, Mk, and ~k by Sk, mk, and pk, respectively,

and denoting the log real exchange rates

and money supplies bys: and m;, the data matrices are:
c for Hypothesis PPP( 1): the 11-variable system
[sBE, ssw, SGE, SGB, SJP, PBE, Psw, PGE, PGB, Pm, Pus

●

for Hypotheses PPP(2) and CRRA( 1): the 17-variable system

1;

The Equilibrium

Approach

[SBE, ss~,

●

page 22

to Exchange Rates

sGE, SGB, SJp, PBE, pSW, pGE, pGB, pm, pUS, mBE, msw,

WE,

mGB, mm,

musl;

for Hypotheses PPP(3) and CRRA(2): the 11-variable system
[sfiE, s’~, &E, s&B,s;p, m~E, m~W, &E. fiB,

mjP, mfiS].

For each data set we first test how many long-run relationships
CRRA(l)-(2)

and PPP(l)-(2)

cointegrating

vectors;

interdependence

hypotheses

predict that there should be at least five of these

but given the nature of the underlying

(and possibly

policy coordination)

existence of a larger number of cointegration

statistical acceptability

variables

among the countries

(~m)

of

in the sample,

the

and the trace statistics. 15

that there are at least five long-run relationships,

we then verify the

of the PPP( 1) hypothesis in the first 11-variable data set. This test is first

done one country at the time, and then for all countries simultaneously.
test is undertaken

and the degree

relations is quite likely. To estimate the number of

cointegrating relationships we use the maximum-eigenvalue

Having established

seem to be present. The

The country-by-country

as follows. In the first 11-series system (the test of Hypothesis

PPP( l)), for

instance, the hypothesis is that, for Belgium, the coefficients for SBE,nBE and zus are 1,– 1, and 1,
respectively.

To test the acceptability

1lx 1 matrix ~ppp = [1 0000
on the remaining cointegrating

of Hypothesis

–1 0000

PPP( 1) for Belgium, we verify whether the

1]’ is compatible with the data, imposing no restrictions

vectors. Such country-by-country

other countries.

The second test is whether the hypothesis

simultaneously,

In this test, five cointegrating

15Lmax = –T log(l–~+1
variables,

is acceptable

vectors are specified

) and TR = –T ~=~+1 log(l–L1),

and Li is the i-th ordered eigenvalue.

tests are done for each of the

where

T is the sample

for all five countries

to conform

to the PPP-

size, p the number

of

The Lmax statistic tests the hypothesis that there are r (<
p-1 ) cointegration
relations against the alternative that there are r+ 1 such relations, The trace statistic
tests the hypothesis that there are r (c p) cointegration
relations against the alternative that there are p
such relations. The tests often yield different conclusions. Osterwald-Lenum
(1992) provides critical values
for p = 11 variables, so that (p-r) can go from O (r= 11) to 11 (1=0). Because these tests are known to have
low power, Johansen and Juselius (1992) recommend using 90% critical values rather than the usual 95%.

hypothesis, while the remaining vectors are left unrestricted. The test statistic is a likelihood ratio.

Tests of the PPP(2) and CRRA( 1) hypotheses

(in the 17-variable system) are analogous:

we test for the presence of a specific cointegrating relation as suggested by (2.9). In a test of a PPP
hypothesis
by theory.

as reported above, the choice of coefficients for Sk, pk and pus—[ 1,–1, I]—is dictated
Under the CRRA hypotheses,

permissible. Consequently,

however,

the hypothesis

value of qus

and q k is

the number of theoretically acceptable cointegration vectors is infinitely

large. We report the tests for some illustrative
restriction one coun~

any positive

values for these parameters,

at a time, and then for all five countries simultaneously.

for Deutsche

Mark we test whether the following

first imposing

the

For instance, to test

vector is acceptable

for the

preselected values for ~GE and qus:
[0, O, 1,0,0,0,0,

111.B.

-(l-IIGE),

0,0, (l-llus),

0,0, –~GE, 0,0, qus] .

Empirical Results and Tests of Hypotheses

We first verify the presence of unit roots in the log of the time series of S(t), H(t) and M(t). Table
1, below, presents the results of applying the augmented Dickey-Fuller

(ADF) t-test with a data

generating process that allows for both constant and a trend, There is a unit root present in all the
data series, except for the Swiss ad

US money supply series which maybe stationary (apart from

the time trend). Tests for the presence of more than one unit root were also performed but failed to
reveal the presence
cointegration

of another unit root in any of the variables

procedure itself was implemented

included

in the system. The

with CATS in RATS. 16 The lag length in the first

set of auxiliary regressions was increased until the Box-Ljung statistic for serial correlation among
residuals was insignificant at 5% level for all the equations. The final value of k was 10.

16Hansen, H. and K. Juselius (1995): CATS in RATS Coinfegration

Analysis

of Time Series.

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 24

to Exchange Rates

To test Hypothesis PPP( 1), we estimate the cointegration

relations in a system consisting

of five nominal exchange rates and six price levels. This is the usual set-up for tests of bilateral
PPP in a multivariate
cointegrating

cointegration

relationships

framework.

Table 2 presents the results for the number of

in the data. At the 107o level of significance,

tests indicate the presence of nine cointegrating

both the ~ax

relations among the eleven variables.

consistent with PPP, which predicts that there should be at least five cointegration

and trace
This is

relations in the

data set.

Table 3 presents the results of the likelihood

ratio tests for the PPP( 1) hypothesis.

Our

results confirm the findings of Ness&n (1994) and others: in the exchange rate/prices system the
hypothesis of stationarity of real exchange rates is rejected for all currencies, whether we test for all
five countries individually or simultaneously.
Belgium, where the hypothesis

The only exception is the country-by-country

test for

of a stationary real rate vis-h-vis the US receives weak support

from the data.

We next analyze the 17-variable system with five nominal exchange rates, six price levels
and six money stocks. Again, the first step is to estimate the number of cointegrating relationships.
The exchange rate model implies that there should be at least five of these relations among the six
countries. Table 4 presents the trace and maximal eigenvalue statistics that test for the number of
cointegrating

vectors, From the table it is clear that the data reveal sixteen cointegrating

relations

among the seventeen variables.

In this 17-variable system we now test the hypothesis
test for the presence of a specific cointegrating

CRRA( 1) and PPP(2); that is, we

relation for each currency involving (only) the

following variables: that currency’s nominal exchange rate, the price level and money stock of the
country and price level and money stock of the reference country (the US). As argued before, the
number of theoretically acceptable values of qus, ~BE, qsw, IluK, qGE, and IIJP is infinite, so that
we can only show some representative

cases. Table 5 presents

the results for four different

pa~e 25

The Equilibrium

Approach

to Exchange Rates

combinations

of q-values: (qus, ~non.us)

= (1.25, 1.50), (0.6, 0.4), (0.05, 0,05), and (O, O). The

(O, O) combination is the test of the PPP(2) hypothesis, which differs from the first PPP-test in that
we now allow money supplies to play a role in the short-tetm dynamics.

From Table 5 we see that each of the proposed cointegration
imposed for all countries

simultaneously.

vectors is still rejected when

However, and unlike what we found in the tests of

Hypothesis PPP( 1), each of these hypotheses now becomes acceptable when tested one country at
the time-with
conclusion

the single exception

for Switzerland

in the case (qus, q 2) = (1.25,

1.50). The

is twofold. First, money supplies seem to play a role in the short term dynamics

process. Second, when allowing for this role of money supplies, it becomes difficult to reject any
low value for relative risk-aversion (including, disappointingly,

zero risk aversion). Apparently, the

money supply and price data are too similar, which causes problems if, as the model suggests, the
corresponding

coefficients, qk and l–ilk, sum to unity. 17

As discussed
between

the bilateral

corresponding

before, equation
real exchange

(2.9) can also be interpreted

as an equilibrium

rate of currency i versus the reference currency

relation
and the

real money stocks, equation (2. 10). To test the validity of such a relation we now

estimate a multivariate system with five real exchange rates and six real money stocks, and we test
for the presence of cointegration vectors involving log(SIH1~us

), log(Ml~l)

and log(Mus~us).

This test has the advantage of restricting, a priori, the coefficients of log(M1) and log(~i) to sum to
unity, and, thus, to steer clear of the multicolinearity

between the two series. The disadvantage

is

that, now, nominal money stocks and price levels are no longer allowed to play an independent
role in the short-term dynamics either; that is, the short-run fluctuations

in the real exchange rate

are assumed to be driven by real money supplies only.

17Mark (1985), who tests the relationship between interest rates and masginal rates of substitution,
obtains very imprecise estimates of q and cannot reject the hypothesis that q = O.

also

The Equilibn”um Approach

to

page 26

ExchnnReRates

Table 6 provides the results of tests for the number of cointegrating
variable

system.

relationships

The CRRA(2)

vectors in this 11-

model says that there should be at least five cointegrating

in the real data. In contrast, the PPP(3) hypothesis

implies that there should be at

most nine. This is because, in the PPP view (as distinct from CRRA) the real rate is not related, in
the long run, to real spending variables, which then implies that all cointegrating relationships must
be either among the real exchange rates themselves— up to four cointegration
among the real spending variables —up to five cointegration relationships.

relationships-or

The &ax test indicates

presence of seven cointegrating vectors while the trace test suggests eight. In the further tests of the
CRRA(2)

hypothesis

we have proceeded

on the assumption

that there are seven cointegrating

relations.

As before, we have tested the acceptability
vectors corresponding

of a large number of specific cointegration

to selected values for the risk aversion parameters.

Some representative

results are shown in Table 7. Each of the proposed vectors in Table 7 is now rejected, with the
possible eXCeptlOn Of the VeCtOr (~us = 3, 11B E = 2) for the Belgian

Franc. To confirm

the

generality of this negative conclusion we add, in the last panel of Table 7, a test where we do not
specify any numerical values for the parameters ~1 and ?lUs; that is, we only wish to test whether
there is a cointegrating

relationship

that involves log(SIH1/TIus ), log(M1/Hi) and log(Mus~us

and only these variables. This restriction is rejected in all cases except, very marginally,

),

for the

Belgian franc.

We summarize our empirical findings as follows. First, nominal money stocks and prices
do seem to play separate roles in the short-term dynamics: the data reject all models where only
real money supplies are allowed to play a role in the short-run fluctuations

or where nominal

money is not allowed to play any role in them. Second, when money supplies and prices are
allowed to play a separate role in the short-term dynamics, equation (2.9) is acceptable when tested
one country at the time, as long as the proposed degree of risk aversion is low or even zero. This

The Equilibrium

Approach

finding is consistent

page 27

to Exchange Rates

with the combined hypothesis that the CRW

and price data follow similar time paths. Indeed, the Cm

model holds and that money

model predicts that the coefficients for

the price and money supply variables sum to unity; so when these series behave rather similarly
over time, it is difficult to distinguish between the roles of the two variables.

Still, the evidence in favor of the CRRA model is far from conclusive. One possible reason
for the less than satisfactory

results may be the model’s assumptions

of homothetic

preferences

and constant risk aversion. In the following section, we therefore return to the general model (1.5)
and see what can be said about (changes in) exchange rates when preferences are not assumed to
be homothetic and risk-aversion is not constant.

Iv.

Characterizing

From equation

Changes in the Exchunge Rate

(1.5), it follows that percentage

changes in the nominal exchange

rate reflect

percentage changes in the marginal utilities of spending:ls
dS
—s-

dAz
——
A2–

dA 1
A1’

(4.1)

As in, for instance, Barten (19@) or Breeden (1978), we now apply a Slutsky decomposition
the changes in the marginal indirect utilities. That is, we decompose

of

dA/A into the effect of the

curvature of the indirect utility (the degree of relative risk aversion) and the effects of changes in
each of the arguments of the indirat

utility, As a result, the change in the nominal exchange rate is

given by the sum of two terms: one, the international differences in real consumption
weighted

by each country’s relative risk aversion, and two, the international

growth rates

difference

in the

18Equation (4,1) is a first-order approximation.
A (second-order) Ito expansion shows that, in a model with
continuous time and continuous but stochastic output processes, there will be a drift added to the right
hand side of (4,1) that depends on the risk aversions and the (co)variances
of the nominal spendings, the
marginal inflation rates, and the total inflation rates.

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 28

to Exchange Rates

marginal inflation rates:

Fropostin

4: The change in the nominal exchunge rate, to a first -order approximation,

’’(t)
(*-*)-q’(t)&-*)+
:-* *

*=

is

(4.2)

where
q(t)

=

Mk a2vk/aMk2
is the degree of relative risk aversion, 19
avk/aMk

;-m
~k‘j=l
Mk
[1

d~k

is inflation weighted on the basis of average consumption, and

pkj

dnk
~k

N~,~
is inflation weighted on the basis of marginal consumption. ZO
Z
‘. J=l [aMk pkJ1 pkj

proof: we start from the total differential

of Ak = Ak(Mk, w), substitute

~Vk(Mk, ptc)/aMk, invoke Roy’s Identity~vk/apkj
differentiating

= - Ckj avk/aMk—,

the definition

Ak =

and use the rule for

a product. Finally, we bring out the percentage changes in the budget and the prices,

and rearrange:

1
= dVk/aMk

[

N
azvk
a2Vk
—
dMk + jgl apkj aMk dpkj .
aMk2

19This definition of relative risk aversion, also adopted by Breeden (1978), is a ‘real’ measure of relative
risk aversion because, when taking partial derivatives with respect to ink(t), we hold constant the prices,
-Ck
In the one-good
case, for instance,
this definition
is identical
to the standard
definition,
[~2Uk/dck2]/[~Uk/d~].
Pkj, sum to unity by virtue of the budget constraint.
We denote the two
“f’he marginal weights, [~ Ckj/dmk]
inflation rates by d?’ck/nk and d~k/~k
for consistency with the notation in the previous section, but we do
not wish to imply that the integrated counterparts ~k and ~k always have known closed-for-m solutions.

The Equilibrium

Approach

to ExchanRe Rates

page 29

=— – Mk a2vk/~Mk2
dvk/aMk

=- [w-%]-%(”)
q(t)

Mk

Substitution of (4.3) into (4.1) then immediately produces (4.2). +

To detect the importance of non-homothetic-preferences

and time-v~ing

risk aversion for

the purpose of describing short-run changes of exchange rates, we can compare Equation (4.2) to
the log-change version of the homothecy/C~

Model in equation (2.6):

(4.3)
Thus, locally, the non-constancy
homothetic-preferences

Specifically,
differential;

effects, but non-

do. Specifically, the marginal and total inflation rates no longer coincide,

and the term ( l–~k) dHk/~k
implication

of relative risk aversion has no first-order

in (4.4) needs to be replaced by dzk/nk – q k dHk/Hk. A related

of (4.3) is that risk-neutrality
when q=O, the exchange

is not sufficient

rate change generally

to obtain

PPP (Proposition

equals the marginal

3),

inflation

and only in the case of homothetic preferences will marginal inflation coincide with

average inflation.

Equation

(4.2) also explains the poor results of regression tests of Relative PPP. To see

this, first consider the special case where preferences are homothetic and relative risk aversion is
equal and constant. Under these conditions, (4.2) simplifies to:

(4.4)

The implications

of (4.4) for tests of relative PPP are similar to the inferences made in the single-

good model of Sercu et al. (1995). An increase in domestic inflation should lead to an appreciation
of the home currency (a decrease in S), as long as we control for nominal spending. In light of
this, the puzzle in standard regression tests of relative PPP is not why we do not observe exchange
rates that are equal, on average, to inflation differences. Rather, given that q is commonly accepted
to be larger than unity, the puzzle is why we often observe a positive association between the two
at all. The reason may be that, in the standard regression
spending
correlated

variables

are omitted.

with inflation

tests of relative PPP, the nominal

Given that growth rates of nominal

rates, the true (negative)

spending

are positively

effect, 1 - q, of inflation is to some extent

confounded with the positive effect, q, of the omitted spending variable. As a result, the empirical
estimates of the regression slope of AlnS on Aln(H l~z)
(1995) argue, this is especially true in low-frequency
hyperinflation

are biased towards unity. As Sercu et al.

data and in samples drawn from periods of

where the correlation between growth in nominal spending and inflation is likely to

be stronger than otherwise. This conclusion also holds if q differs across countries.

Equation

(4.2) also provides

some insights about regression

tests of relative PPP that

cannot be obtained from (4.4). One, in the (realistic) case where preferences are non-homothetic,
there is an additional omitted variable, marginal inflation, which is imperfectly proxied for by the
CPI measure of inflation. Since d~k(t)~k(t)

is an imperfect proxy for dZk(t)/nk(t), the coefficient

for CPI inflation in a regression of AlnS on AlnH l~k
homothetic

is expected to be closer to zero than in the

case. Two, in the regression (4,4), the coefficients

for the true inflation rates and the

growths in nominal spending need not be identical across countries because the degree of risk
aversion need not be equal across countries.21

Imposing

a single coefficient

for Aln(M 1) and

21In their regression tests of relative PPP, Apte, Kane, and Sercu (1994) allow for different coefficients
across countries,
and they test for equality. The only instances where the equality hypothesis
is not

The Equilibrium

–Aln(Mz)

Approach

page 31

to Exchange Rates

will produce estimates

that are neither equal to q 1 nor to Tlz (and likewise

inflation terms). Three, the risk aversion coefficients
standard constant-coefficient

need not be constant over time. Thus, the

regression test for PPP may be inappropriate.

poor results that are commonly
result of rnisspecification

obtained in regression

of the test equation

for the

In view of all this, the

tests of relative PPP may simply be the

rather than some kind of excess volatility

or

irrationality.n

Equation (4.2) has similar implications for cointegration tests of exchange rate models: The
tests presented

in Section

111 suffer from a missing-variable

approach may be inappropriate.

bias, and the fixed-coefficient

In addition, like the homothecy/C~-model,

still consistent with PPP-like behavior in the long run, especially in high-inflation

equation (4.2) is
samples: If long-

run cumulative marginal inflation rates follow similar time paths as cumulative average inflation
rates and money supply data, it will again be difficult to distinguish between the roles of these three
variables if, as Proposition

4 predicts, the true coefficients

Thus, the fact that the country-by-country

of the three variables sum to unity,

tests of Section III appear to accept a rather wide range

of risk-aversion parameters can also be consistent with the generalized model in equation (4.2).

V. Conclusion

Much of the literature on exchange rate determination is based on PPP, with PPP being justified on
the basis of the consumption
standard micro-economics

opportunity

rejected

exchange

commodity

arbitrage), In contrast, the

paradigm views relative prices— and, hence, also exchange rates—as

jointly determined by consumption
the equilibrium

set (fnctionless

opportunity sets and preferences. We accordingly characterize

rate in a general equilibrium

economy

with imperfect

commodity

is when the power of the test is low.

z See the survey article by Frankel

and Rose (1994) for the evidence

on bubbles

in exchange

rates.

The Equilibrium

Approach

to Excbnge

page 32

Rates

markets. We can avoid strong restrictions on the output processes or on preferences because, for
our purpose, there is no need to specify the link between the exchange rate and the underlying
exogenous variables. In such a model, the real exchange rate is determined by differences in initial
wealths—the

currencies

of richer countries tend to be overvalued,

differences in marginal utilities of total consumption.

by PPP standards-and

In the special case of homothetic

by

Constant

Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA) utility functions, the model implies that there is a missing variable
in the PPP equation, the ratio of nominal spendings, and that the ceteris paribus effect of higher
domestic prices is a drop in the value of foreign cmencies
In models with non-homothetic,

rather than a rise (as predicted by PPP).

non-CRRA utility functions the exchange rate change depends not

only on the standard (“average”) inflation differential across countries (as in the PPP model) but
also on the inflation differential computed on the basis of marginal consumption

weights, growth

in real spending, and the possibly time-varying degree of risk aversion in the two countries, Thus,
standard regression or cointegration

tests of PPP suffer from missing-variables

biases and ignore

variations in risk aversions across countries and over time.

We also present cointegration

test of the equilibrium

exchange rate model with constant

relative risk aversion and homothetic preferences. The results of empirical testing appear to yield
few definitive conclusions;

in that sense they seem to accord with an observation

of Froot and

Rogoff( 1994): “cointegration approaches have sometimes created as much confusion as clarity on
the issue of PPP, ” One clear implication,

however, is that a long-run equilibrium

PPP relation

between nominal exchange rates and the relevant price levels does emerge if money stocks are
allowed to play a role in the short-run dynamics of the system, next to (and independently
price levels. Given that one lets money supplies play this role, the hypothesis
combinations

represented

by equation

o~ the

of stationary

(2.9) receives some support for values of risk aversion

parameters which are both theoretically and empirically acceptable when tested for one country at
the time. A related conclusion

is that the structure

of equilibrium

relations

extracted from—a given data set depend crucially upon the specification

revealed

by-or

of the VAR model in

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 33

to Exchange Rates

levels, in particular which variables are included in and excluded from the system being estimated.

We see two challenges

for future research in this area. First, more powerful

tests me

needed to sort out the roles of nominal spending and prices in the long-run relationship,

Second,

one needs to find an explanation for the empirical result that nominal money stocks seem to play
an independent

role in the short-term

matters. Possible approaches
utility-function

dynamics.

could be fluctuations

In a model such as ours, only real spending
in the velocity of money, or money-in-the-

effects. Both routes suggest that interest rates should be incorporated

model; and interest rate changes are likely to be related to short-term
supplies.

fluctuations

into the
in money

Glossary to Notation
Arranged

alphabetically

Ckj(t)

consumption of good j in country k at time t

~(t)

vector of consumption quantities ckj(t) of good j (=1,... , N) in country k

@

function indicating
aversion
–

a positive monotone transformation,

reflects degree of risk

Mk a2vk/aMk2
, degree of relative risk aversion (in real terms)
avk/aMk

q(t)

=

j

subscript used to refer to a particular good

k

subscript used to refer to a particular country (k = 1 is the home country)

Ak(t)

=

av(Mk(t), ~(t))
, the marginal indirect utility of nominal spending in coun~
aMk(t)

M

number of countries

Mk(t)

amount of nominal spending in country k

tlj
~k
~k

number of goods

N

k

number of shares of asset j held in investor’s portfolio
price level, computed on the basis of average consumption
dZk/nk = inflation, computed on the basis of marginal consumption

Pkj(t)

the local currency price of good j in country k

Pk

log Hk(t)

ek

relative weight assigned by the central planner to each country (01 = 1)

P

subjective discount rate

s(t)

nominal exchange rate (nominal value of one unit of foreign currency)

Ilk

function that is linear homogeneous in consumption quantities

uk

utility function of the representative investor in country k

u

the period-by-period
utility of the central
consumption aggregated over all M countries)

V(Mk(t), ~(t))

the indirect utility of nominal spending in country k

v(Mk(t), Pk(t))

the indirwt utility of nominal spending in the linear homogeneous case

z(t)

the real exchange rate

planner

(derived

from current

Figure 1

V’2

Key to Fi~re 1, The figure on the left assumes a one-good, two-country economy with endowments

Q = (q 1,

q2). AS there is but one good. vk equals ck. There is a proportional shipment cost, ~. Thus, if the consumption
point V = (v1, v2) is above and to the left of Q—that is, when country 1 is importing—the
consumption
opportunity set has a slope -dvl/dv2
= l/(1+1). Likewise, if the consumption point V = (v1, v2) is below and
to the right of Q—that is, when country 1 is exporting-the
consumption opportunity set has a slope -dv l/dv2
= 1+1. If t32 < (>) 1, the central planner favors country 1 (2), and equilibria like V (V’) with a real exchange
rate equal to l/(1+~) < 1 (l+r > 1) become more likely. The figure on the right assumes two goods, no
opportunist y set for
friclions, and different consumption preference functions Uk(Ck 1, Ck2 ), The international
real spending (v2, VI) is strictly convex. To show this itsuffices to replace, in a Heckscher-Ohlin
model, the
(linear homogeneous) production functions and the factor endowments,
K and L, by the (linear homogeneous)
preference
functions
u~(~) and the total endowments,
qj = qlj + q2J respectively.
Thus, the bound of the
opportunity set is linear (strictly convex) if the consumption preferences are equal (different). The larger 62,
the more to the right the optimal consumption
point, and the higher the MRS (the real exchange rate for
country 2).

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 36

to Exchange Ra~es

Table 1: ADF Unit Root Test Results
Series

ADF t-test

Series

ADF t-test

Series

ADF t-test

SgE

-2.0047
-2.7169
-2.2176
-2,4062
-2.9324

PBE
Psw
PGE

-2.6100
-3.2411
-1.9687
-2.9429
-2.9831
-1.7852

mBE
msw
mGE
mm
m~
mus

-3.0292
-3.4662
-2.2772
-2.0361
-2.7261
-3.6815

Ssw
%E
SW
SJP

PJP
Pus

Kev to Table 1. The table shows the t-statistic for the ~F
Unit Root Test with a time trend for the seventeen
var;ables (in log form) listed. The 95% Critical Value for 250 observations
is -3.43 .[Hamilton( 1994), Table
B.6, P.763, Case 4].

Table 2: L~m and Trace Statistics for Nominal Exchange Rates and Prices (p=ll
Eigenv.

L-max

Trace

Ho: r

Eigenv.

L-max

Trace

series)

Ho: r

0.4289
129.41
573.96
0
0.1402
34.90
93.74
6
0.3496
99.37
444.55
1
26.50
0.1084
58,84
7
0,3241
90.50
345.19
2
0.0854
20.63
32.34
8
0.2622
70.25
254.69
3
0.0467
11,06
11.71
9
48.28
0.1886
184.44
4
0.0028
0,66
0.66
10
0.1678
42.42
136.16
5 I
Key to Table 2. The table shows the Eigenvalues, L~aX, and trace tests within the 1l-variable system
(exchange
are:

rates and relative

At this significance

prices).

The 90% critical

pr
1
Lmax
18.60
Trace
26.79
level, there are nine cointegration

values,

from Osterwald-Lenum

23
12.07
2.69
13.33
2.69
relations in this data set,

(1992),

Table

1, p.468,

Table 3: Likelihood Ratio Tests for the PPP(l) Hypoth~is
tincy
X2 (do p-value
Belgian Franc
Swiss Franc
Deutsche Mark
British Pound
Japanese Yen
AU Currencies simultaneously

6.44
9.59
9.17
9.16
9.79

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

0.04
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

27.96

(10)

0.00

(p=ll

series)

Key to Table 3. The table shows the ~2-tests, degrees of freedom, and probability
values for the PPP
hypothesis in the 1l-variable data set without money stocks. There are nine cointegration relations in this data
tests, the PPP-vector is imposed one country at the time; that is, in
set (Table 2). In the country-by-country
each such test the other eight cointegration
vectors are left unrestricted.
In the test labeled “all countries
five PPP-vectors are imposed simdtaneously
and four are left unrestricted.
simultaneously”,

Table 4: LmaX and Trace Statistics for Nominal Exchange Rates, Prices, and Money Stocks
(p=17 series)
L-max
Trace
Eigenv.
Ho: r I Eigenv.
L-max
Trace
Ho: r
0.6956
0.6388
0.5905
0.5233
0.4941
0.4755
0.4234
0.3901

274.74
235.26
206.26
171.14
157.39
149.07
127.18
114.23

1879.65
1604.92
1369.65
1163,39
992.25
834.87
685.79
558.62

0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

0.2881
0.2678
0.2041
0.1738
0.1527
0.1291
0.0774
0.0004

78.51
72.00
52.73
44.09
38.29
31.93
18.61
0.09

336.24
257.73
185.74
133.01
88.92
50.63
18.70
0.09

9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16

Key to Table 4. The table shows the Eigenvalues,
Lmax, and trace tests within the 17-variable
system
(exchange rates and relative prices). See Table 2 for the 90% critical values. At this significance level, there
are sixteen cointegration relations in this data set.

Table 5: Likelihood

Currency
Belgian Franc
Swiss Franc
Deutschemark
British Pound
Japanese Yen
All Currencies
simultaneously

I

Ratio Tests for the PPP(2) and CRRA(l) Hypotheses
(p=17 series)
~us = 1,25 ;~k= 1.50
~U> = 0.60 ; ~k = 0.40
p-value
p-value
(do
Z2
(do
x
(1)
0.74
1.33
0.11
(1)
0.25
(1)
0.10
17.73
(1)
0.00
2.70
0.32
(1)
0.73
(1)
0.57
0,12
1.13
(1)
0.39
(1)
0.29
0.75
0.01
(1)
0.71
(1)
0.92
0.14
36.07
qUS z=

Currencv,
Belgian Franc
Sw~s Franc
Deutschemark
British Pound
Japanese Yen
All Currencies
simultaneously

x
0.26
0.03
0.15
0.00
0.85
2.63

(5)

0.00

0.05 ; ~k = 0.05
(do
pvalue
(1)
0.61
(1)
0.87
(1)
0.70
(1)
0.96
(1)
0.36
(5)

0.03

I

32.21

(5)

0.00

llUS = 0.00 ; ~k = 0.00
X2
p-value
(d~

0.33

0.00
0.21
0.04
0,94
12.87

(1)
(1
(1)
(1)
(1)

0.57
0.95
0.65
0.84
0.33

(5)

0.02

Key to Table 5. The table shows the ~2-tests, degrees of freedom, and probability values for the PPP(2) and
CRRA( 1) hypotheses
in the 17-variable data set (including money stocks). There are sixteen cointegration
relations in this data set (Table 4). In the country-by-country
tests, the PPP- or CRM-vector
is imposed one
country at the time; that is, in each such test the other fifteen cointegration vectors are left unrestricted. In the
test labeled “all countries
simultaneously”,
five vectors are imposed simultaneously
and eleven are left
unrestricted.

Table 6: Lmu and Trace Statistics for Nominal Exchange Rates and Prices (p=ll

series)

Eigenv.

L-max

Trace

Ho: r

Eigenv.

L-max

Tram

Ho: r

00.4131
00.2729
00.2586
00.2158
00.2016
00.1614

123.09
73.62
69.12
56.14
52.02
40.67

492.64
369.55
295.93
226.81
170.67
118.65

0
1
2
3
4
5

0.1268
0.0915
0.0701
0.0327
0.0001

31.31
22.16
16.79
7.69
0.03

77.98
46.67
24.51
7.72
0.03

6
7
8
9
10

Key to Table 6. The table shows the Eigenvalues,
Lmax, and trace tests within the 11 -variable system (real
exchange rates and real money stocks). See Table 2 for the 90% critical values. At this significance level, the
Lmax (trace) statistic suggests the existence of seven (eight) cointegration relations in this data set.

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 39

to Exchan~e Rates

Table 7: Likelihood Ratio Tests for Sbtionarity
(17 series)

Currencv
Belgian Franc
Swiss Franc
Deutschemark
British Pound
Japanese Yen

?lus = 3.00 ; ~k = 2.00
p-value
Z2
(df)
17.73
9.79
25.50
13.22
20.37

(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

0.07
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02

of the Real Exchange Rate

llus = 1.25 ;~k= 1.50
X2
p-value
(do
12.98
12.50
21.36
12.68
15.61

(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

0.01
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00

5.32
9.89
12.46
8,73
7.69

(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)

0.07
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.02

qUS z= 0.05

Currency
Belgian Franc
Swiss Franc
Deutschemark
British Pound
Japanese Yen

x
23.35
24.02
25.19
23.64
22.03

; ?lk = 0.05
p-value
(df)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)
(4)

0.00
0,00
0,00
0.00
0.00

Key to Table 7. The table shows the ~2-tests, degrees of freedom, and probability values for the CRRA(3)
hypothesis in the 1l-variable
data set (real exchange rates, real money stocks). We assume there are seven
cointegration relations in the data (Table 6). In the country-by-country
tests, the CRW-vector
is imposed one
country at the time; that is, in each such test the other six cointe~ation
vectors are left unrestricted.

References
Apte, P., M, Kane, and P. Sercu (1994): Relative
International Money and Finance, 13,602-622.

PPP in the Medium

Run, Journal

of

Backus, D., G. Smith (1993): Consumption and Real Exchange Rates in Dynamic Economies
with Non-traded Goods, Journal of International Economics 35, 297-316.
Balassa, B. (1964): The Purchasing
Economy, 72,584-96

Power Parity Doctrine: a Reappraisal,

Journal of Political

Bekaert, G. (1994): Exchange Rate Volatility and Deviations for Unbiasedness
Advance model, Journal of International Economics, 36,29-52
Breeden, D. (1979): An Intertemporal Asset Pricing Model with Stochastic
Investment Opportunities, Jouwl of Financial Economics, 7,265-296.

in a Cash-in-

Consumption

and

Dickey, D.A. and R.J. Rossana (1994): “Cointegrated Time Series: A Guide to Estimation
Hypothesis Testing” O~ord Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, 56,325-353.

and

Domowitz, 1,, and C. Hakkio (1985): Conditional Variance and the Risk Premium in the Foreign
Exchange Market, Journal of International Economics, 19,47-66,
Dumas, B. (1992): Dynamic Equilibrium and the Real Exchange Rate in a Spatially Separated
World, me Review of Financial Studies, 5, 153-180.
Engel, C. M. (1992a): On the Foreign Exchange Risk Premium in a general Equilibrium
Journal of International Economics, 32,305-319.
Engel, C. M. ( 1992b): The Risk Premium and the Liquidity
Markets, International Economic Review, 32,305-319.

Premium

in Foreign Exchange

Engle, R,F. and C.W.J, Granger (1987): Cointegration and Error Correction:
Estimation and Testing, Econometrics, 55,251-276.
Froot, K.A. and K. Rogoff (1994): Perspectives
NBER Working Paper Series, No.4952.

on PPP and Long-Run

Model,

Representation,

Real Exchange

Rates,

Granger, C.W.J, (1981): Some Properties of Time Series Data and their Use in Econometric
Model Specification, Journal of Econometrics, 16, 121-130.
Hamilton, J.D. (1994): Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J.
Hansen, H. and K. Juselius (1995):
ESTIMA, Evanston Ill.

CATS in RATS Cointegration

Analysis

of Time Series,

Hodrick, R. J., and S. Srivastava (1986): The Covariation of Risk Premiums and Expected Future
Exchange Rates, Journal of International Money and Finance, 5 (Supplement), S5-21

The Equilibrium

Approach

to Exchange

page 41

Rates

Johansen, S. (1988): Statisticrd Analysis of Cointegration Vectors, Journal of Economic @namics
and Control, 12, 231-254.
Johansen, S. (1991): Estimation and Hypothesis Testing of Cointegration
Vector Autoregressive Models, Econometrics, 59, 1551-1580.

Vectors in Gaussian

Johansen, S. and K. Juselius (1990): Maximum Likelihood Estimation and Inference on
Cointegration-with Applications to the Demand for Money, O#ord Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 52, 169-210.
Johansen, S. and K. Juselius (1992): Testing Structural Hypotheses in a Multivariate Cointegration
Analysis of the PPP and the UIP for UK, Journal of Econometrics 53,211-244.
Lewis, K. (1995): Puzzles in International Financial Markets, Working paper, Wharton School,
University
of Pennsylvania,
forthcoming
in Grossman, G., and K. Rogoff, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics, North Holland, Amsterdam.
Lucas, R, (1982): Interest Rates and Currency
Moneta~ Economics 10,335-359.

Prices in a Two-Country

Mark, N. (1985): On Time-Varying Risk Premia in the Foreign Exchange
Monetaq Economics, 16,3-18
Ness6n,

World, Journal

of

Market, Journal

of

M. (1994): Common Trends in Prices and Exchange Rates-Tests
of Long-Run
Purchasing Power Parity, Essay I in Essays on Exchange Rates and International
Finance, Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation, Department of Finance, Stockholm School of
Economics.

Osterwald-Lenum,
M. (1992): A Note with Quantiles of the Asymptotic Distribution of the
Maximum Likelihood Cointegration Rank Test Statistics, O#ord Bulletin of Economics
and Statistics, 54, 461-471.
Phillips, P.C.B. (1990): Optimal Inference in Cointegrated Systems, Econometrics,

59,283-306,

Samuelson, P. (1964): Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems, Review of Economics and Statistics,
46, 145-54/
Samuelson, P., and S. Swamy (1974): Invtiant Index Numbers and Canonical Duality: Survey
and Synthesis, American Economic Review , 64, 566-593.
Sercu, P., R. Uppal and C. Van Hulle (1995): “The Exchange Rate in the Presence of Transactions
Costs: Implications for Tests of Purchasing Power Parity” Journal of Finance, September
50, 1309-1319.
Singleton, K. (1990): Specification and Estimation of Intertemporal Asset Pricing Models, in B.
Friedman and F. Hahn, eds: Handbook
of A40neta~
Economics
(North Holland,
Amsterdam).
Stock, J.H. and M.W. Watson (1988): Testing for Common Trends, Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 83, 1097-1107.

The Equilibrium

Approach

page 42

fo Exchange Rates

Stockrnan, A. (1980): A Theo~
88,673-698.

of Exchange Rate Determination,

Journal of Political Economy,

Stockman, A. and H. Dellas (1989): International Portfolio Nondiversification
Variability, Journal of Intematioul
Economics, 26,261-290.

and Exchange Rate

Stulz, R. (1987): An Equilibrium Model of Exchange Rate Detetination
and Asset Pricing with
Nontraded Goods and Imperfect Information, Journal of Political Economy, 95, 10241040.
Svensson, L. E. O. (1985a): Cumency prices, terms of Trade, and Interest Rates: A General
Equilibrium
Asset Pricing Cash-in-Advance
Approach, Journal of International
Economics, 18, 17-42.
Svensson, L. E, O. (1985 b): Money and Asset Prices in a Cash-in-Advance
Political Economy, 93,919-944.

Economy, Journal of

