NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ARE MEDICAL PRICES DECLIN~G?

David M, Cutler
Mark McClellan
Joseph P. Newhouse
Dahlia Remler

Working Paper 5750

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996

We are grateful to Ernie Bemdt, Dennis Fixler, Richard Frank, Irwin Gerduk, Dan Ginsburg, Steve
Goss, Zvi Griliches, Jon Gruber, Anne Martin, Bill Nordhaus, and Jack Triplett for helpful
conversations, and to the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research, the Bureau of Economic
Analysis, the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation, and the National Institute on Aging for research support. We, of course, are responsible
This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in Aging,
for errors and interpretations.
Productivity and Public Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
01996 by David M. Cutler, Mark McClellan, Joseph P. Newhouse and Dahlia Remler. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit
permission provided that full credit, including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5750
September 1996

ARE MEDICAL PRICES DECLINING?

ABSTMCT

We address long-standing

problems in measuring health care prices by estimating

two

medical care price indices. The first, a Service Price Index, prices specific medical services, as does
the current CPI. The second, a Cost of Living Index, measures the net valuation of treating a health
problem.

We apply these indices to heart attack treatment between 1983 and 1994. Because of

technological

change and increasing price discounts, the current CPI overstates a chain-weighted

price index by three percentage points annually. For plausible values of an additional life-year, the
real Cost of Living Index fell about 1 percent annually.

Mark McClellan
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6072
and NBER
markmc@nber.harvard. edu

David M. Cutler
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
dcutler@nber.harvard. edu

Joseph P. Newhouse
Division of Health Policy Research&
Harvard Medical School
25 Shattuck Street
Boston, MA 02115

Education

Dahlia Remler
Department of Economics
Tulane University
New Orleans, LA 70118

The Consumer Price Index for medical care has increased more rapidly than the price of
other goods and services for the past several decades. This “excess medical care price inflation”
was particularly acute in the 1980s, when the annual increase in the medical care CPI was 3.6
percentage points greater than the GDP deflator, compared with an excess of 1.2 and 1,5
percentage points in the two prior decades. The increased spread over the GDP deflator occurred
despite a marked increase in price competition in medical care (e.g., Zwanziger and Melnick,
1988), which would be expected to reduce markups. Yet policymakers

effectively treated the

above-average measured medical care price inflation as true. They proposed at various times
freezing all medical care prices, freezing particular prices such as drugs, and reducing prices paid
by government programs, suggesting that they saw increased unit prices as an important cause of
the sustained rise in medical care spending.
But measuring true changes in medical care prices is very difficult.t

In part, the

difficulty stems from the fact that the bundle of medical services provided changes rapidly.

In

any market where consumption patterns change quickly, issues of sampling frequency and
weighting become very important.
A second difficulty is that there are multiple bases of price in the market. While some
purchasers pay the charge for each service (a day in the hospital, a pint of blood, etc.), others pay
at a more aggregated level (for example, a hospital admission involving bypass surgery),

And

still others pay a fixed amount per person per year (cavitation) without explicit reference to what

‘Difficulties with the medical care CPI have been noted by Armknecht and Ginsburg
(1992), Ford and Sturrn (1988), Getzen (1992), Newhouse (1989, 1992), and Phelps (1992).

services are provided.

A price index should ideally be able to incorporate each of these pricing

systems.
Perhaps the most important issue, however, is quality change. The value of medical care
changes substantial over time, even if its physical characteristics remain the same. A day in the
hospital or an hour in the operating room in 1990, for example, included much more highly
concentrated nursing, monitoring, and other services than a day in the hospital in 1980. Even a
pint of blood, a seemingly well-defined product, now includes more screening tests for infectious
agents and safer packaging than it used to.
Quality adjustment is particularly important because consumers ultimately value the
expected health consequences

of their encounter with the medical sector, not the number of units

of medical services they receive.2 A price index reflecting the cost of living ought to value this
output (Griliches, 1992). In most situations, our presumption is that quality improvements
reduce real price increases relative to nominal price increases.

But quality improvements

are

valuable only if their expected benefits exceed their social costs. Because of moral hazard from
health insurance and other market imperfections, this condition may not apply in medical care
markets.

Thus, the medical care CPI could be seriously biased, but even the direction of the bias

is not entirely clear.
In this paper, we address these problems in the development of appropriate price indices

2This structure is analogous to previous work on the development of unbiased price
indices for computers (where the inputs are the speed and memory of the computer and the
output is the ability to perform specific tasks) or automobiles (where the inputs are characteristics
of the car and the output is transportation and safety).

2

for medical care. There are two conceptual price indices for this industry.

The first is a Service

Price Index – an index of the price of particular medical treatments over time. The Service Price
Index corresponds most closely to current price indices such as the CPI. The Service Price Index
does not have a natural quality adjustment, however.

To incorporate quality change, we form a

second index – a Cost of Living Index – that measures how much consumers would be willing to
pay or would have to be compensated to accept changes in medical treatments and prices over
time.
Because measuring inputs and health outputs is crucial in forming price indices, and
because the relevant medical inputs and health outputs vary by disease, we focus on medical care
for a particular disease: acute myocardial infmction (AMI) or heart attack. We choose AMI for
several reasons. Heart attacks are common, with nearly one percent of the elderly population
suffering a new heart attack annually.
related complications

Indeed, heart disease, which includes heart attacks and

caused by blockages in the blood vessels supplying the heart, accounts for

nearly one-seventh of medical spending and is the leading cause of death in the United States. In
addition, the costs of treating heart attacks have increased substantially in recent years, with
Medicare expenditures per heart attack rising about four percent annually in real terms (Cutler
and McClellan,

1996). Our goal is to separate cost changes into changes in prices and changes in

real output. Finally, an episode of heart attack treatment has a natural beginning point -- the
attack itself -- and a highly-valued

outcome

-- survival -- which is relatively easy to measure.

Thus it is easier to analyze the value of heart attack care compared to care for many other

diseases where other outcomes are more relevant.3
We use two sources of data. The first is detailed data on quantities of care and charges
from a single major teaching hospital (which we term MTH) between 1983 and 1994. Detailed
data are essential in measuring changes in prices for particular medical services. We also use data
from Medicare on major AMI treatments and mortality for all elderly patients who had a heart
attack between 1984 and 1991.
We reach two conclusions about medical care price indices. First, service price indices
are particularly sensitive to which prices are included in the index and how frequently the basket
of goods is reweighted.

When we use list prices for a constant set of services over time, we find

increases in the price index above general inflation of over three percentage points annually.
When we use transactions prices for the variable set of services that patients actually consume
over time, we find real price increases of less than one percent annually.
Second, the increase in the Cost of Living index is even smaller, and our best estimate is
that the real Cost of Living index is actually ~alling, by about one percent annually.

This

estimate is naturally somewhat speculative, since it depends on the assumed value of life. But
given the improving survival of AMI patients, even conservative estimates of that value suggest
that the real Cost of Living Index has been constant or falling over our time period. If the heart
attack example generalizes, it suggests that current price indices are substantially overstated, and

30f course, other outcomes related to quality of life also matter for AMI patients, and we
also consider the implications of changes in quality of life for our price indices. But almost 40
percent of elderly heart attack patients die within a year of AMI, compared with about five
percent of all elderly, making survival a highly relevant consideration for valuing the care
received.
4

that the relative price of medical care may in fact be falling.
The paper is structured as follows. In the first section, we discuss the theoretical issues
involved in calculating price indices for medical care. In the second section, we discuss
treatments for heart attacks. The third section describes the data. The fourth and fifth sections
present our price indices. The last section concludes.

I.

Price Indices for Medical Care
In forming a price index for medical care or anything else, one must first speci~ the good

being priced. For most goods, particularly non-durables, this is not much of a problem. The
consumption

good is simply the physical output of the industry; if the nature of the good does

not change, then the price of the output over time can be used to construct an unbiased price
index. Medical care poses several difficult issues, however.
what the industry provides.

The first problem is in measuring

The goods produced by medical providers are a complex array of

personal interactions and diagnostic tests, leading to insights about the nature of a patient’s
health problem, followed by a range of treatments including drugs, procedures, devices, and
counseling that may or may not affect the course of a particular individual’s illness. Many of
these components of medical care are difficult to measure precisely, and they often differ from
case to case. For example, physician time spent chatting with a mildly-ill patient is different from
time spent diagnosing problems with a more severely-ill patient. A price index must find some
way to differentiate among these different goods.
The measurement

of services is complicated by the fact that multiple bases of price exist

5

in the market. In traditional fee-for-service billing, prices exist for over 7,000 particular
physician services (such as brief hospital visit, interpretation of an x-ray, etc.). Many health
insurance plans today price a more aggregated bundle of services, e.g. an all-inclusive payment
to a hospital for a bypass surgery operation for an AMI patient, or even a single capitated
payment for all treatments for all medical problems in a period of time. Price indices should
ideally capture both of these levels of aggregation.
The third difficulty is that consumers rarely pay the entire cost of medical care out of
pocket. Most of the payment is typically made by an insurer, public or private. Ultimately,
however, consumers must bear the cost of medical care, through lower wages, higher prices, or
increased taxes. We thus allocate all of the costs of medical care to consumers in forming price
indices.4
The final difficulty is that to a first approximation

consumers value the expected effect of

medical care services on their health and not the medical care services themselves. This is true
for the consumption

value of any product – consumers do not value an orange per se, but value

the visual, taste, and nutritional consequences of its consumption.

Medical care is a particularly

difficult case, however, because the expected health output is difficult to measure and changes
over time. For example, when a new clinical trial is published showing that a particular cardiac
drug has a larger effect on improving mortality for heart attack patients than had previously been
supposed, doctors and patients revise their expectations about the value of the drug; assuming no

4Nordhaus(1996)
market goods.

discusses the need for considering indirect costs for a variety of non-

6

change in nominal prices as a result of the trial, such a trial should result in a decrease in the real
cost of medical care. Designing methods to incorporate this type of situation are difficult,
however, particularly since the prevalence of insurance and price discounts means that list prices
are not a good reflection of marginal valuation.
To formalize these ideas in the context of various price indices, we begin by introducing
some theory and notation.

Suppose that consumers may have a series of diseases, indexed by d

(one disease can consist of not being sick). Having diseased results in the receipt of medical
care md(~, a vector of constant-quality

treatments.

If a new procedure is developed or the

ability to perform a given procedure gets better over time, this would be represented as an
addition to the set of md. For the moment, we want to ignore the issue of how md is determined;
it may be through markets, through an administrative
or a combination
representative

mechanism, through the beliefs of doctors,

of all of these factors. We return to this below. The expected welfare of a

consumer i in any period t is:

where nd(fl is the probabilityy that the person has disease d at time t, U is the consumer’s
expected utility, His the health of the person, which depends on the disease and the expected
effects of medical care received, Yi is income (assumed to be constant over time), Pi($ is the
vector of effective price to person i of medical care at time t,and Ti(fl is lump-sum payments
(insurance premiums or taxes) for medical services. pm+T

7

is spending on medical care, so that

the second argument of the utility fanction is just the consumption of non-health goods.
In specifying this utility finction we assume that medical services do not have
independent consumption value, beyond their effect on health. Otherwise we would need to
include them in the utility function separately and keep track of them throughout the indices.
Excluding the direct consumption value makes the calculation of consumer price indices much
simpler and seems to be a reasonable approximation.s
This specification may not capture some interactions between current medical services
and future utility, For example, elderly people whose life is prolonged but who are left partially
disabled may suffer increased risk of fiture uninsured nursing home expense.

The utility cost of

this risk should be counted as a cost of current medical care consumption, just as the longer life
is a benefit of current medical care consumption.

For simplicity, we do not consider such

interaction effects in this paper. But we do discount fiture health benefits and costs to current
dollars.
The consumer’s welfare may change over time for several reasons.

First, the distribution

of medical service use and payments may differ by age. If medical payments increase more
rapidly than receipt of medical services as a person ages, welfare will fall over time. Conversely,
when medical care is subsidized at older ages, welfare increases over the lifetime.
from this in our analysis; by allocating all treatment-related

We abstract

expenditures to each consumer, we

5This assumption will not hold exactly for some medical services that have consumption
value for non-health reasons (e. g., hospitals have some hotel-like qualities). Moreover, some
economists (e.g., Newhouse, 1977, Fuchs, 1993) have emphasized the “caring” role of medical
care -- the process of care itself – has inherent value to the sick and to other members of society
in itself, even if it has no consequences for the patient’s health outcomes.
8

implicitly analyze consumers with a constant age and income over time.
Second, disease incidence may change. Entirely new diseases such as AIDS maybe
added to the set of possible illnesses, and other diseases such as smallpox may be eliminated.
More generally, changes in lifestyles and medical care may change the incidence of a given set of
diseases.

Better diet, reduced smoking, and increased exercise have lowered the incidence of

heart disease over time, and thus resulted in increased welfare.
We also abstract fi-om these effects by estimating price indices for a single disease.
conceptually straightforward

It is

to apply similar methods to other diseases, and to reconstruct an

aggregate price index from the specific illnesses.

With a single disease, welfare is given by:

With these assumptions, welfare changes are only a finction of changes in medical treatments,
their expected effects, and payment over time. The question we pose is: how do these practice
and payment changes affect the price of the medical services industry’s product?

We distinguish

two price indices, one based on medical care services and the other based on the effects of
medical services on expected utility.

Service Price Index. The first index, which we term a Service Price Index (SPI), is the price of a
representative

bundle of medical goods and services overtime.

We use the term Service Price

Index to reflect the focus on medical care services rather than patient welfare. To form the
Service Price Index, we consider a typical set of treatments in period 10, m(to). The Laspeyres
9

Service Price Index is the relative cost of this fixed set of treatments over time:

SPI,O,,, =

p(tl)” m(tt,)

p(t,)

p(tO) ~m(tO)

= a “p(t,,)

(2)

where a is the vector of the share of each service in total costs in the base period. There are many
potential Service Price Indices, depending on the bundle of services chosen as the market basket
and how frequently the basket of goods is resampled. We discuss both of these issues in Section
IV.
Because it prices specific medical care services, the Service Price Index maybe biased
from the standpoint of describing true changes in the cost of living related to medical care. Even
with very detailed measurement of medical quantities, it is possible that the nature of the
measured service changes over time, or that other unmeasured services provided with the
measured service change over time. For example, the price of a cardiac catheter may rise over
time, but the features of the catheter (e.g., size, maneuverability,

etc.) may change, so that a

catheter in the base period and the current period does not represent the same medical product.
In addition, the Service Price Index may not capture the health consequences of changes in
medical services.

In the catheter example, if the product improvements

result in better expected

health outcomes associated with use of the catheter, or if learning-by-doing
catheterization

associated with past

use results in better health outcomes in the future, then the price index should fall.

But a Service Price Index generally will not capture this price reduction.

Consequently,

define an alternative price index that accounts explicitly for the value of the health care
10

we

outcomes.

Cosl of Living Index. Following the literature on true cost of living indices (Fisher and Shell,
1972), we define the Cost of Living Index (COL) as the amount consumers would be willing to
pay (or would have to be compensated) to have today’s medical care and today’s prices, when
the alternative is base period medical care and base period prices. The change in the cost of
living between tO and t~, denoted C, is the amount of compensation required to equalize utility in
those two states. It is implicitly defined from:b

U(H(m(t,)),

Y - p(t~)” m(t,) - T(tl) -C)

= u(H(m(tt~)), y - p(tt~)” m(t(j) - T(to))

(3)

Taking a Taylor series expansion around to, using x to represent consumption,
and rearranging terms, we obtain:

c.

UH

u

H.,

dm-d~.m+~

(4)

x

The first term on the right hand side of equation (4) is the health benefit of changes in medical
care, expressed in dollars. The second term is the change in the cost of medical care. If C is

bFisher and Shell (1972) define the cost of living index in terms of expenditure functions.
The income required to reach utility U over time is: COL = e(U,pl)/e(U,pO). For our purposes, it
is easiest to work with the utility function directly. The two are equivalent, however, since
COL = 1- (e(U,pO)-e(U,p,)) / e(U,pO) = I-C/YO.

11

positive, the consumer is better off in period t~ than he was in period to and conversely.
no necessary presumption,

There is

however, that changes in medical treatments – even with prices

constant – will increase welfare.
The Laspeyres Cost of Living Index between period 10 and period tl is just the index of
changes in C scaled by initial income:7

COL,(,,,, =1-:

(5)

It is important to note that the cost portion of the cost of living index is the change in the
total cost of care, not the change in a Service Price Index (i.e. p“m+T, not p). If consumers care
only about health output, the price of a representative bundle of services is irrelevant; only the
total cost of treatment and its expected consequences for health matter.
The key question in implementing

a Cost of Living Index is what to assume about the

relation between the value and cost in the Cost of Living formulation.

In most markets, a

reasonable assumption is that the marginal consumer’s marginal valuation of the good equals its
cost. Thus, we can link costs and value by observing how much consumers are willing to pay for
the particular components in a bundled product.

This is the foundation of hedonic analysis

(Griliches, 1971). In medical care markets, however, this is not a tenable assumption.

When

medical care decisions are made by patients who are insured at the margin or by health care

7 The Cost of Living Index can be formed using chain weights or other methods
intertemporal aggregation.

12

of

providers whose interests may not coincide with those of the patient, there is no presumption

that

the marginal value of care equals its social cost. Thus, we cannot a pi-iori use hedonic analysis to
measure changes in the cost of living.
A second approach is to specifi a model for how consumption decisions are made. Then,
using the observed path of consumption and spending, one could infer the change in the cost of
living. This is the approach taken in Fisher andGriliches(1995)

and Griliches and Cockbum

(1994) for the case of generic drugs. Many complex medical treatment decisions maybe
involved even in the treatment of a single health problem, however, and there is no generallyaccepted model for how such decisions are made, We thus do not pursue this approach.
A third approach is to use direct evidence on the expected value of medical care in
improving health. Then the Cost of Living Index can be calculated using the measured cost and
value differences directly. We implement this approach in Section V, based on aggregate changes
in health outcomes and in medical expenditures for AMI patients.

IL

The Treatment of Acute Myocardial Infarction
Before discussing a price index for AMI, we sketch some of the major treatment

decisions involved.

A person who suffers a heart attack will almost always be admitted to a

hospital, unless he or she dies before reaching one, because the initial treatments for AMI are all
administered

in an inpatient setting. We thus begin our episode of care with the initial hospital

admission of the AMI patient.

While they survive, patients may receive care for their heart

attack, in and out of hospitals, over the following months,

13

For example, patients may receive

tests or invasive diagnostic procedures in the initial hospital admission, and be readmitted for
additional tests or invasive procedures later on. We group all of these admissions into a single
temporally-based
admission.

episode of medical care, rather than an arbitrary grouping such as a hospital

For our Service Price Index, we define an episode as including all treatments that

occur within 90 days of the AMI; this time period has been used extensively in previous studies
of acute AMI care (e.g., Udvarhelyi et al., 1992, McClellan, McNeil, and Newhouse,

1994).

There are several major treatment options for patients with heart attacks. One method
involves medical management of the heart attack, In the acute period medical management
includes drug therapies, monitoring technologies, and other nonsurgical intensive interventions
for complications

such as heart failure or irregular heart rhythms.

Later, it may include drug

therapy and counseling to promote a healthy lifestyle and reduce the risk of future heart attacks.
This type of care involves many important technologies -- for example, thrombolytic

(clot-

busting) drugs were developed in the 1970s and used on a wide-scale basis in the 1980s -- but
does not include invasive procedures to improve blood flow to the heart.8
Invasive cardiac treatments begin with cardiac catheterization
study of blood flow to the heart muscle. Catheterization

– a diagnostic radiologic

was developed in the late 1960s and

became more widely used in the treatment of patients with heart disease over the next decade. If
a catheterization

detects “significant” blockage, a range of revascularization

applied. Two major types of revascularization

procedures may be

procedures have become widely used: bypass

*Administering an intravenous drug is invasive, strictly speaking, but much less so than
the major cardiac procedures that follow.

14

surgery, a major open-heart operation that involves bypassing blocked blood vessels by splicing
a vein or artery around the blockage, and angioplasty, a percutaneous (less invasive) procedure
that seeks to restore blood flow via inflating a balloon amid the blockage.

Bypass surgery was

also developed in the late 1960s. Angioplasty is more recent. It was first applied clinically in
the late 1970s but was not used on a widescale basis until the mid- 1980s.
The fact that the content and intensity of heart attack treatment can vary widely, and that
many of these treatments and their consequences are difficult to measure, illustrates the price
index problems described above. We elaborate on these issues at length in our construction

of

price indices,

III

Data and Price Measurement

Data.

We use two sources of data to form our price indices. The first is a complete set of

detailed services, charges, demographic information, and discharge abstracts for all heart attack
patients (patients discharged with a principal diagnosis of ICD-9 CM codes 4 10) admitted to a
major teaching hospital (MTH) between 1983 and 1994. Every specific billable service that the
hospital provided is reported in the data. This enables us to observe the quantities of medical
care inputs at the most disaggregated level that is technically possible, and so permits the
formation of a Service Price Index with minimal measurement bias. We restrict the sample to
those patients for whom the observed heart attack was their first at this hospital, roughly 300
episodes annually.9 Table A 1 shows the sample size by year.

9We do not know if the patient had an earlier heart attack elsewhere. However, we do
15

The second source of data is Medicare claims records for all elderly patients with a heart
attack between 1984 and 1991. We again form an episode by linking a patient’s care over time,
The Medicare claims records contain much less detail on services received than our hospitalspecific service data; only major procedures and days in the hospital are reliably coded.
However, the Medicare data have two important advantages relative to the MTH data. First,
because Medicare is the primary payer for the vast majority of elderly Americans, we are able to
construct comprehensive

estimates of expenditures on medical care for almost all elderly AMI

patients from 1984 to 1991. As Appendix Table Al shows, this is roughly 230,000 patients
annually.

We limit our analysis to hospital costs, since hospital costs comprise the predominant

expense in caring for AMI patients.

Second, one can link Medicare data to Social Security death

records and thereby determine survival outcomes.
Measuring Prices. At MTH we do not have transactions prices but rather charges or list prices.
Until recently, the official indices for medical care, including hospital care, were based on such
list prices. But many payers do not pay list price. For example, for Medicare and Medicaid
patients, who account for about 40 percent of hospitals’ revenues, hospitals receive an
administered
System).

price (e.g., after 1984 Medicare payment was based on the Prospective Payment

Likewise, many Blue Cross plans receive discounts off charges. Preferred Provider

Organizations

[PPOS], increasingly common in recent years, usually pay a discount off of list

prices. As a result, list prices have become increasingly unrelated to typical transactions prices.

know if they were transferred to MTH from another hospital. We have experimented
restricting the sample to non-transfers, without important effect on the results.

16

with

Dranove, Shanley, and White(1991)

show that in California between 1983 and 1988 the use of

list prices rather than transactions prices resulted in a 40 percent overstatement
price increase.

of the hospital

Ideally, price indices would be based on transactions prices, which better

approximate actual resource use and the opportunity cost of the resources involved.
We use charges to compare MTH with the hospital component of the CPI; this method
corresponds to the construction of a CPI-like index for heart attack treatment at MTH during the
period of our study. For purposes of estimating an index that is closer to transactions price,
however, we deflate charges to reflect the hospital’s accounting cost. The resulting cost-based
prices increase by one percentage point less than charges per year.’” We use actual transactions
prices for Medicare in our indices.] 1
Because of the attention paid by policymakers to the difference between the medical care
CPI and economy wide inflation, we deflate all of our indices by the GDP deflator. All dollar
figures are in 1991 dollars.

‘“Calculating accounting costs is reasonably standardized across hospitals because until
1988, Medicare paid at least partly on the basis of accounting costs. In our case we deflate
charges using the cost-to-charge ratio for the hospital as a whole,
1]Many believe that Medicare patients were increasingly subsidized by non-Medicare
patients over the time period, as limitations on Medicare payments were made in periodic deficit
reduction efforts (Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, 1996). Alternatively,
Medicare may have paid closer to marginal cost and fixed costs were increasingly shifted to
private payers (for a relevant model see Glazer and McGuire, 1994). Ideally, we would include
all patients with their transactions prices. If cross-subsidies to Medicare patients were rising over
time, results based on Medicare-only transactions prices would be biased down.

Iv

Service Price Indices
In this section, we discuss the formation of Service Price Indices. From Section I, the

Service Price Index is defined as the relative cost of a given set of treatments over time. There
are many potential Service Price Indices, varying along two dimensions: the basket of goods that
is priced (detailed services or a more aggregated set of treatments), and the frequency with which
the basket of goods is resampled (annual or less frequently).
implications

A.

We discuss the empirical

of both of these choices.

Pricing Basic Components
The most commonly used medical care price index in the United States is the medical

care component of the Consumer Price Index (CPI). We thus start with this index. The CPI
prices the basic components of medical services. To calculate the hospital component of the CPI,
the BLS prices charges for six hospital services at each hospital outlet: two room services (for
example, charges per day for semi-private rooms and medical intensive care unit [ICU] rooms),
three other inpatient services (for example, operating room time or electrocardiograms

[ECG])

and one outpatient service (for example, outpatient ECG). 12 These services are aggregated across
hospitals to form hospital room, other inpatient hospital services, and outpatient hospital services
sub-indices. These sub-indices are then combined to form the hospital and related services subindex, which in turn enters the overall medical CPI. The goods priced, and the hospitals in the
sample, are kept constant for 5 years, at which time both hospitals and goods are resarnpled.

‘*Note that Medicare and Medicaid transaction prices are excluded from the CPI.
18

Appendix 1 describes the sampling and aggregation in more detail.
Figure 1 shows the real (relative to the GDP deflator) medical care CPI from 1983 to
1994, and Table 1 shows average rates of growth. Over this time period, the real medical CPI
rose by 3.4 percent annually.

The real hospital component of the CPI increased even more

rapidly, 6.2 percent annually.
To examine how representative our hospital and disease are for forming price indices, we
formed a synthetic CPI for the treatment of heart attacks at MTH. We attempted to match the
current CPI as well as possible, as described in Appendix 1, Because the medical care CPI is
based on list prices, we computed a synthetic CPI based on hospital charges. As Figure 1 and
Table 1 show, the real CPI for heart attacks at MTH grew at an annual rate of 3.3 percent, almost
the same as the overall medical care CPI but well below the 6.2 percent hospital component of
the CPI. To reflect more accurately what the typical payer is paying for medical care, we formed
a second synthetic CPI, based on the estimated accounting costs of treating heart attacks. This
index, also shown in Figure 1 and Table 1, grew about a percentage point less, at an annual real
rate of 2.4 percent.
Our synthetic CPIS are much noisier than the national series (Figure 1). This is not
surprising since they are formed for only one hospital and one disease, and price increases at a
particular hospital do not occur smoothly over time. For example, the synthetic CPI increase in
1985 is largely caused by a repricing of cardiac catheterization in that year, and the increase in
1989 is largely the result of an increase in the price of intensive care unit rooms. In each case,
the increase in the CPI is followed by a relative decline as there are smaller price changes for

19

several years afterwards. Averaged over the whole time period, the cumulative increases are still
substantial.
The medical care CPI does not change the quantity of goods that are priced over time.
For example, the hospital room component always prices the cost of one day in a hospital,
independent of how long patients actually stay in the hospital.

Occasionally, new hospitals are

added and others are deleted, but the set of goods priced remains the same. Because of this, the
CPI may not reflect the price change for the set of goods that is typically purchased.

An

alternative approach to a basic components index is to choose the average patient and price the
basket of medical services provided to that patient over time (Scitovsky, 1967). We term this a
Patient Weighted Price Index (PWPI). The PWPI is similar to the new Producer Price Index
(PPI) that the Bureau of Labor Statistics compiles and to some of the changes scheduled in the
CPI. In the PPI, for example, a patient from a particular DRG is sampled, and that patient’s bill
is repriced every month for five years, For patients paid on a fee-for-service basis, the PPI is like
our Patient Weighted Price Index with a 5-year chain weight. 13
The principal limitation of the PWPI (and other basic components indices) is that it may
not be able to capture the same treatment over time. Some goods disappear from use and others
newly appear. This item-substitution

needs to be accounted for. The detailed MTH data permit

the extent of the problem of market basket change to be quantified. In our heart attack patients at

13The PPI is based on actual transactions prices, whether charges, discounted charges, or
DRGs. For patients whose bills are paid for on a fee-for-service basis, the bill is in principle
repriced each month. In fact, the total charges or discounted charges are usually increased by
whatever amount the hospital’s chargemaster increases.

20

MTH, we can match spending for 98 percent of charges in consecutive years, but only 42 percent
of charges in periods five years apart, and 27 percent of dollars in periods 11 years apart (the
maximum time in our sample).
Some of these market-basket

changes are nearly identical substitutions,

largely new code

names for products and services that are roughly therapeutic equivalents, such as the addition of
equivalent analgesics or acid-suppressing
improvements

drugs. Others may represent incremental

within a given family of services, such as a new variety of intensive-care

rooms, but there is no easy way to quantifi the value of these improvements
index. When we allow for these straightforward

substitutions,

unit

in an output price

78 percent of expenditures can be

matched over the entire time period, 85 percent can be matched over five years, and 98 percent
can be matched annually.
In addition, truly new goods appear. For example, intraortic balloon pumps -- small
pumps inserted near the heart that can temporarily help the heart pump blood -- were nonexistent
in 1987 but had grown to almost one percent of the average heart attack patient’s bill by 1994.
We link these new goods as we are able to do so, but again make no adjustment for potential
quality change associated with the new good Our approach is consistent with the BLS linking
method (Bureau of Labor Statistics 1992).]4

14The BLS treats new and obsolete goods using three possible methods. In some cases, a
new good is considered to be a direct and filly equivalent replacement for an old good (termed
direct comparability). In other cases, quality adjustments are made for the shift from an old to a
new good (termed direct quality adjustment), although this method is rarely used in practice due
to the difficulties in quantifying quality improvements. Other new goods are linked into the old
index, which is equivalent to assuming that the quality-adjusted price change in the substitution
period is exactly equal to the price change of the other goods in the category. For our longer
21

The upper line in Figure 2 and Table 1 shows the Laspeyres PWPI. This index is much
like the synthetic CPI, increasing by 2.8 percent annually in real terms.
With rapid changes in the bundle of goods consumed, as in medical care, an index based
on a constant treatment bundle may quickly become unrepresentative,

Table 2 shows that, at

least in some respects, treatments consumed by AMI patients have changed fundamentally
during the period of our study. The first block of Table 2 shows the share of patients receiving
different cardiac treatment regimens over time: medical management, cardiac catheterization
only, bypass surge~, and angioplasty.

The first set of columns is for the Medicare sample; the

second set of columns is for patients at MTH.
In both sets of data, use of more intensive procedures has skyrocketed. In the mid- 1980s
only about ten percent of elderly heart attack patients received at least one of these intensive
cardiac procedures (35 percent at MTH, including non-elderly).

By the early- to mid- 1990s, 40

percent of patients with a heart attack were treated with the cardiac procedures (75 percent at
MTH). Use of all the procedures grew rapidly, with angioplasty growing particularly rapidly in
MTH.

indices, linking underweights the kinds of goods that appear and disappear frequently, such as
pharmaceuticals, and overweights the kinds of goods that exist over long periods, such as ICU
rooms.
The BLS is trying to integrate quality changes into the new Producer Price Index. In
principle, hospitals are supposed to report when treatment for the patient has materially changed,
so that quality adjustments can be made. In practice, however, few hospitals do so. This may be
because treatment changes are less obvious when they occur gradually as opposed to all at once.
In the case of AMI, for example, the large changes in treatment over a five- or ten-year period are
the cumulative effect of many modest changes in treatment; it is not obvious that hospitals could
easily identi@ these changes as material and report them in any given year.

22

Moreover, within these treatment regimens, there are dramatic changes in medical inputs,
For example, among the medically managed patients at MTH, length of stay in the hospital fell
by 57 percent and ICU days fell by a quarter (not shown). Length of stay for bypass surgery
patients fell by 22 percent.

The use of other resources for bypass patients increased, however,

Operating room time, for example, rose by 38 percent.
As treatments consumed diverge from the mix in a fixed-weight index, the index yields
increasingly biased estimates of the price increase facing a typical patient.
problem, more frequent resampling of the basket of goods is required.

To address this

We consider two chain-

weighted PWPIS. One PWPI reweights the bundle of treatments every five years, and the other
reweights it annually.

Figure 2 and Table 1 show that the Laspeyres bias is substantial.

Compared to annual real price growth of 2.8 percent for the Laspeyres index, the 5-year chainweighted index increases by 2.1 percent annually, and the annual chain-weighted
by only 0.7 percent annually.

index increases

The difference in these indices results almost entirely from the

weight placed on room charges. Between 1983 and 1994, the price of a hospital room rose by 60
percent, while the average length of stay for AMI patients fell by 36 percent.’5

B,

Pricing Treatments
Increasingly, payments to health care providers are moving away from the basic-

components level. For example, Medicare payment is made on the basis of the four treatment

15The growth of the chain-weighted index need not always exceed that of the Laspeyres
index, If length of stay reaches a minimum, for example, the difference could be in the other
direction.
23

regimens shown in Table 2. Each treatment regimen is a separate DRG, and hospitals receive a
fixed amount for every patient in that DRG. 16 Price indices based on such major treatment
regimens avoid the major limitations of pricing basic components, by implicitly reweighing
changes in the basic components of the treatment regimen as they occur. We thus form a service
price index that prices the major treatment regimens to compare to our basic components indices.
Forming the Treatment Price Index requires definition of major treatment options and the
collection of comprehensive

data on payments for the treatment regimens.

treatment regimens defined in Table 2, to match current Medicare practice.

We use the four
We have data on

prices and quantities of treatment regimens for both the national Medicare sample and the MTH
data. We present results for both samples.
The lower panel of Table 2 shows the prices of our different treatment regimens over
time. Reimbursement

conditional on a treatment regimen was relatively constant or even falling

over time. This is particularly true in the Medicare sample, where the range of real cost changes
is from -6 percent annually (for angioplast y) to 2 percent annually.
reimbursement

The reductions in

were typically by design. Angioplasty reimbursement

Medicare administrators

was reduced in 1986 as

cut payments to reflect more accurately the estimated cost of performing

the treatment; catheterization-only

payments were reduced as more catheterizations

performed during the initial hospital stay rather than on a subsequent admission.

were
Reimbursement

lGThis is a bit of a simplification. There are actually 3 DRGs for medically managed heart
attacks, and 2 each for the other treatment regiments, depending on whether the patient had
complicating conditions or died. There are also outlier payments for particularly costly or longstay patients. Still, the grouping into these four categories is the dominant source of payment
variation. See McClellan (1995) for more details on DRG payment methods.
24

for medically managed heart attacks or bypass surgery increased marginally (see Cutler and
McClellan,

1996, for more details.)

The MTH accounting cost data generally show the same pattern, with two exceptions.
First, the accounting cost of angioplasty increased in MTH, as opposed to the 6 percent decrease
in the Medicare sample. This largely reflects the difference between costs and Medicare
reimbursement,

Second, the grotih

of bypass surgery costs in the MTH sample is greater than

the payment growth in the Medicare sample, by about 1 percent per year. The reason for this
difference is not entirely clear. It maybe that the mix of cases in the hospital changed over time
into a more severely ill group.
The fact that payment within each treatment regimen was relatively constant implies that
price indices that adjust for changes in the frequency of use of each treatment regimen over time
will not rise substantially.
annual chain-weighted
striking.

This is shown empirically in Figure 3 and Table 1, which present

price indices at the treatment level. The pattern in the Medicare data is

There was essentially no increase in the Price Index through 1990, and then a mild

increase in 1991, Over the entire time period, the total change in the Price Index was only 0.6
percent per year. The Price Index based on MTH data is again noisier than the index based on
national Medicare data. Indeed, the MTH index is particularly variable because annual
fluctuations in the average severity of admissions affect this index. Still, the average growth of
the index is 0.4 percent annually.”

‘7We formed an alternative price index using a three year moving average of costs for
each treatment regimen and the share of patients receiving each treatment regimen. The resulting
index fell by 0.1 percent annually.
25

Thus, for both the Medicare and MTH data, the growth of treatment-level
about one-half percent annually.

price indices is

This is roughly the same as the growth of the annual chain-

weighted PWPI, but substantially below the 3.3 percent increase of the synthetic CPI. We thus
conclude that adjusting for the difference between list and transactions prices and incorporating
changes in the bundle of what is actually consumed can have a dramatic effect on medical care
inflation.

Our prefemed Service Price Indices increase about 0.5 percent per year, roughly 3

percentage points less rapidly historically than official price indices.

v.

The Cost of Living Index
The biggest difficulty with the Service Price Index is adjusting for quality. A Service

Price Index only captures changes in quality that occur with changes in the measured quantities
of goods and services that are included in the index, and even these changes may not be weighted
properly. In this section, we forma true Cost of Living Index to value quality change explicitly.

A.

A4ethodolo~

The value of medical care is given by the change in the length and quality of life. Since
survival is a very important outcome for patients with a heart attack and is much easier to
measure than is morbidity, we focus predominantly

on changes in life expectancy.

Consider a

person with a heart attack in period t who diess periods after their heart attack. The value of

remaining life for that person is Value,, (t)

=

“

~

m

where ~(~ is the value of lifej

j.~(l+r)i’

years in the fiture,

aj

is 1 if the person lived the entire period and % if the person died during the
26

period,lg and r is the real interest rate (assumed to be 3 percent).
Ignoring quality of life changes amounts to holding ~(~ constant over time.’9 Then, the
.V
value of remaining life in year t is Value,, (t) = V. /,,, where 1,,= ~
.j=()

people die in intervals

If a share d~(fl of

aj
(1

+

Y

~’

‘

after their heart attack, the average value of remaining life for the entire

heart attack population is:

Value (t)

=

~ V. d,,(t). 1,,
J=o

(6)

We divide the costs of this additional life into two parts: the baseline costs of maintaining
life, which we assume are constant each year (Co), and the (discounted value of the) additional
costs from the care provided in treating the heart attack, which may vary over time (C~~~(~).
Adding over people, total costs are given by:

1s This assumes that all people who died during an interval died exactly haltiay through
that interval. Empirically, after the first year (which we model using finer time intervals), deaths
among AMI patients are approximately evenly spread through the time period.
19The value of a year of life may also vary across people. Years of life for a healthy 70
year-old are likely to be worth more than years of life for a comatose 90 year-old, for example.
Indeed, it need not be the case that the value of a lifeyear is greater than its social cost. We
ignore this distinction in our analysis,
27

cost (1) =

~ c“ . d,,(t). 1,, + CM’ (t)
,v=~

(7)

The net valuation of remaining life after a heart attack is just the difference between the
value and cost of additional lifeyears.

We divide this into two parts: the net value of a lifeyear

given the baseline cost of that year (P = V-Co); and the cost of AMI treatment required to
produce those lifeyears:

Net Value of Remaining Lfe (t)

=

~ P. d,,(t). 1,, ,y=
~

CM1 (t)

(8)

To proceed we must quantify the net value of a lifeyear (P). There is great uncertainty
about the worth of a life (Viscusi, 1993). Rather than speci~ one particular number, we use a
range of estimates that roughly span the literature.

Our benchmark estimate is $25,000 per year.

We use upper and lower bounds of $50,000 per year and $10,000 per year.20 Note that all of our
estimates are positive, so that we have ruled out a situation where the individual is alive but
society wishes they were not.

20One way to gauge these estimates is to sum them into the value of a life. For an
individual who is 40 years old, remaining life expectancy is about 40 years. With a $25,000 per
year value of a lifeyear, the (undiscounted) value of his remaining life is $1 million. Our range is
$400,000 to $2 million. Survey evidence on the value of life for people around age 40 is $3
million to $7 million (Viscusi, 1993), so our central estimate is conservative.

28

B.

Estimating the Cost of Living

Implementing

the cost of living empirically requires measuring the effects of changes in

AMI treatment on life expectancy and on the costs of medical care. Figure 4 shows cumulative
mortality rates for the elderly for various time periods after a heart attack: one day; 90 days; and
1 through 5 years. Substantial reductions in mortality rates following a heart attack have
occurred in the elderly. Mortality during the initial hospital stay fell nearly two percentage
points between 1984 and 1991. Mortality at one year fell by considerably more, five percentage
points.

Because the mortality data only extend through the end of 1992, we cannot measure

mortality rates in 1991 for time periods longer than a year. Still, the data through 1987 suggest
declines in cumulative mortality rates at periods beyond one year as well.
It is important to recognize that these changes represent changes in average health
following a heart attack. A substantial amount of evidence suggests that the marginal amount of
medical care - even care for heart attacks -- provides benefits at relatively high cost (McClellan,
McNeil, and Newhouse,
McClellan,

1994; Cutler, 1995; McClellan, 1995; Cutler and Staiger, 1996;

1996; McClellan and Newhouse, 1996).

In examining the Cost of Living for the

average heart attack patient, we care about the change in average health. For other purposes,
such as examining the efficiency of the medical sector, we care about marginal changes in health.
It is also important to recognize that other factors besides changes in the medical
technologies

used to treat heart attacks may lead to changes in average health following a heart

attack. Three kinds of factors are important.
patients.

Demographics

The first is changes in the mix of heart attack

are one source of change, which we adjust for in our calculations.

29

But

there are other, subtler changes in the mix of patients that maybe important.

For example, better

control of cardiac risk factors such as high blood pressure and high cholesterol levels may reduce
or delay the occurrence of AMI. Thus, over time, actual AMI patients may have more or less
severe blood vessel blockages, or they may be more or less likely to suffer from other comorbid
diseases by the time the AMI occurs. The effects of these trends on the mortality risk of AMI
patients is difficult to predict.
A second factor is environmental

changes unrelated to medical care. For example, public

health programs and even private advertising may make AMI patients more conscious of the
benefits of reduced smoking and a carefil exercise program, leading to lifestyle modifications
that reduce the risk of subsequent heart attacks. Similarly, innovations in the food industry
leading to new products with lower fat and salt content could also contribute to survival
conditional on a heart attack. In this case, it would appear that correlated changes in heart attack
treatments were very productive, even though the changes in treatment may not have caused the
survival improvement.
The third factor is medical care for conditions other than AMI that are also experienced
by AMI patients.
Improvements

For example, some AMI survivors may also suffer from diabetes.

in treatment for diabetes would show up as improved survival among patients

having a heart attack, even though the heart attack treatment may not have contributed to the
longevity gains.
While we cannot completely address these issues, we do attempt corrections for some of
them. We describe our approach briefly here and in more detail in Appendix 2. We start by

30

fomingdemographically-adjustedmofialitydatafortheAMIpopulation.

Wedivide

the

population into ten demographic groups, based on age (65-69; 70-74; 75-79; 80-84; and 85+) and
sex. For each group, we form average mortality for the time periods shown in Figure 4. Using
the average demographics

of heart attack patients over the 8 year period, we form an adjusted

cumulative mortality series and the share of the initial population dying in each interval after the
AMI. Since our mortality data extend only through 1992, some extrapolation of life expectancies
is required for later years in the sample; our methods are described in Appendix 2, Furthermore,
for people who lived at least five years after the heart attack, we do not have sufficient long-term
mortality data to quantifi their expected survival. For this group, we project life expectancy
based on national lifetables but with a higher annual mortality rate that is characteristic of the
heart attack population.21
The first column of Table 3 shows life expectancy for elderly patients who have had a
heart attack in each year. In 1984, life expectancy following a heart attack was 5 years and 2
months.

Life expectancy rose over time; by 1991, it was 5 years and 10 months, an increase of 8

months.
We need to compare the net valuation of these additional months to the net additional
AMI and related condition treatment costs that produced the additional months, To measure these
costs, we add up Medicare reimbursement

for all inpatient services received in the year after the

21Since we have no information on changes in life expectancy beyond 5 years, we assume
that it is constant at its 1984 level throughout the period. This is almost certainly a lower bound,
since mortality rates for the population as a whole and for the AMI population in the first 5 years
after the heart attack were both falling.

31

AMI, adjusted over time for the changing demographic mix of the AMI population.

By one year

after the heart attack, most of the direct costs of the episode should have been incurred, and while
there may be other indirect costs of the AMI episode beyond one year, it is difficult to separate
these costs from any general time trends in the use of medical care by the elderly. The second
column shows the increase in spending in the year after the heart attack, For the average elderly
heart attack patient, expenditures increased by $3,600 over the seven year period.
The next three columns show the net change in utility from the change in medical
treatments -- the value of additional life less the costs required to produce it. For our benchmark
estimate of $25,000 net valuation of a lifeyear, the change in net benefits was about $11,000 over
the period. The range of this benefit is between $2,000 and $26,000 for the lower and upper
values of a lifeyear. In each case, the value is positive -- on net consumers are better off in 1991,
afier the change in heart attack treatments and prices, than they were in 1984, before the change
in heart attack treatment.
To forma price index, we need to scale these net valuations by the cost of reaching
baseline utility in the reference year. Total resource use among the elderly, including in-kind
transfers as well as consumption,

is roughly $25,000 per capita per year. Since the average

elderly person with a heart attack had a life expectancy of just over five years in 1984, the
discounted value of the resources involved in this length of life is about$110,000.

We scale our

estimate of the net gain from medical care by this baseline cost of life to form a Cost of Living
Index.22

22This is a Laspeyres Cost of Living Index. To form a chain-weighted
32

index, we would

Figure 5 shows the resulting Cost of Living Indices. For our middle estimate, the Cost of
Living fell by about 9 percent over the period, or -1.1 percent per year. The range of estimates is
roughly no change to about -3 percent per year. Naturally, the specific numbers here are subject
to substantial variability.
conservative assumptions,

Our most important conclusion, though, is that even under
the Cost of Living is constant or decreasing over time. Indeed, under

our baseline assumptions the Cost of Living would be falling even if the increase in medical
costs had been 300 percent greater than it was in actuality.
This set of calculations assumes that all of the increase in life expectancy afier an AMI is
a result of changes in medical practice for the AMI. As noted above, environmental

factors or

treatments for other conditions may also affect AMI mortality or costs. There is no way to
definitively parcel out the factors leading to the increase in longevity.

One sensitivity test for our

estimates is to look at the difference in life expectancy and costs for the AMI population relative
to the elderly population as a whole. Any trends in environmental
of the elderly would be difference

factors that are common for all

out by this approach.

While we implement this approach, it is important to note that this adjustment is not
perfect. Changes in environmental
disproportionately

factors or the quality of other medical treatments that

affect AMI and non-AMI patients will lead to differences in the two series

that would not cancel out. For example, improvements

in cancer treatments would affect the

non-AMI population more than the AMI population and would incorrectly reduce our estimates

scale by the cost of remaining life for the previous year. Because the net valuation and cost of
life are approximations, we do not experiment with alternative indices.

33

of the health effects of AMI treatment.

The bias could work the other way as well.

Despite these difficulties, comparing trends in life expectancy for the AMI and general
populations is a valuable sensitivity test of our results. We estimate changes in longevity and
hospital costs for the overall elderly population using lifetables from the Social Security
Administration

and hospital spending for elderly Medicare beneficiaries (see Appendix 2). In

both cases, we weight the data to match the demographic composition of the AMI population,
The next two columns of Table 3 show changes in life expectancy and medical costs for
the elderly population as a whole. Life expectancy for the elderly population was 10 years and 3
months in 1984. Life expectancy rose over the 8 year period, but by only half as much (4
months) as for the AMI population.23 And real Medicare expenditures rose as well, by about

$400.
The final column of the Table shows an adjusted measure of the change in the Cost of
Living Index: the change in life expectancy for the AMI population beyond that for the general
population, less the increase in costs for the AMI population beyond that for the general
population.

We present results for our intermediate assumption of a $25,000 net valuation of

life. The estimates suggest that the benefits of AMI treatment still outweigh the costs. Over the
whole time period, the change is about half as large -- $5,000 relative to $11,000 in looking at
just the AMI population -- but still positive.24

23Some of the increase in life expectancy for the population as a whole is a result of
increased longevity for the AMI population. Only about 1 percent of the population has a new
heart attack each year, however, so this concern is not particularly important.
24Using the low and high end estimates of the value of a lifeyear provides a range of net
valuations of about $0 to about $13,000.
34

Thus, while our Cost of Living measures are necessarily uncertain, they uniformly
suggest that the Cost of Living following a heart attack has been either constant or falling over
time. Our best guess is that the real Cost of Living Index declined by about 0.5 to 1 percent
annually between 1984 and 1991.
These calculations do not account for changes in the quality of life for AMI patients.

If

the average quality of life increased, then the Cost of Living Index based on survival changes
alone is too small; conversely, if reductions in the quality of life of survivors occurred, then the
decline in the Cost of Living index is too large. Other research suggests that accounting for
morbidity factors would not change our conclusions materially. A detailed analysis of the AMI
data used here (McClellan,

1996) showed that, between 1984 and 1991, the share of AMI

patients experiencing heart failure requiring hospital admission in the year afier AMI increased
by 1.4 percentage points (approximately
quarter of the reduction in mortality.
long-term complications

15 percent). As a worst case estimate, this is about one-

On the other hand, the share of AMI patients experiencing

of ischemic heart disease requiring hospitalization

suggesting quality of life improvements.

declined slightly,

And other research indicates that the rapid growth in

cardiac procedure use in the US elderly population may have resulted in improvements
functional status that were larger than the mortality improvements

in

(Rouleau et al., 1993).

Because heart failure and firther problems with ischemic heart disease represent the principal
complications

of AMI, and these changes are not clearly in a uniform direction, we suspect that

accounting for changes in average quality of life would not substantially alter our Cost of Living
index.

35

VI.

Conclusions
In this paper we develop and estimate two types of price indices for medical care

provision: one based on the price of specific medical care services, and another based on the net
value of the changes in medical care to consumers,

We estimate these indices using data on heart

attack treatments for the Medicare population, and for all patients at a large teaching hospital,
Our preferred price indices increase substantially less than do current medical care price
indices.

Relative to the GDP deflator, all of our indices suggest that medical prices have at most

risen modestly in recent years, and may well have fallen. The differential for Service Price
Indices is particularly high, due to differences between list and transactions prices and changes in
the bundle of goods consumed.

One relatively easy change in index calculation involves

switching from reliance on an index like the current CPI to one that reprices treatments for
patients with a given health problem annually; for heart attack patients, such a change would
reduce measured index growth by almost three percentage points annually.
However, even these indices are unlikely to capture the net value of changes in medical
care very accurately.

The rapidity of changes in consumption in the health care industry and the

potential difficulties in interpreting the value of these many changes make a strong case for
trying to value health explicitly and develop real Cost of Living indices. For patients with a
heart attack, our best estimate is that the real Cost of Living actually fell over 1984-1991 period.
There is clearly a great deal of uncertainty in this estimate, but even under conservative
assumptions,

we find no change in the Cost of Living.

Our research also sheds light on several other public policy issues. Ofien policies to limit

36

spending on medical care have focused on limiting the prices paid for medical care. The
economic justification

for such policies is presumably the assumption that expenditure growth is

due in large part to price increases from market failures, a conclusion consistent with the
behavior of traditional price indices. In fact, if true prices are nearly constant or falling, then
focusing on price reductions to control costs maybe misguided.

It is important to test this

conclusion with other data and other diseases.
Second, it is important to extend these indices to a changing health care environment.
basic-components

The

Service Price Index is designed for a fee-for-service era, where providers had

charges for particulm treatments and insurers paid these charges. As managed care increases in
importance, however, this type of pricing will become increasingly less common.

Insurers will

pay providers on a DRG, or even a capitated basis. In such a situation, the price of specific
services will not be well-defined, and even the price for treating a specific disease may lose its
meaning.

Calculating price indices in this more aggregated context will be essential to keep

medical price indices relevant for policymaking.

37

References

Armknecht, Paul A., and Daniel H. Ginsburg, “Improvements in Measuring Price Changes in
Consumer Services: Past, Present, and Futare,” in Zvi Griliches, cd., Output
Measurement in the Service Sector, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, “The Consumer Price Index,” Chapter 19 in BLS Handbook of
Methods, Bulletin 2414, September 1992.
Cutler, David M., “The Incidence of Adverse Medical Outcomes Under Prospective Payment,”
Econometrics, February 1995, 63(l), pp. 29-50.
Cutler, David M., and Mark McClellan, “The Determinants of Technological
Attack Treatment”, mimeo, August 1996.

Change in Heart

Cutler, David M., and Doug Staiger, “Measuring the Value of Medical Progress,” mimeo,
December 1995.
Dranove, David, Mark Shanley, and William D. White, “Does the Consumer Price Index
Overstate Hospital Price Inflation?” Medical Care, August 1991, 29(8), pp. 690-696.
Fisher, Franklin M., and Zvi Griliches, “Aggregate Price Indices, New Goods, and Generics,”
Quarterly Journal ofEconomics, February 1995, 110(1), pp.229-244.
Fisher, Franklin M., and Karl Shell, The Economic Theory of Price Indices, New York:
Academic Press, 1972.
Ford, Ina Kay and Philip Sturm, “CPI Revision Provides More Accuracy in the Medical Care
Services Component,” Monthly Labor Review, April 1988.
Fuchs, Victor, The Future of Health Policy, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1993.
Getzen, Thomas E., “Medical Care Price Indexes: Theory, Construction, and Empirical Analysis
of the U.S. Series, 1927 -1990,” in Advances in Health Economics and Health Services
Research, JAI Press, Inc., 1992, pp. 83-128.
Glazer, Jacob, and Thomas G. McGuire, “Payer Competition and Cost Shifting in Health Care,”
Journal of Economics and Management Strategy, Spring 1994, 3(1), pp. 71-92.
Griliches, Zvi, editor, Price Indexes and Quali~ Change, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 1971.

Griliches, Zvi, editor, Output Measurement
Chicago press, 1992.

in the Service Sector, Chicago: University of

Griliches, Zvi, and Iain Cockbum, “Generics and New Goods in Pharmaceutical
American Economic Review, December 1994, 84(5), pp. 1213-1232.
McClellan, Mark, “Hospital Reimbursement

Price Indexes,”

Incentives in Medicare,” mimeo, 1995.

McClellan, Mark, “Changes in the Marginal Value of Medical Care,” mimeo, 1996.
McClellan, Mark, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “The Marginal Benefits of Medical Treatment
Intensity,” mimeo, Harvard University, 1995.
McClellan, Mark, and Joseph P. Newhouse, “The Marginal Costs and Benefits of Medical
Technology: A Panel Instrumental Variables Approach,” Journal of Econometrics, in
press.
Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Expenditure: A Cross National Survey,” Journal of
Human Resources, Winter 1977, 12:1, pp. 115-125.
Newhouse, Joseph P., “Measuring Medical Prices and Understanding
Prize Address,” Journal of Health Administration Education,

Their Effects -- The Baxter
Winter 1989, 7(l), 19-26.

Newhouse, Joseph P., “Medical Care Costs: How Much Welfare Loss?,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Summer 1992, 6(3), pp. 3-21.
Nordhaus, William, D. “Beyond the CPI: An Augmented Cost of Living Index,” Yale University
mimeo, 1996.
Phelps, Charles, Health Economics, New York: Basic Books, 1992.
Prospective Payment Assessment Commission, Medicare and the American Health Care System:
Report to the Congress, Washington: The Commission, June 1996.
Rouleau, Jean L., Lemuel A. Moyd, Marc A. Pfeffer, et al., “A Comparison of Management
Patterns Afier Acute Myocardial Infarction in Canada and the United States,” New
England Journal of Medicine, 328(1 1): 779-84, March 18, 1993.
Scitovsky, Anne A., “Changes in the Costs of Treatment of Selected Illness, 1951 -67,” American
Economic Review 57:1182, 1967.
Shapiro, Matthew, and David Wilcox, “Causes and Consequences of Imperfections

in the

Consumer Price Index,” mimeo, 1996.
Viscusi, W. Kip, “The Value of Risks to Life and Health”, Journal ofEconomic
(4), 1912-1946.

Literature, 31

Zwanziger, Jack, and Glem A. Melnick, “The Effects of Hospital Competition on the Medicare
PPS Program on Hospital Cost Behavior in California,” Journal of Health Economics,
December 1988, 7(4), pp.301-320.

Figure 1: Consumer Price Indices
1.5

1

I
-.
.—

/---\J

1.4

1.3
I

1.2

-+–-

1,1

/
1

0.9

I
983

I
1984

I
1985

I

I

1986

1987

I
1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

Year
1¤ Medical Care CPI

e Synthetic CPI - Charges

A Synthetic CPI - Costs

Note: Index is normalized to 1 in 1983.
————

.———

I

Figure 2: Patient Weighted Price Indices
1.4

1.3

1.2

1,1

W

1

0.9

I

I

1984

1985

- ‘“---”
‘-”-’
I

1986

1987

I

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

Year

~■ Laspeyres
Note: Index is normalized to 1 in 1983.

05 Year Chain Weight

A Annual Chain Weight I

lFigure 3: Treatment Price Indices
1.5

1,4

1.3

/

1.2

A

1.1

L

1

0.9

I

I

I

I

983

1984

1985

1986

I
1987

1988

1989

1990

Year
I

1. MTH
Note: Index is normalized to 1 in 1984.

A Medicare
7

1991

1992

I

I

1993

1994

Figure 4: Changes in Mortality Rates After AMI
0.8

/4’’’’”:’

0.6

0.2

0
I day

90 Days

1 Year

3 Years

2 Years
Interval after AMI

■ 1984

e 1987

A 1991

4 Years

5 Years

Figure 5: Cost of Living Index
1.05

1

0.95

‘ .... . ...

-b-----–-----@

0

.-c
.->
J

0.9

0,85

L. ~~

0.8

‘- -i

0.75
1984

1985

1986

1988

1987

1989

1990

Year

■

$lo,Ooo/year

Note: Index is normalized to 1 in 1984.

e

$25Jooo/year A $Solooolyear

I

1991

Table 1: Summary of Price Indices

Real Annual Change

Index
Service Price Indices

Basic Components Price Indices

Medical Care CPI

3 .4%

- Hospital component

6.2

- Room

6.0

- Other Inpatient Services

5.7

Synthetic CPI for MTH - Charges

3.3

Synthetic CPI for MTH - Costs

2.4

Patient Weighted Price Index - Laspeyres

2.8

Patient Weighted Price Index - 5-Year Chain Index

2.1

Patient Weighted Price Index - Annual Chain Index

0.7

Treatment Price Indices

Medicare Sample
MTH Sample

Cost of Living Index

0.6%
0.4

-1,1YO

[0.0%,

-3.1%]

Note: Service Price Indices are for the 1983-94 period, with the exception of Other
Inpatient Services, which begins in 1986. Treatment Price Index for Medicare data and
Cost of Living Index are for 1984-91. The values in [.]s for the Cost of Living Index are
upper and lower bounds based on alternative estimates of the net value of a lifeyear.

m
w
r-m

.

Table A 1: Number of Observations
Year

Major Teaching
Hospital

Medicare

1983

156

..-

1984

209

233,295

1985

205

233,898

1985

222

223,589

1987

242

227,925

1988

214

223,199

1989

206

218,269

1990

309

221,167

1991

365

227,182

1992

471

..-

1993

566

---

1994

477

.-.

Note: The numbers are the number of new heart attack episodes
each year.

Appendix 1: Forming Input Price Indices

The Medical Care CPI
The hospital component of the medical care CPI is the aggregate of sub-indices for three
particular entry-level items: hospital rooms, other inpatient services, and outpatient services.25 The CPI
is formed in two parts: sampling specific services, and aggregating those services into an index.

Sampling. BLS periodically conducts surveys of consumer spending for hospital services. Hospitals are
sampled for the CPI with a probability based on the hospital’s share of revenues and are in the index for
five years. Replacement

of hospitals in the sample is on a staggered basis.

Once a hospital has been selected for the CPI, BLS then finds particular items to be priced. The
priced items are in all three entry-level items. Two rooms are automatically selected: a regular room,
and an ICU room. To find which other inpatient services are priced, the BLS groups inpatient services
into ten clusters (for example, neurology and cardiology are one cluster). Each hospital calculates the
share of revenue associated with each cluster, and three clusters are random Iy selected, with selection
probabilities equal to the revenue share of the cluster in that hospital. Within a sampled cluster, the
specific good to be priced (for example, electroencephalogram
(EEG) or stress test in the neurology and
cardiology cluster) is chosen randomly, again with sampling probability equal to the share of that good in
cluster revenue. Finally, within the specific good (for example EEG), the modal type of service is
priced.
BLS tries to price the same good every period. If it no longer exists, they ask the hospital for the
closest substitute.

Aggregation. BLS uses the specific price quotes to form price indices for the three entry-level items.
Denote i as the specific good being priced in stratum z, has the area of the country, a as the base period
(the period when the expenditure survey was taken), and 1 as the year for which the index is being
formed. Thus, Phit is the price of good i in area hat time t. The relative price increase for each areaitem is:

~i~

Rh,i,l, =

Whi

X,= Whi

(P~;(i ph,o)
(phi,, j phi.)

where the weights are the probabi Iity that each particular item in each particular hospital was sampled,
Once the relative price increase has been formed, it is straightfomard
the entry-level item. The index is formed as:
Ih,l,o =

to form the price index for

IhZ,,,(~
Rh,,,,,

25 For more detail on the medical care CPI, see Bureau of Labor Statistics (1992),

The final step is to aggregate the three entry-level indices into the overall hospital CPI. To do
this, weights are formed from regional population and spending patterns, based on the Consumer
Expenditure Survey. The weight is denoted Aht. The CPI is:

Synthetic

CPIfor

A4TH

Because our MTH data are for a single hospital and a single disease, our indices are not directly
comparable to the official CPI. To try to isolate the effect of methodology from the effect of the
particular hospital or disease, we constructed a “synthetic CPI” from our data. We sampled specific
goods and weighted them into an index as does the BLS. Since we are pricing a specific disease, the
weights we use reflect the share of revenue~or that disease resulting from the specific item.

Patient

Weighted

Price Index

The Patient Weighted Price Index is formed by repricing the same patient over time. The most
difficult issue results from some goods disappearing and others appearing over the course of the sample.
If we look at exactly the same price codes, we find that between 27 and 98 percent of goods match over
time, depending on the frequency of rebasing (Table A2). Several substitutions between price codes are
easily made. For example, in 1988, an intermediate care unit was renamed an intermediate care room. If
we make the substitutions that are apparent from these coding changes, we find that we can match
between 78 and 98 percent of charges over time.

Table A2: Share of Goods Matched Over Time
Frequency of Rebasing

Same Codes

Similar Codes

None

27%

78%

Every 5 Years

42%

85%

Every Year

98%

98%

Note: Entries are the dollar-weighted share of goods that can be
matched over time. In the case of annual match, the entry is the
average percent over the 11 one-year changes.

We use the set of goods with similar substitutes over time and omit the remainder of the goods.
We have checked whether this differential sampling affects our index, and found it does not.
The goods that cannot be matched after allowing for the substitution of similar codes are
generally goods that are prescribed less frequently, By area of hospital, these goods are:

Table A3: Share of Goods that Cannot be Matched Over 5 Year Interval
Part of Hospital
Total

Percent
15%

ICU

o

OR

3

Room

0

Blood

0

Emergency

o

Incubation

o

Invasive Procedures

3

Laboratory

3

Oxygen

o

Pharmacy

3

Supplies and Devices

1

Tests

2

Other
Note: The share that match over time is weighted by dollars.

Appendix 2: Estimating
Our calculations
1.

Changes in Life Expectancy

and Cost

on the Cost of Living following a heart attack are divided into two parts.

Valuing life expectancy for AMI patients.

We divide the AMI population into ten demographic groups, based on age (65-69; 70-74; 75-79;
80-84; 85+) and sex, For each cell, we find the number of AMIs each year, and average mortality during
the initial hospital admission, at 90-days post heart attack, and 1-5 years post-heart attack. We also find
average Medicare reimbursement in the year afier the initial AMI admission. Reimbursement is for any
hospital admission, whether related to the heart attack or not. We weight the mortality and
reimbursement data by the average demographic mix of the heart attack population over the 1984-1991
period to form adjusted mortality and cost data. All of our subsequent calculations are based on these
adjusted data.
To determine the value of life following a heart attack, we need to find the share of the initial
heart attack pool who die in each interval after the heart attack. We begin with survival between the
heart attack and 5 years after the heart attack. Because our mortality followup data only extend through
1992, we need to extrapolate these values for several years at the end of the time period. For example,
we do not observe the share of deaths between 1 and 2 years after an AMI in 1991, and we must
extrapolate this from the data we do have. To perform this extrapolation, we first find the hazard rate for
each year and interval -- the number of people who die in an interval as a share of the number alive at the
beginning of the interval. We assume that the hazard rate is constant at its last observed value for those
years and intervals where we are missing it. For example, the hazard rate between 1 and 2 years after an
AMI in 1990 was 10.6 percent. We thus assume the hazard rate in 1991 is also 10.6 percent. Since
hazard rates are falling over the period where we can measure them (the 1 to 2 year hazard rate was 12.1
percent in 1984), this is likely to be an overestimate of the true hazard rate, and thus an underestimate of
the true change in life expectancy. We use the imputed hazard rates to simulate the share of the AMI
population dying in each interval.
For those AMI patients surviving 5 years, we need to predict subsequent life expectancy. We do
this by forming a simulated life table for AMI survivors. We start with the actual life table for 1984
estimated by the Social Security Administration,
Using the age and sex distribution of the heart attack
population, we compared the hazard rate for the AMI population between 4 and 5 years in the future
(10.5 percent in 1984) with the hazard rate for the overall population (8.6 percent in 1984). The hazard
rate for the AMI population was 21 percent above that for the overall population, We assumed this 21
percent differential persisted every year in the future and formed an AMI life table based on the higher
hazard rate. The AMI lifetable, in turn, yields a value for life expectancy conditional on surviving 5
years (6.9 years in 1984). We use this value for 5-year conditional survival in every year between 1984
and 1991 since we have no definitive data on how long-term survival for AMI patients is changing
beyond 5 years, This is again likely to understate mortality improvements over time, since survival
conditional on living 5 years was improving for the general population over this period, as was AMI
survival in the first 5 years after the heart attack.
We assume that someone who died in an interval died halfiay through that interval. For
example, someone dying between 1 and 2 years afier a heart attack would be assumed to have died at 1

1/2 years. The average moment alive was 1/4 of the way through the year. The discounted

value of life,

assuming a 3 percent real discount rate, is therefore V = P[l/(1 .030.5) + ,5/( 1.03 1.25)].

2.

Valuing life expectancy for the general population.

To measure life expectancy and costs for the population as a whole, we use unpublished life
tables provided by the Social Security Administration and unpublished data on average Medicare Part A
spending from the Health Care Financing Administration.
Part A spending is predominantly inpatient
services (about 95 percent), with some ski Iled nursing services and home health care. The data on Part A
spending use somewhat different age breakdowns from our AMI data: 65-66; 67-68; 69-70; 71-72; 7374; 75-79; 80-84; and 85+. We weight the Iifetables and cost by the distribution of heart attack patients
over the 8 year period.

