NBER WO~G

PAPER SERIES

THE GOVERNMENT AS VENTURE
CAPITALIST: THE LONG-RUN IMPACT
OF THE SBIR PROGR4M

Josh Lemer

Working Paper 5753

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996

I thank Fran Featherston, Lowell Mininger, and Mark Nadel of the U.S. General Accounting Office
and Jesse Reyes of Venture Economics for access to data; Horace Crouch and Robert Wrenn of the
U. S, Department of Defense for assistance in arranging interviews with awardees; and Lewis
Branscomb, Ken Flarnm, Paul Gompers, Adam Jaffe, Scott Wallsten, and seminar participants at the
NBER Science and Technology Policy Meeting and Harvard Business School for helpful comments.
Chris Allen, Mannie Liu, and Kathleen Ryan provided research assistance. I thank the Center for
Science and International Affairs at the Kennedy School of Government and the Division of
Research at Harvard Business School for financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Productivity.
Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
O 1996 by Josh Lemer, All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fill credit, including 0 notice, is given to
the source,

NBER Working Paper 5753
September 1996

THE GOVERNMENT AS VENTURE
CAPITALIST: THE LONG-RUN IMPACT
OF THE SBIR PROGR4M

ABSTRACT

Public programs to provide early-stage financing to firms, particularly

high-technology

companies, have become commonplace in the United States and abroad. The long-run effectiveness
of these programs, however, has attracted little empirical scrutiny. This paper examines the impact
of the largest U.S. public venture capital initiative, the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
program, which has provided over $6 billion to small high-technology firms between 1983 and 1995.
Using a unique database of awardees compiled by the U.S. General Accounting Office, I show that
SBIR awardees grew significantly faster than a matched set of firms over a ten-year period.

The

positive effects of SBIR awards were confined to firms based in zip codes with substantial venture
capital activity.

The findings are consistent with both the corporate finance literature on capital

constraints and the growth literature on the importance of localization effects.

Josh Lemer
Graduate School of Business Administration
Morgan Hall
Harvard University
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlemer@hbs.edu

1.

Introduction
The federal government has played an active role in financing new firms, particularly in

high-technology industries, since the Soviet Union’s launch of the Sputnik satellite. In recent years,
European and Asian nations and many U.S. states have adopted similar initiatives.
programs’

precise structures

assumptions:

have differed, the efforts have been predicated

While these

on two shared

(~ that the private sector provides insufficient capital to new firms, and (i) that the

government can identify firms where investments will ultimately yield high social and/or private
returns.’ These claims have, however, received little scrutiny by economists.2

lIt is striking to note the similarities between, for instance, the statement of Senator John
Sparkman [1958] upon the passage of the Small Business Investment Act and the recent testimony
of Dr. Mary Good, Under Secretary for Technology at the U.S. Department of Commerce [1995].
The rationales for such programs are discussed in depth in U.S. Congressional Budget Office
[1985].
2While both government agencies and academic economists have sought repeatedly to assess the
efficacy of federal programs to aid technology-intensive industries, they have tended to focus on
different questions. Most federal evaluations of these programs have consisted of case studies and
Examples of such
surveys of the commercial activity directjy attributable to the awards.
evaluations of the SBIR program include Myers, Stem, and Rorke [1983], Price, Waterhouse
[1985], and U.S. General Accounting Office [1987a, 1989, 1992]. Surveys of direct commercial
impacts are subject to several biases. For instance, in the case of the SBIR program, small business
advocates conducted a protracted lobbying campaign to expand the program. Executives active in
this effort may have overstatd the benefits from the awards. At the same time, some firms had
reasons to downplay the commercial benefits of the program. During the early 1990s, a number of
pharmaceutical and biotechnology companies that developed research originally funded by the
Firms that received spectacular
National Institutes of Health were intensely scrutinized.
commercial benefits from the SBIR program may have been reluctant to acknowledge them, lest
they attract unwelcome attention from reporters and politicians.
Finally, because many firms
pursued SBIR projects closely related to their core technologies, determining the direct impact of
an SBIR award may have been difficult. Studies of federal technology programs by academic
economists, beginning with Levy and Terleckyj [1983], have tended to focus on the short-run
effects of these effofis. In particular, they ask whether federal finds substitute for or stimulate
private R&D spending.
For instance, Irwin and Klenow [1994] show that semiconductor
manufacturers substantially reduced their own R&D spending while participating in the Sematech
1

The neglect of these questions is unfortunate

While the sums of money involved are

modest relative to public expenditures on defense procurement or retiree benefit% these programssurnmarized

in Table

l—are

very substantial

when compared

to contemporaneous

private

investments in new firms. For instance, the Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) program
led to the provision of more than $3 billion to young firms between 1958 and 1969, more than three
times the total private venture capital investment during these years (Noone and Rubel [1970]). In
1995, the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program provided almost $900 million to
young technology-intensive

firms.

This was about equal to the annual rate of early-stage

investments by venture capitalists in recent years (Venture Economics [1996], U.S. Small Business
Administration

[1996]). Some of America’s most dynamic technology companies received support

through the SBIC and SBIR programs while still private entities, including Apple Computer,
Chiron, Compaq, Federal Express, and Intel.

Public venture capital programs have also had a

significant impact overseas: for instance, these programs have accounted for more than one-half of
the recent investments in new German technology -intensivefirms

(Wupperfeld [1992]).

The recent economic literature suggests reasons to be both optimistic and skeptical about
the efficacy of public venture programs.

On the positive side, a growing body of writing suggests

that new firms, especially technology-intensive

ones, may be receiving insufficient capital.

The

literature on capital constraints (reviewed in Hubbard [1996]) documents that an inability to obtain
external financing limits many forms of business investment.

Particularly relevant are works by

consortium. Wallsten [1996] shows that the subset of SBIR awardees that were publicly traded
reduced their own spending on R&D in the years immediately following the award.
2

Hall [1992], Hao and Jaffe [1993], and Himrnelberg and Petersen [1994]. These show that capital
constraints appear to limit research-and-development

expenditures, especially in smaller firms. It

might be thought that these effects would have been particulady strong during the 1970s and early
1980s, when the venture capital pool was relatively modest in size. As the first panel of Table 2
reports, the pool of venture capital fids

has grown dramatically in recent years.

This has been

largely due to the relaxation of the regulations and informal curbs that precluded many pension
finds from investing in this asset class (Fenn, Liang, and Prowse [1995]). The capital constraints
literature suggests that public awards to high-technology

firms should be associated with significant

growth, as firms pursue value-creating projects that they would otherwise be unable to finance?

On the opposing side, the corporate finance literature highlights the importance of private
mechanisms to finance young, high-growth

firms.

The dominant form of financing is venture

capita~ which accounts for about two-thirds of the external equity financing raised from pnvatesector sources by privately held technology-intensive

businesses

(Freear and Wetzel [1990]).

Venture investors frequently disburse finds in stages. Managers of these venture-backed firms are
forced to repeatedly return to their financiers for additional capital, in order to ensure that the
money is not squandered on unprofitable
monitor managers.
and representation

projects.

In addition, venture capitalists intensively

These investors demand prefemed stock with numerous restrictive covenants
on the board of directors.

(Various aspects of the oversight role played by

private equity investors are documented in Gompers [1995], Lemer [1995], and Sahlman [1990];

3A related body of literature documents that investments in R&D yield high private and social
rates of return (e.g., Griliches [1986], Mansfield, et al, [1977]). These findings similarly suggest
that a higher level of R&D spending would be desirable.
3

the theoretical literature is reviewed in Barry [1994].) Government officials are unlikely to have the
expertise or resources to effectively monitor entrepreneurs.

Consequently,

even if an award of

public finds to an entrepreneurial firm leads to a short-run expansion in activities, the increase is
unlikely to be sustainable.

The academic literature also differs in its predictions of where public grants will have the
greatest impact.

Venture capital financing is concentrated in particular regions and sectors.

The

second and third panels of Table 2 document this pattern, showing the distribution of early-stage
venture financing

by state and Standard Industrial Classification

(SIC) code between 1983 and

1985 (the period in which the SBIR awards under study in this paper were made).
concentration
sotiare

of awards in California and Massachusetts,

The

as well as in computer hardware and

sectors, is apparent.

This concentration can be interpreted in two ways. On the one hand, several models argue
that institutional investors frequently engage in “herding”: making investments that are too similar
to one another. These models suggest that a variety of factor=for
assessed on a relative, not an absolute, basis-can
making too similar investments.

instance, when performance is

lead to investors obtaining poor performance by

(Much of the theoretical literature is reviewed in Devenow and

Welch [1996]; Sahlman and Stevenson [1986] present a case study suggesting such behavior by
venture capitalists)

These models suggest that public investments

4

in sectors and regions less

heavily supported by venture capitalists might lead to superior returns, because value-creating
investments in less popular areas may have been ignored

On the other hand, recent models of economic growtbbuilding
economic geographers-have
may be very concentrated.

on earlier works by

emphasized powerful reasons why successful high-technology

firms

The literature highlights several factors that lead similar firms to cluster

in particular regions including knowledge spillovers, specialized labor markets, and the presence of
critical intermediate good producers

(The theoretical rationales for such effects are summarized in

Krugman [1991 ].) Case studies of the development

of high-technology

regions (e.g., Saxenian

[1994]) have emphasized the importance of intermediaries such as venture capitalists, lawyers, and
accountants in facilitating such clustering

If these effects are important, and the supply of venture

capital was restricted as discussed above, then we might expect public awards to have particular
impact if they were dispersed in the same regions as independent venture capitalists invested.

This analysis assesses the long-run success of firms participating in the largest U.S. public
venture capital initiative the SBIR program.
firms. Approximately

I examind

the employment and sales growth of 1135

half of the sample received one or more awards of approximately one-half

million dollars in the first three cycles of the SBIR progra~

the other half were matching firms

constructed to resemble the SBIR awardees as closely as possible. In order to assess the program, I
relied heavily on a unique longitudinal

data-set of awardees compiled

Accounting Office (GAO).

5

by the U.S. General

One decade later, the SBIR awardees have enjoyed substantially greater employment and
sales growth than the matching firms. This superior performance, however, was not universal. The
differentials in both employment

and sales growth were confined to firms in zip codes that were

simultaneously the site of substantial venture capital activity. The SBIR awards appear to have had
much less impact on the performance of firms in other regions. The awards contributed both to the
growth of firms that were or were not backed by venture capital, and that were or were not in
industries heavily financed by venture capital.

Some evidence suggests that the positive impact

was strongest for firms in areas with many venture investments but in industries not frequently
financed by venture capitalists.

While the superior long-run performance

of the SBIR awardees is consistent with the

presence of capital constraints, it is clearly not the only interpretation.
lead to the identification of firms with superior long-run prospects
might make no difference.

The selection process might
The provision of funds itself

Alternatively, the selection of a firm for an SBIR award might serve as

a favorable signal to potential customers and investors.

In other words, the results are consistent

with the second claim of the first paragraph of the introduction being true, but the first claim not
being true.

To address this concern, I employed two sets of matching firms: one set with no

participation in the SBIR program; the other which received at least one much smaller, but highly
competitive,

preliminary

SBIR awmd (termed Phase I awards).

If the SBIR awards simply

identified superior firms, and the capital provided did not make a difference, I anticipated that the

6

long-run success of the Phase I awardees would be consistently

greater than that of the non-

awardees. The fact that the growth of these two sets of matching firms did not materially differ
from each other—both lagged the performance of recipients of the fill SBIR awardesuggested
that the capital provided was important

The results are also robust to controls for the hypothesis

that SBIR awardees grew because they established relationships with federal officials or politicians,
which led to procurement contracts.

These findings are relevant for several reasons.

First, they are consistent with both the

corporate finance literature on capital constraints and the growth literature on the importance of
localization effects.

Second, they provide guidance as to what types of public venture programs

are likely to be effective.

In particular, they underscore doubts about recent federal efforts to

encourage the formation of venture finds investing in economically
abroad. Finally, the findings are relevant to the intensi~ing
program itself.

While the results cannot be unambiguously

the arguments of university

distressed areas here and

policy debate surrounding the SBIR
interpreted, they call into question

and medical center administrators

(summarized

in Mervis [1996])

that the program has not produced any economic benefits.

The plan for the paper is as follows.

In Section 2, I review the structure of SBIR awards,

and why they may address the financing needs of smaller firms.

The third section describes the

data set. Section 4 presents the analysis, and the final section concludes the paper.

7

2.

The SBIR Program and the Financing of Entrepreneurial Firms
The Small Business Innovation

established the SBIR program.

Development

The progra~modeled

Act, enacted by Congress in July 1982,
after a pioneering program initiated by the

National Science Foundation in 1977—mandated that all federal agencies spending more than $100
million annually on external research set aside a fixed percentage of these funds for awards to small
businesses

The act required that 1.25% of all external research be allocated for this progrm

set-aside was phased in over five years.)

(The

When the program was reauthorized in 1992, Congress

increased the size of the set-aside. It will reach its new steady-state level of 2. 5°/0in 1997, At this
point, total annual funding is projected to be about $1.1 billion.

While the eleven federal agencies participating in the program are responsible for selecting
awardees, they must conform to the guidelines stipulated by the act and the U.S. Small Business
Administration (SBA). Awardees must be independently owned, for-profit firms with less than 500
employees, at least 510/0 owned by U.S. citizens or permanent residents.
awards is also constrained to be similar across agencies.

The structure of the

Promising proposals are awarded Phase I

awards (originally no more than $50,000, today $100,000 or smaller), which are intended to allow
firms to conduct research to determine the feasibility of their ideas. Approximately one-half of the
Phase I awardees are then selected for the more substantial Phase II grants. Phase II awards of at
most $750,000

(originally,

one-half

million

dollars) are designed

to support

two years of

development work. The funds are transferred to the small firm as a contract or grant. In return for
the finding,

the company

must provide the agency with a report on the technology

8

under

development.

Thegovement

receives noequity

inthefim

anddoes

nothave

claim on the intellectual property that the firm develops with these funds.

any ownership

Table 3 displays the

annual expenditure= on the SBIR program, the percentage set-aside, and the number of Phase II
awards.

One of the key rationales for the establishment of the SBIR program was that imperfections
existed in the market for the financing

of young technology-based

firms.

These firms are

characterized by considerable uncertain y and information asymmetries that permit opportunistic
behavior by entrepreneurs.

As discussed above, the bulk of the equity invested in these firms

comes from venture capitalists,

who have developed

a variety of mechanisms

to limit such

behaviors.

But venture capital has important limitations.
technology-oriented

Venture funds only back a tiny fraction of the

businesses begun each year: of those firms that submit business plans to

venture organizations, historically only 1YOhave been tided

(Fenn, Liang, and Prowse [1995]).

While this may partially reflect the mixed quality of these proposals, it may also reflect regulatory
constraints on pension funds that have until recently limited the size of the venture capital pool.
Private pension funds were essentially prohibited from venture investments by the U.S. Department
of Labor until 1978. Even afier this policy shifi, private pensions did not invest in venture funds in
significant numbers until the mid- 1980s.

A variety of regulatory and political factors restrained

substantial venture investments by public pension funds until the 1990s.

9

Furthermore, the structure of venture investments is inappropriate for many young firms.
Venture finds tend to make quite substantial investments, even in young firms: the mean venture
investment in a start-up or early-stage business between 1961 and 1992 was $1.8 million (in 1992
dollars) (Gompers [1995]).

The substantial size of these investments is largely a consequence of

the demands of institutional investors.
a limited partnership)

The typical venture organization raises a fund (structured as

every few years.

Because investments

consurning to negotiate and monitor, institutions
venture

funds

(typically

$10 million

or more).

in partnerships

are often time-

prefer making relatively large investments
Furthermore,

governance

in

and regulatory

considerations lead investors to limit the share of the find that any one limited partner holds. (The
structure of venture partnerships

is discussed at length in Gompers and Lemer [1996a].)

pressures lead venture organizations to raise substantial finds.

These

Because each firm in his portfolio

must be closely scrutinized, the typical venture capitalist is typically responsible for no more than a
dozen investments.

Venture organizations are consequently unwilling to invest in very young firms

that only require small capital infisions.4

4There are two primary reasons why venture funds do not simply hire more partners if they raise
additional capital. First, the supply of venture capitalists is quite inelastic. The effective oversight
of young companies requires highly specialized skills that can only be developed with years of
experience. A second important factor is the economics of venture partnerships. The typical
venture fund receives a substantial share of its compensation from the amual fee, which is typically
between 2% and 3% of the capital under management. This motivates venture organizations to
increase the capital that each partner manages. Recently several industry leaders have explored
mechanisms to facilitate investments by institutions in very small venture funds.
These
partnerships, they hoped, could readily make small investments in start-up firms. These efforts
have encountered considerable difficulties (see Vincenti [1996]).
10

The amount that a firm can raise from the leading alternative source of private equity,
individual investors,5 is usually much less than the minimum financing round that a venture find
will consider providing.

Freear and Wetzel [1990] report that median financing round raised by

private high-technology

firms from individual investors was about $200,000.

from individuals were under $500,000.

82% of the rounds

Thus, a substantial gap exists between the resources that

firms can raise from individual investors and from venture capitalists, which SBIR awards may
partially fill.

3.

The Data Set
Identi@ing the appropriate metric to assess the long-term effects of the SBIR program is

problematic.

Ideally, I would measure both the social and private impacts of the program.

While

case studies of a small number of participants in the SBIR program (along the lines, for instance, of
Mansfield, et al. [1977]) might shed some light on the social benefits, such an effort would be
impossible for a larger sample.b

5Freear and Wetzel [1990] report that venture capitalists and individual investors were the source
of81 YOof the external equity financing raised from non-govemrnental sources by a sample of 284
privately held high-technology companies.
‘These analyses were complemented with eleven interviews of Massachusetts firms that had
received at least one Phase II award from the Department of Defense. I thank Department’s
Office of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization for their help in identifying these firms
and arranging the interviews.
11

Even determining an appropriate measure of private benefits was difficult. Ideally, I would
measure the impact of participating in the program on the firms’ valuations.

Only 2°/0 of the SBIR

awardees in the first three program cycles, however, were publicly held at the time of their initial
Phase I awards. Determining whether participation in the program was associated with an increase
in firm value was consequently

difficult.

I focused instead on two alternatives: the impact of

participation in the SBIR program on sales and employment.

While neither was a perfect measure

of firm value, Paul Gompers and I have shown [1996b] that the valuations assigned to private firms
by venture capitalists are highly correlated with these two scale measures.

As a consequence of their status as private firms, almost all SBIR awardees did not need to
disclose employment

or sales information

Commission (SEC). Consequently,
was mandated
initiative.

in the legislation

in filings with the U.S. Securities

and Exchange

I relied on a unique database prepared by the GAO. The GAO
establishing

the SBIR program to periodically

evaluate the

In late 1985, the agency generated a sample of 933 firms that received SBIR awards in

the first three program cycles from the twelve federal agencies participating in the program at the
time.

This sample included all firms that had received Phase II awards to that date, as well as a

sampling of the firms that had only received the preliminary Phase I awards.’

‘At the time that the survey population was selected, not all firms that received Phase I awards in
fiscal year 1985 had been selected for Phase II awards. Consequently, some firms that received
Phase II awards in the first three program cycles were not included in the survey.

12

These firms were surveyed by the GAO in early 1986.

The survey collected basic

demographic data (e.g., the firm’s founding date, employment, revenue, and intellectual property
holdings), the avenues through which the firm had been financed prior to and afier the award, and
the organizational
offering).

changes that occurred afier the award (such as a merger or an initial public

The survey had an 81‘A response rate, which reflected the extensive efforts by GAO,

SBA, and agency officials to track down non-responding
complete the survey.

entrepreneurs and to encourage them to

The GAO completed a follow-up survey in mid-1988.

respondents answered this survey, as well as 46°/0 of the non-respondents

86°/0 of the original

to the first survey.

In

total, 835 firms responded to at least one survey. Of these, 541 received Phase II awards in the first
three program cycles, while 294 only received Phase I awards.

In addition to the 294 firms that only received Phase I awards, I constructed a matching
sample of 300 firms that received no SBIR funds in the first three program cycles.
select firms that closely resembled the 541 Phase II awardees.
Technology
comprehensive

Information

Services’

Corporate

directory of U. S. high-technology

industry classification

Technology

I sought to

I matched firms using Corporate
Directory

[1996],

the

most

firms. This directory employs a highly detailed

scheme, which allows quite precise matches.g

I recorded the primary

industry classification of each Phase II awardee in the 1986 edition of the Corporate Teckology
Directory, or the first subsequent volume in which the firm was listed. (In all, 74% of the Phase II
awardees were listed.)

‘For instance, while the SIC classification scheme places all sofiware firms in class 7372, this
directory distinguishes between firms that manufacture educational software used to teach typing
and for music instruction.
13

I then pulled a random selection of 300 of these awardees.
identified in the 1986 Corporate Technolog

For each selected firm, I

Directory the firm in the same classification with the

closest employment level. 9 I excluded as possible matches firms that were units or subsidiaries of
other concerns. I also eliminated firms that had received any Phase I or Phase II awards in the first
three program cycles.

(These were determined

through U.S. Small Business Administration

[1986].) If there were no matches within the class, I chose a firm in a related industry: e.g., if there
were no appropriate match for a firm classified as a plastic composite laminate manufacturer,
matched the firm to another composite laminate manufacturer.

I

From the listing for each matching

firm in the Directory, I collected information on sales, employment, location, and founding date. I
determined

whether the matching

firms had received venture financing using Security Data

Company’s Venture Intelligence Database.
venture capital financing,

This database provides comprehensive information on

and is described in detail inLemer[1995].

The samples are summarized

in Table 4 and 5. Table 4 describes the construction of the

sampl=; Table 5 compares the Phase II awardees with the matching firms. The firms were similar
in most respects.

The awardees had slightly larger employment

in 1985; the matching firms,

91t may be questioned why I matched firms exclusively on the basis of their industry and
employment, rather than also matching on geographic proximity, or some other attribute. My
rationale was that my approach would minimize possible biases due to inter-industry differences
that would be very difficult to control for otherwise. (Most studies that control for industry
differences use data at the four-digit SIC code level, which is much more crude than the degree
of industry matching done here.)
Geographic differences, however, could be (and were)
addressed through the use of information about venture activity in each zip code.
14

greater sales. The SBIR awardees were more likely to have received venture financing by the end
of 1985 ( 10°/0vs. 7°/0for the matching firms) and to be located in either California or Massachusetts
(35% VS.26%).

A final step in constructing the sample was determining the employment and sales of the
SBIR Phase II awardees and the matching firms at the end of 1995.’0 For publicly traded firms, I
used SEC filings.

For private firms, I employed, in order of preference, the 1996 editions of the

Corporate Technolo~Directory,

Dun’s Marketing Services’ Million Dollar Directory [1996], Gale

Research’s Ward’s Business Directory of U.S. Private and Public Companies
Register

Publishing

considerable

Company’s

Directory

number of state and industry

of Leading
business

Private

directories

Companies

[1996], National
[1996],

in the collections

and

a

of Harvard

Business School’s Baker Library, the Boston Public Library, and the Library of Congress.

For

firms that I could not find in published directories, I employed several electronic databases: the
Company

Intelligence

COMPANY/USPRIV

and
libr~,

Database

America

VentureOne’s

compilations

available

through

LEXIS’S

Venture Data System, and the American Business

Disk CD-ROM directory.

For firms where I could not ascertain employment
compiled in LEXIS’S NEWS/ALLNEWS

and sales, I checked the news stories

library and the Business Dateline, F&S Index, and Wall

‘“In a few cases, firms did not disclose 1985 sales. Furthermore, SBIR awardees were only
requested to report ranges for 1985 sales. Consequently, in all cases where firms did not report
sales, or where reported sales were in one of the ranges above $1 million, I ascertained 1985
sales using the 1986 editions of the same sources used to determine 1995 sales.
15

Street Journal Index CD-ROM files. These searches of news stories revealed that many of firms
for which I was unable to obtain 1995 sales and employment data had gone out of business.

I did

not include in the analysis the employment and sales of firms that had been acquired, unless the
firm continued to be operated as a separate subsidiary through the end of 1995. Another exception
was cases where the purchase of the firm was an asset sale as part of a bankruptcy, in which case
employment and sales were recorded as zero. In some cases, I was only able to determine a range
in which sales fell. In these cases, I employed the mid-point of this range.

4.

Empirical Analysis
Table 6 compares the growth of the Phase II awardees with the matching firms. The mean

employment increase from the end of 1985 to the end of 1995 was greater for the awardees (a boost
of 26 ,employees vs. 5), as was the sales increase ($5 million vs. $2 million).

For the mean SBIR

awardee, this represented an 56°/0 increase in employment and a 123°/0 boost in sales (in inflationadjusted dollars).

The table also presents various percentile rankings in order to demonstrate that

the differences were not driven by a few outliers.

At each reported percentile

employment and sales were more positive for the awardees,

the changes in

These differences were statistically

significant in t-tests and Wilcoxon rank-sum tests.

Tables 7 and 8 examine the impact of SBIR awards in light of the concentration of venture
capital financing.

I undertook comparisons

similar to those in Table 6, but with an additional

complication: firms were divided by whether (i) their headquarter

16

at the end of 1985 was located

in a zip code with a private early-stage venture financing in the years 1983-1985 or (ii) their
primary assigmnent was to a four-digit SIC class with such a financing.
(and how many) early-stage financing

I determined whether any

occurred in each zip code and SIC class through the

Venture Intelligence Database described above.

The differences between the SBIR awardees and the matching firms in the zip codes with
one or more venture financin~

were pronounced

For instance, employment increased by 47 for

these firms, as opposed to decreasing by 5 for the non-awardees
pronounced elsewhere (employment

The differences were much less

rose by 13, as opposed to by 10). These differences were

statistically significant only among the firms in regions with venture activity.
SBIR awardee in a zip code with venture activity—which
sales in 1985-employment

For the average

had 57 employees and $3.9 million in

over the next decade grew by 83°/0 and inflation-adjusted

sales by

169%. These patterns are depicted in Figures 1 and 2. The first picture shows the number of seed
and early-stage venture capital investments in each county in the continental U.S. between 1983
and 1985; the second depicts the mean employment

growth of SBIR awardees in each county

between 1985 and 1995.”

1‘These patterns were also robust to the use of a third measure of firm success, the increase in
public market value. For the subset of SBIR awardees and matching firms that were publicly
traded sometime between January 1985 and December 1995, I examined the change in valuations
over this interval. I determined these valuations through the databases of the Center for Research
in Securities Prices and the several Moody’s stock guides. The public market valuation of the
541 SBIR awardees increased by a total of $9.5 billion in this period. (This is the sum of the
increase in the market value of firms that were publicly traded at the beginning of the period and
the valuation of formerly private firms that went public over these years.) The public market
valuation of the 594 matching firms, on the other hand, only increased by a total of $2.6 billion.
The increase in the public market value of the average SBIR awardee was 19 times greater if the
firm was located in a zip code with an early-stage venture financing in the years 1983-1985, a
17

The analysis in Table 8, however, reveals few clear patterns.

The differences between the

growth of the SBIR awardees and the matching firms were similar, whether the companies were in
an industry that received venture financing or not.

These patterns remained pronounced

when I disaggregated

the matching firms.

If the

positive performance of the SBIR Phase II awardees was due primarily to the selection of superior
firms rather than the infision of capital, we might expect the Phase I awardees to similarly display
rapid growth.

These firms, despite receiving much smaller awards, went through an exhaustive

review process: only 12°/0of applicants were selected for these preliminary grants in the first three
program years (U.S. General Accounting Office [1987b]).

(In the Phase II selection process, 50V0

of the applicants received awards.)

The growth of sales and employment was only slightly greater among the 294 firms that
received SBIR Phase I awards than the 300 firms taken from the Corporate Technolo~

Directo~.

For instance, the mean employment for the Phase I awardees increased by 6.2 jobs, while for the
Directory

firms, the increase was 4.2.

(Recall that the increase in the Phase 11 awardees’

employment was over 26 j ohs, ) The differences between the SBIR Phase II awardees that were
significant in Tables 6 and 7 remained so when the Phase II awardees were only compared either to
the Phase I awardees or to the Corporate Technology DirectoW firms.

difference significant at the five percent confidence level. There were no significant differences
in the changes in public market valuations of SBIR Phase II awardees and non-awardees among
those firms located in zip codes without early-stage venture activity.
18

Tables 9 and 10 examine the growth of employment and sales in a regression framework.
used

1995 employment

and sales as the dependent

independent variables and specifications.
least squares (OLS) specification.

variable% and employed

a variety

I
of

The first two regressions in each table used an ordinary

Among the independent variables were 1985 employment

or

sales, a dummy variable indicating whether the firm received any Phase II awards in the first three
SBIR finding cycles, measures of the extent of venture capital activity in the firm’s zip code and
SIC class, and interactions

between the SBIR dummy variable and the venture capital activity

measures. In the reported regressions, I measured the extent of venture capital activity in two ways:
the number of early-stage financing

in the zip code or SIC code, as well as dummy variables

indicating whether there were any such financing.

I also report a variety of alternative specification.

First, because 1995 employment

and

sales could not be below zero, I used a Tobit specification, which corrected for censored data. (I
also estimated Tobit regressions

using the other sets of independent variables, which produced

results similar to the reported OLS analyses.) Second, rather than using a single dummy variable to
denote SBIR awardees, I disaggregate

the number of SBIR awards. I employed separate variables

for firms that received only one Phase II SBIR award in the first three cycles, two-to-four such
awards, and so forth.

Thir~

I added additional independent

variables to the analysis.

I was

concerned that the results may have been shaped by some unobserved differences between the
SBIR awardees and the matching firms.

I hence controlled for each firm’s age, whether it was

19

venture-backed by the end of 1985, and the nature of its industry.

Following Gompers [1995], I

controlled for industry effects by using the characteristics of the average public firm in the same
SIC class at the end of 1985. I computed the ratios of market value to book value, tangible assets to
total assets, and R&D spending to sales for all firms with a primary assignment in Compustat to the
same industry as a company in the sample.

If there were fewer than four firms assigned to a four-

digit SIC code, I used all firms with a primary assignment to the same three-digit SIC code. I then
computed the average of these ratios.

In this way, I controlled for industry differences that may

have affected the ability of firms to raise external financing through traditional sources.

For

instance, firms in industries characterized by mostly intangible assets may have found it difficult to
arrange bank financing.

The results strongly supported the suggestions that the impact of SBIR awards was not
uniform.

The presence of a SBIR award alone had little impact on employment and sales. Rather,

only the interactions between the SBIR indicator and the measures of venture activity in the zip
code were consistently significant in the employment and sales regressions

SBIR awards had a

strongly positive impact on firms that were in areas simultaneously receiving venture financing, but
no significant impact on other firms. This effect wm robust across the different specifications.

In

some regressions, the coefficient on the interaction between the SBIR awardee dummy variable and
the measures of venture activity in the region and industry was significantly

negative.

This

suggested that the beneficial effect of SBIR awards was greatest if the firm was in an area attracting
considerable venture investment, but not in a frequently financed industry.

20

I examined the robustness of the regressions in several unreported analyses.

The results

were robust to the use of the total dollar volume of early-stage venture financing

in the zip code

and SIC class between 1983 and 1985, instead of the number of such awards.

I alternatively

employed
independent

the number of early-stage
variables.

financing

These two alternative

in the state and the two-digit
specification

SIC code as

weakened the significance of the

results, but the coefficients on the interaction terms remained significant at conventional confidence
levels.

I re-estimated the equations only using the Phase II SBIR awardees and the Corporate

7’echnolo~ Directory matching firms, as well as only the Phase 11 and Phase I SBIR awardees.
The smaller sample sizes led to reduced significance levels, but had little effect on the magnitudes
or signs of the coefficients.

The magnitude and significance of the coefficients changed little when

I estimated systems of two equations, with the second equation examining the propensity of firms
to win Phase II awards in the first three program cycles. Finally, rather than employing an OLS or
Tobit specification, I estimatd

a two-stage Heckman regression.

I first examined whether the firm

survived and then the extent of its growth. The interaction terms remained strong] y significant.

An alternative explanation

for the superior growth of the SBIR awardees is that winners

of SBIR awards were more likely to subsequently
had cultivated

relationships

with politicians

receive procurement

contracts because they

or federal program managers.

To examine this

possibility, I restricted the above analysis to the two agencies which made significant numbers of
SBIR awards but were unlikely to undertake procurement contracts with awardees: the National
Science Foundation

and the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).

21

HHS’s external

research,

and consequently

Institutes

of Health.

their

SBIR

awards,

overwhelmingly

came from the National

The gap between the firms that received Phase II awards from these

agencies and those that only received Phase I awards was even greater than that in the sample as
a whole.

For instance, firms that received Phase II awards from NSF and HHS in the first three

program cycles grew by 32.6 employees between 1985 and 1995; those that only received Phase
I awards grew by 2.1 employees. 12

5.

Conclusions
This paper examined the long-run impact of awards to new high-technology

through a major public venture capital initiative, the SBIR program.

firms made

First, several rationales why

these awards might or might not have had positive effects on firms were explored, as well as
whether the impacts were likely to be stronger in regions and sectors that attracted substantial earlystage financing from venture capitalists

I compared the growth of awardem to a set of matching

firms. The SBIR awardees enjoyed substantially greater employment and sales growth, but these
effects were confined to firms in areas that attracted significant venture financing.

121also compared the awardees from HHS to matching firms specializing in biology and
biochemistry that had received no SBIR awards, with similar results.
Another alternative
explanation for the superior growth of the SBIR awardees is that winners of SBIR awards were
more likely to win subsequent SBIR awards. While this may have been true in the initial years
of the program (e.g., U.S. General Accounting Office [1987b]), conversations with federal
officials suggest that it has been much less of an issue in recent years. Not only were SBIR
awards to firms that had receiving multiple previous grants more likely to be scrutinized by the
GAO, resulting in a reluctance to make such grants, but the 1992 reauthorization of the SBIR
program (Public Law 102-564) added additional criteria for the evaluation of SBIR applications
of firms that had received awards in the past.
22

I have already discussed

some of the issues raised by alternative interpretations

results. At least three additional questions can be raised concerning the analysis.

of the

One concern is

whether political pressures will lead to a deterioration of the SBIR program’s effectiveness over
time.

First, as discussed

dramatically.

above,

the percentage

set-aside

for SBIR awards has increased

This may be leading program managers to fund less promising firms.

program has attracted congressional

Second, the

scrutiny due to the geographic concentration of its awards.

Program managers to date have resisted these pressures: the share of finds going to firms in
California or Massachusetts has remained constant at around 40Y0. Because the awards appear to
only have had a positive effect on firms in regions with significant venture financing, the political
pressures towards geographic
award~might

dispersion-were

they to succeed in shifting the distribution

of

have a detrimental effect on program effectiveness’3

A second concern about the results relates to whether the supply of private equity has
adjusted to address any capital constraints.

As discussed above, the pool of venture capital

expanded during the 1980s. The capital constraints that may have troubled small high-technology
firms during the early 1980s, when these awards were made, may have vanished today.

The

13Thepathologies that can result from political pressures on government technology policies are
discussed in Cohen and Nell [1991] and Romer [1993]. On the other hand, SBIR program
managers in most agencies indicate that program quality has increased over time. They argue
that this increase is due to the rising ratio of applicants to awards, and the growing ability of
evaluators to discern the qualities that presage commercial success as well as scientific
excellence. These observations are confirmed by the GAO, which has found [1985, 1987b, 1995]
that in those agencies where a consistent scoring system has been used to rate SBIR applications,
awardees’ scores have risen steadily. In addition, the GAO has found [1985, 1987a] that several
agencies were tardy in coming into compliance with SBA procedures as the program began.
23

expansion of the private equity market may have obviated the need for such a program, and the
long-run competitive

advantage that SBIR awards confer today may be much lower.

These

questions about the changes in the effectiveness of the program over time will only be answerable
in the future.

Another

important unanswered

question relates to the social benefits of the program.

Numerous studies have suggested that, because of knowledge spillovers, social rates of return to
privately funded R&D are often much higher than the private returns which the firms performing
the research enjoy. This analysis has focused exclusively on private returns, as roughly measured
through sales and employment growth. The differentials between the private and social benefits of
the SBIR awards might be particularly

large, because many of them involve very early-stage

technologies (where spillovers to other firms may be more frequent) or those important to national
defense.

At the same time, the program’s

reduction in finding
Mervis, 1996].

critics argue that the SBIR set-aside has led to a

for academic research, which may have even greater social benefits [e.g.,

The program’s impact on social welfare is an important, but difficult to resolve,

issue.

The evidence presented here sugges~ that public initiatives to provide capital for new firms
may have only a limited economic impact. This role, it appears, is much more as a complement to
the venture capital organizations and other private institutions that assist new firms: the impact of
the awards in regions without these private sector mechanisms was minimal.

24

This raises questions

about recently enacted programs (summarized in Table 1) that encourage public financing of and
guarantees for venture funds that invest in economically disadvantaged areas.

At the same time, SBIR awards appear to have had a positive and substantial long-run
impact on the firms in regions with considerable venture capital activity,
appear to have grown substantially
matching set of firms.

faster—whether

In particular, awardees

measured by sales or emplo ymen=than

a

These results suggest that economists need to ask somewhat different

questions about such public initiatives.

As discussed

in footnote 2, a major focus of economic studies of federal technology

programs has been the issue of “crowding out”: has federal finding

led to less private sector

investment, particularly in R&D, than would have occurred otherwise?

It is not clear, however,

that this is the proper question to be asking of programs that assist small, possibly capitalconstrained, companies.

For many of these firms, a major concern of management is extending the

amount of time until they need to seek refinancing or run out of capital.14 Thus, it is not clear
whether the pattern of small firms using public funds to extend the period before they need to seek
refinancing,

rather than using the funds to increase their rate of research funding, should be

14Theability of SBIR finds to give researchers additional time to prove the viability of a new
technology was repeatedly emphasized in my interviews with awardees. More generally, the
impact that concerns about running out of cash-colloquially
known as “tie
dates’’—have on
the management of new ventures is discussed in Sahlman [1990]. Gompers [1995] documents
how venture capitalists adjust the amount of capital they p;ovide and hence the amount of time
until the firm needs to seek refinancing in response to uncertainty and informational
asymmetries.

25

considered problematic.

While an assessment of the ultimate success of firms receiving public

venture finding may not answer all the questions about these programs, this type of analysis is an
important complement to studies of the short-run impact on R&D spending.

Even if, as Wallsten [1996] argues, capital constraints are unimportant and firms simply
substitute SBIR finding for their own expenditures, the funds provided by the program may still be
important.

One of the important benefits conferred by SBIR awards, participants argue, is the

signal that they provide to potential investors and customers.]s

Were SBIR awards purely an

honorary designation, they might more readily be designated for explicitly political considerations.
The presence of a substantial financial component—and
govern such awards-may

the associated regulatory provisions that

limit these pressures, and insure that the awards are an effective signal

of the quality of a firm’s technology.

15Asillustrations of this claim, several directories of high-technology firms denote companies
that have won SBIR awards, and at least 103 press releases concerning SBIR awards were issued
between August 1995 and July 1996.
26

References

Barry, ChristopherB., 1994,“New Directionsin Researchon VentureCapitalFinance,”Financial A4anagemen~ 23
(Autumn),3-15,

CharlesRiverAssociates,1976,An Analysis of Capital Markt Imperfections
Clarke,MarianneK., 1987, State-Supporled
NationalGovernors’Association.

SBIR Programs

Cambridge,CharlesRiverAssociates.

and Related State Technolo~

Cohen,LindaR., and RogerG. Nell, 1991, The Techno/o~Pork

Barrel,

Washington,BrookingsInstitution.

Colton, R.M., editor, 1982, Analyses of Five National Science Foundation Experiments
TechnologicalInnovation
in the Private Sector, Washington,NationalScienceFoundation.
Corporate Technology Information Services, 1996, Corporate
CorporateTechnologyInformationServices(andearlieryears).

Washington,

Programs,

Techno[o~

Directory,

to Stitnulate

Increased

Wobum, Massachusetts,

Devenow,Andrea,and Ivo Welch,1996,“RationalHerdingin Financial Economics;’ European Economic Review, 40,
forthcoming,
Dun’s Marketing Services,
earlier years).

1996, Million Dollar Directory,

Eisenger, Peter, 1991, “The State of State Venture Capitalism;
, 1993, “State Venture Capitalism,
Development Quarterly, 7 (May)131 -139.

Parsippany, New Jersey, Dun’s Marketing Services (and

Economic Dme/opmentQuarterly,

State Politics, and the World of High-Risk

5 (February) 64-76
Investment;

Economic

Fenn, George W., Nellie Liang, and Stephen Prowse, 1995, The Economics of the Private Equity Market, Washington,
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Fox, James W., 1996, “The Venture Capital Mirage: An Assessment of USAID Experience with Equity Investment,”
Unpublished working paper, Center for Development Information and Evaluation, U.S. Agency for International
Development.
Freear, John, and William E. Wetzel, Jr., 1990, “Who Bankrolls High-Tech
Venturing 5,77-89,
Gale Research,
earlier years).

Entrepreneurs?;’

1996, Ward’s Business Directory of U.S. Private and Public Companies,

Gompers, Paul A., 1995, “Optimal Investment, Monitoring,
50, 1461-1489.

An Analysis

of Venture Partnership

, 1996b, “The Valuation of Private Equity Investments;’

27

Detroit, Gale Research (and

and the Staging of Venture Capital,” Journal of Finance,

and Josh Lemer, 1996z “The Use of Covenants:
JournaI of L;w and Economic% 39, forthcoming.
, and
Harvard University.

Journal of Business

Unpublished

Agreements;’

working paper,

Good, Mary L., 1995, “Prepared Testimony before the Senate Commerce,
Subcommittee on Science, Technology and Space,” (January31 ), mimeo.
Griliches, Zvi, 1986, “Productivity,
Review, 76, 141-154.

Science and Transportation

Committee,

R&D, and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the 1970’s,” American Economic

Hall, Bronwyn, H., 1992, “Investment and Research and Development: Does the Source of Financing
Working Paper No. 92-194, Department of Economics, University of California at Berkeley.

Matter?,”

Hao, Kenneth Y., and Adam B. Jaffe, 1993, “Effect of Liquidity on Firms’ R&D Spend ing,” Economics of innovation
andNew Technoio~, 2,275-282.
Himmelberg, Charles P., and Bruce C. Petersen, 1994, “R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel Study of Small Firms in
High-Tech Industries,’’ Review of Economics and Statistic\ 76,38-51.
Hubbard, R. Glenn,
forthcoming,

1996,

“Capital-Market

Imperfections

and

Investment,”

Journal

Irwin, Douglas A., and Peter J. Klenow, 1994, “High Tech R&D Subsidies: Estimating
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 4974.

of Economic

Literatur<

the Effects of Sematech,”

Krugman, Paul R., 1991, Geography and Trade, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1991
Lemer, Josh, 1995, “Venture Capitalists and the Oversight of Private Firms,’’Journal

of Finance, 50,301-318.

Levy, David M., and Nestor E. Terleckyj, 1983, “Effects of Government R&D on Private R&D Investment
Productivity: A Macroeconomic Analysis,’’ BellJournalofEconomics,
14,551-561.

and

Mansfield, Edwin, John Rapoport, Anthony Romeo, Samuel Wagner, and George Beardsley, 1977, “Social and Private
Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations’ Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91,221-240.
Mervis, Jeffrey D., 1996, “A $1 Billion Tax on R&D Fund%” Sciencq 272,942-944.
Myers, Sumner, Robert L. Stem, and Marcia L. Rorke, 1983, A
PrograW Lake Forest, Illinois, Mohawk Research Corporation

StU@

National Register Publishing Company, 1996, Directoty of Leading
Afiliation~ Wilmette, National Register Publishing Company.

of the small Business[nnovalionResearch

Private

Noone, Charles M., and Stanley M. Rubel, 1970, SBICS: Pioneers in Organized
Publishing Company.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development,
1982, Innovation
BackgroundReports,
Washington, OECD Publications and Information Center.

Companies,

including

Corporate

Venture Capital, Chicago, Capital

in Small

and Medium

Firms:

Price, Waterhouse, 1985, Survq of Small High-Tech Businesses Shows Federal SBIR A wards Spurring Job Growth,
CommerciaISales, Washington, Small Business High Technology Institute.
Private Equity Analyst, 1996, “Fund Raising in ’96 Shatters Record, Soaring 29°A to Reach S27 Bill ion,” Pr]vate Equity
Analyst, 6 (January), 1,29-31.

28

Romer, Paul M., 1993, “[implementing a National Technology Strategy with Self-Organizing
BrookingsPapers
on Economic Activi@: Microeconomicq 345-390.

Investment

Sahlman, William A., 1990, “The Structure and Governance
Economicq 27,473-521.

Journal of Financial

of Venture-Capital

Organizations,”

, and Howard Stevenson, 1986, “Capital Market Myopia,” Journal of Business Venturing
Saxenian, Annaleq 1994, Regional Advantage:
Harvard University Press.

Boards,”

1, 7-30.

Culture and Competition in Silicon Valley and Route 128, Cambridge,

Sparkman, John, 1958, “Introduction,” in U.S. Congress, Senate, Small Business Committee, Small Business Investment
Act of 1958, Washington, Government Printing Office.
U.S. Congressional Budget Office, 1985, Federal Financial
CongressionalBudget
Office.

Support for High- Technolo~

Industries

Washington,

U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Model Cities Administration, 1970, Model Cities: Continued
Planning and Evaluafio~ Washington, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
U.S. General Accounting Office, 1981, Consistent Criteria are Needed to Assess Small Business Innovation Activities
Washington, General Accounting Office.
, 1985, Implementing
General Accounting Office.

the Small Business Innovation Development Act—The First Two Years, Washington,

1987a, Federal Research: Small Business Innovation Research Participants
Washington,’General Accounting Office.
1987b, Federal Research: Effectiveness
Washington,’General Accounting Office.
1989, Federal Research: Assessment
General Accounting Office.

of Small Business Innovation

of Small Business Innovation

Give Program High Marks,

Research Program Procedure~

Research Programs,

Washington,

1992, Federa[ Research: Small Business Innovation Research Shows Success But Can Be Strengthened
Washington:General
Accounting Office.
1995, Federal Research:
Washington;General
Accounting Office.

Interim

U.S. Office of Technology Assessment, 1984,
Washington, Office of Technology Assessment.
U.S. Small Business Administration,
Office (and earlier years).
1994, Small Business
Printing Offi;e (and earlier years).

Report

on the Small

Technolo~,

Innovation

Business

Innovation

and Regional

Economic

1986, Listing of SBIR A wardees for FY 1985, Washington,

Innovation

,1996, http:// www.sbaonline,sba.

Development

ACI: Tenth-Year

gov/Research_And_Deve

29

lopment.

Results,

Research

Prograq

Development

Government Printing

Washington,

Government

Venture Economics,
earlier years).

1996, “Special Repon: Rose-Colored Asset Class,” Venture Capifa/Journa[,

36 (July), 32-34 (and

Vincenti, Lisa, 1996, “Trio Preps Unusual Effort to Raise Capital for Early-Stage Funds,” Venture Capital Journal, 36
(February), 10.
Wallsten, Scott J., 1996, “The Small Business Innovation Research Program: Encouraging
and Commercialization in Small Firms?,” Unpublished working paper, Stanford University.

Technological

Innovation

Wupperfeld, Udo, 1992, The Role of Various Types o~ German Investment Companies for the Financing
Techno/ofl-Based
Firms, Karlsruhe, Franhofer-Institut fur Systemtechnik and Innovationsforschung.

30

of New

-1
0
h
.

1

u

Table 2: Volume of Venture Capital Activity
Venture Capital
Early-Stage Investments by Venture
Pool at Year End
Number of
$ of Financing
474
1554
1996
520
2056
755
3049
802
4452
806
6391
813
11796
1707
16640
1689
20880
1194
25186
14’78
30645
1440
34024
1272
37379
1119
38292
705
38148
458
38910
646
36401
765
36066
1005
36362
1438
Leading States, Early-Stage Venture Financing, 1983-1985
#of
State
% of Total
$ of Financing
45.5
California
2089
Massachusetts
14.0
643
Texas
299
6.5
New York
3.3
153
New Jersey
136
3.0
Leading Industries, Early-Stage Venture Financing, 1983-1985
#of
Industry (SIC Code)
‘A of Total
$ of Financing
Prepackaged Software (7372)
12.4
570
402
8.8
Semiconductors(3674)
Computer Peripherals (3577)
7.1
328
Telephone Apparatus (366 1)
6,9
317
Electronic Computers (3571)
5,5
254
Year
1977
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995

Funds
Financing

227
343
413
568
529
716
796
674
623
571
335
435
368
499
611
Finarrcings
770
310
130
65
97
Financing
347
91
130
107
75

Note: The table provides an overview of investment activity by U.S. venture capital organizations. The first panel
indicates the total size of the venture capital pool and the amount of early-stage investment, The venture capital pool is
defined as the capital raised by all venture finds that had a first closing within the past ten years. The second and third
panels display the amount of early-stage investments in the period 1983-1985, disaggregate
by the leading states and
industries, All amount figures are in millions of 1994 dollars, No data are available on the number of early-stage
investments prior to 1981.
Source: Private Equity Analyst [1996], Venture Economics [1996], and unpublished Venture Economics databases.

Table 3: Volume of SBIR Awards

Year
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

SBIR Awards
$ Amount
#of Phase 11A war~
0
64
388
150
407
266
388
564
442
768
472
711
502
749
513
837
518
788
530
916
664
950
694
961
847

Size offiternal
R&D”Set-Aside
0.2%
0.6%
1.0%
1,25%
1.25%
1.25%
1.25°h
1.25%
1.25%
1.25%
1.5%
1.5%
2.0%
2.0%
2.5%

Note: The table provides an overview of the SBIR program. It indicates the amount of awards, the number of such
awards, and the share of external R&D spending that all agencies spending more than $100 million on external R&D
were required to set aside for the program. The Department of Defense was allowed an extra year to reach the 1.25°/0
target, and consequently had lower set-aside levels between 1983 and 1986. A1l amount figures are in millions of 1994
dollars.
Source: U.S. Small Business Administration

[1994, 1996].

Table 4: Construction of Sample of SBIR Phase II Awardees and Matching Firms
Number of Firms
General Accounting Office Survey:
Sample Size
Respondents to 1986 General Accounting Office Survey
Respondents to 1988 General Accounting Office Survey
Respondents to Either General Accounting Office Survey

933
750
729
835

Of Respondents to Either General Accounting Office Survey:
Received One or More Phase 11Awards in First Three Program Cycles
Did Not Receive Phase II Award in First Three Program Cycles

541
294

Matching Firms Selected Through 1986 Corporate Technolo~Directoiy

300

Final Sample:
Phase 11Awardees from Survey
Matching Firms from Survey and Corporate TechnoIo~Direclo~

541
594

Table 5: Comparison of SBIR Phase II Awardees and Matching Firms
Variable

Mean

541 SBIR Phase II A wardees
Year Founded
Received Venture Financing (thru 1985)?
1985 Employment
1985 Sales
Publicly Traded in January 1985?
#of Phase II Awards in First 3 Cycles
Located in California?
Located in Massachusetts?
#of Early-Stage Venture Financing, 1983-1985, in
State
Zip Code
SIC Code
594 Matching Firms
Year Founded
Received Venture Financing (thru 1985)?
1985 Employment
1985 Sales
Publicly Traded in January 1985?
#of Phase II Awards in First 3 Cycles
Located in California?
Located in Massachusetts?
#of Early-Stage Venture Financing, 1983-1985,
State
Zip Code
SIC Code

StandardDeviation

Minimum

A4mimum

1935
0
0
0.1
0
1
0
0

1985
1
600
65.0
1
30
1
1

293,3
8.1
7,2

0

770
46
47

10,5
0.26
72.0
6.8
0.20
0
0.39
0.28

1899
0
0
0.1
0
0
0
0

1985
1
650
64.0
1

278.4
5.6
9.3

0

770
46
95

1977.5
0.10
46.6
3.0
0.03
2.8
0.21
0.14

6.9
0.30
85.8
6.3
‘0.17
3.5
0,4”1
0.34

230.0
3.2
2.2

1976.2
0.07
37.0
3.4
0.04
0
0.18
0.08
in . .
203.6
1.8
2.6

0
0

0
0

0
1

1

Note: The table provides summary statistics on the 541 firms that received SBIR Phase II awards in the tir~t three program
cycles and the 594 matching firms in the sample. All sales figures are in millions of current dollars.

Table 6: Growth of SBIR Phase 11 Awardees and Matching Firms
p- Valuefrom Comparison

SBIR Phase II A wardees

Matching Firms

26.20
16.32
499

5.22
4,78
561

0.057

5.05
1.30
493

1.76
0:63
551

0.019

66
10
-1
-8
-45

31
5
-2
-lo
-50

0,002

9.0
2.0
0.1
-0.3
-3.0

5.5
0.8
-0.1
-0,5
-5.8

0.000

Comparison of Means [t-tests]
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations
Change in Sales, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Emor
Observations
Comparison of Distributions [Wilcoxon tests]
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
90’hPercentile
75* Percentile
Median
25ti Percentile
1O’hPercentile
Change in Sales, 1985-1995
90* Percentile
75* Percentile
Median
25* Percentile
1O* Percentile

Note: The table summarizes the change in the employment and sales of the 541 firms that received SBIR Phase II
awards in the first three program cycles and the 594 matching firms in the sample. All sales figures are in millions of
current dollars.

Table 7: Growth of SBIR Phase 11 Awardees and Matching Firms, by Location
SBIR Phase II A wardees
Firms Locatedin Z@ Code wi~h an Early-Stage
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations
Change in Sales, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations

Matching Firms

p- VaIuefrom t-Test

Venture Financing, 1983-1985

Firms Locatedin Zip Code without an Ear~-Stage
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations
Change in Sales, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations

47.43
22,99
190

-4.61
8.37
181

0.038

9,03
3.11
189

1.23
0.99
175

0.021

13.14
8.80
309

9.90
5,86
380

0.752

2.58
0.81
304

2.02
0.81
376

0.627

Venture Financing, 1983-1985

Note: The table summarizes the change in the employment and sales of the 541 firms that received SBIR Phase 11
awards in the first three program cycles and the 594 matching firms in the sample. Firms are divided by whether their
headquarters in 1985 was in a zip code with one or more seed or early-stage venture financing between 1983 and
1985. All sales figures are in millions of current dollars.

Table 8: Growth of SBIR Phase II Awardees and Matching Firms, by Industry
SBIR Phase II A wardees
Firms Located in SIC Code with an Early-Stage
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations
Change in Sales, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations

Matching Firms

p- Valuefrom t-Test

Venture Financing, 1983-1985

Firms Localedin SIC Code without an Early-Stage
Change in Employment, 1985-1995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations
Change in Sales, 19S5-1 995
Mean
Standard Error
Observations

28.45
12.40
324

12.83
7,64
310

0.289

5.04
1.51
319

2.35
1.04
306

0.146

22.02
18.46
175

-4.05
5.04
251

0.116

5.07
2.42
174

1.04
0.57
245

0.061

Venture Financing, 1983-1985

Note: The table summarizes the change in the employment and sales of the 541 firms that received SBIR Phase II
awards in the first three program cycles and the 594 matching firms in the sample. Firms are divided by whether their
primary industry assignment in 1985 was to a SIC code with one or more seed or early-stage venture financing
between 1983 and 1985. All sales figures are in millions of current dollars.

—
--

.Ca
--

00
.-

-m
Om

mw
-.

odo-

?0
0

0-

0-

?0
0

--

0

*

. ..

oo—

~g
00
--

?0
0
0

m.
-0

00

0-

0-

?0

.00 .

0

ma
m.

o-

--

Om
o-

-m

Fo

00

0“

U.

w-0

0“

?0
0

r-

o

0

00-

0. 0
0

r

I

1

—

T
.

..=
.
.7 A

o-l+
VOA

1-

/

