                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           FIXING CAPITAL GAINS: SYMMETRY,
                            CONSISTENCY AND CORRECTNESS
                             ~ THE TAXATION OF F~ANCIAL
                                     ~STRUMENTS




                                        David F. Bradford




                                       Working Paper 5754



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1996

This is a revised version of a paper presented to the Tax Law Review Colloquium on Financial
Instruments, New York University, New York, May 22, 1995 and will be published in a forthcoming
issue of the Tax Law Review, Comments of colloquium participants and subsequent helpfil
comments from Alan Auerbach, Joseph Bankrnan, Louis Kaplow, Mark Gergen, Diane Ring, Robert
Scarborough, Deborah Schenk, Daniel Shaviro, and Alvin Warren are gratefully acknowledged. In
addition, I would like to thank the John M. Olin Foundation for support of the research underlying
this paper. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in Public Economics. Any opinions
expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research or any
other institution.

O 1996 by David F. Bradford. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fill credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                             NBER Working Paper 5754
                                                                                      September 1996

                               FIXING CAPITAL GAINS: SYMMETRY,
                                CONSISTENCY AND CORRECTNESS
                                 N THE TAXATION OF FINANCIAL
                                         INSTRUMENTS

                                                ABSTRACT

        An enormous amount of effort and ingenuity has been addressed to patching holes in the

income tax attributable to realization accounting, A classic instance of the problem is the headaches

created by capital gains, whereby the taxpayer can choose to postpone recognition                of gain and

accelerate recognition of loss (a practice known as cherry picking). Nowhere are the inconsistencies

that result fi-om realization accounting more pronounced than in the taxation of financial instruments,

especially “derivatives”     of familiar securities.   This paper sets forth the requirements    for income

measurement    rules based on realization that are “linear” in the sense that doubling a person’s

transactions will double the taxable income, and adding one set of transactions to another will result

in the sum of the associated income. Under present realization conventions, the tax law cannot be

linear because there would then be no limit on tax arbitrage profit via variations on borrowing with

deductible   interest and lending tax exempt.          To focus on the principles,    the paper assumes

transactions are costless.    In that case, it is shown that to deal with the intertemporal     aspect of the

problem requires virtually universal imputation of taxable interest income to basis (the taxpayer’s

cost of an asset). To deal with the risk aspect of the problem (lock-in and cherry picking) requires

simply that the effective rate of tax on gains and losses be the same (not necessarily equal to the rate

on inter-temporal returns).     A new method is proposed that satisfies the requirements           for linear

income measurement.        It is shown that the retroactive taxation of gain devised by Alan Auerbach

is a special case of the new approach (involving a zero effective rate of tax on gains and losses).



David F. Bradford
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544-1013
and NBER
bradford@princeton. edu
                                                     Fixing Capital Gains:
                                           Symmetry, Consistency and Comectness
                                           in the Taxation of Financial Instruments

                                                                     David F. Bradford

                                                                               8/23!96

L INTRODUCTION                  ...........................................................................................................................................    1

H. BACKGROUND                 ......................................................................................................................................0.... 10

T= A~ITUGEPROFITm~TEQULIBRm                             ................................................................................................. 10
A CANONICAL
         PROBLEM:   DISCO~TBONDS                ......................................................................................................... 11
WmREN'SANWYSIS
             ............................................................................................................................................ 14
HL TIME AND MARGINAL                           TAX RATES .................................................................................................... 16

THEWORLD
       OFAS~GLE~G~WT~mTE                                              .................................................................................................... 16
   S~metqis     SufJcient ..................................................................................................................................... 16
   Mat If Demand and Supply Prices Differ? ..................................................................................................... 21
   The Case ofa Zero.Coupn         Bond .................................................................................................................... 23
   Under General Conditions, Symmety is Necessa~ ......................................................................................... 24
   Present Realization Approach to Capital Gains Taxation Fails the Symmetry Test,.., ......................................26
   Possible Fixes for Capital Gains ..................................................................................................................... 30
   Correctness in the Treatment oJTime .............................................................................................................. 36
MULTIPLE
       T~WTES~D                       THECONSISTENCY
                                                  mQUmMENT................................................................................ 38
   OID Rules Illustrate the (Strictly Speaking, Unsuccessfu~ QuestJor Consistency ....... ..... ... .. .. .. .................41
   Present Realization Approach to Capital Gains Taxation Fails the Consistency Test .......................................42

IV, THE TAXATION                  OF NSKY             INSTRUMENTS                  ....................................................................................... 43

PURER.ISKEFFECTS:
               TIMELESS
                     GNBLES............................................................................................................. 43
~T~GTIME mDWSKTmETHER...................................................................................................................... 45
    Tax Rules to Prevent Unlimited TaArbitrage                           ProJt ...................................................................................... 47

V. A GENERAL             PROCEDURE                 FOR TMG                  FINANCIAL              ~STRUMENTS                   .......................................... 53

THECmEOFAWSK.FREE
                TEm STRUC~W........................................................................................................54
   The Proposed Approach When There Is No Cash Flow beJore Realization ....................................................... 54
   An Illustration of the ProposedApproach   ........................................................................................................ 59
   Commentson the Proposed Approach ............................................................................................................. 63
   Treatment of Intermediate Cash Flows ............................................................................................................65
   The ProposedApproach      and Correctness ........................................................................................................ 65
E~END~G THEANWYSIS
                 TOUNCERTNN
                          mWSHORT-TE~                                                          UTES................................................................ 67
   The Term Structure ofInterest                 Rates with Uncertain Short. Term Rates ........................................................... 67

VL CONCLUSION                 ................................................................................................................................ 0..0.,0.... 73

APPENDIX:          A CONTINUOUS-DISCOUNTING                                   VERSION OF THE PROPOSED                                  RULES ....................... 75

BIBLIOGRAPHY               .....................................................................................................................................0........     78
                                 Fixing Capital Gains:
                       Symmetry, Consistency and Correctness
                       in the Taxation of Financial Instruments

                                      David F, Bradford*


I. Introduction

        This paper was stimulated by reading “Financial Contract Innovation and Income

Tax Policy,” by Alvin C. Warren (1993), dealing with certain fundamental problems in

income tax accounting for financial instruments.    Subsequent browsing in the burgeoning

literature to which Warren’s paper contributes (see Bibliography) has shown me there is a

much about the income tax treatment of financial instruments that I do not know,          Some

of what is set forth in this paper will be in the nature of review for serious thinkers on this

subject. I believe, however, there is something new in my conclusions.

        In his paper Warren develops the difficulties created for the income tax system by

its reliance on a combination of different rules applicable to “fixed” and “contingent”

returns to the holders of financial instruments.   The fixed returns are taxed according to a

generalization of the long-standing treatment of periodic interest.   That is, there is




 Professor of Economics and Public ~airs, Princeton University, Adjunct Professor, New
York University School of Law, Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic
Research and Adjunct Scholar, the American Enterprise Institute. This is a revised version
of a paper presented to the Tax Law Review Colloquium on Financial Instruments, New
York University, New York, May 22, 1995 and will be published in a forthcoming issue of
the Tax Law Review. Comments of colloquium participants and subsequent helpful
comments from Alan Auerbach, Joseph Bankman, Louis Kaplow, Mark Gergen, Diane
Ring, Robert Scarborough, Deborah Schenk, Daniel Shaviro, and Alvin Warren are
gratefully acknowledged. In addition, I would like to thank the John M. Olin Foundation
for support of the research underlying this paper. Views expressed are my own and
should not be taken as representing any institution.
                                                 2


inclusion in the taxable income of the holder and a deduction by the issuer of the

equivalent of periodic interest payments, using a “yield to maturity” calculated from the

instrument as the basis for specifying the applicable interest rate. The contingent returns

are taxed upon a realization event, with the difference between cost basis and realized

amount included in the income of the holder (deducted if it is a loss). Warren calls the

first the “yield to maturity” approach and the second the “wait and see” approach.        A third

approach, discussed by Warren, is the mark-to-market        method. For the case of an

instrument that is held throughout a period during which it gives rise to no cash flows, the

holder includes in income the increase in the instrument’s market value over the period.

(If there is a cash flow during the period, it is added to the increase in market value. This

principle would apply equally to asset and liability sides. For an instrument with a party

and counterpart,      to each inclusion by one party would correspond a deduction by the

counterpart.)

        The main challenge Warren sees is in the taxation of contingent returns

Postponement       of income until realization gives rise to familiar problems due to a

differential between the treatment of accruing and deferred income. Having convincingly

demonstrated    the limitations of the established approaches to dealing with this differential,

Warren offers in conclusion the following provocative observation:

        Serious consideration should [therefore] be given to reducing the
        differential by taxing at least some contingent returns in accordance with a
        formula, such as the retrospective allocation of gain or the imputation of
        interest at a standard rate. Although not without precedent, development
        of a formulaic approach would be a significant change in the concept of
        realization, Such a change maybe necessary, for the traditional concept no
        longer seems adequate to deal with innovative financial contracts.
                                                 3


        In this paper I take yet another look at the taxation of financial instruments.     To

isolate certain income-measurement      problems, I focus on a world with no transactions

costs. This setting throws into particular relief that the critical difficulty is dealing

consistently with the intertemporal aspects of transactions.     This is well known in a sense;

timing is central to an income tax. But I shall argue that the difficulties are more serious

than is commonly realized, and the constraints on workable rules in the no-transactions-

cost world are extremely confining. Imputation of interest (at a specific, if not a

“standard” rate) is the key to isolating the timing problem. By contrast, there are

surprising degrees of freedom in dealing consistently with contingency.

        Original issue discount (OID) bonds provide a usefil illustration of what I mean by

the purely intertemporal problem, since taxing them does not obviously raise issues of

contingency or collateral issues, such as character,    The yield-to-maturity   method of

assigning taxable income attempts to produce consistency between the consequences of

holding an OID bond and holding an otherwise similar instrument that generates periodic

interest payments.   If we take as the standard the mark-to-market      method, which does not

depend at all on transactions, the yield-to-maturity   method may accomplish a reasonable

approximation   in practice. But to understand or deal with more complex cases, it is

helpfil to be clear that, strictly speaking, neither the yield to maturity nor the other

familiar rules that rely on either actual or imputed cash flows between parties to a financial

instrument precisely solve the intertemporal consistency problem, This is partly because

the yield to maturity is typically an amalgam of the shorter-term interest rates that

represent the “proper” measure. It is also because longer-term instruments almost

inevitably incorporate some degree of contingency.
                                                 4



        As I shall argue, to eliminate differentials in taxation of the purely intertemporal

effects of financial instruments in a transactions-based    system, one needs to start with the

taxation of one basic set of instruments that accomplishes exchange of dollars at one time

for dollars at another time. I take as what I regard as the natural choice the taxation of

simple, one-period loans that have no risk of default. 1 The taxation of these elementary

transactions then restricts the possibilities for taxing other transactions without

introducing “complications,”     Chief among the complications are rules such as the limit on

the deductibility of realized capital losses, which I describe as violations of linearity (to be

explained shortly).

        Accordingly, my approach in this paper is to examine the restrictions on the

income measurement rules applicable to financial instruments implied by the requirement

that the rules be linear, More precisely, I focus on the rules that must apply to a “bilateral

financial instrument ,“ I mean by this term a bilateral contract that consists entirely in the

specification of cash payments to be made by a party to a counterpart.            So, for present

purposes, an ordinary bond is a bilateral financial instrument but a property lease is not,

since the latter provides that one party deliver certain services in return for cash payments

by the other party.

        The reason for restricting attention to bilateral financial instruments is not that I

believe it would make sense for thereto be a special regime for them, On the contrary, I

take for granted that whatever income measurement rules exist should apply as well to the

restricted class of transactions in bilateral financial instruments.     Bilateral financial




1 Such instruments maybe subject to inflation risk, however,           As I shall emphasize,
                                                  5


instruments are the focus here because they provide the opportunity for the tax arbitrage

transactions that call forth complicating fiscal defenses,

        In an income tax based on transactions, the consequence of a particular sequence

of transactions   over time is a sequence of taxable income amounts.z      The rules that

translate the transactions into taxable incomes have the property of lineari~ in the sense

used in this paper if, when applied to the combination of two sequences of transactions

(adding them together), they produce the combination (the period-by-period         sum) of the

corresponding     taxable income sequences.   Similarly, if every element of a sequence of

transactions is multiplied by some number (doubling everything, for example), the

resulting sequence of taxable incomes is multiplied by the same number. In particular, if

everything is multiplied by negative one, the taxable income sequence is reversed as well,

rendering deductible losses taxable gains and taxable gains deductible losses.q

        Linearity is a desideratum of a tidy tax system. Violations of linearity tend to

produce inefficiencies and anomolies, as when an investor is unable to deduct a loss that

has no tax motivation.    Nonlinearities also typically imply a reward to carefil tax planning,

and add to tax complexity.    The U, S. federal income tax rules incorporate many violations

of linearity, however.   I use the limitation on the deductibility of capital losses as

representative.   A taxpayer whose net capital losses in a given year exceed $3000 is

obliged to carry forward the excess, to be netted against possible fiture gains. Doubling




consistency, not correctness, is the objective.
2 A transaction may itself be more or less complex. So, for example, acquisition of a
discount bond gives rise under the rules to a sequence of increments to fiture taxable
income. If the bond is sold, the sequence is revised in a way specified by the rules.
                                                6


everything about the transactions of a taxpayer who is right at the $3000 capital loss limit

will result in a net $6000 loss. Since the extra loss cannot be deducted currently, the

consequence is generally that the taxable income will not be doubled, in violation of

linearity. Another example is the limitation on the deductibility of investment interest.

Adding some dividends to a person’s transactions will increase the tax due from a

taxpayer not up against the limitation, but will not increase the tax due from one who is.

As will become clear, if it is not obvious, both of these nonlinearities serve to bound tax

arbitrage profit opportunities that would not otherwise be self-limiting.4

        In the interest of sharpening understanding, I work in this paper with some

extreme assumptions.    I have mentioned the most significant extreme assumption I make,

that there are no transactions costs. Arguably, it is transactions costs that protect the

income tax from much more extensive tax arbitrage than currently occurs, Assuming them

away removes the protection and exposes the income measurement problems.             I also

assume (perhaps this is implied by the absence of transactions costs) a taxpayer can

costlessly take any zero-value position, borrowing to buy a security, for example.

        There is a practical as well as an analytical reason to investigate the fictionless

world, One of the most striking developments in financial markets in recent years has

been a steady decline in transactions costs, reflected in the proliferation of new

instruments,   The paper thus can be read as exploring problems that we can expect to get

worse, absent redesign of the rules.




3 This definition is very close to Stmad’s (1994, p. 576).
1 For a comprehensive analysis of the role and effect of loss limitations to obstruct tax
arbitrage, see Scarborough (1993).
                                                     7


        A subtheme of the paper is correcties,s, about which I have two general points in

mind. First, it is quite possible for rules that fail to produce an accurate measure of a

period’s income (in the sense of change in accrued wealth) nevertheless to produce a

result that is economically equivalent to accurate measurement from the point of view of

the taxpayer,       An example would be some sort of look-back calculation of interest accrued

on a discount bond, Second, it may be essential that income measurement rules involving

different sorts of instruments be consistently related to one another, even if the rules fail to

measure income correctly.          The underlying program of most rule-writing for financial

instruments (for example, the treatment of original issue discount) can be described as

seeking consistent treatment with that applied to plain vanilla interest. But consistency in

this sense in the treatment of different financial instruments is not the same as correctness

of the treatment of any of them. Plain vanilla interest may be a poor approximation               to the

real return on the associated asset.

        The difference is due to intlation. It is conventionally accepted that modest

inflation --   2%   to   3%   per year -- can safely be neglected in the tax system, But this

paper’s emphasis on the critical role of time, and not risk, invites the observation that the

real return to pure waiting (as opposed to risk-taking) in U. S. financial markets over the

past few decades has been about 0.5% per years            If this is a reasonably close

approximation       to the pure intertemporal return, a very modest income tax rate applied to

nominal interest of 2, 5°/0to 3. 5°/0renders the real, after-tax return negative.         It is




5 This is the average real rate of return on U. S. Treasury bills. See R. G. Ibbotsen
Associates (1995).
                                                   8


somewhat ironic that great effort is applied to assure that all transactions are treated

equally badly,

         The most important instance in this paper of rules that produce a correct result (in

the sense of equivalence, from the taxpayer’s point of view, to taxing accruing wealth)

arises in connection with taxation of risky instruments,        If the outcome of a risky situation

is a gain of $1 by one party to a financial instrument and an offsetting loss of $1 to the

counterpart,     an accurate measure of wealth change would add $1 to the income of the

winner and subtract $1 from the income of the loser, I think most of the rule-writing

effort with regard to contingent returns seeks correctness in this sense. My conclusion is

that the objective is unimpofiant in the context of risk-taking because of the flexibility

people have to adjust their financial positions.       It is impofiant that a taxpayer’s gains and

losses on a given asset be taxed at the same rate, but not necessarily at the rate applied to

other transactions.   It is thus possible to identifi rules that are economically equivalent to

taxing a taxpayer’s change in wealth but make no pretense at producing a correct measure

of it.

         The body of this paper is divided into four parts (preceded by this introduction       and

followed by a brief conclusion).   In Part II, I present a background discussion of the

concept of tax arbitrage and review Warren’s findings. In Part III, I focus narrowly on the

problem presented by time, in the absence of risk. Much recent writing, including

Warren’s paper, emphasizes the central role of risk. This emphasis is clearly justified.        It

may, however, not be clear quite how time and risk interact to challenge the

implementation    of an income tax. The object of Part III is then to restate the problems of

taxing purely intertemporal transactions.    I found it desirable, and probably necessary, to
                                                9


write down my own version of this material in order to address with precision the problem

of dealing with contingency,    The main conclusion that I reach in Part III that may be

somewhat new or controversial is the one already mentioned.        Strictly speaking, there is

very little flexibility about the “right” way to tax intertemporal transactions.   The yield to

maturity method, for example, is “wrong.”      The practice of using the “applicable federal

rate” for imputing interest to positions of different maturity is another example of an

approach that is, strictly speaking, wrong. Taxation based on realization requires either

imputing interest to basis at the going rates during the holding period, or what amounts to

the same thing, imposing a tax on realization that treats the proceeds as having been

accumulated at the interest rates prevailing during the holding period. (I refer to the latter

approach as the Auerbach method, since Alan Auerbach spelled it out in a 1991 article.)

        In Part IV, I suggest that the taxation of risk per se poses surprisingly few

problems,   It does, however, upset the efficacy of the method of imputing interest to basis

as a way of perfecting a realization system, Instead, of the approaches that have been

considered, only the Auerbach method remains as a possibility.

        In Part V, I describe an alternative approach to taxing contingent returns using

realization accounting.   It eliminates any tax-induced timing advantages or disadvantages

from realization.   The key idea is that the rate applicable to gains in excess of the current

interest rate may be set freely, but it must be set in advance of any information about the

extent of any such gains. As it turns out, the Auerbach method is a special case of the

alternative approach, which offers considerably greater flexibility for the design of policy,

        The title of the paper suggests both reach, “fixing capital gains,” and narrowness

of focus on financial instruments.   As I have indicated, financial instruments are central in
                                               10


the paper because they raise most sharply problems due to inconsistency in the taxation of

different forms of return. But, with provisos that I discuss in Part V, I believe that the

method I have devised for taxing contingent returns on financial instruments could be

extended to contingent returns generally.


II. Background

Tax Arbitrage Profit in Market Equilibrium

        The term “arbitrage” refers to the activity of buying and selling the same thing in

different markets, and a profit results if the price paid to buy is below that received on the

sale (by enough to cover the costs of arranging the pair of transactions).    One could mean

more than one thing by the term “tax arbitrage.”G For example, some would describe as

tax arbitrage, the activity of borrowing with deductible interest to purchase a business

asset that offers accelerated depreciation,   In this paper the focus is on tax arbitrage using

financial instruments.   The instrument itself specifies cash flows between the parties. An

opportunity for tax arbitrage profit exists when there is a pair of instruments (or pair of

packages of instruments) that are identical in their cash flows but differ in the associated

flows of taxable income, Then, if the tax system is linear, by entering into exactly

offsetting positions in the two instruments, taxpayers may be able to reduce their taxes.

        The opportunity for arbitrage profit of any kind is inconsistent with equilibrium.

So the potential for tax arbitrage must be eliminated by some combination of adjustments

in asset prices, changes in effective marginal tax rates (including changes resulting from




6 On the definition of tax arbitrage, Warren ( 1993, p. 471) cites Steuerle (1985), Bradford
(1980), and Warren (1985).
                                              11


such rules as limits on deductions, so that the marginal rate on an extra dollar of the

deduction in question is effectively zero) and increases in transactions costs.

A Canonical Problem:    Discount Bonds

       The tax treatment of a zero-coupon discount bond provides a handy canonical

example of tax arbitrage,   In the old days, a cash basis taxpayer holding a zero-coupon

discount bond had no inclusion in taxable income until the bond paid off at maturity, at

which point the holder included the difference between the amount received and basis, the

amount paid for the bond. By contrast, the holder of a bond that pays interest currently

was, and still is, obliged to bring into taxable income the successive interest payments.

Consider the problem posed by this treatment of the two sorts of instruments.       For

purposes of this discussion, assume all the taxpayers in question are on a cash basis. Also,

since the concern here is with timing, not character, assume no difference between

ordinary and capital gains rates.

        In the absence of taxes, neglecting transactions costs (the cost of arranging the

arbitrage) and ignoring possible unpredictable variations in the short-term interest rates (to

which I return below), we know an investor who undertakes a sequence of investments in

short-term bonds paying ordina~ interest, always reinvesting the principal and interest,

can achieve exactly the same pattern of net period-by-period    cash flows as the holder of

the zero-coupon   discount bond. There are two important points to emphasize about the

equivalence between the two positions, the zero-coupon discount bond and the program

of investment in ordina~ one-period loans with reinvestment:      First, with a little

cleverness, two parties could enter into an agreement to exchange one for the other in

such a way that no cash flow ever occurred between them. In all but superficial details,
                                                       12


    this would be a pure arbitrage transaction -- buying and selling the exact same thing.

   Second, in the capital markets this equivalence would be recognized in that the two

   positions would have the same value, They could be exchanged at arm’s length, without

   any cleverness between two parties.

           With the tax rules as assumed, the exact equivalence of the two positions is upset

  when taxes are taken into account,          The zero-coupon discount bond delivers a better flow

  of taxable income to the holder because the gain is not taxed until maturity. Relative to

  the taxation of the duplicating sequence of short-tern       bond transactions, the zero-coupon

  discount bond is tax-favored to the holder.

          If the timing of the inclusions of the holder were identical to the timing of the

  deductions of the issuer, the tax advantage to the holder would be matched by a

 disadvantage to the issuer. A simple solution to the OID problem might then seem to be

 to let the market absorb the tax aspects of transactions.

          The problem with this solution is that the extent of the tax advantage to the holder

 of the zero-coupon    discount bond depends on the holder’s marginal tax rate, and the

 extent of its disadvantage to the issuer depends on the issuer’s marginal tax rate. (A tax

exempt entity is fictionally     the same as a taxable entity with zero marginal tax rate.) If

the marginal tax rates of holder and issuer were the same, the advantage of the tax-favored

instrument to the holder would be just balanced by its disadvantage to the issuer. In that

case, we would expect the market-detemined           terms of the two types of instruments to

correct for their different tax attributes.    Through adjustment in the prices of debt

contracts, the implied afier-tax yields would be equated, regardless of the cash-flow
                                                  13


pattern involved, and regardless of the relationship of the taxation of any one of them,

taken in isolation, to any patiicular income concept.

        The possibility of such an adjustment illustrates the point that correctness of the

treatment of a transaction is not required to achieve the result of consistency between the

effective taxation of two types of instruments.        In the example, both currently taxed and

original issue discount bonds (taxed by the old rules) could coexist in financial market

equilibrium with no real consequences,       If the result for the currently tax bond were

correct, then taxing original interest bonds by the old rules would also give the correct

result, even though the treatment is not correct, viewed in isolation. Notice that this is not

simply another manifestation of the point that inequities tend to be erased through market

reactions, at a cost in the form of inefficiency (Bittker, 1980). In this case, the market

erases incorrectness at no cost, The opportunities faced by the saver or dissaver would be

the same (namely, the after-tax rate of currently taxed interest), regardless of the form of

the chosen instrument.      So if the current-taxation   of ordinary interest were correct, the

saver or dissaver would be correctly taxed, regardless of the form of the chosen

instrument

        The firther point is also illustrated by this case, since, with inflation, the basic rule

of taxing periodic interest does not produce a measure of accruing real wealth:

correctness     of the taxation of neither type of instrument is required to eliminate the

opportunities    for tax arbitrage profit. (Note, however, that, afier the market has done its

work, with a urzz~ormrate of tm the incorrect rule of taxing nominal interest will produce

the economic effect of taxing real income. This is because the market will build the
                                                   14


 taxation of the “inflation premium” in interest rates into the interest rates themselves,

 (See, for example, Bradford, 1986, pp. 229-230.))

           By extension of the same line of reasoning, debt involving any arbitrq         cash flow,

 with arbitrary rules about the timing of inclusion of interest received and deduction of

 interest paid, could coexist with debt paying periodic interest and taxed according to the

usual rules provided the same marginal rate of tax applied to all payers and recipients and

inclusion and deduction were simultaneous.         I develop this point at greater length below

where I look, in particular, at the possibility that such market adjustment would also deal

with the cases of contingent return that are the subject of Warren’s analysis.

          If it is taken for granted that a single-rate system is not a realistic possibility, this

analysis will serve simply to highlight the much more serious challenge of designing

satisfactory rules for a multiple-rate world, The existence of taxpayers in different

marginal rate brackets virtually eliminates the potential to use market adjustment as a

substitute for consistent rules to measure returns over time. Something like the yield-to-

maturity approach will work for risk-free instruments, but, as Warren’s analysis makes

clear, that approach will not generalize to cover all the problem cases,


Warren’s Analysis

          In his essay, Warren developed two general propositions:

      ●     The present income taxis based on transactions and accords very different

            treatment to two classes of transaction:    those that are held to depend for their

            resolution on contingencies to be determined in the fiture (“wait and see

           transactions”), and those that are held to involve fixed and determinate terms at

           the outset (taxed on some sort of yield-to-maturity      basis).
                                                 15


      ●     This distinction is not tenable in theory or, increasingly, in practice.

          The put-call parity theorem of finance theory provides the key to understanding

these propositions.     That theorem builds on the fact that buying and holding a share of

stock (with market value S) plus a put on that share with a particular strike price and date

(valued in the market at P), while writing a call on that share with the same strike price

and date (valued at C), produces exactly the same cash flow pattern as results from

holding a zero-coupon bond over the period until the strike date, That being the case, the

two positions must have the same value in the market. Letting T (“Treasury”) stand for

the discount bond’s value, the theorem says:

                                            S+P-C= T.

          The theorem derives from the fact that the cash-flow consequences of holding the

portfolio reflected in the left-hand side are identical under every contingency to holding

the Treasu~     bond reflected in the right-hand side. (I neglect here possible consequences

of different rights in the governance of the corporation,)      The problem is that the tax

treatment of the right-hand side is yield-to-maturity,    and of every element of the left-hand

side is wait-and-see.     In general, the two ways of determining taxable income lead to

different results.    Specifically, under the current standard rules, the Iefi-hand-side package,

the components of which are assumed acquired at the outset of the option period and

disposed of or settled for cash on the strike date, is taxed the way original issue discount

bonds used to be taxed: capital gain on the difference between purchase price and

maturity value (Ferguson, 1994, p. 1003; Warren, 1993, p. 464). The right hand side is

taxed (roughly) on accrual.
                                                16


         It seems almost inevitable that the taxation of financial instruments will involve a

blend of yield-to-maturity   and wait-and-see elements, which I take to be more or less

synonymous with “accrual” and “realization” accounting,        Does this inevitably imply the

need for nonlinear anti-abuse rules that render the tax system complex and introduce

unwanted incentive effects (for example, by disallowing true economic loss deductions)?

This is the question to which I now turn.


III. Time and Marginal Tax Rates

The World of a Single Marginal Tax Rate

        To develop the analysis I proceed in steps, first looking at the world of certainty,

where only time matters.     In that world, I first take up the case where all participants in

the market cofiont    the same rate of tax. This is the context in which it is most likely that

adjustments in the market prices of financial instruments can neutralize potential tax

arbitrage profit opportunities,


        Svmmetw is Sufficient

        For purposes of the rest of this paper I attach particular meanings to the terms

“symmetty” and “consistency” as applied to the tax system’s treatment of financial

instruments.   By symmetry I mean the sort of “equal and opposite” treatment of the party

and counterpart    to a financial instrument that obtains for debt. Shuldiner (1992) uses this

term to describe the tax consequences of a transaction if there is “equivalent” treatment of

the two sides. I mean hereby equivalent treatment that, whenever a transaction has as a

consequence a deduction from taxable income for one of the parties to a financial

instrument it also has as a consequence an equal and simultaneous inclusion in the taxable
                                                17


income of the counterpart,     Symmetry involves a party and counterpart.       As I use the

term henceforth, the concept of consistency supplements symmetry with additional

requirements on the tax results from different sets of transactions of a single party. I give

more details on this notion of consistency as needed below.

        When there is just a single marginal tax rate applicable to all transactors, and the

tax treatment applicable to the instrument in question is symmetrical in the sense just

defined, then tax effects can be capitalized into market prices of financial instruments.      To

develop this point, it will be sufficient to consider in detail a two-period world, identified

by three time points, O, 1, and 2, that we can think of as one year apart.

        The basic building blocks are simple one-period (“unit”) interest-bearing bonds.         A

time O unit bond sells for 1 at time O and pays off l+rol at time 1. A time 1 unit bond sells

for 1 at time 1 and pays off l+rlz at time 2.

        Table 1 lays out in general form the cash flows associated with the two possible

unit bonds as well as with an arbitrary alternative instrument; c1 and CZrepresent the

payoffs from investing z in the alternative instrument at time O. For reference, Table 1 also

shows the cash flows associated with borrowing in the form of a zero-coupon         (discount)

bond that will pay 1 at time point 2 and nothing at time point 1. Its price at time O is

denoted Z02,reflecting the fact that it is issued at time O and will pay off at time 2, two

periods later.
                                                      18



                     Table 1. Cash Flows to Lender Using Various Instruments

                        Time Point:                         o                   1        2

             Time OUnit Bond                               -1                 1+ rOl

             Time 1 Unit Bond                                                  -1      1+ rlz

             Alternative Instrument                        -z                  c1       C2

             Discount Bond                                 -Z02                          1



           The two unit bonds filly determine the relative prices of dollars in the three

periods,     In the absence of taxes, the price of any arbitrary cash flow sequence is

determined by eliminating the opportunity for arbitrage profit, This is because any

sequence can be reproduced exactly by an appropriate package of purchases and sales of

unit bonds, To match the future payoff from the alternative instrument in Table 1, invest

                                          c1                   C2
                                      (l+ro,   )+(l+ro,         )(l+rl,   )


in the time O unit bond at time O, At time 1 the payoff will be

                                                          C2
                                               “+(l+r12)


Extract c1 and purchase         C2       units of the time 1 unit bond. At time 2 the payoff will
                             (1+ r,, )
be C2,

           From this description, it seems apparent that the price of the alternative instrument

must be given by ( 1 ), At the risk of being tedious, I would emphasize that the underlying

mechanism assuring this result is arbitrage. That is, if the going price, z, of the alternative

instrument differs from the sum needed to be invested at time O to reproduce its fiture

cash flows, there will be arbitrage profit to be made, The profit would take the form of a

positive cash flow in some period with no offsetting negative cash flow in any period. As
                                                 19


the description suggests, such a pure surplus could be had by an appropriate sequence of

borrowing (selling) and lending (buying) transactions in the unit bonds, coupled with

either buying or selling (depending on the direction of the inequality) the alternative

instrument.

                                            c1               C2
(1)                                 z=
                                         (l+rol)+     (l+ro1)(l+r12)

        When we introduce taxes on unit bonds, the price of the alternative instrument will

depend upon the taxable income flows associated with holding it. Table 2 lays out

schematically the taxable income associated with the unit bonds as well as an arbitrary

sequence of taxable income flows (denoted ti)that might, hypothetically, be attached to

the alternative instrument specified in Table 1. Also shown is the taxable income flow for

the zero-coupon   bond under the old rules: no tax until realization at time 2, at which

point taxable income is the difference between basis and payoff.


         Table 2. Taxable Income Flows from Borrower to Lender with Symmetry

                    Time Point:             o                      1              2

          Time O Unit Bond                                        ro1

          Time 1 Unit Bond                                                        r12

          Alternative Instrument            to                     tl             tz

         Discount Bond                                                           1-Z02
                                                   20

            Readers will be very familiar with the idea that afier-tax cash flows are discounted

    at the after-tax discount rate by taxable investors.   This is the essence of the story spelled

    out in Table 3. In the expressions in the table, the symbol ml stands for the marginal tax

    rate of the lender, and mb for the marginal tax rate of the borrower.        The first row of

    Table 3 shows the condition on the price, z 1,of the alternative financial instrument

    specified in Table 1 at which a lender (the demander of the instrument) would find it an

    interesting proposition when the applicable tax consequences are as shown in Table 2.

    The second row of Table 3 shows the condition on the price, z b, of the alternative

    financial instrument at which a borrower (the supplier of the instrument) would find it an

    interesting proposition.

            A low price for the instrument means a high yield, The equality case of the

    condition in both rows shows the point of indifference between putting money into the

    instrument and, instead, putting money into some combination of unit bond purchases and

    sales. For the lender who is buying the instrument any price is attractive that is below a

    critical break-even level that depends on the lender’s marginal tax rate. For the borrower,

   who is selling the instrument, the inequality runs in the other direction.       An attractive price

    is one that is higher than a break-even level that depends on the borrower’s marginal tax

    rate. Again, the conditions in Table 3 are based on arbitrage considerations.          Thus, for



       Table 3. Demand (Lender) and Supply (Borrower) Prices for a Financial Instrument

Price at which lender would                         c1 – mfil                      C2– m\t’2
                                  21< –mlto +
    be willing to buy the                       (l+(l-ml)rol)        + (l+(l-m~)r~~)(l+(l-m~)rl~)
         instrument

 Price at which borrower                           c1 – m~t,                        c2 – m~t2
                                 zb > –mhtO +
would be willing to sell the                    (l+(l-m,        )r,, )+(1+(1   -m, )r,, )(l+(l-m,)r,,)
        instrument
                                                21


example, if the price is strictly greater than the right hand side value in the second row,

there is an arbitrage profit to be made by taxpayer with marginal tax rate mb, by borrowing

in the form of selling the instrument for a relatively high price, using the proceeds to lend

in the unit bond market, to finance the fiture payoff on the alternative instrument (taking

into account the associated tax consequences).

        If m is the single applicable marginal tax rate, there will be exactly one value of the

instrument satis&ing both conditions specified in Table 3, The opportunity for arbitrage

profit for both borrowers and lenders is eliminated simultaneously by the price given in

expression ( 2 ), which corresponds to ( 1 ) with taxes taken into account.

                                     c1 – mtl                      C2– mt2
(2)
                     z = ‘into+ (l+(l-m)rol)         + (l+(l-m)rol)(l+       (l-m)rlz)

        The fact that there is a single tax rate implies that the discount factors (the factors

multiplying the cash flows) on the right hand side of ( 2 ) are the same for everyone, and

the fact of symmetry in the taxable income flows means that the amount added to or

subtracted from the afier-tax cash flows as a result of the tax is the same for everyone.

Any positive amount of tax that has to be paid by the lender will be reflected in a lower

price that the lender would be willing to pay for the instrument, that is, a lower amount

that can be realized by the borrower, who is exactly compensated by the corresponding

deductions.

        What If Demand and Su~~lV Prices Differ?

        With different marginal tax rates, the critical values of the demand and supply

prices, the prices that would render demanders and suppliers indifferent between the

alternative instrument and the package of unit bonds that reproduces the fiture cash flows,
                                               22


will generally differ. There are two possibilities:   First, the maximum price the lender

would be willing to pay for the instrument could be below the minimum price the

borrower would be willing to accept. In this case, the transaction in question would not

be observed.    The same effective transaction would be carried out using unit bonds.

        The second possibility is that the maximum price the lender would be willing to

pay for the instrument exceeds the minimum price the borrower would accept. Here we

would say that capital market equilibrium does not exist in the model world. Translated

into application, it means that there would be no natural limit on the tax arbitrage profit to

be made at a price somewhere between the two limits. The lender would sell the time O

unit bonds to buy the alternative instrument and the borrower would buy time O unit bonds

with the proceeds of selling the alternative instrument.

        These two possibilities are not independent.    If there is a transaction that would

not take place between a borrower in one tax bracket and a lender in the other (because it

is unattractive to both sides), the reverse transaction will provide an opportunity for tax

arbitrage profit.
                                               23


        Price adjustments cannot eliminate this profit potential. Either the marginal tax

rates must be equated, or linearity of the tax rules must be sacrificed (for example,

incorporating   limits on the allowable loss that can be claimed by a taxpayer),T

        As the algebra suggests, if there is any potential for arbitrage profit, the absolute

amount of profit is proportional to the scale of the transactions.     Since the pure arbitrage

transaction involves no actual cash changing hands (except with the tax collector) there is

no natural limit. As a practical matter, however, the transactions are not costless, so the

quantitative importance of the potential for arbitrage profit depends sensitively upon the

degree of difference in marginal tax rates and on the interest rate.


        The Case of a Zero-Coupon Bond

        The taxation of cash-basis issuers and holders of a zero-coupon bond under the old

rules provides a convenient illustration of these ideas. Under this rule for taxable income,

the market-clearing   price of the zero-coupon bond implied by ( 2 ) is ( 3 )

                                                    l-m(l–zo2)
(3)                                z–
                                    02-(1+(1    - m)ro, )(1 +(1 -m)r,’)

        Some algebra translates condition ( 3 ) into ( 4), which should have a ftiliar

look. The discount factor on the right hand side is modified from the no-tax case by terms




7 In a graduated rate system, the marginal tax rate can adjust endogenously. So, for
example, if high bracket taxpayers could deduct interest on borrowing to hold tax exempts
and low bracket taxpayers could costlessly go short tax exempts, tax arbitrage would lead
everyone to end up in the same marginal rate bracket, Someone whose marginal tax rate
was below this common level would lend on a taxable basis and borrow tax exempt by
going short. The result would bean arbitrage gai~ a higher taxable income, and a higher
marginal tax rate. The opportunity for arbitrage profit would persist until marginal tax
rates were all equal, Note that a limit on allowable loss deductions can also be viewed as
making the marginal tax rate endogenous, since a taxpayer up against the limit faces a
                                                 24


that incorporate the advantage to the lender of the deferral of tax, from time 1 to time 2,

on the implicit yield between time O and time 1. If the marginal tax rate is zero, the right

hand side reduces, as expected, to the no-tax expression.          A positive marginal tax rate

raises the equilibrium price of the instrument, the amount the lender would be willing to

give and the borrower require to be paid for the fiture cash and taxable income flows. (It

is not clear from the derivation, but is the case, that the tax rate in question in this example

is the one that applies at time 1.)

                                                              1
(4)                                   Z02=
                                             (l+ro,)(l+r,z(       1‘:;,:J’01      ))


        Under General Conditions. Symmetry is Necessary

        As has been demonstrated, with a single tax rate, symmetry of the rule determining

the income of party and counterpart     of a financial instrument is wfficient for any

disparity from the treatment of the unit bonds to be completely absorbed in the price of the

instrument.   There is no need to provide special rules to limit tax arbitrage profit. mote

that this statement requires that there really be just one rate. This condition would be

violated by, for example, the presence of tax exempt participants in a market where

taxable persons or entities all have some positive marginal rate.)

        A natural question is whether symmetry is also necessary.              That is, would a rule

that violated symmetry necessarily result in an unlimited opportunity for tax arbitrage

profit? The answer is yes if we confine our attention to the case in which the sum of the

deductions from taxable income by one party over the life of the instrument equals the sum




marginal tax rate of zero on firther losses of the type subject to the limit. For firther
                                                   25


of inclusions in taxable income by the counterpart.          (Two additional conditions are taken

for granted:       interest rates and the single marginal tax rate are positive.)

        Here is the argument.        Suppose the tax rules do not have the symmetry property

with respect to some particular position. For example, let the offending case involve a

deduction for the “borrower” side of the position (I use the term just to identi~ one of the

counterparties),     that occurs before the inclusion in the income of the lender. This would

describe the old treatment of the discount bond issued by an accrual taxpayer to a cash

taxpayer in the same rate bracket. To be concrete, suppose that the borrower in a unit

position of this financial instrument gets to deduct $100 at some point, but that the lender

does not have to include the $100 until two years later. Now suppose a person takes both

sides of this financial instrument, being both borrower and lender. Then there is no net

cash flow involved apart from taxes. But by virtue of being the borrower, the taxpayer

gets a deduction of $100 at some point, which is offset by an inclusion of the same

amount, two years later. If there is a positive after-tax interest rate, this change in the

timing of tax liabilities is valuable. By firther transactions in the unit bonds, the taxpayer

could arrange for a cash flow sequence that is positive at some time point and never

negative,

        There is no way to eliminate this tax advantage through adjustment in the price at

which the position is exchanged, since it results from holding simultaneously opposite

sides of the same instrument.




development of the role of endogenous adjustment in marginal rates, see Bradford (1 980).
                                                    26


             Current Realization Approach to Caoital Gains Taxation Fails the Symmetrv Test

             The discussion of the zero-coupon bond, showing that capital markets could

    incorporate taxation at maturity on a capital gain basis, assumed that both issuer and

    purchaser of the instrument held the instrument to maturity, Barring limits on capital

    losses, however, it will generally be advantageous for one side or the other of this

    transaction to accelerate the realization of a loss at time 1. The tax treatment of the

    position held to maturity, while formally correct, is therefore of limited relevance.      The

    question is, whether the tax that results from optimized realization behavior can be

    incorporated    into the market price (always given a single applicable marginal tax rate)


                         Table 4. Cash and Taxable Income Flows to Borrower
                                     (Taxpayer Option to Realize)

                                                                                                  2

Discount Bond if Paid       Cash                    I       Z02       I                          -1
Off at Maturity

                            Taxable Income                                                    -(1-Z02)

Discount Bond if            Cash (aggregate to              Z02                                  -1
Transferred to              borrower’s side)
Another Person at
Time Point 1

                           Taxable Income                                 -(Z,2-Z02)          -(1-z,~)
                           (aggregate to
                           borrower’s side)



            Examination of the sequence of transactions in Table 4 establishes that the taxable

    income flows that result when taxpayers advantageously time their realizations fail the test

    of symmetry.    It is possible to establish zero-market value positions that shifi tax liability

    toward the fiture.    Table 4 lays out the taxable income flow to the borrower under two

    scenarios.   In the first, the original borrower pays off the loan at maturity,    In the second
                                                      27


the original borrower pays someone else an amount 212,the price of the discount bond as

of time 1, to take over the obligation.          There is no net cash flow in the aggregate to the

borrower’s side at time 1, since the original borrower’s outflow is matched by the i~ow

of the person taking over the obligation. But there is an increase in the original

borrower’s liabilities for tax purposes amounting to zIZ-ZOZ,
                                                           which can be claimed as a

deduction.     The remaining unrealized loss to the borrower side of the financial instrument

appears as the deduction, 1-212,at time 2. If the lender waits to realize gain until maturity,

the taxable income flows are asymmetric, and the net effect, in the aggregate, is to

accelerate the deduction side, relative to the inclusion side. Table 5 and Table 6 spell out

the details.

         Table 5 describes an arbitrage sequence in that the transactions are organized to

produce a net cash flow of zero at every time point except time 1. The “bottom line” in


             Table 5. Details of Discount Bond Issuer’s Tax Arbitrage Transactions

                Time Point;                  o                                     1

Transaction:                      Issue l/z02 discount          Receive principal plus interest on the
                                  bonds for $1,                 unit bond.
                                  Buy unit bond,                Pay someone to take over the
                                                                discount bonds, realizing a loss.

                              I                             I Pay any taxes due.
Details of transactions:      I                             I
       Time O Unit Bond I                   -1              I                    l+ro,

             Discount Bond                   1
                                                            I                   –1/202


                       Tax                   o
                                                                        –mro, + m(—1/202 –   ~)
                                                                                   l+r,2

                        Net                  o                           l/zo~                 l/z~~
                                                                 l+rol - —–m(rol+l–           —)
                                                                         1+ rlz               l+rlz
                                                    28


the table shows just such a sequence, There is an arbitrage profit if the one non-zero

result, shown in the lower right hand cell of the table, is positive. To bring about the

required pattern, the issuer of I/zOzunits of the discount bond uses the $1 proceeds to buy

a time O unit bond. The third column of Table 5 shows the cash flow at time 1, when the

discount bond issuer unwinds the pair of positions.         The time O bond pays off (l+rol),    The

discount bond is equivalent to a quantity of time 1 unit bonds, since there is no tax

advantage to the holder looklng ahead from that point. So the l/zoz units must be worth

the payoff amount at time 2, l/zo2, discounted at the time 1 unit bond rate, rlz. The issuer

of the discount bond will thus have to pay someone that amount to take over the

                                             1/202
instrument, giving rise to the cash outflow —               There are, in addition, cash flows
                                            l+rlz

owing to the tax consequences of all this: –mrol (an outflow) due to the interest received,


        1/202
and m(—         – 1) (an inflow) due to the fact that the amount paid to buy out of the
      l+rlz

discount bond obligation exceeds the amount received on its issue. The net proceeds are

shown in the lower right-hand cell of Table 5; the no profit condition for the issuer,

expressed algebraically by ( 5 ), is that this amount be less than or equal to zero.

                                                  l/z~~                1/202 <()
(5)                                    l+rol–    —–m(rol+l–           —
                                                 l+rlz                l+r12)-

Condition ( 5 ) simplifies to ( 6 ).

                                                              1
(6)                                                                    =a
                                                ’02< (I+rlz)(l+rol)

        Table 6 depicts the other side of the market, showing the result of financing the

holding to maturity of $1 worth of the discount bond by a sequence of borrowings in the
                                                29


form of unit bonds, Note that there is a fourth column, showing the cash flows at time 2.

The transactions are designed to produce a net cash flow of O except at time 2. The lower

right-hand cell of Table 6 contains the net result at time 2, from which we see that the no

profit condition for the person who lends in the form of a discount bond (the buyer of the

instrument) is given by ( 7 ),


(7)                -(1 +(1 - m)r~~)(l + r~~) + ~ - m((:        - 1)- r~~(l + (1 - m)r~~)) s o
                                               Z02

which simplifies to ( 8 ).


(8)




        Taking ( 6 ) and ( 8 ) together, if the marginal tax rate and the first period interest

rate are positive, i.e., m >0 and rol >0, then the critical price, b, for the lender is greater

than the critical price, a, for the borrower.   A price for the discount bond that

simultaneously eliminates opportunities for arbitrage profit by borrower and lender thus

must satisfi the condition that it is less than itsel~ Z02< Z02. This is impossible; no such

price exists.
                                                     30


                      Table 6. Discount Bond Lender’s Tax &bitrage Transactions
                                     (Taxpayer Option to Realize)

                Time Point:          o                  1                              2
Transaction:                   Buy 1/202      Pay principal plus      Collect 1/202on the discount
                               discount       interest on the unit    bonds,
                               bonds for      bond,
                                                                      Pay principal plus interest on the
                               $1.
                                              Collect tax savings     time 1 unit bonds.
                               Sell time O    from interest
                                                                      Pay any taxes due.
                               unit bond      deducted.
                               (borrow).
                                              Sell time 1 unit
                                              bonds to cover the
                                              difference.

Details of cash flows:
      Time OUnit Bond                1               -(l+ro~

      Time 1 Unit Bond                            (l+(l-m)rO~                -(1+(1 -m)rOJ(l+r,J

         Discount Bond              -1                                               l/zo2

                        Tax          o                mrol                  1
                                                                       –m((— – 1) –r12(l +(1 –m)rol)
                                                                            202

                        Net          o                  0
                                                                       -(1 +(1 -m)ro, )(l +rl, ) +$-

                                                                           1
                                                                       m((— – l)–r,z(l       +(l-m)ro,   ))
                                                                           202




           Possible Fixes for Capital Gains

               The stark conclusion is that, even if there is just one marginal tax rate, some

   nonlinearity (such as the ceiling on the deductibility of losses) is required to limit tax

   arbitrage profit when income is based on the present realization conventions,         Note that

   this particular conclusion has nothing to do with “cherry picking” or other risk-related

   phenomena, but rather turns on timing alone: The party and counterpart           can choose
                                              31


different realization paths, to their mutual advantage,   Some other approach, satisfying the

symmetry requirement, would be required, of which the following four are examples.

       Mark to Market

       Under a mark-to-market     rule, the holder of an instrument would recognize gain or

loss each period by including in income the difference in the instrument’s market value and

its basis at the end of the period, Recognized gain would be added to basis (and loss

deducted from basis). Cash payments received during the period would be subtracted

from basis. If the issuer of such an instrument were treated in the same way, except that

cash payments paid during the year were added to basis, any time holding one side of the

position resulted in a loss, holding the other side would result in a gain of the same

amount, thereby satisfing   the symmetry property.

        I~ore   Intermediate Transactions

        Another approach would be to provide that a sale of an instrument such as the

illustrative zero-coupon bond would have no tax consequences,       Basis would go along

with the instrument.   The purchaser of the instrument at time 1 would thus obtain with the

fiture cash flow the fiture taxable income flow that would otherwise have gone to the

initial holder. In this way, the symmetry of the tax treatment would be assured.

        As a result, the market could incorporate any apparent rnismeasurement of income

into the prices of financial instruments, provided that everyone in the market faced the

same tax rate. The fiture tax consequences for the ultimate holder of the instrument at

maturity would be discounted into the price obtained at intermediate points. In our

example, it is readily shown that the market-clearing price at issue in this case WOUldbe

given by(4),    and the price at time 1 by ( 9 ).
                                              32



(9)




       Impute Interest Current&

       Another possibility would be to impute interest to the holder of a financial

instrument, providing as well an addition to basis.g (The issuer would obtain an imputed

deduction and corresponding basis adjustment.)     Cash payment from borrower to lender,

whether representing “interest” or “principal,” would give rise to a deduction from basis of

the lender and a corresponding adjustment for the borrower.     It can be shown that under

these rules the price a taxpayer would be willing to pay for the discount bond would be the

same as in the no-tax world. This implies that the price would be independent of the

applicable tax rate (by contrast with the previous example).

       This is very close to the present treatment of a discount bond. Present treatment

involves calculating a yield to maturity and imputing annual interest income to the lender

(and allowing a deduction to the borrower) of the product of that rate and the adjusted

basis of the instrument, which is increased by the amount of the imputed interest,    The

main difference from the suggested alternative is that the adjustment required to eliminate

the potential for arbitrage profit from selective timing of capital gain and loss on the

instrument is the current period’s market rate, not a yield to maturity.

        The yield to maturity of a financial instrument is that unz~orm rate of period-by-

period interest that equates the market value of the instrument to the discounted value of

its fiture cash flows, If the actual, known, fiture period-by-period   interest rates vary in




g This is the approach suggested by Cunningham and Schenk (1992).
                                                33


the risk-free context assumed in this section, then the yield-to-maturity    of an instrument

with any arbitrary cash-flow profile will be a kind of average of them. If, on the other

hand, the actual, known, fiture period-by-period      interest rates are the same, then the yield

to maturity of an instrument will equal that common value. It is only in this case that the

present yield-to-maturity   method of assigning interest income and deductions forecloses

profit from tax arbitrage using unit bonds. When there is variation in the one-period

interest rate, the yield-to-maturity   approach to imputation results in a difference between

an instrument’s basis and its market value, opening up the possibility for tax arbitrage

profit. 9 (There is an additional element involved in the term structure of interest rates in

practice: fiture unit bond rates are not known, so that the price of a fiture dollar

incorporates   a bet on fiture interest rates, as well as purely intertemporal value. I develop

this point below.)

        In the world of petiect certainty, imputation of interest should result in exact

equality between the market value of an instrument and its adjusted basis. This precise

equality would fail, in general, under the yield-to-maturity   approach,    As a practical

matter, however, by narrowing the difference between basis and market value, the yield-

to-maturity imputation presumably greatly narrows the potential for profit, that is,

increases the likelihood that transactions costs would swamp the gain, even if limitation on

the deductibility of capital losses did not address the problem in another way.




9 See Bankman and Klein (1989), Sims (1992),
                                                34


           Impute Interest on Realization

           Another possibility would be to impute interest on realization.   That is, at the time

the instrument is sold, the taxable income would be based, in effect, on the assumption

that the proceeds of the sale were the result of a sequence of investments in unit bonds (at

each intermediate point reinvesting the proceeds from the previous point’s investment)

from the time of acquisition to the sale date, The period-by-period      interest payments thus

imputed to the instrument at the time of sale would be allocated to the intervening tax

years. Interest would be charged on any taxes that would have been due, with everything

settled up at the time of sale. 1° (The tax on an instrument held to maturity would be the

same as that on one sold at that time for the payoff amount, Cash payments received

during the holding period would be treated as sales proceeds on a position held since the

acquisition date of the underlying instrument.)

           The only observed facts about the transaction used in this approach are the sale

price of the instrument and its acquisition date. The amount of money that changed hands

at the time of acquisition does not enter the calculation; the concept of basis is not

invoked.

        The symmetrical treatment would apply to the issuer of the instrument, who would

obtain, in effect, a deferred interest deduction.    Intermediate cash flows would be treated

as realizations, dated from the time of acquisition.




10 This is the Auerbach (1991) method.
                                                                35


        Table 71aysout          thedetails        ofttisapproach                inthetwo-period         conteti.          Notethat

the net-of-tax payoff on the discount bond at time 2 (the lower right-hand cell of Table 7)

simplifies to ( 10 ).

                        ~((1   +~o])     – ~~01)~12                                         (1+ (1 - m)ro, )(1 +(1 - ~)~,z)
(lo)                                                            ~~ol(l+~12)             =

                 1-        (l+~o,      )(l+~12)
                                                       -   (1    +~o,     )(l   +~,2)              (1   +~o,   )(1    +   ~,2)




        The market equilibrium price of the instrument is determined by discounting the

afier-tax cash flows at the afier-tax interest rates. As shown in ( 11 ), as in the case of

imputing interest currently to basis (and adjusting basis accordingly), under the suggested

tax rules, the price is independent of the investor’s tax rate, being simply the discounted

(at the before-tax market interest rates) value of before-tax flows.

                                           (1+ (1 -m)ro~)(l              + (1 - m)r~~)
 (11)
                                                     (1+ ro~)(l +r~~)                                          1
                                ’01 = (1+(1 -??z)ro~)(l + (1 - m)r,~) = (1 + ?-o~)(l +r,*)

        Although I have not spelled it out in detail, it is the case that this rule results in tax

effects’ being incorporated to asset prices even though it does not satisfy the property of

symmetry (since either party to the instrument has the option to sell at time 1), It might be

thought that this fact contradicts the conclusion that symmetry is necessa~,                                         as well as

sufficient, for tax effects to be filly incorporated to market prices of instruments.

Necessity, however, was shown to obtain for rules that result in equality between the sum

of inclusions in and deductions from income for the party and counterpart                                            to the

instrument,   The interest-imputation-on-realization                            rule may not satis~ this condition, and

would not do so in the case in which one party chose to realize at time 1, whereas the

counterpart    realized at time 2. This rule satisfies, instead, the weaker symmetry
                                                36



                  Table 7, Imputing Interest at Maturity to Discount Bond Lender

              Time Point:            o                        1                          2

                Transaction:    Buy 1                                     Collect 1 on the discount
                                discount                                  bond.
                                bond for ZOZ.
                                                                          Pay any taxes due.

  Valuation Implicit in Tax                                                      (l+rol)-mrol
     Calculation at Time 2                                                      (1 +rol)(l   +r12)

     Implicit Interest in Tax                               rol
      Calculation at Time 2                          (l+ro1)(l+r12)

    Implicit Tax on Implicit                                mrn1
 Interest in Tax Calculation                         (1 +rol)(l   +r12)
                  at Time 2

    Tax on Implicit Interest                                                  m((l+rol)–mro1)r12
                                                                                (1 +rol)(l   +r12)

       Interest on Deferred                                                       mr01(l+r12)
                Implicit Tax                                                    (1 +rol)(l +r12)

      After-Tax Cash Flow           -202                                    ~_ m((l+rol)–mro1)r12
                                                                                  (l+ro1)(l+r12)
                                                                                   ~rol(l+r12)
                                                                               ‘(l+ro1)(l+r12)



:ondition, that the discounted sum of taxable inclusions equal the discounted sum of

deductions from the tax base, which is sufficient as well as necessary for the result.


        Correctness in the Treatment of Time

        With symmetry, or with its present value equivalent, and a single rate of tax, tax

arbitrage profit will be eliminated in financial market equilibrium, where the taxation of the

unit bonds -- the taxation of ordinary, one-period interest -- is taken as the fixed element
                                               37


of the system. As I have already stressed, this fixed element does not give the correct

measure if by “correct” is meant real (inflation-corrected)    income. 11

        Getting to a correct measure would require adjusting the nominal interest receipts

and payments to extract the itiation    premium. 12 A relatively simple procedure for doing

so would be to generalize the imputation of interest to basis for all assets, including the

ordinary one-period bonds that are the foundation stones of the income measurement

system. Income for the year would be the product of adjusted basis and whatever is

determined to be the inflation-adjusted interest rate. The annual adjustment to basis would

include, in addition to the usual increase for imputed interest and decrease for any cash

received, a percentage increase equal to the change in the price level during the period,

(Basis adjustment for cash flows between the beginning and end points of the year would

require some appropriate approximation for price-level change during the year,)

        Given that interest imputation is required for all but the fundamental one-period

instruments in any case, it would thus be conceptually fairly simple to implement an

inflation-corrected   tax. If the analysis were extended to take into account, for example,

real investment, inflation correction would be an important consideration (since tax

arbitrage forces come into play in that connection as well).

        In the world of a single marginal rate, taxing nominal interest involves an incorrect

income measure, but need not produce an incorrect result. That is because the market

could take into account both the real and nominal elements of the transaction,    For




11 I have elsewhere (1996) described taxation of nominal interest as giving rise to a
“nominal economic income” tax,
12For discussion and references to the literature, see Bradford (1986).
                                                 38


example, the nominal interest rate should vary by 1/(1-tax rate) per percentage point of

anticipated, steady itiation,   With a 33 percent marginal rate, an interest rate of 3 percent

with no inflation and interest rate of 18 percent with inflation of 10 percent per year would

offer exactly the real same after-tax borrowing and lending terms. (18 percent less 33

percent of 18 percent in tax gives a 12 percent after-tax nominal return.    Subtracting the

10 percent inflation, leaves a 2 percent real afier-tax return, the same as in the no-inflation

case,) With multiple tax rates, however, it is impossible for the financial markets to

produce an adjustment that works for all taxpayers. Then incorrect income-measurement

produces “incorrect” real results, as well. 13


Multi~le Tax Rates and the Consistency Requirement

        When we leave behind the world of the single tax rate, the constraints on the rules

necessary to permit the elimination of tax arbitrage profit in a linear income measurement

system become more stringent,      Symmetry is no longer sufficient. Rather consistency of

income measurement is both suficient and, under conditions, necessary.

        Shuldiner defines consistency as the “equivalent treatment by a single taxpayer of

two or more individual transactions making up parts of a larger overall transaction.”

(1992, p. 782) What I have in mind is similar. I specifi consistency as requiring that a

given sequence of net cash flows give rise to the same taxable income flows for all

taxpayers, regardless of how that cash flow is composed out of one or more financial

instruments.   Because it is more specific about the meaning of “equivalent treatment” and




13 The Comprehensive Income Tax proposal described in the U.S. Treasury’s Blueprints
for Basic Tax Reform erred in relying on financial markets to produce an automatic
                                                 39


refers to all taxpayers, it is more restrictive than Shuldiner’s concept.   As I use the term

here, it is also more restrictive in adding symmetry, which relates to the tax consequences

to the two parties to a financial instrument,    Consistency as I use the term here implies

symmetry under my definition, but not vice versa. Assuming that he means to imply the

treatment is universally applicable to all taxpayers, it appears to be close to Stmad’s

usage, at least for the case of cetiainty:   “A tax system is consistent if and only if every

cash flow pattern has a unique tax treatment.” (1994, p. 573)

        The “old” treatment of the (cash-basis) issuer and holder of an OID bond is an

example of measurement that is symmetrical but not consistent with the treatment of the

equivalent sequence of one-period loans. Yield-to-maturity       treatment of an OID bond

gives an example of an effort to achieve consistency.     The ideas are (a) that the taxpayer

who has a cash flow from the date of issue of the zero-coupon discount bond to its

maturity should have the same set of inclusions in taxable income, regardless of whether

the cash flow is the result of holding the zero-coupon discount bond or a series of one-

period instruments and (b) whenever one party has an inclusion in income, the

counterpart   has a deduction (subject to any limitations that would apply to a borrower

making ordinary periodic interest payments).

        The sufficiency of consistency so defined to eliminate the potential for relevant tax

arbitrage profit using financial instruments follows almost by definition, Tax arbitrage is

effected by taking a position in two or more financial instruments so as to produce a zero

net cash flow each period on a before-tax basis, but a valuable flow of taxable income. (In




adjustment of interest income for inflation, an error on which I commented in the Preface
                                               40

the usual case, a flow of taxable income is valuable if it has a positive net present value at

afier-tax discount rates; in other words, when it gives rise to an acceleration of deductions

or deferral of taxable income.) If income measurement is consistent, a combination of

instruments that gives rise to a zero net cash flow each period must bring with it the same

sequence of taxable income flows as any other such combination of instruments.        But it

cannot be the case that holding no financial instrument (and therefore a zero net cash flow

each period) results in a favorable flow of taxable income.

        The more interesting proposition is that consistency is necessary under reasonable

conditions.   These conditions are the same ones as applied in the single-rate case: for

rules that imply the sum of inclusions and the sum of deductions on the two sides of a

financial instrument are the same, consistency is necessary if there is always more than one

tax rate in the population of taxpayers and if interest rates are positive.

        The argument is very close to the one given above for the necessity of symmetry.

Start with the taxable income flows that are associated with the unit bonds, Refer to as

“the” afier-tax discount rates the implied net of tax rates of return from unit (one-period)

bonds. If the tax rules do not have the consistency property then there must be some

instrument such that the sequence of one-period bond transactions that duplicates its cash

flow produces a different sequence of taxable income flows. Suppose the price of this

other instrument adjusts, along the lines discussed earlier, so as to render the two positions

indifferent for taxpayers with a particular tax rate. (If the price does not so adjust, there is

an opportunity for tax arbitrage profit for those taxpayers, ) Then the discounted sum of




to the 2nd edition (Bradford et al, 1984),
                                                41


inclusions in the tax base of the “lender” side of the other instrument, using the after-tax

discount rates, must be the same as the discounted sum of deductions from the tax base of

the “borrower,” using the same after-tax discount rates. At a different tax rate, the after-

tax discount rates will differ, But two different sequences of cash flows that have the

same discounted value at one set of discount rates will have different discounted values at

another set of discount rates, It is impossible to eliminate the potential for arbitrage profit

without giving up the linearity of the tax (or setting all marginal tax rates equal),


        OID Rules Illustrate the (Strictly St)eakin~. Unsuccessful) Ouest for Consistency

        As discussed above in connection with the analysis of the single-tax rate system,

the present rules for inclusion of interest on an original issue discount bond (impute

interest at the implied yield to maturity) fail the symmetry test when combined with the

option to realize gain or loss. If we restrict our attention to OID bonds held to maturity

by both counterparties,   there is symmetry but still, in general, a failure of consistency.

Except when the one-period interest rates are all the same, the sequence of transactions in

unit bonds that reproduces the OID cash flows will generate a different path of taxable

income flows. Whereas this difference in tax results can be built into the price of the

instrument when there is a single tax rate, when there are multiple tax rates, there will

always be an opening for tax arbitrage profit through transactions between a pair of

taxpayers with different marginal rates. 14 (To be sure, the opening maybe very small,

Transactions costs will typically swamp it,)




14 See, again, Bankman and Klein ( 1989), Sims (1 992)
                                               42


        Present Realization AP~roach to Capital Gains Taxation Fails the Consistence Test

        Since the present realization regime for capital gains fails the symmetry test, a

fortiori it fails the consistency test, Some of the techniques, discussed in the single-rate

context, that produce symmetric treatment require modification to produce consistency.

        Mark to Market

        Since mark to market taxation produces exactly the same path of taxable income

as results from the duplicating sequence of unit bond transactions, it satisfies consistency.

        Ignore Intermediate Transactions

        Ignoring intermediate transactions in an instrument between issue and maturity

(with basis carried over), which guaranteed symmetry, would not generally produce

consistency,   This method assures that the path of deductions by the “borrower” side of an

instrument is equal and opposite to the path of inclusions by the “lender” side, regardless

of intervening sales by either side. The problem, however, is that this symmetric result is

not the same as the path of taxable income associated with the duplicating sequence of

unit bond transactions,

        Impute Interest Current&

        The technique of imputing interest currently would produce consistency,       It is

important that the interest imputed be identical to that obtaining on the unit bonds, as this

is how the potential for tax arbitrage is eliminated. This could be effected by taxing the

unit bonds themselves on an imputed-interest basis, in which case the applicable rate could

be chosen as a matter of policy (for example, to equal the inflation-corrected   rate).
                                              43


       Impute Interest on Realization

        As we noted, the technique of imputing interest on realization fails the strict

symmetry test, but satisfies an appropriate generalization in the case of a single-rate

system. Roughly the same conclusion applies in the multiple rate system to a modified

specification of this approach,   To achieve the effect of consistency, the look-back that

treats the seller of an instrument as having accrued interest at the market rate would have

to apply the seller’s marginal tax rates (both for the implied periodic taxes and for the

effect of any acceleration or deferral of tax payments).   Then the discounted value of the

taxable income flows (at the after-tax discount rates applicable for the taxpayer in

question) will be the same as that of the duplicating unit bond transactions.   This equality

is the generalization of the consistency notion that is necessary to eliminate the potential

for relevant arbitrage profit with multiple marginal tax rates.

        Using, instead, a single marginal tax rate, rather than the seller’s actual marginal

tax rates through time, to infer the factor to apply to the proceeds of sale would fail the

consistency test.


IV. The Taxation of Risky Instruments

Pure Risk Effects: Timeless Gambles

        Perhaps because uncertainty is inextricably bound up with sequence (before and

after its resolution), we tend to think of risk and intertemporal return together.   Thus, for

example, if I enter into a forward contract to purchase some asset at a specified Price on a

specified date, in the typical situation the price is so chosen that the value of my position

at the outset is zero. Immediately thereafter, however, as information about the fiture

begins to unfold, my position acquires value, Whether the value is positive or negative
                                                44


depends upon whether the new information implies the fiture price is more likely to be

higher or lower than anticipated earlier. If the former, my position acquires a positive

value. If the latter, my position acquires a negative value. The value of the position of the

counterpart     to my contract moves in exactly the same amount but in the opposite

direction.    These effects occur with the passage of time, but time is not of the essence in

the changing values. On the contrary, if all that happens is the passage of time, and no

new information develops, the value of the position will not change at all,

        Taxing pure bets between a party and a counterpar&y, involving sequence (before

and after the resolution of uncertainty) but not the passage of time, is less problematical

than the taxation of transactions involving time. The striking fact is that, provided the

same tax rate applies to the gains and losses from a risky position, the tax rate itself is of

no fundamental importance.       The reason is simple: the tax has the effect of reducing the

scale of the bet but not the relative payoffs under the various relevant contingencies,

Since transactors have the option of varying the scale of their bets without recourse to the

tax system, taxation does not affect the set of possible bilateral bets at all.

        To illustrate, by analogy with the choice between a series of one-period loans and

a zero-coupon     discount bond, suppose there were two kinds of bets, taxable and not, with

the choice lefi up to the transactors.   For example, suppose gains and losses from flipping

pennies are taxable if the bet is governed by a contract written in red ink, but not if it is

governed by a contract written in green ink. The green ink deals get the wrong result

from the point of view of proper income accounting.      But one cannot produce tax

arbitrage profit consequences.
                                                45


        The analogy to the discount case would involve something like my writing a red

contract betting on heads and a green contract betting on tails for the same coin flip

(thereby eliminating any actual risk), and the counterpart     doing the opposite.     It is true

that this would convert an apparently riskless situation for me into a genuine gamble,

because I will either pay tax or collect a refind, depending on the coin flip. My

counterpart      on the red contract will experience the opposite taxable income outcomes.

But there is no opportunity for arbitrage profit at the expense of the tax system, so long as

the marginal rates of the transactors are taken as given. All that is required is that the

applicable tax rates be specified in advance of entering into the bet.

        Allowing the parties to specifi the fraction of gains (and losses) to be included in

(deducted from) taxable income would not enable them to obtain an arbitrage profit at the

expense of the tax system. This result holds even if the inclusion fraction is allowed to

differ for the party and counterpart.     The essential requirement is that the treatment of

gains and losses for a given party be the same and specified before the uncertainty is

resolved.     (Clearly, if I can decide afier the fact whether my position is governed by a red

or green contract, I can profit at the expense of the tax system,)

        The tax arbitrage at the heart of the analysis in this paper is thus a matter of time,

and not risk, The question is what this insight implies for the taxation of complex financial

instruments,


Putting Time and Risk Together

        Most financial instruments have both intertemporal and risk aspects.         An option is

a good example.      So too, however, is a long-term bond. Even if there is no risk of default,
                                                    46


there is a risk of changes in the short-term rates of interest. Thus the value of a long-term

bond between issue date and maturity is risky. 15


                Table 8. Illustrative Risky Instruments:         Cash Flows to Lender

          Time Point:                  o                    1                                 2

        Contingency:                                                            Heads                Tails

Time OUnit Bond                        -1                 1+ rO1

Time 1 Unit Bond                                            -1                   ]+ r12             1+ rlz

Risky Instrument H                    –z:                                           1                  0

Risky Instrument T                    –z:                                          o                   1



        We can use the two-period framework to consider the possibilities. Table 8

illustrates a pair of typical risky instruments, absent taxes. One of the instruments pays the

holder $1 at time 2 if a coin comes up heads. The other instrument pays the holder $1 at

time 2 if the coin comes up tails. The prices of the instruments, determined in the market,

are denoted z: and z;, respectively, where the subscript indicates the time point at

which the value is determined.

        It is instructive to consider the effect of variations in the time point at which the

uncertainty is resolved.        One possibility is that the uncertainty is resolved (the coin is

flipped) immediately afier the instrument is created and sold, at time O. In that case, the

positive payoffs of the two primitive bets offered in the financial market are, in effect, OID

bonds at time O. (The instrument is worthless if the coin comes up on the wrong side.)




15 The modern    theow     of   the term st~cture   of interest rates   treats all but   the inStantaneOUS
current interest rate as stochastic, with a risk premium typically built into the expected
return on longer-term instruments, See Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985).
                                                 47


The price of an instrument, say the heads bet, will jump immediately from z; to either

zero or 1/(1 + rO1)(1+ rlz ), depending on the outcome.       In either case, the price of the

instrument will subsequently appreciate at the risk-free unit bond interest rates until time

point 2,

           A second possibility is that the uncertainty is resolved at time point 1, Just before

that moment, each instrument will be identical to what it was at time point O, except that

the payoff moment will have come closer. Its value at that moment will simply be its

initial value times 1 plus the time Ounit bond interest rate, Just tier    that moment, it will

be known which payoff will occur, It is converted into either zero or a one-period unit

discount bond.

        The third possibility is that the uncertainty is resolved at time point 2. Just before

that point, each instrument will be indistinguishable from its issue date except that the time

of payoff will have arrived, The value of the heads claim, for example, will be

Z: (1 + ro,)(1 + r,2).   Upon resolution of the uncertainty, its value will jump to 1 or O.


        Tax Rules to Prevent Unlimited Tax Arbitrage Profit

        The possible time paths of the value of the alternative instrument under different

scenarios about the timing of the resolution of uncertainty suggest what is required to

preclude tax arbitrage profit, To test for the possibility of arbitrage profit, the required

step is to hedge away the risk (as in the case of the Put-Call Parity Theorem) and

determine whether a proposed treatment will eliminate the tax arbitrage potential from the

resulting pure intertemporal transaction.    Here risk is eliminated by buying one each of the

risky instruments,
                                               48


        One overarching proposition follows immediately from the analysis of the risk-free

case:

        Barring appropriate adjustments to basis, if the rules are linear, taxpayer option to

choose the time to recognize gain or loss will imply the potential for unlimited tax

arbitrage profit. We do not need risk to establish this conclusion, although the presence of

risk renders difficult fixes based on the market value of the instrument.

        The various approaches to deal with the problem of gain recognition maybe

divided, as in the risk-free analysis, into the single and multiple tax rate regimes.

        One Marginal Tm Rate for All Transactors

                Mark-to-Market

        Mark-to-market    income measurement precludes tax arbitrage profit.

                Ignore Intermediate Transactions

        Carrying basis along until maturity of the original instrument should work as well

in the presence of risk as in the certainty case. The price of the instrument will reflect the

tax advantage of deferral to the lender and its disadvantage to the borrower.

        To illustrate, suppose that in the case displayed in Table 8 a lender purchases a unit

of risky instrument H and that the contingency is resolved, with “Tails” as the outcome


revealed, immediately after purchase but still at time O. The lender’s basis is z~.     After

the outcome is revealed, the instrument is worth O. If the lender holds the instrument to


maturity, the payoff after tax will be O– m(O – Z( ) = mz~,      By the same argument used

in the risk-free analysis, this payoff will be worth


                             mz~ /( 1+(1 –m)rO1)(l+(l      –m)r12)
                                               49


in the market at time O, afier the resolution of the uncertainty.   If, alternatively, the lender

sells the asset at time O, this will be the amount realized because the basis in the asset will

be conveyed to the purchaser and deducted at the maturity of the instrument,         Since the

net present value (at afier-tax discount rates) of the two outcomes is the same, there is no

payoff (or penalty) to early realization of losses,

                Impute Interest Currently

        In applying the technique of imputing interest to the holder of an original issue

discount bond in the world of certainty, the payment by the borrower to the lender at

maturity gives rise to a reduction in both borrower’s and lender’s basis to zero, thereby

bringing the imputation to an end. These payments are not otherwise reflected in taxable

income. There is no current deduction of the payment by the borrower, nor inclusion of

amounts received by the lender,

        In the world of risk, there is, in addition, settlement of a bet involved in the

payments from borrower to lender, Under the usual treatment of bets, the payment from

loser to winner is currently deducted by the loser and included by the winner. The

question is how one can separate the two (other than by marking to market).

        A possible answer is to wait until maturity, along the way imputing, and taxing,

interest on basis (with basis adjustment).   At settlement time, any amount paid by the

borrower in excess of adjusted basis would be deducted by the borrower and included by

the lender. Any shortfall of the settlement amount from basis would be deducted by the

lender (as a loss) and included by the borrower.
                                                50


         This relatively straightforward   approach would work out well in a world in which

 the instrument is held to maturity. As in the risk-free analysis, the effect is to eliminate the

 tax rate from the determination of the value before maturity.

         There are two problems presented by sale of the instrument at an intermediate

 point. One is the potential for shifting gains to low marginal-rate holders and losses to

high-marginal rate holders. This does not arise in the one-rate case. The second problem

is the potential for cherry picking, which arises because the information about winners and

losers generally emerges before the payoff date.

        To illustrate, consider the first scenario described above, in which the coin flip

takes place at time O. For specificity, let us focus on instrument H. The outcome of the

coin flip is to convert it into one of two risk-free discount bonds, one paying off $1 at time

2, and one paying off O. Immediately following the issue of the instrument, the coin is

flipped and there is a jump in its market value, up or down, horn the issue price, z;,    to

whatever the value of those discount bonds may be when account is taken of the tax

consequences to the seller and buyer.

        In what might be regarded as the natural procedure, the OID bonds would be

taxed to a subsequent acquirer like any other bond with the same terms, and the seller of

the instrument would take into income the proceeds of sale, deducting basis (and thereby

reducing to zero the amount on which interest is imputed to the original lender).     Since the

bond-equivalent   will be treated by the new “lender” exactly like a newly issued bond, its

market value will have to be either 1/(1 + rO1)(1 + rlz ) or O, depending upon the resolution


of uncertainty at time O, Interest imputation based on the issue price, z;,    would tontine

to be deducted by the borrower (with adjustments to basis). Interest imputed to the new
                                               51


lender would be higher or lower, depending on the payoff. At maturity, the payments of 1

or O, as appropriate, would be made. For the new lender, the payoff will just equal

adjusted basis, so there will be no tax consequences at payoff time (other than elimination

of basis and its associated interest imputation).   For the borrower the payoff amount will

exceed basis in the high-payoff case, resulting in a deduction,   In the low-payoff case the

payoff amount will be O, below basis, resulting in a taxable gain,

         The question is, would selling the instrument after the uncertainty is resolved

produce a tax advantage?     Would it pay, for example, to sell a losing position, thereby

accelerating the deduction of basis? We can pose the issue in general terms by supposing

that the outcome after resolution of uncertainty at time O is some arbitra~ amount,

~(1 + ~01)(1+ ~z), payable with certainty at time 2. Immediate sale (for a by the original


lender would give the seller a net pay off (1 – m)a + mz~, afier taking acount deduction of

basis. Holding to maturity would imply a larger basis deduction at that time, worth

m~(l    + rO1)(l+ qz), but at the price of paying tax on imputed interest in the interim,


amounting to mz~r
               o o] at time 1 and mz~(l + ro,)q2 at time 2. The extra basis deduction

exactly compensates for the extra tax along the way, but the gross sale proceeds grow to

~(1 + rol)(1 + q2), that is, on before-tax terms, resulting in a payoff to deferral whenever a

is positive.

         An alternative treatment would be to require carryover of basis until maturity,

much as under the “ignore intermediate transactions” approach, but with the addition of

interest imputation to basis. The purchaser would be obliged to carry the basis, with its

imputed interest, and would take the consequences at maturity of the gain or loss in
                                               52


settlement with the issuer. In other words, the purchaser would step into the shoes of the

original lender. The firther new twist is that any excess of the amount paid by an acquirer

over the basis taken over would be treated as settlement of a bet, deducted by the acquirer

and included by the seller, Because the tax rate is the same for all participants, the result

is that the net flow of taxes associated with the instruments in the market would be

independent of intermediate transactions in those instruments.     The outcome would be the

same as under obligatory holding to maturity.

        Unlike the case of imputation of interest under certainty, which resulted in the

market prices of all instruments being independent of the tax rate, under this generalization

of the approach to the case of risk, “the” tax rate would manifest itself in the market prices

of assets for which gain or loss has been determined.

                Impute Interest on Realization

        Imputing interest on realization should also work as well in the risky as in the risk-

fiee setting. This is the essence of the Auerbach analysis. 16 Recall that basis is dispensed

with in this approach.   Instead, the actual payoff is treated as having been accumulated at

the risk free rate from the acquisition date to the realization point. Typically, the result

would be a lower tax than under a mark-to-market      regime on the holder of the winning

risky instrument (who is not taxed on the gain, but simply on the implied past interest),

offset by higher taxes on the loser. This becomes clear when it is noted that, for an

instrument with any positive value, no matter how far below basis, the loser would owe

tax on realization.




16For details of the argument, see Auerbach (1991)
                                               53


        me Multiple Ta Rate World

       In the multiple tax rate world without risk, we saw that a stronger condition than

symmetry, namely consistency, was generally required to preclude tax arbitrage profit.

The general conclusion is that those techniques for dealing with the realization problem for

capital gains that give rise to the independence of the market value of an instrument of the

single rate of tax in the one-rate world continue to work out in the multiple tax rate world,

even with risk.

        Of the techniques considered thus far, only the mark to market and the Auerbach

method of retrospective allocation of gain pass the test. Ignoring intermediate

transactions and imputing interest currently work only with a uniform tax rate, because

under these methods the tax rate affects equilibrium asset prices. The essential reason the

mark to market and Auerbach methods work is that they eliminate any timing advantage in

the risk-free case and they imply that the same effective rate of tax will apply to gains and

losses due to the resolution of contingency.


V. A General Procedure for Taxing Financial Instruments

        The conclusion of the discussion above is that, with zero transactions cost and

multiple marginal rates of tax (and positive interest rates), the only approaches thus far

suggested that would permit a linear tax are the mark-to-market      and Auerbach look-back

methods.   Of these, only the Auerbach look-back method is based on realization.        If it is

true, as is generally accepted, that the mark-to-market    approach is practically infeasible,

the implication would be that the Auerbach look-back system is the only practically

feasible approach thus far discovered that will “work.” The question is, is it the only such

approach, period; is it necessary as well as sufficient?
                                                54


        The answer is no. As argued above, risk presents “no problem” provided the tax

rate that applies is specified in advance of its resolution.   The difficulty with cherry picking

is that it allows the parties to a financial instrument, in effect, to decide after the fact what

tax will apply. They choose a high tax rate to apply to losers (deduction) and a low tax

rate to apply to winners (deferral).

        A system that will work must (a) result in consistent taxation of pure timing and

(b) establish in advance the tax rate that will apply to any taxpayer’s gain or loss due to

the resolution of contingency,    If the parties are to have a choice of when to realize, the

trick is to find a way to make the parties commit to an effective tax rate in advance.

The Case of a Risk-Free Term Structure

        To develop rules sufficient to address both problems it will be convenient to start

with the assumption that the fiture short-term interest rates are known with certainty in

advance.   Other returns may be risky, but the short-tern      interest rate at each date is

predictable with certainty,   In that case, the term structure of interest rates (the implicit

rates of return on zero-coupon bonds with different maturities) would filly inform about

the path of fiture short-term rates.


        The ProDosed ADDroach When There Is No Cash Flow before Realization

        The first step under the proposed approach is to speci~ at the time a taxpayer

takes a position in afinancial    instrument (so at the of writing the contract or on acquiring

the instrument by purchase), a gain reference date (GRD) and a gain tax rate (GTR).

(Although I call these “gain” rate and date, it is intended that they apply to losses as well;

“gain” might be negative.)    The specification of gain tax rate and gain reference date is

arbitrary, and they need not be the same for the pafiy and countef’p~y        to an instrument.
                                               55


GRD and GTR could be specified by the tax authorities.       They could even be freely

chosen by the taxpayer.    In practice one might want to render these foreign ideas more

digestible by restricting the specification in some way. For example, the gain tax rate

might be the investor’s marginal rate in the preceding year; the gain reference date might

be specified as the date of acquisition of the instrument.   The key requirement is that the

date and rate be out of the taxpayer’s control before new information about the instrument

comes in. The gain reference date and the gain tax rate are used only for determining that

party’s tax consequences of gains and losses on the instrument.

        Up to the GRD, a taxpayer who acquires an instrument will be taxed on interest

imputed to basis (with a basis adjustment for the imputed amount), exactly as discussed

above in the case of the world without risk. A taxpayer with a net liability (the

“borrower”) will obtain a deduction for imputed interest and corresponding basis

adjustment.    The new element is that there is, at the GRD, a special one-time adjustment

to the basis for imputing interest,   At that point the basis jumps to the value that would

have to have prevailed to grow at the unit bond rates to the actual realization price at the

realization date. Since this amount is not known until realization, this part of the interest

imputation has to be worked out afier the fact, (In the event of realization before the

GRD another procedure has to be used to make sure the interest imputation results are the

same as they would be if the asset had been held to the GRD.)

        The gain tax applies as of the GRD to the jump in basis as of the GRD just

described.    The sale of the instrument, regardless of when, will give rise to a tax on the

seller of any gains (with a tax rebate in the event of loss) at the GT~ as though all the

gains relative to basis, adjusted for interest imputed without taking into account the
                                                56


special, one-time adjustment, had occurred at the GRD and had been realized then. Under

this approach, the extent of gain is determined by the taxpayer decision to realize, the

revealed amount of gain or loss being projected forward or backward to the GRD at the

going interest rates.

        The idea of this system is, I think, fairly simple, even if the details seem somewhat

complex, treated as a cookbook recipe. Apparent complexity arises from the steps needed

to arrange the gain tax so that it were as if all the gain occurred at the GRD and to

implement the imputation of interest to basis. Here are rules that will do this:

●   In all cases, interest is imputed to basis and subjected to tax until the point of

    realization.   Basis is adjusted upward by the imputed interest,   (For a liability, the

    imputation results in a deduction.)

.   If the realization is at the GRD, the excess of the realized proceeds over adjusted

    basis is subject to tax at the GTR. In the event of a loss, there is a credit of the GTR

    times the loss.

.   If the realization is after the GRD, there is a look-back calculation.    The excess of

    realized proceeds over adjusted basis is projected back to the GRD at the before-tax

    rate of interest,   The gains tax that would have been due at that point is calculated by

    applying the GTR to the back-cast amount. The implied tax liability as of the GRD is

    brought forward with (deductible) interest and paid at the realization point. In the

    event of a loss, there is a credit instead of a positive tax.

    Also, the basis to which the interest imputation applies is adjusted retroactively

    upward by the amount of the gain as of the GRD. (It is as though the basis had been

    marked to market at that point, except that the value used is the back-cast amount,
                                                57


    rather than the actual market value, which is not observed.)       So there is imputed to the

    years between the GRD and the realization year interest on the gain, with yearly

    compounding,     Implied changes in tax for past years are brought forward with

    (deductible) interest and paid at the realization point. (In the event of a loss, the extra

    interest income is negative; that is, there is imputed to the years between the GRD and

    the realization year a deduction of interest on the loss, with yearly compounding.)

.   If realization is before the GRD, the gain or loss relative to adjusted basis is projected

    to the GRD at the going rates of interest. At the GRD, the gain thus projected is

    taxed at the GTR (for a loss there is a credit). 17 Between the realization date and the

    GRD, the seller is supposed to continue to get the benefit of deferral (a negative

    benefit in the case of a loss). So between the realization date and the GRD the

    taxpayer is allowed a deduction of interest imputed to the amount of the gain

    (adjusted each year by the amount of interest deduction),       (The idea is to offset, until

    the GRD, the part of the imputation of interest to basis in a new position taken with

    the sales proceeds that is the result of the realization.)   In the case of a loss, there is an

    annual imputed interest inclusion.

        The choice of GRD and GTR together determine the effective rate of tax on gains

and losses, For any given date of realization, the variation in the GRD alters the taxation
                                                        58


of gains and losses because the rules adjust the basis to which interest is imputed as of the

GRD, Using continuous discounting, and assuming constant marginal tax rate on interest

and a constant interest rate on the continuous equivalent of the unit bonds, the tax payable

at realization date,s, on an extra dollar’s worth of sales proceeds is

1– (1 – GTR)e-m’(S-GRD).Given the realization date,s, an increase in the GRD makes this

effective tax rate on gains smaller. 18 (For further details on the continuous discounting

version of the rules, see the Appendix,)




17 A peculiarity of this procedure is that the tax consequences of realization are not fillY
known until the GRD. This is a consequence of not knowing the taxpayer’s marginal rates
(and perhaps the current interest rates) for the intervening period. If the marginal tax rates
and current interest rates period by period are known in advance, the tax on the gain could
be brought to the realization date, with appropriate discounting. In that case, the basis for
the imputed interest deduction would be reduced by the amount of the gain tax paid at
realization. (The idea of the interest credit is to give the holder the same amount of “tax
fi-ee” accumulation as would obtain if the asset had been held to the G~.)
18 In the case of realization at times, an extra dollar realized implies an extra gain tax
liability (reckoned as of the GRD) of GTRe-r(s-Gm),       where continuous compounding at
a constant interest rate, r, has been used to simpli@ the calculations. This amount of tax
regarded as payable at the GRD translates into an extra tax at the realization date of
 GTRe-r(’-G~)      e(l-rn)r(S-G~) = GTRe-mr(S-G~)      , where a constant marginal tax rate,

m, is assumed. There is an additional effect due to the revision in the basis for imputation,
starting at the GRD. (The description applies to a realization after the GRD, but the
mathematical expressions apply as well for a realization before the GRD.) The extra basis
is e-r(s-Gm),     implying a flow of extra interest imputed of
~e–r(s–GRD)er(t   -GRD)   = ~e
                                 ‘(t–s)   starting at t = GRD and running up to the realization
date,s. This, in turn, implies an extra flow of tax liability, mrer(t-s), which must be
brought forward and paid ats. An extra dollar realized ats thus implies an extra amount
of tax to be paid ats, due to extra interest imputation, of
                          s
                                 ~rer(t–s)e(~–m)r
                          J
                          GRD
                                                      (’–t)dt   =
                                                                    Js
                                                                    GRD
                                                                          ~rem’(t–s)dt




                                     = emr(t–s)   s             –mr(s–GRD)
                                                  ~D=l-e
                                                59


       An Illustration of the Proposed A~~roach

       To take an illustration, suppose your tax rate is 30% the going interest rate is 10%

and you have invested $1000 in a share of stock this morning. You have established a

GRD of one year from now, and a GTR of 50V0, By this afternoon, your stock has

jumped to $1200, You know that fi-om here on, the stock will yield with certainty the

going rate of return on risk-free bonds, with no cash dividends. 19 Consider the choice of

when to sell.

.   If you wait one year, your asset will be worth $1320. Your basis will be adjusted up

    to $1100, at a cost to you of $30 in tax on the imputed interest. The gain calculated at

    that time will be $220, on which you will owe $110, You will be lefi with $1320-$30-

    $110=$1180.

.   If you wait an extra year to time 2, you will pay tax at the one-year point of $30 on

    imputed interest,   In order to get everything to one point in time, assume you borrow

    the $30. Your position at the end of the second year will then be an asset worth

    $1452 and a liability of $33 (bringing with it a $3 interest deduction).        The basis of the

    asset will be $1210 ($1000 + $100 + $11 O) and you will owe tax of 30°/0 of the second

    year’s imputed interest of $110.




Putting the two pieces together, the extra tax due at the realization date due to an extra
                               –mr(s–GRD)   + 1 _ e– mrf~-G~)   = 1 _ (1 _ GTR)e-mr(s–G~),
dollar realized then is GTRe

19 These assumptions are made to allow us to focus on the essential issue of cherry
picking. Alternatively, we could specifi a hedging transaction that would eliminate any
risk of gain or loss on the position, as in the put-call parity theorem, but it would greatly
complicate the description.
                                              60


    Your gain of $1452 less $1210, or $242, will be projected back at the unit bond rate

    of 10OAone year to the GRD. So you will be treated as having a gain of $220 at the

    GRD, As a consequence of your back-projected gain of $220 at the GRD, you will

    have a $110 gain tax liability as of that point. The $110 gain tax will be treated as a

    loan from the government.    You will pay it at the 2-year point, plus deductible interest.

    Your gain tax payment at the 2-year point will thusbe$121,      of which $11 is

    deductible interest.

    The extra $220 you are treated as having realized at the GRD will also imply a higher

    basis, by $220, for interest imputation from that time forward (one year in this case).

    So at the 2-year point you will have total imputed interest received of 10% of $1100

    plus $220, or $132, total interest to pay of $3 (on the money we assume you will

    borrow to pay the tax at time 1) plus $11 (on the money you are treated as having

    borrowed to pay the tax on gain at the GRD); since the interest paid is deductible, you

    will have a net income tax liability of 30V0of $132-$14    = $118, or $35.40.

    Your position at the 2-year point will then be $1452 (from selling theasset)-$121      (tax

    on gain plus interest for the deferral of one year since the GRD)-$33 (repay, with

    interest, the money borrowed to pay the income tax at time 1) -$35.40 (income tax at

    time 2) = $1262.60,    This is the same position you would be in as under the other

    scenarios:   $1180 x 1.07V0 = $1262,60.

.   If you realize now, you will realize $1200, for a gain of $200 over your acquisition

    cost, which is also your basis. For tax purposes, you will be treated as though the gain

    (intlated by the interest rate) actually occurred as a jump a year from now. In the

    meantime, you will qualifi for an interest deduction on $200, and you will earn interest
                                             61


   on the $1200 realized proceeds.    So at year end you will have $1320, including $120

   in interest earned on your $1200, There will be an imputed interest deduction of $20,

   so for tax purposes you will have net interest income of $100, on which you will owe

   $30 in income tax. In addition, your gain will be calculated as $200 times 110%,

   resulting in $110 in gains tax. The net proceeds will be the same as if you waited to

   the GRD to realize: $1320-$30-$110=$1          180.

       1~ in this illustrative case, you had chosen the same GTR but a GRD of two years

from now, the results would be different. As in the example, you would be indifferent

whether to realize immediately or at some time before or afier the GRD. But the amount

at the two-year point that would be common to your projections of the consequences of

realizing at different dates would be $1452 (from selling the asset)-$121 (tax on the gain

of $242) -$33 (repay, with interest, the money borrowed to pay the income tax at time 1) -

$32.10 (income tax at time 2on$110     in interest imputed to the adjusted basis at time 1 of

$1100 less $3 in interest paid on borrowing) = 1265.90 instead of $1262.60.     The reason

for the difference is that you save on extra basis of $110 that would have come into the

interest imputation calculation at the one-year point if that had been your chosen GRD.

       The choice of GRD and GTR thus does “matter” ex post. In the event of a gain,

the outcome with a two-year GRD would be better than with a one-year GRD.          Similarly,

in the event of a gain, a lower GTR would be better than a higher GTR. But these plusses

are exactly balanced by the minuses in the event of a loss, Then a later GRD is worse and

a lower GTR is worse.

        To spell out how a loss would be handled, take the original fact situation (income

tax rate of 30Y0, interest rate of 10VO,$1000 invested in a share of stock this morning,
                                              62


GRD one year from now, and a GTR of 50Yo), except the share falls to $800 in the course

of the day. And suppose you sell immediately. Under the rules, interest is still imputed

for one year on $1000, but you get a deduction for interest imputed on $800, for net

imputed interest of $20. The $800 has, in the meantime earned $80 in interest, so YOU

owe tax of $30 on the sum of imputed and actual interest income. Basis and sales

proceeds are projected to $1100 and $880, respectively, so your loss is treated as $220 at

time 1, saving you $110 in tax. Your net position is then $880 (proceeds of sale of stock

plus interest) -$30 (tax on interest)+   $110 (tax saving due to capital loss, assumed

refinable   or otherwise usable to offset other taxes) = $960.

        If you wait a year to realize, you can anticipate the asset being worth $880. You

will owe $30 in interest imputed to your basis of $1000, which is adjusted to $1100.     You

will have a loss of $220, quali~ing you for $110 in tax savings. Your net position will be

$880 (proceeds of sale of stock) -$30 (tax on imputed interest)+     $110 (tax saving due to

capital loss, assumed refinable   or otherwise usable to offset other taxes) = $960.

        If you had instead chosen the date of acquisition of the asset as the GRD, you

would have a tax saving at that point of $100 in the case of immediate realization of the

loss. You would then have $900. A year from now you would have $990 less tax of $27

on $90, or $963 (i.e., more than with the later GRD), In the case of waiting a year, you

could anticipate the asset being worth $880. The loss would be back-cast to $200 at the

acquisition date; the tax saving of $100 would be brought forward with (taxable) interest

to year 1. You would also be imputed an interest deduction on $200. Your net position

would be $880 (sales proceeds) + $110 (capital gains tax saving due to loss, plus interest)

-$30 (tax on imputed interest on original basis) -$3 (tax on interest paid on capital gains
                                                 63


tax saving) + $6 (tax saving due to back-cast adjustment in basis for imputation)=           $963.

Similarly, choosing a higher GTR would turn out, afier the fact of a loss, to work to your

advantage.

        Comments on the Proposed Au~roach

        Both new elements of the proposed approach, the GTR and the GRD, serve the

same finction:      to specifi in advance of the resolution of uncertainty the rate of tax that

will apply to the “bet” aspect of an instrument with contingent returns.         (The treatment of

the intertemporal     aspect is dealt with by the imputation of interest to basis and interest

charges for any postponement       of tax payments.)    The GTR obviously serves this finction.

But the GRD also plays a role in determining the effective taxation of gains and losses.

The farther in the fiture is the GRD, the greater is the extent of deferral advantage

conferred on winnings (and disadvantage on losses).

        Given the option to set the GT~ the option to set the GRD is essentially cosmetic.

Considerations      of simplicity and the risk of non-arms length circumstances might argue for

setting the GRD at O (relative to acquisition).       This implicitly treats all gain as occurring at

the moment afier acquisition of the asset. A GRD of O eliminates any problem of

projecting gain or loss from a pre-GRD realization point.

        The policy interest in the GTR and GRD is an open question that invites firther

exploration.     There is no obvious case for allowing the taxpayer free choice. I have

suggested free choice as an option simply to emphasize the arbitrary role played by these

parameters.      If there is the possibility of non-arms length terms of financial instruments, it

might be desirable to impose a requirement of the same GTR and GRD on both sides of a
                                               64


bilateral transaction.   (A simple way to do this would be to speci~ a uniform GTR and

GRD at the acquisition date.)

        A similar obsemation applies to the possible extension of the proposed approach to

positions other than in bilateral financial instruments.   The owner of a small business or

piece of real estate, for example, is perhaps best understood as obtaining a form of “labor

income” in gains realized from the enterprise or other property.     In such cases, policy

might imply setting the GTR in some appropriate relationship (e.g., equality) with the rate

of tax on compensation.

        I have argued that the proposed approach is sufficient to satis~ the requirements

of a linear income-measurement     system. An open question is whether, among realization

methods, the proposed approach is necessary, i.e., encompasses all the possibilities.        Is

there another realization method that works and cannot be described in terms of the

proposed approach’s GRD and GTR? I believe the answer is no, but I have not proved it.

        An interesting instance of this question is the connection of the proposed approach

to the Auerbach method, which we know works. The Auerbach method treats the sales

proceeds on realization as all due to accumulation of gain at the going interest rate since

the acquisition date, Only that gain is subject to tax (with appropriate look-back interest

charges).   Although it may, at first sight, appear different (since there is no current

imputation of interest to basis), the Auerbach method is effectively a special case of the

proposed approach, where the GRD is O and the GTR is also O: gains and losses are taxed
                                              65


at a zero rate as though occurring a moment after acquisition; interest is imputed to the

implied basis and taxed in retrospect.20

        Treatment of Intermediate Cash Flows

        Any cash inflow from the “borrower” to the “lender” side of an instrument (an

interest payment received, for example) between the acquisition date and the time of

realization would result in a reduction to basis. The cash outflow (payment of interest, for

example) would reduce the liability basis of the “borrower”.

        Sale of a fractional interest in an instrument could be handled by apportioning the

basis between the interest sold and the interest retained. Treatment of the sale of any

more complex claim to the instrument (selling off the rights to the dividends, for example)

would require more thought.     Probably such a transaction would be best treated as the

issue of a new instrument.

        The Pro~osed AP~roach and Correctness

        Since it relies on imputation of interest, the proposed approach suffers from the

general shortcoming of interest as a measure of income: failure to adjust for inflation. If

inflation-adjustment   were implemented, or for the case of no ifiation,   the interest




ZOUnder the Auerbach approach, all the imputation of interest takes place retrospectively
at the time of realization, working back to a kind of reconstructed basis from the amount
realized. It does not matter whether the asset is sold at a gain or loss. In the proposed
approach, there is interest imputed from the moment of acquisition, but the basis for
imputing interest is retrospectively adjusted, from the GRD forward, at the time of
realization. So if the GRD is the acquisition date, the effective imputation of interest
occurs as under the Auerbach approach. Since under the Auerbach approach the amount
of gain or loss is irrelevant, the GTR is effectively zero. This is maybe seen in the
continuous-compounding        example of footnote 18: if GTR = GRD = O, the only extra tax
at the time of realization is the “correction” to the imputation of interest since acquisition.
This is, effectively, the Auerbach result.
                                                  66


 imputation would produce a correct measure of income for riskless instruments.              In fact,

 for such instruments, the path of taxable income would be the same as under a mark-to-

 market regime.

         For risky instruments, however, there would be no comection          between the path of

 taxable income and the path of market value of the instrument,       There would, for one

 thing, be a one-time extra liability (or rebate) at the moment of realization (as in the case

 of realization with conventional income-tax rules), Furthermore, there would be no

 necessary relationship between the discounted value of tax liability under the proposed

 system and the path of liability under a mark-to-market     regime, Nor could there be, since

there is no observation of an instrument’s market value except at the moments of its

acquisition and sale.

         There would, however, be equivalence of the proposed method’s results and those

obtaining under mark-to-market      accounting.   Offered a choice at the time of acquiring the

asset, the taxpayer should be indifferent between any particular specification of the

proposed method (GTR and GRD) and mark-to-market             accounting.   (Strictly speaking, to

establish indifference with fill generality requires a sufficiently fill set of contingent

instruments to permit the taxpayer to take any desired position in the risk aspects of an

instrument.)   The correctness thus resulting from the proposed method is akin to that that

would be produced by taxation of nominal interest income in a single-tax rate world.            The
                                                  67


outcome for the taxpayers would be the same as that with income correctly measured for

tax purposes, even though the actual flow of tax liabilities would be different.2]

Extending the Analvsis to Uncertain Future Short-Term Rates

        The Term Structure of Interest Rates with Uncertain Short-Term Rates

        As I have pointed out above, the imputation of the yield to maturity to holders of a

long-term instrument will not, in general, yield the right tax result, where “right” refers to

a result that precludes arbitrage profit opportunities.   The exception is the case of short-

term rates that are known to be constant.     When the term structure of interest rates results

simply from the variation over time in the short-term rate, but not from uncertainty about

that variation over time, the imputation of the current short-term interest to basis (rather

than yield to maturity) does produce the right result. The holder of a long-term zero-

coupon bond will be filly taxed by the imputation of interest to basis at the going rate.

The adjusted basis on a discount bond will always equal its current market value, so the

effect is the same as a mark-to-market    rule.

        When, however, the short-term rates are themselves uncertain (even if they are

expected to be constant), this will not, in general, be the case.zz Instead the machinery




21 As in that case, to complete the establishment of equivalence from the point of view of
everyone, including the government (representing the rest of the taxpayers), requires the
government to take a position appropriately offsetting that taken by the taxpayer. To
illustrate, in the example of the bets using red and green contracts, if one side of the bet
chooses red and the other green (and both have the same tax rate), the government would
need itself to write a taxable contract on the same event to avoid any net cash flow due to
the bet.
22 Profit from buying and selling as the price of longer-term instruments vary with changes
in short-term rates is the main focus of Stmad’s (1995) analysis.
                                                 68


described in the previous section comes into play and gives rise to taxation of gains and

losses on the instrument that are contingent on the movement of short-term rates,z3

            Although it is beyond the reach of this paper to address the issues in depth, I

describe in this section the way the proposed method of taxing financial instruments would

apply to a long-term discount bond when fiture short-term rates are not known.           In doing

so, I would reemphasize that the issue is not correctness of the measure in some absolute

sense. Rather, the objective is a linear income measurement system. The theme of the

design of rules is consistency of the taxation of all financial instruments with the taxation

of the duplicating sequence of unit bond transactions.

            U.S. income taxation already makes use of standardized interest rates (the

Applicable Federal Rates) for various purposes.       These rates are identified for various

terms of the instruments in question.      As has been shown, strictly speaking, these rates are

not quite what are called for. The rates observed for contracts of any length blend

different underlying short-term rates that correspond to the simple model’s unit bonds’

interest.    Furthermore,   the fiture values of those short-term rates are not known with

certainty and the longer-term rates reflect that uncertainty,    So they represent a blend of

pure intertemporal returns and risk premia. It is for this reason that I was a bit vague in

referring, in the introductory discussion of tax arbitrage, to the sequence of transactions in

short-term bonds required to duplicate a discount bond for tax arbitrage purposes.




23 Taking into account that the fiture unit bond rates are not known adds (to the unknown
fiture tax rates) another reason to wait until the GRD to complete the taxation of the sale
of an instrument before the GRD. It is likely, however, that the equivalent at the time of
realization could be derived from options prices, I have not tried to work out the details.
                                                    69


                                 Table 9, Term Structure Illustrated

I                                          Cash Flows to Lender                                            I
              Time Point:            c1                           1                         2

            Contingency:                             Heads            Tails        Heads           Tails

    Time O Unit Bond                 -1                  1+ rol       1+ rO1

    Time 1 Unit Bond                                      -1           -1          1+ rl~          l+q;

    Discount Bond           I       -Z02        I                 I            1111
    Risky Instrument H      I       –z:         I          1
                                                                  I            I             I
    Risky Instrument T
                            I       –z;         I                 I     1
                                                                               I             I

            The story is illustrated in Table 9. Here the uncertainty refers to the unknown

    interest rate on the time 1 unit bond. The events, “Heads” and “Tails,” referred to in the

    columns for times 1 and 2 are the same ones. That is, there is a single coin flip, at time 1,

    that determines the short-term interest rate that will prevail between time 1 and time 2.

    The two explicitly risky instruments shown in the table pay off at time 1 according to the

    same coin flip that determines the interest rate on the time 1 unit bond. (They can be

    thought of as options at time O on the time 1 unit bond interest rate.) Also shown is a

    discount bond that pays 1 at time point 2, regardless of the outcome of the coin flip. Its

    payoff is not risky, but its value at time 1 is, because that value depends on the coin flip

    that determines the short-term interest rate then, At time O, the newspapers would report

    rol as the interest on a bond with one-year maturity, and the yield to maturity of the

    discount bond, based on its price, zOZ,as the interest on a bond with two-year maturity.

    Notice that the actual unit bond interest at time 1, r12, is not known at time 0.

            It is not possible to duplicate the cash flows from the discount bond by a planned

    sequence of unit bond transactions.    If I buy zoztime 1 unit bonds and reinvest the payoff
                                                 70


 from them in time 2 bonds at time 1 the amount I will have at time 2 will not be a certain

 amount, but rather an amount that will depend on the outcome of the coin flip, To obtain

 a certain return at time 2, other than by buying the discount bond, I must purchase at time


 O 1/(1+ rl~ ) units of risky instrument H and 1/(1+ rl~) units of risky instrument T. By

 reinvesting the payoff at time 1 in the time 1 unit bond, a certain outcome of 1 at time 2 is

 assured.    Thus, if the coin comes up heads at time 1, the payoff from the position in the

 package of risky instruments is 1/(1 + rl~ ) (instrument H pays off 1 per unit, and

instrument T pays off O). Reinvesting the proceeds in the time 1 unit bond generates an

outcome (1/(1 + rl~ ))(1 + rl~) = 1 at time 2.

        For consistency (i.e., to eliminate the potential for arbitrage profit), the tax liability

of the person who takes the direct route to a certain $1 at time 2 by purchasing the

discount bond must be the same as that of one who buys the appropriate duplicating

package of risky instruments and unit bonds through time. The precise meaning of “the

same” merits closer examination, but the condition is clearly met if the cash tax liability is

the same at every point in time and under every contingency.

        The fixed point of this situation is the tax treatment of the unit bonds, period by

period. A sequence of cash flows identical to a time O unit bond can be obtained by

purchasing    1+ rO1units of each of the two risky instruments.    An arbitrage profit

opportunity will be available unless the package is taxed the same as the time O unit bond

(thus integrating the taxpayer’s positions in the two instruments).    Applying to the

contingent returns the system discussed in the previous section, using the time O unit bond

rate to adjust for timing, will produce the desired tax outcome,
                                                 71


        To illustrate the working of the system, start with the condition for financial

market equilibrium in the absence of taxes. Since the outcome is a certain payoff of $1 at

time 1, the position consisting of one unit of each of the risky instruments can be financed

by borrowing the purchase price of the position, z: + z;, in the form of the time O unit

                                                                              1
bond. The repayment due at time 1 will be 1 = (z: + z; )(1 + rO1), so                 =ZOH+Z; .
                                                                          (1+ r,, )

        Now suppose there is a tax and the person in our illustration elects a GRD of time

1 and a GTR of 50V0 to apply to the package of risky instruments acquired at time O. In

the case examined here, the uncertainty is resolved at time point 1, when the coin is

flipped. Until then, the instruments increase in value at the time O bond rate. If the prices

are those determined without consideration of taxes, at time 1 the investor will have no

profit apart from possible tax considerations.    There will be interest imputed to basis of

(z: + z: )rO, but this will be matched by the deduction of interest paid on the money

borrowed to buy the risky instruments.     For tax purposes, the gain at time 1, which is the

chosen GRD, will be the market value of the position, 1, less the adjusted basis,

(z: + z; )(1 + r,,).   This difference will be zero if the assumed prices prevail. So they will

be equilibrium prices, and there will be no tax due on the position.

        What about the tax results of buying the equivalent to the time 2 discount bond in

the form of the appropriate position in risky instruments, combined with investment of the

payoff at time 1? Suppose again that the tax scheme works and that the pricing in the

absence of taxes prevails in the presence of taxes. Then we know that ( 12 ) holds.


(12)                                  (1/(1+r,~))z~+(11    (1 +rl~)zf = z,,
                                                         72


        Consider the case that the coin comes up heads. Applying the same rules, there is

a taxable gain at time 1 on the position in instrument H equal to ( 13 )


(13)                                             (1/(1 + r~;))(l - 2((1 +~ol))

and a gain (negative) on the position in instrument T equal to ( 14 )


(14)                                             (1/(1 +r;))(o       - 2;(1 +~~~))

for a net taxable gain overall of ( 15).


(15)                         (1/(1 +r;))(l       - 2:(1 +ro,)) + (1 / (1 + r,;))(-z;(l      +~o, ))

        In general, the net of the two gains will not be zero and a tax payment or refind, at

the GT~ will be due.

        Applying the same method to the time 2 discount bond would have the same tax

consequences,   given the same choice of GRD and GT~ if the bond were sold at time 1,

with the proceeds reinvested in the time 1 unit bond. It may be less obvious that the result

will be the same i~ instead, the bond is held until maturity. Under the rules, and still

assuming the coin comes up heads, the interest rate used for imputing income to the


bondholder will be   rol   in the first period and rl~ in the second. At time 2 the bondholder


will be treated as having gain 1– 202(1+ rol)(l + q;).                The gain will be “discounted” to


                            (l-zoz(l+ro~)(l            +q;))
time point 1, treated as                                       at that point, We can substitute the
                                          1+ rl~

cmdidate equilibrium relationship ( 12) into the expression for gain, yielding ( 16),


(16)                              —     — +)2;
                                      H
                                                                 +   (+)2:))(1       + r,] ) “
                                  1+; 12 ‘(               12              12




                                    +(1            -   z:)(1 + rO,) - (*)z;(l         +~ol )
                                            12                              12
                                                 73


which will be seen to be identical to ( 15 ), the gain on the position in the risky instruments

used in the duplicating sequence of transactions.      The results are thus the same, afier all

taxes, of holding the time 2 discount bond and the equivalent sequence of a package of

risky instruments at time O followed by reinvestment of the proceeds at time 1 to obtain a

certain $1 at time 2.


VI. Conclusion

        The approach to realization in the existing income taxation of financial instruments

renders inevitable the complexities I describe as nonlinearity.    In a general sense, this is

well known.       I have suggested that the fundamental difficulty is dealing with the

intertemporal     aspects of income accounting (the reward to waiting) rather than the

challenges of uncertainty (the reward to risk-bearing).     The present analysis implies that

the intertemporal     problems maybe more serious than may have been thought (as reflected

in shortcomings of the rules for instruments with fixed and determinate returns), whereas

the treatment of risk (the rules for contingent returns) is in a sense simple.

        It is, however, the element of uncertainty that gives rise to realization accounting,

We cannot record what we do not yet know. In this paper I conclude that the only

approaches that would make realization accounting “work” involve virtually universal

application of “the retrospective allocation of gain” and, especially, “the imputation of

interest at a standard rate” alluded to by Warren.

        In the world of zero transactions cost examined in this paper, there is no substitute

for nonlinearity of the income measurement system (such as the limit on the deduction of

capital losses) barring near-universal application of “interest at a standard rate” to basis,

retrospectively    if need be. The only instruments for which what is labeled “interest” in the
                                                74


contract is the amount subject to tax are the unit bonds. These are the default-risk free

instruments against which tax arbitrage is constructed,    (I do not think these “standard”

instruments need to be free of risk, default or otherwise, but it would greatly complicate

the story to spell out why.) For all the other instruments, including most of those

presently regarded as unproblematic (fixed-return assets), either mark-to-market      taxation

or imputation of interest to basis is required. Furthermore, since essentially all other

instruments are risky, relative to the unit bonds, for all other instruments, either mark-to-

market taxation or the realization rules described in this paper must be applied,

          One implication is that, if it is desired to have a linear income measurement system,

considerations   of transactions cost must enter the design of rules. Another, more radical,

thought is suggested.    Assuming the taxation of interest income is regarded as worth the

candle, perhaps consideration should be given to truly universal application of a

standardized rate of return to basis (with the sort of realization rules described in this

paper).   There would be no taxation of interest as observed in the market (no unit bonds).

That would make it a simple matter to adjust basis for inflation, and probably come very

much closer to a true income tax than is presently achieved by our hybrid rules.
                                                   75



Appendix:       AContinuous-Discounting         Version of the Proposed Rules

         Some readers may find helpfil a demonstration using continuous discounting that

the proposed rules render the taxpayer indifferent to the timing of realization when it is

assumed that the asset in question will increase in value at the unit bond yield. Consider

the taxpayer’s decision to postpone realization from some time, S, to some fiture time,s’.

(To simplifi matters, assume that both times are after the GRD for the instrument in

question.     The mathematical expressions developed in this appendix apply as well for a

realization before the GRD,) As outlined in footnote 18, in the case of realization at a

times,      an extra dollar realized implies an extra gain tax liability at the realization date of

1– (1 – GTR)e-m’(S-GRD),where there is continuous compounding at a constant interest

rate, r, and where a constant marginal tax rate, m, is assumed.

         If an asset has value V(s) at times, the path of its value at fiture time, s‘, accruing


at the unit bond rate, is described by V(s)er(s’-S)      (assuming throughout no cash flow

from the asset), If the asset follows this path, the amount of capital gain as of the GRD

will be unchanged by postponing realization.         The extra tax due at a fiture realization date

will rise, since there will be more postponement of liability to make up, Suppose, for

example, that the current adjusted basis in the asset is B(s), so that the gain, reckoned at

the GRD, is

                                      X - (V(s)-   B(s))e-r(S-Gm)

         which is also the extra basis subject to interest imputation upon realization.       Then

the gain tax as of the GRD is GTR”X, This translates into extra tax due at the hypothetical
                                                   76


                                          ,where the liability cumulates at the afier-
later realization date of GTR.xe(l-m)r(’’-G~)

tax interest rate (since interest paid on postponed tax payments is deductible).


        The extra interest imputation follows the path rXer(*-Gm) starting at t = Gm              and

running up to the realization date,s’.       This, in turn, implies an extra flow of tax liability at


time t betweens   ands’ of mrXer(l-Gw),          which must be brought forward and paid ats’,

resulting in extra liability ats’ of

                                       s’


                                   JmrXe ‘(’-cm)e(’-’’’)’(’’-’)di
                                       GRD


                                        = xer(m~’(]-m)s’-c~~ S’
                                                             GRD

                                  = xer(~’-GD)    (~   _   e-mr(~’-c~))   .



        Putting the two pieces together, the total tax “pulse” ats’ is

                      xer(s’-GRD) ( ~_ e-rnr(S’-G~) + GTRe-rn’(S’-G~))


                             = Xe’(S’-Gm)(l- (1 - GTR)e-m’(S’-Gm)).

        The extra afier-tax cash flow at t due to waiting untils’ to realize is the tax on

interest imputed to basis,

                                             –mrB(s)e’(l-S)

for t running froms tos’.     The net gain from waiting froms tos’ is the discounted value

(tos, at the afier-tax rate) of this flow of tax payments and the pulse of realized proceeds

of sale ats’ less the pulse of extra tax payments due ats’,


                             js’(-mr~(s)er(t-s))e-(’-m)r(t-s)~,+
                                    _{~_ GTR)e-mr(s’-G~)
           (V(s)er(s’-s) _ x~r(s’-G~)(l            ))e-(~-m)r(s’-s)

less the foregone cash flow (net of taxes) that would have been obtained from realization

ats,
                                                      77


                        V(s) - Xer(s-Gm)((l          -(1 - GTR)e-mr(s-GM))

        If this total is positive, it pays to postpone realization,                           If it is negative, it pays to

realize immediately.    By laborious algebra, making use of the fact that, by definition of X,


V(s) – Xer(s-Gm)       = B(s) this expression for the net current cash flow equivalent ats of

waiting to realize froms tos’ reduces to

                          V(s)(l   –   emr(s’-s))_   xer(’-G~)(l           _    e-mr(~’-s))      +


                 v(s)emr(~’-~) _ xer(~’-GRD+(l-~)~)        (1 _   (1   _       GTR)e-mr(’’-Gm))           +


                           –V(s) + Xer(S-GD)(1 -(1 - GTR)e-m’(S-GD)

which equals, on collection of terms,

                                   V(s)(l – e“’’(’’-’)+ em’(s’-s)– 1) +
  + Xe ‘(S-GRD)
             ((1 - GTR)e-”r(’-GD) - (1 - GTR)e-m’(S-Gm)- (1 - e-~r(’’-s) + e-mr(’’-’)- 1))
                                                      =0
                                            78



Bibliography

Auerbach, Alan J., “Retrospective Capital Gains Taxation,” American Economic Review,
       [LXXXI-1] March 1991, pp. 167-178.

Bankman, Joseph, and William A. Klein, “Accurate Taxation of Long-Term Debt: Taking
      into Account the Term Structure of Interest” Tax Law Review, [XLIV] 1989, pp.
      335-348,

Battle, Frank V., Jr., “Bifurcation of Financial Instruments,” Taxes, December 1991, pp.
        821-833.

Bittker, Boris I., “Equity, Efficiency, and Income Tax Theory: Do Misallocation Drive
         Out Inequities?” in Henry J, Aaron and Michael J. Boskin, eds,, The Economics of
         Taxation, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1980, pp. 19-31.

Bradford, David F., “The Economics of Tax Policy toward Savings,” in George M. von
        Furstenberg, cd., The Government and Capital Formation, Cambridge, MA,:
        Ballinger, 1980, pp. 11-71.

Bradford, David F,, “Issues in the Design of Savings and Investment Incentives,” in
        Hulten, Charles R., cd,, De~reciation. Inflation and the Taxation of Income from
       ->       Washington> DC     The urban Institute> 1981) PP. 13-4’7”

Bradford, David F., UntanRlinR the Income Tax, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
        Press, April 1986.

Bradford, David F., and Kyle D, Logue, “The Effects of Tax-Law Changes on Prices in
        the Property-Casualty Insurance Industry,” Working Paper 5652, National Bureau
        of Economic Research, July, 1996.

Bradford, David F., and the U, S. Treasury Tax Policy Staff, Blueprints for Basic Tax
        Reform, 2nd cd., Arlington, VA: Tax Analysts, 1984.

Cox, John C., Jonathan E. Ingersoll, Jr., and Stephen A. Ross, “A Theory of the Term
       Structure of Interest Rates,” Econometrics, (LIII-2) March 1985, pp. 385-408

Cunningham, Noel B., and Deborah H, Schenk, “Taxation Without Realization: A
       “Revolutionary” Approach to Ownership” Tax Law Review, [XLVII] 1992, pp
       725-814,

Ferguson, Bradford L., “The Rationales for the Rules: How to Think About Derivatives
        in the Tax World, ” Taxes, December 1994, pp. 995-1026.

Hall, Robert E, and Alvin Rabushka, The Flat Tax, 2nd cd., Stanford, California:   Hoover
        Institution Press, 1995.
                                            79


Halperin, Daniel I., “Interest in Disguise: Taxing the Time Value of Money,” Yale Law
        Journal, [VC] 1986, pp. 506-552.

Hariton, David P., “The Taxation of Complex Financial Instruments,” Tax Law Review
        [XLIII] 1988, pp. 731-788.

Kaplow, Louis, “Taxation and Risk Taking: A General Equilibrium Perspective,” National
       Tax Journal, (XLVII-4) December 1994, pp. 789-798.

Kau, Randall KC., “Carving Up Assets and Liabilities -Integration or Bifurcation of
       Financial Products,” Taxes, December 1990, pp. 1003-1014.

Kayle, Bruce, “Where Has All the Income Gone? The Mysterious Relocation of Interest
       and Principal in Coupon-Stripping and Related Transactions, Vir~inia Tax Review,
       (VII) 1987, pp. 303 ff.

McCaffe~,   Edward J., “The Holy Grail of Tax Simplification,” WiSCOnSlnLaw Review.
        1990, pp. 1267-1322.

R, G. Ibbotsen Associates, Stocks. Bonds. Bills and Inflation:   1995 Yearbook, Chicago,
        IL, 1995.

Scarborough, Robert H., “Different Rules for Different Players and Products: The
       Patchwork Taxation of Derivatives,” Taxes, December 1994, pp. 1031-1049.

Scarborough, Robert H., “Payments in Advance of Performance,” Taxes, December 1991,
        pp. 798-820,

Scarborough, Robert H,, “Risk, Diversification and the Design of Loss Limitations Under
        a Realization-Based Income Tax, ” Tax Law Review, [XLVIII] 1993, pp. 679-717.

Shaviro, Daniel N,, “Selective Limitations on Tax Benefits,” The University of Chicago
        Law Review, [LVI] 1989, pp. 1189-1260.

Shuldiner, Reed, “A General Approach to the Taxation of Financial Instruments, ” Texas
        Law Review, [LXXI-11] December 1992, pp. 243-350.

Shuldiner, Reed H., “Consistency and the Taxation of Financial Products,” Taxes.
        December 1992, pp. 781-792.

Sims, Theodore S., “Long-Term Debt, the Term Structure of Interest and the Case for
       Accrual Taxation,” Tax Law Review, [XLVII] 1992, pp. 313-375.

Sims, Theodore S,, “Debt, Accelerated Depreciation, and the Tale of a Teakettle: Tax
       Shelter Abuse Reconsidered,” UCLA Law Review, [XLII-2] December 1994, pp.
       263-376.
                                           80


Steuerle, C. Eugene, Taxes. Loans. and Inflation: How the Nation’s Wealth Becomes
        Misallocated, Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, 1985.

Strnad, Jeff, “Taxing New Financial Products: A Conceptual Framework,”   Stanford Law
        Review, [XLVI] February 1994, pp. 569-605.

Strnad, Jeff, “The Taxation of Bonds: The Tax Trading Dimension,” Virginia Law
        Review, [LXXXI] 1995, pp. 47-115.

U. S, Treasury Dept,, Reuort on Integration of Individual and Comorate Tax Svstems:
        Taxing Business Income Once, Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing
        OffIce, January 1992.

Warren, Alvin C., Jr., “Accelerated Capital Recovery, Debt, and Tax Arbitrage,” m
       ~,    [XXXVIII] 1985,

Warren, Alvin C., Jr., “Commentary - Financial Contract Innovation and Income Tax
       Policy,” Harvard Law Review, [CVII] 1993, pp. 460-492.
