                              NBER WO~G            PAPER SERIES




                        WHAT DOES THE BUNDESBANK               TARGET?




                                        Ben S. Bemanke
                                          Ilian Mihov




                                      Working Paper 5764




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1996




The authors thank the discussants, Lawrence Christian and Jurgen von Hagen, as well as the editor
and anonymous referees, for useful comments. Don Redl’s excellent assistance and financial support
from the National Science Foundation are both gratefully acknowledged.       This paper is part of
NBER’s research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Growth, and Monetary Economics. Any
opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research,

01996 by Ben S. Bemanke and Ilian Mihov. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.
                                                                         NBER Working Paper 5764
                                                                                  September 1996



                             WHAT DOES THE BUNDESBANK             TARGET?



                                            ABSTRACT



        Although    its primary ultimate objective is price stability, the Bundesbank     has drawn a

distinction between its money-focus strategy and the inflation targeting approach recently adopted

by a number of central banks.     We show that, holding constant the current forecast of inflation,

German monetary policy responds very little to changes in forecasted money growth; we conclude

that the Bundesbank is much better described as an inflation targeter than as a money targeter. An

additional contribution of the paper is to apply the structural VAR methods of Bemanke and Mihov

(1995) to determine the optimal indicator of German monetary policy: We find that the Lombard rate

has historically been a good policy indicator, although the use of the call rate as an indicator cannot

be statistically rejected.




Ben S. Bemanke                                                         Ilian Mihov
Woodrow Wilson School                                                  INSEAD
Princeton University                                                   Boulevard de Constance
Princeton, NJ 08544                                                    77305 Fontainebleau
and NBER                                                               FRANCE
bemanke@wws.princeton. edu
1.   Introduction

       In the past few yea~s a significant ntier     of central banks--

including those of Canada, New Zealand, Britain, and Sweden--have

adopted some form of “inflation targeting” as a framework for monetary

policy.   In an inflation targeting regime, the central bank and/or the

government announce explicit goals for the inflation rate, usually at

several horizons.   Although attaitunent of the inflation target does not

necessarily exclude other objectives, such as short-run stabilization of

output or exchange rates, meeting the inflation target at medium and

long horizons is treated as the overriding goal of policy.1

      As a strategy for conducting monetary policy, inflation targeting

has some appealing features, including     (perhaps) greater ease in

explaining policy objectives to the public and the avoidance of the

“velocity instability” problem that can arise when policy relies heavily

on a single intermediate    target.   On the other hand, potentially    serious

problems with inflation targeting include the difficulty of making

accurate inflation forecasts and reduced accountability        arising from the

substantial lags between policy actions and inflation outcomes.

      Because inflation targeting bears great promise but also

significant risk for its adopters, it would be most useful to know how

this strategy has worked in practice.      Unfortunately,    the explicit

adoptions of inflation targets by industrial-country        central banks have

all occurred within the last five years or so, so that the relevant

experiences are short.     A possible exception to this statement--which

motivates this paper--is the case of Gerrnany.2 Since the end of 1974,

the Bundesbank has conducted monetary policy in a framework that is




lFor excellent discussions of comparative inflation targeting
experience, see Goodhart and Vinals (1994), Leiderman and Svensson
(1995), and Haldane (1995).
‘Switzerland also follows a German-style strategy, although it has
emphasized narrower money aggregates in its intermediate targeting.


                                                                                 1
officially designated as money targeting-- and in which money growth

rates certainly play an important role--but which also appears to have

significant elements of inflation targeting.     As von Hagen   (1995) and

others have emphasized, and as we discuss furthe~ in Section 3, from the

inception of the current regime the Bundesbank has used a projection of

inflation for the next year as the main input to its derivation of its

money growth target.     Except for a small blip in 1980, this inflation

projection has been low and steadily declining; since 1986 it has been

constant at 2% per year, the level the Bundesbank deems consistent with

“price stability”.     Thus it might be argued that inflation goals, rather

than money growth targets, are the driving force behind German monetary

policy.   This conclusion would not be grossly inconsistent with the

German public’s perception of the Bundesbank’s behavior, nor with the

Bundesbank’s   1957 charter, which designates the safe-guarding of the

currency as the bank’s prime responsibility.     On the other hand, as we

also docwent   in Section 3, the Bundesbank itself draws a strong

distinction between inflation taxgeting, as adopted by the U.K. and

others, and its own money-focused    approach; and it argues that the

latter, if feasible, is the superior strategy.

      Is the Bundesbank, then, “really” an inflation-targeter     or not?

That is the question we try to answer in this paper.     To make the

question more precise, we consider the following thought-experiment:

Suppose that the Bundesbank were to observe money growth coming in

higher than expected, but (because of offsetting factors) its forecast

of inflation did not change,    Then would the Bundesbank tighten policy?

If not, we would say that for most intents and purposes the Bundesbank

is an inflation targeter.     If it did tighten, then we would classify it

as a money targeter    (albeit one with important inflation objectives) .

      Resolving this question would help us to decide whether to treat

the Bundesbank’s success in controlling inflation as an argument for or



                                                                             2
against the inflation-targeting    approach, and perhaps allow us to draw

useful lessons from the Bundesbank’s experience.       A more concrete

consideration is the following:     Cuxrently, the designers of the

etiryonic European Central Bank are debating the type of monetary policy

strategy the ECB should use, the two leading candidates being inflation-

targeting and money-targeting.     There appears to be some political

pressure from Germany for    the ECB to adopt money-targeting,   presumably

in order to reassure the German public that the ECB’S policies will be

very similar to those of the Bundesbank.      We are concerned that money-

targeting might be a poor choice for the ECB, on the grounds that

velocity is likely to be very unstable in the early stages of monetary

union.     If it could be demonstrated   that the Bundesbank has really been

inflation-targeting    (with money targets happening to be a convenient

instrument, given the particular characteristics      of the German financial

system), this contentious issue might be resolved.

         In order to answer the question of how the Bundesbank has

responded to changes in money growth, we obviously need some indicator

of German monetary policy other than money growth itself; we also need

empirical estimates of how changes in this indicator will affect the

evolution of prices and other key variables.      These issues are addressed

in Section 2.     Like a number of recent authors, we study German monetary

policy and its impacts in the context of a vector autoregression         (VAR)-

based approach.     Unlike most recent work, however, we do not simply

assme     that some particular variable is the appropriate measure of

policy; instead, we follow the methodology advocated by Bernanke and

Mihov    (1995) and derive the policy indicator from structural VAR

estimates of the Bundesbank’s operating procedures.      We find that, as an

indicator of German monetary policy during the 1975-1990 period, the

Lofiard rate “$s at least marginally to be preferred to the call rate,




                                                                               3
which is the indicator of policy that has been used in most previous

studies.     This finding may be of independent interest.

       Section 3 uses the V~       framework to address the question posed by

our paper’s title.     Specifically, we ask whether the expected evolution

of the money stock affects the Bundesbank’s setting of the Lombard rate,

given the forecast of inflation       (as well as other potential objective

variables) . Our results generally support the inflation-targeting        view

of the Bundesbank.     In particular, although money growth forecasts

retain predictive power for the Lombard rate (in the sense of Granger-

causality) even when several objectives of policy are allowed for, at

medium-term   and longer horizons forecasted inflation explains a much

greater share of the variance of German monetary policy than does

forecasted money growth      (or, for that matter, than forecasted changes in

output or the value of the Deutschemark) .



2.   I&ntifying    monetaq   policy in Ga~y

       In order to answer the question of how the Bundesbank responds to

changes in forecasts of inflation, money growth, or other variables, our

first task is to identify an appropriate indicatoI of Bundesbank policy.

To do this, in this section we employ the VAR-based approach suggested

by Bernanke and Mihov    (1995).    This approach is similar to the

methodology   employed by Bernanke and Blinder     (1992), Christian   and

Eichenbaum    (1992), Sims (1992), Christian,     Eichenbaum, and Evans

(1994), Strongin    (1995), and many other recent papers, in that the

effectg of monetary policy in the economy axe identified with the

dynamic responses of    variables in a VA.R to innovations to an indicator

of monetary policy.     The Bernanke-Mihov    approach differs from others,

however, in,that it uses estimates of the central bank’s operating

procedure to identify the policy indicator, rather than picking the




                                                                                 4
indicator on purely a priori grounds.              Section 2.1 describes this

methodology;       those familiar with it may skip this subsection without

loss of continuity.           Section 2.2 discusses the evolution of Bundesbank

operating procedures and proposes a structural V~               model of those

procedures.        Section 2.3 presents results, focusing on the comparison

between the call rate and the Lombard rate as candidate indicators of

German monetary policy.

        2.1 Methodology.            To derive the Bernanke-Mihov   approach formally,

we follow them in supposing that the economy is described by the linear

structural model given in equations             (2.1)-(2.2) :


(2.1)    Y, =~BiY,.,        +~C,P,_i+Ayv;
               i=o            i=O

               k
(2.2)    P, =~DiY,_i        +~GiP,_i+Apv;
              ;=0             i=o

where boldface variables denote vectors or matrices.               The distinction

between variables that are elements of Y              and those that are element of

P will be explained momentarily.

        Equations      (2.1)-(2.2) may be viewed as a standard Cowles-type

system of simultaneous equations, in which each variable               (i.e., any

component of Y        or P)     is allowed to depend on current or lagged values

of any variable in the system.’             In eqs. (2.1)-(2.2) the v’s    are

mutually uncorrelated “structural” or “primitive” disturbances;               as in

Bernanke   (1986), these structural disturbances are premultiplied               by

general matrices       A,     which permit any disturbance in the Y       block to

enter into any equation in that block, and similarly for the P block.




3 Expectational variables could be accommodated in this framework by
replacing expected future values with linear projections on current and
past values of any variable in the system. Consistent with the real
business cycle framework, one could also interpret some of the equations
in the system as decision rules relating current choice variables to
variables describing the current state of the economy.


                                                                                        5
Thus no restriction is placed on the covariance matrices of composite

error terms within a block.             The only Restriction imposed by this way of

writing the error terms is that the error terms in the two blocks are

uncorrelated.        Since we will always allow contemporaneous      elements of

Y   to enter the P       block in an unrestricted manner, this assumption is

not particularly       stringent.

        Equations      (2.1) and (2.2) partition the variables under

consideration        into two groups, Y and P, which we refer to as “non-

policy” and “policy” variables, respectively.            The set of policy

variables includes variables that are potentially useful as direct

indicators of the stance of monetary policy, e.g., short-term interest

rates and reserves measures.             Non-policy variables include other

economic variables, such as output and inflation, whose responses to

monetary policy shocks we would like to identify.

        With respect to the identification of monetary policy shocks and

their effects on the economy, there are two cases of interest.                The

first possibility is that there exists a single variable which is known

a priori to contain the relevant information about the stance of

monetary policy; i.e., P is a scalar, say P,             rather than a vector.      In

the scalar case eq. (2.2) can be rewritten as:

               k            k
‘2”3)    Pl=~Diyf-i       +~giPl-i+v;
               i=O          i=]


Most of the recent VAR literature has employed a scalar monetary policy

indicator   (e.g., the federal funds rate in the United States) .             In

European applications,          all studies of which we are aware have used a

short-term market interest rate, such as the call rate or a goverment

bill rate, as the policy indicator            (see, e.g., Sims, 1992; Gerlach and

Smets, 1995; Clarida and Gertler, 1995; Tsatsaronis,            1995; Barran et

al., 1996) .       In the case of a scalar policy indicator, as is by now well



                                                                                     6
known, identification of the effects of policy shocks on the non-policy

variables can be achieved by means of a simple “timing” assumption.         For

example, as is most common in the literature, suppose we are willing to

assume that policy innovations do not affect non-policy variables within

the same period     (i.e., the elements of the vector Co in eq. (2.1) are

all zero) .   Under this assumption the system   (2.1)-(2.2) can be written

in VAR format by projecting the vector of dependent variables on k lags

of itself.    Estimation of the resulting system by standard VAR methods,

followed by a Choleski decomposition of the covariance matrix     (with the

policy variable ordered last) yields an estimated series for the

exogenous policy shock Vp.     Impulse response functions for all variables

with respect to the policy shock can then be calculated, and can be

interpreted as the true structural responses to policy innovations.

      It is worth emphasizing the substantial advantage of this

approach, relative to traditional Cowles methods and more completely-

identified VAR analyses, that responses to policy can be measured

without identifying assumptions other than the timing assumption.

However, this methodology does require that one accept the idea that

there are exogenous shocks to monetary policy, uncorrelated with the

current state of the economy.     The appendix to this paper illustrates

how such shocks could arise from plausible sources, such as imperfect

current information on the part of the central bank or    shifts in central

bank preferences.

      The second case of interest occurs when there is no unique, scalar

indicator of policy, i.e. , P has two or more elements.     This case in

turn is relevant in at least two distinct situations.     First, central

banks sometimes use hybrid operating procedures--a    combination of

interest-rate targeting and reserves-targeting,    for example.   In that

scenario, both interest rates and reserves will contain information




                                                                              7
about monetary policy      (but will also be affected by shocks to the demand

for reserves and other factors).       Second, although it may be that a

scalar measure is ultimately appropriate, the econometrician may be

uncertain about which variable or set of variables is the best measure

of monetary policy, and would like to compare alternative possibilities

statistically.     As we demonstrate in the application below, this

situation is also acconunodated by a non-scalar P, taken in this case to

be a list of the candidate indicators.

        Identification of policy shocks in the case in which P has

multiple elements is analogous to the scalar case.         Suppose that one

element of the set of shocks Vp affecting P         in eq. (2.2) is a shock to

monetary policy, denoted V’.       To identify V’, and the responses of other

variables in the system to that shock, we make a timing assumption like

the one used in the scalar case; i.e., we assume that innovations to

variables in the policy block do not affect variables in the non-policy

block within the period, or CO=O.         Now suppose that we write the

system (2.1)-(2.2) in standard VAR form (with only lagged variables on

the right-hand side, and with the Y block prior to’the P          block) ,

Define U;   to be the V~      residuals corresponding to the Y   block and U:

to be the residuals corresponding to the P block, orthogonalized         with

respect to U:.     Then Bernanke and Mihov    (1995) show that



(2.4)   u:= (l-   GO)-’APV:

where the right-side parameters and disturbances are as defined in the

structural equation    (2.2).    Alternatively,   dropping subscripts and

superscripts, we can rewrite eq. (2.4) as:


(2.5)   u=Gu+Av




                                                                                8
      Equation    (2.5) is a structural VA.R (SVAR) system, which relates

observable VAR-based residuals U to unobserved structural shocks      V,    one



of which is the policy shock Vs.    This system can be identified and

estimated by conventional methods, allowing recovery of the structural

shocks , including Vs.   The policy shock v’ is analogous to the

innovation to the scalar policy indicator in studies such as Bernanke

and Blinder    (1992), Sims (1992), and Christian,   Eichenbaum, and Evans

(1994) .    AS in the scalar case, the structural responses of all

variables in the system to a policy shock can be measured by the

associated impulse response functions. In the next subsection we apply

this method to an analysis of the Bundesbank’s operating procedure, then

use our estimates to develop an indicator of German monetary policy.

      2.2     Instruments and indicators of Bundesbank policy.   Bernanke

and Mihov    (1995) emphasize that, in order to develop a reliable

indicator of monetary policy, it is important to understand the central

bank’s operating procedure and instruments.     In general, using a

variable that the central bank allows to respond to reserves-market

shocks as a policy indicator will lead to incorrect inferences about the

effects of policy changes on the economy.     (The appendix illustrates

this point by means of an algebraic example in which the central bank

may target either money or interest rates.)     Thus, as a necessary prior

step to finding the appropriate indicator for German monetary policy, we

here briefly discuss and model the Bundesbank’s operating procedure.4

      Prior VAR studies which use the call rate or other short-term

market interest rate as a measure of German monetary policy are, at

least to some extent, relying on the analogy to the U.S. federal funds


4Good descriptions of Bundesbank procedures may be found in Trehan
(1988); Kahn and Jacobson (1989); Kneeshaw and van den Bergh (1989); von
Hagen (1989); Batten et al. (1990); Kasman (1992); von Hagen and Neumann
(1993); Clarida and Gertler (1995); and Deutsche Bundesbank (1995).


                                                                                  9
rate.    Although Bundesbank operations have become increasingly similar

to those of the Fed over time, however, historically there are some

important differences.    The Fed has used open-market operations in

government securities as its principal tool of reserves management           for

many decades; relatively speaking, the Fed’s other tools–-its ability to

set conunercial banks’ reserve requirements and to make loans through the

discount window--have played a minor role in monetary policy.         And,

since the maturation of the federal funds market in the mid-1960s,

except during the 1979-1983 “Volcker experiment”, the Fed has treated

the federal funds rate as its primary short-run target.        Thus, at the

operational level, the differences in Fed policy-making       between the

1970s and the 1990s are not large.

        In contrast, the Bundesbank has seen considerably more evolution

in its instruments of policy.    Prior to about 1980, the German central

bank did not make frequent use of open market operations.         Instead, in

the earlier period it implemented desired changes in the stance of

monetary policy, for the most part, in one of    three ways:

        First, it made relatively frequent changes in reserve requirements

(which are fairly high in Germany, compared to other countries) .          Some

indication of the active use of reserve requirements is given by Figure

1, which shows the ratio of current required    reserves    to required

reserves at 1974 legal ratios.    (The denominator is obtained by

subtracting currency in circulation from central bank money at 1974

ratios.)    Since (given the composition of deposits) the former but not

the latter varies with changes in reserve requirements, this ratio is a

rough measure of how requirements have changed.       ~so   shown in the

figure are dates of official changes in requirements        (denoted by

vertical lines) .   Note the relatively frequent use of this instrument

prior to about 1981.
         Second, in the earlier period the Bundesbank eased (tightened)

policy by increasing     (reducing) discount-window   borrowing quotas for

banks.     Since the discount rate in Germany is below the market rate of

interest, and moral suasion is not used (in the manner of the Fed) to

reduce discount-window    borrowing, banks usually borrow up to their

quota.     Thus , changes in quotas translated directly into changes in the

quantity of reserves available to the banking system.

         Finally, the Bundesbank could affect the quantity of loans through

its second borrowing facility       (Lombard loans) by changing the rate

charged banks for those loans (the Lombard rate) .       In the earlier period

the Lombard rate was typically held below the market rate for reserves

(the call rate), but above the discount rate, and thus functioned

analogously to the U.S. discount rate.

         For our purposes, a key aspect of Bundesbank operating procedures

prior to about 1980 was their relative lack of flexibility.        All three

tools--reserve    requirements, discount-window   quotas, and the Lombard

rate--could be, or at least were, changed only on a discrete rather than

continuous basis.     Thus the Bundesbank lacked the ability, enjoyed by

the Fed, of finely targeting market interest rates.       However, over the

last fifteen years that situation has changed, for two principal

reasons.     First, the Bundesbank has begun dealing in repurchase

agreements    (repos) with banks,    Repos provide a means by which the

Bundesbank can make short-term loans to the banking system.        Second,

aided by a deepening of    securities markets, the Bundesbank has made

increasing use of U.S. -style open-market operations.       These two

developments have greatly increased the Bundesbank’s ability to “fine-

tune” movements in market interest rates, such as the call rate.

Indeed, in a short-term operational sense, the Bundesbank is able now to

target the call rate or other rates (such as the repo rate) in very much

the way that the Fed pegs the federal funds rate.



                                                                               11
      What implications do the changes in Bundesbank instruments and

operating procedures have for the choice of a monetary indicator for

Germany?   A tentative conclusion is that it may be somewhat risky to use

the call rate (or other short-term market rate) as one’s indicator of

monetary policy, at least prior to 1980 or so.     Because the Bundesbank

lacked the tools to target open-market interest rates precisely, it

seems possible that short-term innovations in market rates might have

reflected non-policy factors in the economy, such as shifts in the

demand for reserves, as well as policy innovations.     If shocks to the

call rate reflect non-policy influences, then measured impulse responses

to call rate innovations are no longer “clean” estimates of the effects

of monetary policy shocks on the economy.

      A bit of indirect evidence on this issue is the persistence of the

“price puzzle” for Germany.     For example, Sims (1992) found (both for

Germany and other countries) that the price level rises following a

positive innovation to the call rate, despite the presumption      that an

increase in the call rate represents a tightening of monetary policy.

Sims finds that this perverse response of prices persists for Germany

even when commodity prices and the exchange rate are included in the

system to control for anticipated future inflation.     Sims’s sample

begins in 1961, and thus includes a lengthy period prior to the

introduction of repos and the expanded use of open-market operations.

However, Clarida and Gertler    (1995) estimate VARS with German data

beginning in the mid-1970s and also find a positive response of prices

to call rate innovations.     We present further evidence below,

      These considerations    suggested to us that it might be worthwhile

to make a closer empirical examination of the Bundesbank’s operating

procedures.   We found that, with some conceptual re-definitions,     we

could apply the model of the reserves market proposed by Bernanke and




                                                                             12
Mihov    (1995) for the U.S. to the German case.         Our adaptation of their

model, written in innovation form, is as follows:

                                                            d
(2.7)    Total reserves demand:           Um   =–aua+v




(2.8)    Lombard loans demand:            ~u=P(um-uM)+v’


(2.9)    Nonborrowed   reserves supply:   Um = ~dvd + #’v’ +#Jv’ +Vn


(2.10)    Lombard rate:                    Um=ydvd+ynv”         +ybvb+v’


where    TR is total reserves, ~      is Lombard loans, NBR        is nonborrowed

reserves,   ~      is the Lombard rate, and CR is the call rate.

        Equation    (2.7) relates the innovation in the demand for bank

reserves to the innovation in the call rate (analogous to the federal

funds rate in the U.S.) and an autonomous shock to reserves demand.                For

simplicity, we abstract here from the Bundesbank’s use of reserve

requirements as a policy tool:       Hence we measure total bank reserves as

required reserves at 1974 ratios (equal to central bank money at 1974

ratios less currency in circulation), plus excess reserves.                This

adjustment, albeit somewhat crude, does eliminate the large jumps in

reserves associated with changes in the legal requirements.

        Equation    (2.8) assumes that, in innovations form, the demand for

Lombard loans (analogous to discount-window borrowing in the U.S.)

depends on the spread between the call rate and the Lombard rate

(analogous to the U.S. funds rate-discount rate spread) and a shock to

desired Lofiard borrowing.       A difference between Lombard borrowing and

U.S. discount-window     borrowing is that --as noted above--since          1985 the

Lombard rate has been at or above the call rate, while the U.S. discount

rate is virtually always below the federal funds rate.            One would expect

Lombard loans to be very low when the rate charged on those loans




                                                                                       13
exceeds the open-market borrowing rate, and that is indeed the case.

However, Lombard loans have not been zero during the past decade by any

means, presumably because some banks have emergency borrowing needs or

have imperfect access to the call market.        Since the spread between the

call rate and the Lotiard rate is still a measure of the opportunity

cost of using the Lotiard window, we would expect eq. (2.8) to apply

during the recent period, although one should be wary of possible breaks

in the structural parameters       (which we will always allow for) .5

         Equations   (2.9) and (2.10) describe the behavior of the

Bundesbank.      Equation   (2.9) is the supply of nonborrowed   reserves,

defined as total reserves less Lombard loans.        Thus , we include

borrowings at the discount window as part of “nonborrowed”         reserves;

this seems to be the right simplification,       since--as discussed above--

discount-window      loans are inframarginal and could just as well be

supplied via open-market operations or other methods,        Equation    (2.9)

allows for the possibility that the Bundesbank can observe and offset

shocks to the bank reserves market-- which would be necessary to target

the call rate on a month-to-month      basis, for example.   There is also an

autonomous shock to the supply of nonborrowed reserves, V“ .         Equation

(2.10)   describes   the Bundesbank’s setting of the Lombard rate; again,

this equation is (so far) unrestricted, allowing both for the Bundesbank

to use the Lombard rate to offset other shocks in the reserves market,

and for autonomous innovations to the Lombard rate, V’ .




‘As our discussant van Hagen pointed out, on a few occasions during our
sample period the Bundesbank imposed additional restrictions on Lombard
lending:   Between September 1979 and March 1980, limits on Lombard
lending equal to 15% of the standard rediscount quota were imposed.
Between February 1981 and May 1902, the Bundesbank granted “special”
Lombard loans at 3% above the regular Lombard rate, with provisions for
recall or ch”anges in the rate at short notice; the regular Lombard
window was closed. We do not account for these periods in our analysis,
which may cause us to understate the tightness of monetary policy during
those episodes. Special Lombard loans have been discontinued since 1982.


                                                                                 14
      Using the identity Um =uMR        +Uu,     we can write the solution of

this model in the form of eq. (2.4), where

                                 ~—d
u’= u~   ‘NBR     ‘CR   u~rv-v         Vb   V“   v’   ,   and




(1- G)-’A =




      This model has twelve unknown parameters               (including four shock

variances) to be estimated from ten residual variances and covariances;

thus fu~ther identifying restrictions are necessary.                Bernanke and Mihov

(1995) used two strategies for achieving identification:                First, they

showed that some simple operating procedures, such as federal funds

rate-targeting,     implied overidentification        of this model.     Thus the

combination of the model and the proposed operating procedure could be

tested in the data, by applying standard tests of overidentifying

restrictions.      Second, as an alternative, they made enough additional

assumptions to just-identify the model, estimates of which implied an

“optimal” policy indicator        (in general, a weighted average of

alternative     simple indicators) .

      Here we restrict ourselves to the first strategy and consider

three simple alternative characterizations            of Bundesbank operating

procedures:      call-rate smoothing, nonborrowed reserves targeting           (where,

again, “nonborrowed       reserves” is defined as total reserves less Lombard

loans), and smoothing of the Lombard rate (i.e., insulation” of the

Lombard rate from reserves-market shocks).                Each of these alternatives

can be used to impose additional identifying restrictions on the model.




                                                                                       15
         For the call-rate model, we impose


(2.11)      l-~d    +pyd    =0,   1++’ -py’=o,        #’=o

The first two restrictions imply that the call rate does not respond to

(i.e., the Bundesbank offsets) reserves demand and Lombard borrowing

shocks (cf. the third row of the matrix               (l-G)-’A      above).   The third

restriction says that the call rate is allowed to passively adjust

(i.e., no changes are made in nonborrowed reserves) to innovations in

the Lombard rate.          This seemed to be the right ass~tion;              otherwise, we

would have to assme          that changes in the Lombard rate are “sterilized”

and thus have no effect on open-market rates.                    However, the alternative

assumption, that the call rate is insulated from Lombard rate shocks as

well as reserves and borrowings shocks (#t =fl), led to similar

empirical results.

      For nonborrowed-reserves            targeting    (which seems reasonable to

consider for the Bundesbank, given its putative close attention to money

growth targets), we impose the restrictions


(2.12)      #d=o,     #b=o,       #’=o

i.e., nonborrowed      reserves depend only on their own autonomous shocks

and are not systematically adjusted in response to contemporaneous

shocks in the bank reserves          market.

         Finally, for Lombard-rate targeting, we impose


(2.13)      yd=o,     yb=(),      yn=o

or that the Lombard rate is independent of contemporaneous                    reserves-

rnarket shocks.      The assumptions associated with all three procedures are

identical to those used by Bernanke and Mihov                (1995) in their model

including the discount rate.             Note that in this setup there are two




                                                                                          16
structural shocks that can be interpreted as “policy shocks”:            the

reserves innovation      V“ (emphasized by the call rate and nonborrowed

reserves models) , and the Lombard rate innovation       VJ (emphasized by the

Lombard rate model) .

      Each of these alternative characterizations        of Bundesbank

operating procedures imposes three additional restrictions on, and thus

over-identifies,      the general model.   In the next sub-section we report

parameter estimates and statistical comparisons for these three models.

      2.3    Estimates of the Bundesbank’s operating procedure.          To

implement the above procedure we need to specify the “nonpolicy”

variables    Y    and the “policy variables”   P.   In all VARS discussed in

this section we use three nonpolicy variables:         the index of German

industrial production,      the German CPI, and the Dow-Jones index of

corrunodityprices     (not specific to Germany) .   Industrial production and

the CPI a~e probably the best available monthly indicators of output and

inflation.       The index of commodity prices is included to account for

supply shocks and to capture information about future inflation that the

Bundesbank might have when choosing its policy stance        (see Sims, 1992,

for a discussion).       Policy variables include total bank reserves

(defined as central bank money at 1974 reserve ratios, minus currency in

circulation, plus excess reserves) ; “nonborrowed”       reserves   (total

reserves less Lombard loans) ; the call rate; and the Lombard rate.            In

some of the preliminary      results described below the Lombard rate is

dropped from the VAR.      All data are from Datastream, except the

commodity price index, which is from CITIBASE.        Interest rates are

included in the VARS in levels, other variables in log-levels.6



%e include the output, price, and reserves  measures in levels despite
their nonstationarity, as has become standard practice in VAR studies.
The levels specification will yield consistent estimates whether
cointegration exists or not, whereas a differences specification is
inconsistent if some variables are cointegrated.   Clarida and Gertler


                                                                                    17
        Data were available from Janua~y 1969 through 1995, except that

reserves data are missing during the transition period July-December

19900     In what follows we always end the sample period in June 1990, to

avoid dealing with the unification period and its aftermath       (which

obviously raised special problems for the Bundesbank) .

        We applied a variety of lag-length and stability tests to the

reduced-from parameters of the seven-variable V~.       The likelihood ratio

test with a modified multiplier     suggested by Sims (1980) rejected

truncation at less than twelve lags; hence, for all the principal

results repo~ted below we use twelve-lag VARS.       (For a few shotter-

sample results reported in Table 1, we needed to use fewer lags to

conserve degrees of freedom.      Additional tests confirmed that a lag

structure of    (1,2,3,4,9,12) was adequate to capture the main dynamics of

the data.)     To test stability of the reduced-form parameters    (with

unknown break point) we used an LM-type test, testing simultaneously          the

coefficients on all lags of each variable in each equation, for a total

of 49 tests per estimated VAR.7      Critical values were as tabulated by

Andrews    (1993).   All tests used a heteroscedasticity-robust   variance-

covariance matrix.      We found considerable evidence of instability in the

earlier part of the sample; our ntier      of rejections of parameter

stability became less than the ntier      expected under the null of no

break only when the start date was 1975:1 or later.      Since this date in

any case marked the beginning of the current policy regime, we began all

our VAR analyses with that date.      We were not able to reject the null of




(1995) use an error-correction specification, but it does not appear to
have important effects on their results.
‘Testing all lags of each variable in each equation seemed a reasonable
compromise between testing each coefficient separately--which would not
have been informative about the stability of the qualitative dynamic
properties of”.the system--and testing all coefficients in the system,
which would have lacked power. We also performed tests of stability
equation-by-equation, with similar results to those reported in the
text.


                                                                               18
stability of the reduced-form parameters for the sample period beginning

in 1975:1 and ending in 1990:6.

      Bernanke and Mihov     (1995) focused on the case without discount

rate shocks (Lombard rate shocks, in our context), which is both the

simpler and the more comparable with the prior literature on VAR-based

monetary indicators.      As a preliminary exercise, we estimated the

analogous case for Germany, which of course restricted us to

consideration of the call rate and nonborrowed reserves as potential

policy indicators.     We used a six-variable VAR (omitting the Lombard

rate), and we set to zero the Lombard rate innovation and the associated

parameters   Yd ,yb,Y”,   and ~’.      To see if changes in the instruments

available to the Bundesbank had had any effect, we estimated the model

for the first ten years and last ten years of the sample, as well as for

the whole fifteen-year sample (re-estimating the VAR each time) ,           The

last ten years of the sample (1980:7-1990:6) correspond roughly to the

period following the introduction of repos; the first ten-year period

(1975:1-1985:1) ends at the date that the Lombard rate became a penalty

rate, exceeding the call rate for the first time.

      The results are shown in Table 1.         They are reasonable and fairly

comparable to the U.S. results of Bernanke and Mihov         (1995).    The slope

of the resexves demand function, ~ , is generally found to be small and

insignificantly   different from zero, although larger in the nonborrowed

reserves model, as in the U.S. (Strongin, 1995, argues on institutional

grounds that the ass~tion        a=o     is valid for the U.S.)     The slope of

the borrowings    function, P,   is of the right sign, precisely estimated,

and fairly stable across subsamples.         The more interesting    findings are

the tests of the overidentifying        restrictions:   First, the nonborrowed

reserves model is rejected in the full sample and the first subsample

(it does somewhat better in the        latter subsample, being rejected at the




                                                                                   19
10% level but not at the 5% level).       Second, the call rate model is not

rejected in the full sample.     (P-values are obtained for Hansen’s J

test. )    These two results are consistent with the usual characterization

of Bundesbank operating procedures as focusing on interest-rate

stabilization in the short run.       Third, the call rate model does much

better in the subsample beginning in 1980 (p = 0.947) than it does in

the subsample ending in 1985 (p = 0.093).      This is at least a bit of

evidence in favor of our hypothesis that the Bundesbank was less able to

target open-market interest rates prior to the advent of repos and

increased use of open-market operations.

         We turn now to the results from the full model, including the

Lombard rate and the associated equation, eq. (2.10) .      The estimates, to

be found in Table 2, are based on the full seven-variable V~,       described

above.     Since we did not reject stability of the reduced-form V~

parameters, we use residuals from the VAR estimated for the enti~e

1975:1-1990:6 sample to obtain estimated structural parameters for the

various subsamples.     We did however find evidence of a break in the

variance-covariance    matrix of V~   residuals in 1981:6; hence we break

several subsamples at that point (which also corresponds roughly to the

introduction of repos), as well as 1985:1 (when the Lombard rate began

to exceed the call rate).     The set of parameters for which estimates are

reported differs across models in Table 3, because the alternative

models impose different restrictions.

         We skip discussion of the parameter estimates and go directly to

the p-values for the overidentifying     restrictions, which form our basis

for choosing among models.    Again the nonborrowed reserves model is

strongly rejected for the sample as a whole and for the earlier

subsamples; however, it cannot be rejected for the subsample beginning

in 1981 and does particularly well for the post-1985 period.




                                                                             20
      Comparing the call rate and Lombard rate models, we find that

neither is rejected in either the whole sample or in any subsample.           To

some extent this is a disappointing      finding, since we are therefore not

able to discriminate   sharply between these two candidate indicators of

German monetary policy.a     However, comparison of p-values does yield

some interesting points.     In particular, note that the call rate model

achieves a much higher p-value    (0.881) in the period following the

introduction of repos than in the earlier      period   (0.116), consistent

with arguments made above.     Similarly, the Lombard rate model is far

from being rejected in the pre-1985 period, before the Lombard rate

became a penalty rate (p = 0.925); after 1985, this model does

relatively less well   (p = 0.423) .    A somewhat anomalous result is that

the Lombard rate nevertheless achieves a better p-value than the call

rate in the last, short sample period, 1985-1990.        Judging by the

estimate of ~d from the Lombard rate model, which is only 0.114 and not

statistically different from zero, and by the earlier finding that the

nonborrowed reserves model does well in the post-1985 period, there

appears to be evidence of reduced smoothing of market interest rates

during the pre-unification    period.

      Overall, although the data do not speak very       strongly, the results

suggest a slight preference of the Lombard rate over the call rate as an

indicator of Bundesbank policy for the pre-1990 period.        The Lombard

rate has a (marginally) higher p-value for the whole sample, and for

three of the four subsamples considered.       From an a priori perspective,

the weakest case for the Lombard rate should be in the 1985-1990 period,



‘In early estimations using the entire sample we were able to strongly
reject the call rate in favor of the Lombard rate, a finding that
motivated us to pursue this line further. It appears now that this
rejection was due somehow to the instability of the first-stage V~ in
the early 1970s. However, this result may still be taken as a
cautionary note to those considering the call rate as an indicator for
the period prior to 1975.


                                                                               21
when this rate became a penalty rate.      Yet as Table 2 shows, the Lombard

rate is not close to being rejected as an indicator for this subperiod,

and its movements after 1985 were very close to those of the call rate.

For these reasons, we use the Lombard rate as the main policy indicator

in the exercises of Section 3.      However, we also check the robustness of

our results to the use of the call rate and a cotiination of the Lotiard

rate and the call rate.

       Figure 2 shows the dynatic responses of industrial production and

the CPI to innovations in the call rate and the Lombard rate, the two

non-rejected    indicators.   These impulse responses are calculated from

four-variable VARS including the same set of non-policy variables as

above plus the relevant indicator.      The main point of interest is that,

unlike the call rate, the response of the price level to Lombard rate

innovations does not exhibit the “price puzzle”.      The statistical

uncertainty about this result is large, but we nevertheless     find it

encouraging for the use of the Lombard rate as a policy indicator.



3.   The Bundesbank:     Closet inflation targeter?

      We are prepared now to try to answer the question posed by the

introduction,    of whether the Bundesbank is better characterized as an

inflation targeter or as a money targeterm      We first briefly discuss

some historical evidence, then turn to our statistical test.

      Although the Bundesbank has publicly emphasized the importance of

money targets in its policy-making     since 1975, it has been often noted

that these money targets are tied to projections of inflation and

potential output growth through the quantity equation relationship        (von

Hagen, 1995; Bernanke and Mishkin, 1992; von Hagen and Neumann, 1993) .

Our attempt to reconstruct that calculation from Bundesbank reports is

shown in Table 3.      The column labelled “money growth target” shows the




                                                                             22
official ex ante targets (for growth of central bank money prior to

1988, M3 growth thereafter), as set in December prior to the year to

which the target applies.        As in von Hagen (1995), what we have labelled

the “inflation target” is the announced rate of “unavoidable inflation”

for 1975-1985; afteI 1985, the inflation target is always set to 2.o%,

which the Bundesbank has deemed to be the rate consistent with “price

stability”.     Also given are the Bundesbank’s estimates of growth of

“production potential” and their stated adjustment for velocity.         By the

Bundesbank’s procedure the money growth target should be the sum of the

inflation target and forecasted potential output growth, less the

velocity adjustment.     This is usually the case (or nearly so) in Table

3, although note that after 1978 money gzowth targets are generally set

as a range rather than as a point.g

         The impression one receives from the table is that, for the most

part, the Bundesbank has made its money growth targets subservient to

its inflation targets.        Note that the inflation targets decline steadily

(except in the oil-shock year, 1980), and are considerably less volatile

than the money growth targets; and that, as mentioned, money growth

targets are usually specified as ranges, while inflation targets are

points    (except in 1981).    Also, on one occasion   (1987) the Bundesbank

changed its targeted money aggregate, an event that occurred when above-

target money growth coincided with below-target inflation.

         The Bundesbank has subjugated its money growth objective to its

inflation objective in another sense, in its willingness to deviate from

money growth targets to offset unexpected inflation.        This point--which

has been emphasized by von Hagen (1995)--is also illustrated in Table 3,

by the columns which show targets, outcomes, and deviations        from targets



9 Part of the’.discrepancy between the actual money growth targets and
the targets implied by the quantity-theory calculation arises because
inflation rates are expressed as annual averages while money growth
rates (after 1978) are measured fourth quarter to fourth quarter.


                                                                               23
(or from the middle of target ranges) for both money growth and

inflation.    At least through unification in 1990, the record indicates a

clear negative relationship between deviations of money growth from

target and deviations of inflation from target, suggesting a willingness

of the Bundesbank to “lean against the (inflationary) wind”.        (The

regression coefficient of the money growth deviation on the inflation

deviation for 1975-1990 is -0.872, with a t-statistic of 4.0.)       Indeed,

the Bundesbank achieves its target range for money in only a minority of

cases .   However, after 1990 there has been at least a temporary change

in behavior, with inflation and money growth tending to deviate in the

same instead of opposite directions.

      Despite these indications that the Bundesbank is “really” an

inflation targeter, such a conclusion would not fit entirely with the

Bundesbank’s own claims.       For example, a recent official publication

(Deutsche Bundesbank, 1995) includes the following corrunentary:

      “More recently, the central banks of some countries (e.g. Canada,
      New Zealand, the United Kingdom, Finland) have abandoned the
      practice of setting an intermediate target and switched to
      targeting the final goal direct. However, the transition to such
      a one-tier strategy of inflation taxgeting was not effected
      because such strategies are inherently superior--say, in terms of
      theoretical approach.   It was effected not by choice but rather of
      necessity, since (particularly in the wake of radical change in
      the financial markets) the traditional monetary relationships had
      become unstable, and there was no longer a predictable correlation
      between the intermediate target variable and prices. The one-tier
      strategy would thus appear to be a “second-best” solution if a
      suitable intermediate target is no longer available. ..The
      disadvantages of such a multi-indicator approach lie in a very
      high degree of complexity, the associated lack of transparency for
      the general public and the risk of a certain disorientation of
      monetary policy decisions.   For these reasons an intermediate
      target strategy is preferable to targeting the final goal direct
      as long as monetary policy has at its disposable an intermediate
      target variable which basically meets the above-mentioned
      requirements. ..“(pp. 67-8)


      We take the above statement as asserting the view that targeting

money growth can be superior to targeting the forecast of inflation--

notwithstanding   Svensson’s    (1996) argument to the contrary--because




                                                                            24
money targeting is easier to explain to the public and perhaps because

it limits the scope for poor policy decisions     (“disorientation”) .    If

this statement accurately reflects German policymakers’     views, then

clearly they must sometimes allow policy to respond to deviations of

money growth from the projected path, even if inflation is on target.

        In the remainder of this section we attempt to evaluate

statistically whether the Bundesbank should be thought of as an

inflation targeter or not.      We do this by asking the question:     Given

forecasted inflation, do changes in forecasted money growth affect

Bundesbank policy?      And if so--to take the question one step further--is

it because money growth is correlated with other goal variables of the

Bundesbank, or because the Bundesbank considers it intrinsically

desirable to hit its money target?

        Although our test is an intuitive one, it may be useful to

motivate it by a simple example.      Consider an economy that lasts three

periods, t = O, 1, 2.      In period O, the log price level pot    the log

money supply rno, and the central bank’s policy instrument        (e.g., the

overnight interest rate) 10 are given and known.      In periods 1 and 2,

prices and money evolve according to


(3”1)    Pt=m, +&p,


(3.2)    m,=–bit.l+sw

Equation   (3.1) says that prices depend on the money supply and other

stochastic factors, such as velocity shocks.      According to (3.2), the

money stock in turn is affected by stochastic factors and (with a one-

period lag) by the policy instrument.     We assume for simplicity that the

error terms affecting prices and money are random walks     (it can be shown

that our results hold for more general stochastic processes):




                                                                               25
(3.3)    &p, =&pr.l+qp,


         E ml = E~,_l + q~

where the ~’s       are i.i.d., mean-zero random variables.

        Assume that in period O the central bank sets growth targets, foI

t = o to t = 2, for prices and money.             From (3.1), we know that

EO(p2-PO)=EO(rn2        -mO),    so consistency requires the targeted growth

rates of prices and money to be the same; without significant loss of

generality, set both of these targets to zero.             Interim values of pzices

and money are realized in t = 1: since 10 is given, these interim values

depend only on the realizations of ~Pl and ~~l.              The question we want

to ask is, how will the central bank adjust its policy instrument in the

interim period, j,, in response to its new information?

        The answer depends, of course, on the central bank’s objectives.

Assme    that, as of t = 1, the central bank’s loss function is


(3.4)    E,[+(p~-Po)     2+f(m2-mo)2]+~(il       –io)*


where   ~l[.] signifies the expectation conditional on information

available in t = 1, and a         and d      are non-negative parameters.    Equation

(3.4) says   that      the central bank’s loss depends on the expected squared

deviations of inflation and money growth from their targets, with Cl the

relative weight put on the money growth target per se; a “pure”

inflation targeter sets .a=O,          i.e., it cares about money growth only

insofar as it affects inflation.             The last term in (3.4) captures an

interest-rate-smoothing         motive, for which there is considerable

evidence, both formal and informal.

        Minimizing     the loss function (3,4) yields the optimal value of the

policy instrument in period 1, l;:




                                                                                    26
              b(&m, + &p,– po) +~~(gml- ~o) +~~o
(3.5)   1:=
                              b-(l+a)+d

                        ,*
The innovation in 1,, relative to its expectation as of period O, is



(3.6)   i: - Eoi~   = ~[(~ml+~P1)+uqml 1
                             bz(l+a)+a’

The innovation in the policy instrument can be related to the

innovations in the forecasts of inflation and money growth.                 Using the

facts that the revision in the inflation forecast, EIP2–EOP2,                  equals

–b(i~ - Eoi~) + q~, + qPl ; and, similarly, that the revision in the money

growth forecast, E,m2-Eom2,                 equals -b(i~-Eoif)+qmi,   some algebra

reveals that


(3.7)   i: - Eoi~ = ~[(E,p2       -Eop2)+a(Elm2       -Eom2)]

That is, the innovation in the policy instrument responds to interim

innovations in the forecasts of inflation and money growth, with a

relative weight that depends on the importance of money deviations in

the central bank’s loss function.                 In particular, if the central bank is

a “pure” inflation targeter, and it therefore puts no weight on

deviations of money from target except insofar as money affects

inflation     {a= O),   then changes in the instrument will be related only

to changes in forecasted inflation and not, given forecasted inflation,

to changes in forecasted money growth.                 In contrast, if money growth

enters the objective function independently, then the policy’ instrument

will respond to changes in forecasted money growth even if forecasted

inflation is held constant.               More generally, if additional factors

besides inflation and money growth are of concern to the central bank,

changes in the forecasts of               these variables will have marginal
predictive power for the policy instrment,      given forecasts of inflation

and money.

      These insights provide the basis for our test of the inflation-

targeting propensities of the Bundesbank.1°     We began by constructing

monthly time series of twelve-month-ahead     forecasts for inflation, money

growth, and other variables to be specified in a moment.      In-sample

forecasts were constructed from a six-variable VAR including the three

non-policy variables, the Lotiard rate, money, and the exchange rate.11

The in-sample, twelve-month-ahead     forecasts of inflation obtained by

this method fit closely with the series of Bundesbank inflation targets

as shown in Table 3.

      Our main tests of the determinants of German monetary policy are

given in Table 4.    The basic result is illustrated by the first colm

of ntiers    corresponding   to Equation 1, under the heading “Lombard rate”

(ignore the other columns for now).     These results are drawn from a

twelve-lag VA.R including three variables:     the forecast for inflation

over the next twelve months, at each date; the forecast for money growth

(CBM before 1988, M3 afterwards), at each date; and the Lombard rate.

The question we ask is:      Given twelve lags of the inflation forecast and



1° In his cormnent on this paper at the conference, Larry Christian
pointed out another implication of this framework: namely, that
deviations of inflation from target should be unforecastable.
Equivalently, the best statistical forecast of inflation should always
equal the official target. These implications are rejected by the data
at most horizons, but (like the analogous “random-walk” tests of the
permanent-income hypothesis) these rejections do not shed much light on
the quantitative significance of the deviation from inflation targeting.
For this reason we prefer the test described in the text.
llWe compared in-sample forecasts of inflation and other variables based
 (1) on an autoregression; (2) on the “base” VA.R, including the three
non-policy variables and the Lombard rate; and (3) on the base VAR
augmented by various combinations of the log of the money stock (CBM
spliced to M3 in 1988) and the log of the DM/dollar exchange rate,
twelve monthly lags being used in all cases. Statistical tests
(including Gqanger-causality and block-erogeneity tests) favo~ed the
inclusion of both the money stock and the exchange rate in the
forecasting equations. In particular, the fact that money contains
significant marginal information about future inflation is interesting,
given the claim that money is targeted for that very reason.


                                                                            28
twelve lags of the Lombard rate itself, do lags of the money growth

forecast have additional predictive power for the Lombard rate?lz        In a

Granger sense, Table 4 shows that the answer is yes:        Both inflation

forecasts and money forecasts Grange~-cause the Lombard rate at better

than a 5% level.   Thus there is some evidence that the money forecast

affects Bundesbank policy decisions, even given the inflation forecast.

       But how big is this effect?     The second part of Table 4 shows the

percentage of the forecast variance for the Lombard Kate explained at

different horizons by innovations to each of the three variables in the

VAR.   We find that at short horizons the forecast error for the Lombard

rate is dominated by its own shocks, and at longer horizons it is

dominated by shocks to the inflation forecast.       Shocks to the money

growth forecast do not play an important role quantitatively       in

determining the Lotiard rate at any horizon,      This is the basis for our

conclusion that the Bundesbank is better characterized as an inflation

targeter than as a money targeter.

       It would be interesting to know whether the Granger-causal

relationship between money growth forecasts and the Lotiard rate arises

because the Bundesbank is interested in money growth per se, or because

money growth forecasts goal variables other than inflation.        Equations 2

and 3 in Table 4 add sequentially the one-year forecasts of industrial

production growth and nominal exchange-rate     (DM/$)   depreciation.

(Exchange-rate depreciation is ordered after, rather than before the

Lotiard rate on the grounds that exchange rates are not a “slow-moving”

variable, like inflation   or   output; this ordering modestly   reduces the

share of forecast variance attributed to the exchange rate, but of




12The example presented above suggests that we should relate
innovations in the Lombard rate only to innovations in contemporaneous
forecasts. We include lagged forecasts in our test to allow for outside
(information-gathering) and inside (decision-making) lags in the policy
process.


                                                                               29
course does not affect the Granger-causality     statistics. )   We find that

the money growth forecast continues to Granger-cause the Lombard rate at

the 5% level in both cases, suggesting that the Bundesbank pays

attention to money growth for some reason (establishment of credibility,

perhaps) not directly related to its predictive power for ultimate goal

variables,   There is also some evidence, consistent with what others

have found, that the Bundesbank pays attention to ultimate objectives

other than inflation:    Forecasted output Granger-causes   the Lotiard rate

in the presence of the other variables, and makes some contribution        to

the forecast variance decomposition   as well.   The expected rate of

exchange rate depreciation does not Granger-cause the Lombard rate, but

it has some effect on the Lombard rate’s forecast error at longer

horizons.    (This latter result is difficult to interpret; it may arise

from the collinearity of expected exchange rate depreciation       and

expected inflation. )   Our main result survives, however, in that

innovations to inflation forecasts continue to play a large role, and

innovations to money growth forecasts a small role, in the determination

of Lotiard rate forecast errors,

      To check that these results do not depend on the use of the

Lombard rate as the policy indicator, we repeated all of these tests

using as the indicator a) the call rate, and b) a “spliced” series based

on the Lombard rate prior to 1985 and the call rate afterwards.13        The

Granger-causality   results using the alternative indicators are shown in

the second and third columns of numbers in the top half of Table 4.        The

results for the call rate seem even stronger than for the Lombard rate:

The inflation forecast always Granger-causes     the call rate at the 5%

level, while the money growth forecast never does.      For the spliced




13 We also considered using the repo rate. However, this rate is
available for a shorter period and is very close to the call rate over
the period for which it is available.


                                                                                30
series, inflation forecasts Granger-cause the policy indicator at the 5%

level     in the presence of money and output forecasts, but only at the 10%

level when an exchange rate forecast is added.          Variance decomposition

exercises for the alternative indicators         (not shown to conserve space)

looked quite similar to those for the Lombard rate, confirming the

dominance of inflation forecasts as a determinant of German monetary

policy actions, particularly at longer horizons.14

          As a final exercise,   we   use the largest VA.R from Table 4 (with the

LoWard      rate as the policy indicator) to study the response of the

system to an innovation in the inflation forecast.          The impulse

responses, shown in Figure 3, convey a plausible story:          A positive

innovation to the inflation forecast leads to a policy tightening, as

captured by a rise in the Lombard rate.          Forecasted output growth

declines, as would be expected, and the rate of expected depreciation of

the exchange rate rises.15 Most interesting, though, is that the

forecasted rate of money growth falls in an almost mirror image of the

increase in forecasted inflation.          This pattern seems to confirm the

“leaning against the wind” story told by von Hagen (1995) and others.



4.      Conclusion

          Our main conclusion has been amply foreshadowed.      In brief,

although the Bundesbank uses money growth as an important informational

variable and operating guide, and despite its protestations         to the



14 We also ran our tests ’using the forecasted deviations of inflation
and money growth from the official targets (and of output and exchange
rates from their Hodrick-Prescott trends) in place of the simple
forecasts.   In doing so, we experimented with different assumptions
about the willingness of the Bundesbank to try to offset previous
overshooting or undershooting of targets. The results were not much
different from those reported in Table 4.
151t is probably dangerous to overinterpret the latter finding, given
the asset-price nature of exchange rates. Possible explanations for an
increased rate of expected depreciation include an overshooting effect
from money tightening, and the information effect of the increased rate
of anticipated inflation,


                                                                                 31
contrary, it seems to be better characterized as an inflation targeter

than as a money targeter.   Following the example set by German monetary

policy should not be construed as ~igid adherence to money growth

targets, a practice which the Bundesbank itself has not followed.




                                                                         32
Appendix.    What in a monetary   policy shock?

      VAR-based analyses of monetary policy have proliferated in recent

years, both in academic research and in policy-making.         This widespread

use reflects the method’s strengths, notably its simplicity and its

tendency to deliver “reasonable” results.         As should be expected for any

novel methodology,    the VAR-based approach has also drawn its share of

criticism--some    justified, of course, but some less so.      In this

appendix we use simple examples to address two questions that have been

raised about the central concept of “shocks” to monetary policy, as

follows:

      (1) What is the source of monetary policy shocks?

      (2) Why draw a distinction between innovations to the money supply

and innovations to monetary policy?



      (1     Some critics have questioned the concept of “shocks” to

monetary policy.     They point out that the Fed and the Bundesbank

certainly do not randomize their policy actions explicitly, and that any

errors made in the implementation of policies are likely to be quickly

reve~sed.    How then could shocks to policy be laxge enough to matter?

      In general, all that is necessary for what we call a ?olicy shock

to occur is that the policy decision be influenced by some factor

(personalities, beliefs, political considerations, problems of

measurement or interpretation)     that is imperfectly correlated with the

current state of the economy.      In the following example we illustrate

that valid   (in the sense required by our paper) policy shocks can be

generated from two realistic sources:     (a) imperfect information on the

part of the central bank about the current economy, and (b) changes in

the relative weights put by the central bank on moderating        fluctuations

in output and inflation.     In particular, neither explicit randomization




                                                                             33
nor persistent implementation errors are needed to generate meaningful

policy shocks.

         Consider the following simple economy:


(Al)      Y,=~,-~,+X,

(A.2)     ml =~,.l–fi,

(A.3)     f,=X,+~l


(A”4)     P, =E,_,m,    =m,_,



Equation    (Al)     says that output Y is determined by real money balances

??I-p and a supply shock X that we take to be i.i.d. with mean zero.

The central bank’s policy reaction function is described by (A.2):              The

change in the money supply between periods t-1 and t is inversely

related to the supply shock observed by the central bank at t.             (We give

further justification of this assumption below; later we also relax the

assumption that the money supply is the operating instrument) .            However,

the central bank does not observe the contemporaneous           supply shock;

instead it obsersves            (and bases its policy on) a noisy measure of the

supply shock ~, which is equal to the actual shock plus uncorrelated

measurement    error     (eq. (A,3)).     We assume the error in observation

reflects lags in data collection, revisions, etc., which obscure the

true state of the economy for one period only; hence both the Fed and

the econometrician        can observe past values of the supply shock without

error.     Finally, we assue         that prices prevailing in period t are set at

the end of t-1, using only information available in t-1.            If we assume

that prices are set so that the expected value of output equals its

full-employment        level (which we normalize to zero), than it is

straightforward        to deduce that prices will equal the expected money

stock, which in turn equals the lagged money stock (eq. (A.4)) .




                                                                                   34
         The solution for output, expected inflation, and the money supply

in period t is



(A.5)     ~, =X1-fl(X, +~t)

(A.6)     pf+,-p, =-p(~, +n, )

(A.7)     m, =ml., - fl(~, + n, )



Note that the solution involves simultaneous determination          of the macro

variables and the money supply.          Thus this example does not literally

conform to the framework used in this paper, which bases identification

on the assumption that policy shocks affect macro variables only with a

one-period delay.        However, the assumption of simultaneity    is for

simplicity only and could be eliminated by a more complicated

specification;       it does not affect the focus of this example, which is

the interpretation       of policy shocks.

        Now we suppose that the econometrician estimates the central

bank’s reaction function (A.7), using her ex post knowledge of the

supply shock in period t.           (Note that this provides a rationalization

for using revised data, that was not known contemporaneously          to the Fed,

when estimating the reaction function. )          In this case the policy shock

v’   would be consistently estimated by a least-squares        regression of

money on the supply shock to be:




(A.8)     v: =–pqt




Given this policy shock, the econometrician          can correctly estimate the

effects of monetary policy shocks on the economy, i.e., from (A.5) and

(A.6):




                                                                                  35
        This first example shows that data errors and revisions provide a

possible source of policy shocks.          An alternative rationalization     is

random preferences on the part of the central bank:           To illustrate this

possibility,       suppose now that the central bank observes the supply shock

perfectly within the period         (so that ~= O) but chooses its reaction

coefficient        ~   in each period to minimize the value of the following

period-by-period         loss function in the variances of inflation and output:




(A.9)    L = (p,+, –P,)*    ‘@:



where @ is the weight on output deviations from full employment.              Using

the model     (A.1)-(A.4) above but with the measurement error set to zero,

we find that the value of p          that mini~zes   (A.9) is given by




(A.1O)      fl=~
                1+8



Now suppose that the central bank’s aversion to output fluctuations                @

is a stationary random variable, so that P           is as well.     Let the mean of


P   be ~.     The reaction function       (A.2) can now be written




(All)       m, =mr., - B, - (P, - 7)X,.




                                                                                       36
If we make the assumption of statistical independence between the shock

to central bank preferences and the supply shock (implying that
               —
~,.l[@,-P)x,l=oJ~               then the solution      for output and inflation is




(A.12)     y, = (1 -1)X,        -@,   - j)xf


(A”13)     P,+, -P,     = -z,     -(P,   -7)X,



Here we can identify the monetary policy shock with the random part of

the reaction function, eq. (All) :




Despite the presence of the supply shock term in (A.14), which would

induce a form of heteroscedasticity,                  the assumption that random

fluctuations in central bank preferences are independent of the supply

shock is sufficient to permit the monetary policy shock term to be

extracted from (All)              by least-squares regression.       Again, as (A.12) and

(A.13) show, if supply shocks are controlled for, the estimated policy

innovations could be used to correctly identify the effects of monetary

surprises on output and inflation                  (cf. eq, A.8) ,



         (2)       In the example        above   the policy shock was identified with the

innovation to the money supply.                  To show that this is not always

correct, and to reinforce the point that it is important to base the

identification         of policy shocks on knowledge of the central bank’s

operating procedure, consider the following simple model of the type

explored by Sargent and Wallace                  (1975):




                                                                                       37
(A.15)     ~, = -b[R, – (E,p(+,- P,)1+e:

(A.16)     m,–pt     =cy, –dR, +e~

(A.17)     Y, = g(P, – ~,.lPt) +e:



Equations    (A.15)-(A. 17) are an IS relationship, a money demand equation,

and a Lucas-type aggregate supply curve respectively.            R is the one-

period nominal interest rate, and the t?’are mean-zero,           i.i.d., mutually

uncorrelated shocks.         Note that in this example prices are not pre-

determined, but aggregate supply depends on the deviation of actual from

anticipated prices.

         Consider two cases.         In the first case, called money targeting,

the central bank sets the money supply equal to its lagged value plus an

                                         M
unpredictable disturbance,           ~       :




Note that, under money targeting, the money supply does not respond to

the contemporaneous       non-policy shocks f?:
                                              .      In the second case, called

interest-rate        targeting, monetary policy is used to set the nominal

interest rate equal to its equilibrium value (which is zero, if we

maintain the martingale assumption for the money stock) plus an

unpredictable disturbance,           VR :




(A.19)     R, = q:




                                                                                  38
         Rational-expectations        solutions of the model conditional on the

lagged money stock can be obtained by the method of undetermined

coefficients .     For the case of money targeting, the solution is




              Y,              dg       -bg      b(l+d)       bg(l+d;
           PI – ml-l          d        -b      -(bc+d)        b(l+d)
(A.20)
              R,            l+cg      b+g        be-l        g(bc -1)
           Im, - m,.,       10          0            0            1



where AM =d(b+g)+b(l+cg).

       For interest-rate          targeting, the solution is




              Y,              g        bg        O            -bg(l+d)

           P, – ml-l . A;     1         b      bc-             -b(l + d)
(A.21)
              R,              000                                     1
           Im, - m,-,       l+cg      b+g      bc-       -b(l+cg)-d(b+g)          ~:

where AR =g(l-bc).



      Now suppose that we want to recover the effect of a one-unit,

autonomous innovation in the money stock on an endogenous va~iable, say

output .    If the central bank is targeting money, so that innovations to

the money supply are exogenous by assumption, then the desired magnitude

can be read off directly from the the last colm                           of the 4x4 matrix in

                                   bg(l + d)
(A.20); its value iS                                     Under money targeting, this
                            b(l+cg)+d(b+g)           “

magnitude could be calculated as the regression coefficient of output

residuals on money residuals.               What if, instead, the central bank is

targeting interest rates?           Then, as the reader can verify from (A.21),

the identical measure of the effect of a unit money shock can be




                                                                                                 39
obtained s     the response of output to an interest-rate innovation,

divided     for normalization purposes) by the response of money to an

interest- Kate innovation.    Again, these values are obtainable by simpler

regression.

      The example illustrates that, as long as the econometrician       knows

or can estimate the central bank’s operating procedure, it is irrelevant

whether that procedure is interest-rate targeting or money-targeting;       in

either case, the true impact effect of an innovation to money can be

obtained.     However, it is also true that if the wrong operating

procedure is asswed,     the correct impact effect will not be obtained.

Suppose for example that interest rates are being targeted, but the

econometrician measures the impact effect of a money shock by the

regression of the output residual on the money residual.     As can be

calculated from (A.21), this regression coefficient bears no particular

relation to the desired impact effect; instead, it is a mongrel

coefficient that depends on the impact of each type of shock on money

and output, and the relative variances of those shocks.     We conclude

that identification    of the operating procedure is an important

preliminary   step for valid inferences about the effects of monetary

policy shocks.




                                                                            40
                                 Referenma

Andrews, Donald W. K., “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural
Change with Unknown Change Point”, Econometrics 61, 1993, 821-56.

Barran, Fernando, Virginie Coudert, and Benoit Mojon, “The Transmission
of Monetary Policy in the European Countries”, Centre d’Etudes
Prospective  et D’Informations Internationales, working paper no. 96-03,
February 1996.

Batten, Dallas S., Michael   P. Blackwell, In-Su Kim, Simon E. Nocera, and
~uzuru Ozeki, “The Conduct   of Monetary Policy in the Major Industrial
Countries: Instruments and   Operating Procedures”, International Monetary
Fund, Occasional Paper no.   70, July 1990.

Bernanke, Ben, “Alternative Explanations of the Money-Income
Correlation”, “in K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, eds., Real Business Cycles,
Exchange Rates and Actual Policies, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
on Public Policy no. 25, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1986.

Bernanke, Ben and Alan Blinder, “The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels
of Monetary Transmission”, American Economic Review 82, September 1992,
901-21.

Bernanke, Ben and Ilian Mihov, “Measuring Monetary Policy”, National
Bureau of Economic Research working paper no. 5145, June 1995.

Bernanke, Ben and Frederic Mishkin, “Central Bank Behavior and the
Strategy of Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrial
Countries”, in Olivier Blanchard and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, 1992.

Christian,  Lawrence and Martin Eichenbaum, “Identification and the
Liquidity Effect of a Monetary Policy Shock”, in A. Cukierman, Z.
Hercowitz, and L. Leiderman, eds., Political Economy, Growth, and
Business Cycles, Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1992.

Christian,   Lawrence, Martin Eichenbam, and Charles Evans,
“Identification and the Effects of Monetary Policy Shocks”, Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago, working paper WP-94-7, May 1994.

Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler, “How the Bundesbank Conducts
Monetary Policy”, unpublished, Columbia University and NYU, December
1995.

Deutsche Bundesbank,   The Monetary Policy of the Bundesbank, October
1995.

Gerlach, Stefan and Frank Smets, “The Monetary Transmission Mechanism:
Evidence from the G-7 Countries”, in Financial Structure and the
Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism, Basle: Bank for International
Settlements, 1995.

Goodhart, Charles A.E. and Jose’ Vinals, “Strategy and Tactics of
Monetary Policy: Examples from Europe and the Antipodes”, in Jeffrey C.
Fuhrer, cd., Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary
Policpakers,  Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, conf. series no. 38, 1994.



                                                                         41
Haldane, Andrew G., cd., Targeting Inflation, Bank of England, 1995.

Kahn, George and Kristina Jacobson, “Lessons from West German Monetary
Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Economic Review, April
1989, 18-35.

Kasman, Bruce, “A Comparison of Monetary Policy Operating Procedures in
Six Industrial Countries”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly
Review, Summer 1992, 5-24.

Kneeshaw, J.T. and P. Van den Bergh, “Changes in Central Bank Money
Market Operating Procedures in the 1980s”, Bank for International
Settlements (Basle), BIS Economic Papers no. 23, January 1989.

Leiderman, Leonardo, and Lars E.O. Svensson, Inflation Targets, London:
Centre for Economic Policy Research, 1995.

Sargent, Thomas J, and Neil Wallace, “’Rational’ Expectations, the
Optimal Monetary Instrwent, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule”, Journal
of Political Economy 83, 1975, 214-54.

Sims, Christopher, “Macroeconomics   and Reality”, Econometrics   48, 1980,
1-40.

           r “Interpreting the Macroeconomic Time Series Facts: The
Effects of Monetary Policy”, European Economic Review 36, 1992, 975-
1011.

Svensson, Lars, “Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and
Monitoring Inflation Targets”, IIER, Stockholm University (this
journal) .

Trehan, Bharat, “The Practice of Monetary Targeting:  A Case Study of
the West German Experience”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Economic Review, Spring 1988, 30-34.

Tsatsaronis, Costas, “Is There a Credit Channel in the Transmission of
Monetary Policy? Evidence from Four Countries”, in Financial Structure
and the Monetary Policy Transmission Mechanism, Basle: Bank for
International Settlements, 1995

von Hagenv Jurgen, “Monetary Targeting with Exchange Rate Constraints:
The Bundesbank in the 1980s”, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Review,
Vol . 71 no 5, September/October 1989, 53-69.

              “Inflation and Monetary Targeting in Germany”, in Leonardo
Leiderman an: Lars E.O. Svensson, Inflation Targets, London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research, 1995.

von Hagen, Jurgen and Manfred J.M. Neumann, “Germany”, in M. Fratianni
and D. Salvatore, eds., Handbook of Monetary Policy in Industrialized
Countries, Westport CT: Greenwood, 1993.




                                                                          42
Table 1.     Estimates of models      of the operating     procedure
            (6-variable VAR)


a.   Call rate model
         Restrictions:    I-#d=o,      l+~b=o

Sample          Parameter estimates                                    Test of
period            a           P             Od      Ob         0“      OIR (p-value)

1975:1-          .00104       0250      .0045   .0150    0003            0.567
1990:6         (.00092)    (:0041)     (.0003) (.0010) (:0014)

1975:1-        -.00041       0141       .0052    0190   .0059            0.093
1985:1         (.00117)    (:0055)     (.0004) (:0015) (.0025)

1980:7-        -.ooloe   .0188          .0034     .0118     .0041        0.947
1990:6         (.00142) (.0054)        (.0002)   (.0009)   (.0013)



b.   Nonborrowed reserves model
         Restrictions : ~d=o,        ~b=o


Sample          Parameter estimates                                    Test of
period            a           P          0’         0’         0“      OIR (p-value)

1975:1-         .00382   0.090          .0044   .0244        .0170       0.001
1990:6         (.00122) (0.072)        (.0003) (.0021)      (.0013)
1975:1-         .00436   0.107          .0048   .0329         .0220      0.000
1985:1         (.00216) (0.013)        (.0004) (.0052)      (.0018)

1980:7-          00070   0.134          .0032   .0200         .0119      0.073
1990:6         (:00183) (0.031)        (.0002) (.0071)      (,0010)


Notes: Estimates are based on six-variable VARS, excluding the Lotiard
rate (see text) . The first-stage VAR is re-estimated for each
subperiod, using 12 lags in the full sample and 6 non-consecutive lags
(1,2,3,6,9,12) in the sub-samples. The final column gives the p-value
for the test of the overidentifying restrictions of the model for each
subperiod.  Standaxd errors are in parentheses.
Table 2.     Estimates of models of the operating procedure
             (7-variable VAR)


a.   Call rate model
         Restrictions : I-@ ’+py    ’’=o,        l+~b-pyb=o,           +’=0


Sample          Parameter estimates                                           Test of
period             a           P         4’             4’       y“           OIR (p-value)

1975:1-          00016   .0156           0.918 -0.986          -7.91            0.427
1990:6         (:00315) (.0178)         (0.341) (0.159)        (23.2)

1975:1-        -.00004    0123           0.934 -0.993          -1.11            0.116
1981:6         (.01704) (:0077)         (1.547) (0.064)        (10.8)

1981:7-         .00104   .0234           0.914     -0.978 -16.42                0.881
1990:6         (.00205) (.0465)         (0.482     (0.431: (54.6

1975:1-        -.00057   .0124           0.938     -0.996      -5.95            0.603
19e4:12        (.00438) (.0122)         (0.369     (0.083      (22.1

1985:1-           00192    0228          0.901     -0.940      -12.35           0.157
1990:6          (:00223) (:0300)        (0.513     (0.450       (22.0



b.   Nonborrowed       reserves model
         Restrictions:     #’=(),   tp’=o,       #s=o

Sample          Parameter estimates                                           Test of
period             a           P          Y’            Yb        Y“          OIR (p-value)

1975:1-           00884   0.128          2.14         3.23      -0.77            0.OOO
1990:6          (:00304) (0.021)        (3,98)       (1.63)     (0.60)

1975:1-        -.00141   0.185          -8.56         0.63      -0.41            0.000
1981:6         (.00046) (0.036)         (2.35)       (0.17)     (0.55)

1981:7-          .00946   0.131          9.25        -0.55      -1.46            0.128
1990:6          (.00471) (0.035)        (7.24)       (3.70)     (1.15)

1975:1-        -.00180   0.229          -8.87         0.44      -0.19            0.000
1984:12        (.00071) (0.068)         (3.22)       (0.17)     (0.67)

1985:1-          .00440   0.089         -1.97         0.81      -3.07            0.638
1990:6          (.00290) (0.022)        (5.70)       (1.15)     (2.07)
Table 2. (continued)


c.   Lombard rate model
         Restrictions :   yd=o,   yb=o,       yn=o

Sample          Parameter estimates                                 Test of
period            a           P       4’             4’             OID (p-value)

1975:1-         .00635   ,0075       0.561 -1.044         -0.001       0.456
1990:6         (.00369) (.0074)     (0.541) (0.024)       (0.003)

1975:1-          04477    .0105     -0.152     -1.028      0.005       0.354
1981:6         (:06793) (.0026)     (0.098)    (0.018)    (0.003)

1981:7-         .00330   .0247       0.706 -0.988         -0.006       0.460
1990:6         (.00213) (.0200)     (0.511) (0.166)       (0.006)

1975:1-         .00792    0061,      0.448 -1,046          0.000       0.925
1984:12        (.00496) (:0063)     (0.559) (0.021)       (0.003)
1985:1-         .00476    1095       0.114   0.057        -0.024       0.423
1990:6         (.00198) (:0531)     (0.534) (0.216)       (0.011)



Notes : Estimates are for three models of Bundesbank operating
procedures, described in the text. Estimates for subsamples are based
on residuals estimated for a single VAR over the entire 1975-1990 sample
period. Twelve lags of each variables are included in the VAR. The
final column gives the p-value for the test of the overidentifying
restrictions of the model for each subperiod.  Standard errors are in
parentheses.
Table 3.         German money growth and inflation targets, 1975-1995:
                    Derivation-and outcomes


                 MONEY GROWTH                     INFLATION               POTENTIAL     VELOCITY
                                                                           OUT PUT
Year    Target    Actual   Deviation    Target    Actual      Deviation   Projection   Projection

1975       8        10.1     +2.1        4.5        5.6         +1.1         NA           NA
1976       8         9.2     +1.2        4.5        3.7         -0.8         4.5**        0.5
1977       8         9.0     +1.0         4.0       3.3         -0.7         5.0++        1.0
1970       8        11.4        +3.4      3.5       2.6         -0.9         3.0          NA
1979     6-9         6.1        -1.4]     3.0       5.4         +2.4         3.0          NA
1980     5-e         4.9        -1.6      4.0       5.3         +1.3         3.0          1.0
1981     4-7         3.5        -2.0    3.5-4.0     6.7         +2.95        2.5          1.0
1982     4-7         6.0        +0,5]     3.5       4.5         +1.0       1.5-2.0        0.0
1983     4-7        7.0         +1.5]     3.5       2.6         -0.9       1.5-2.0        0.0
1904     4-6        4.6         -0.4]     3.0       2.0         -1.0         2.0          0.0
1985     3-5        4.5      +0.5]        2.5       1.6         -0.9         2.0          0.0
1986   3.5-5.5      7.7      +3.2         2.0      -1.0         -3.0         2.5          0.0
1987     3-6        8.1      +3.6         2.0       1.0         -1.0         2.5          0.0
19e8     3-6        6.7      +2.2         2.0       1.9         -0.1         2.0         -0.5
19e9       5        4.7      -0.3         2.0       3.0         +1.0       2.0-2.5       -0.5
1990     4-6        5.6     [+0.6]        2.0       2.7         +0.7         2.5         -0.5
1991     4-6+       5.2     [+0.2]        2.0       4.2         +2.2         2.5         -0.5
1992   3.5-5.5      9.4      +4.9         2.0       3.7         +1.7         2.75        -0.5
1993   4.5-6.5      7.4      +1.9         2.0       3.7         +1.7         3.0         -1.0***
1994     4-6        5.7     [+0,7]        2.0       2.5         +0.5         2.5         -1.0
1995     4-6        2.1      -2.9         2.0       1.8         -0.2         2.75        -1.0


Notes: “Money” is central bank money at 1974 reserve ratios through
1987, West German M3 for 1988-1990, and all-German M3 since 1991. Money
growth Iates are measured year over year for 1975-1978 and fourth
quarter to fourth quarter thereafter.  Deviations are measured from the
midpoint of the target range; brackets indicate that the money-growth
outcome was within the target range. For 1975-1985, inflation targets
are the announced rate of “unavoidable inflation”.  Since 1986, the
inflation target has been 2.0%, the rate judged consistent with “price
stability”. Money growth targets are calculated (using the quantity
equation) as the inflation target plus the potential growth of
production minus an adjustment for expected changes in velocity.


● The 1991 target range for money growth was lowered to 3-5% in July.
●* Includes expected increase in capacity utilization as well as
increase in production potential.
“+ Includes “price rise related to administrative decisions” regarding
eastern Germany as well as velocity adjustment.

Source: Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Reports and Annual Reports,
various issues.
Table 4.    Determinants of German monetary policy


                                Granger-causes policy indicator?
                                            (p-value)
Equation    Variables            Lombard rate    Call rate   LR/CR

1.    EE(CPIt+lz-CPIt)                 .0296          .0176          .0221
      Et(Mt+12-Mt)                     .0387          .1290          .0540
      Policy indicator                 .0000          .0000          .0000


2.    Et(cPIt+12-cPIt)                 .0351          .0443          . 0209
      Ec(IP~.lz-IPE)                   .0751          .5226          .1660
      Et(Mt+12-Mt)                     .0498          .1132          .1024
      Policy indicator                 .0000          .0000          .0000


3.    Et(CPIt+lz-CPI,)                 .0236          .0287          .0963
      EL(IPC+12-IPL)                   .4175          .5968          .6134
      Et(Mt+12-Mt)                     .0258          .1012          .2670
      Policy indicator                 .0000          .0000          .0000
      Et(ER:+12-ERt)                   .3742          .4385          .9543



                          Percentage of Lombard rate forecast variance
                                     (horizon in months)

Equation   Variables      1      2       3      4      6      12        24

1.    EL(CPIL+12-CPIL)    3.4    1.7    1.1     0.8    3.4    10.0      58.2
      Ec(Mt+12-Mt)        0.0    0.6    0.7     0.9    2.1     1.8       2.5
      Lombard rate       96.5   97.7   98.2    98.3   94.5    80.2      39.3


2.    Ec(cPIt+~2-cPIt)    3.7    2.1    2.2     2.5    9.1    31.5      61.8
      E~(IP.+lz-IPt)      0.1    1.0    3.8     8.0   14.2    17.9      10.7
      Et(Mt+12-Mt)        0.7    0.7    0.8     1.2    3.8     5.7       6.7
      Lombard rate       95.6   96.2   93.2    88.3   72.8    44.9      20.9


3.    E~(cPI~+12-cPIt)    0.3    1.0     3.1    5.0   14.4    36.3      47.7
      Et(IPt+~2-IPt)      0.0    0.6     2.4    5.3   10.3    11.0       9.2
      Et(Mt+12-Mt)        0.6    0.6     0.6    0.7    2.2     2.5       3.4
      Lombard rate       99.0   95,0    91.8   87.5   72.2    43.4      21.1
      Et(ER~+12-ERt)      0.0    2.7     2.0    1.5    0.9     6.9      18.6


Notes: This table is derived   from three-, fou~-, and five-variable VARS
including combinations of the policy indicator (the Lombard rate, the
call rate, or a splice of the two rates); and twelve-month-ahead VAR-
based forecasts of the growth rates of the CPI, industrial production,
the money stock (CBM through 1987, M3 afterwards), and the DM/$ exchange
rate. The top half of the table gives p-values for tests of whether
each variable Granger-causes the alternative policy indicators, with low
values indicating a significant relationship.   The bottom half of the
table shows decompositions of forecast variance at various horizons for
the Lombard rate only.
Figure 2:                of   OUtpUL         pric~,         and   [nterat        ~te~         tO Call      ~te              and      Lombard
                                   Shocb          b   TWOV-tor Autoregr~sions


             Cal]?ate Model.Re~pausc
                                  of1P                                                LombardRateModel.Re~ue                                 O( [P




            Cail‘?ateModel.Response
                                 ofCPI




                                                                        u ‘
                                                                                                        -------                     ------
                                                                                                   .                                                  .
                                                                                 ~#   .--”-


                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                               9
                                                                                                                   \
                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                .




           CallRate Model:Respow orCall
                                      Rate                                       kmbard RateUodelRespoueof LombardRate


                                                                                                                                                          I


       I           ‘-   -.
                                                                                                         *.-
                                                                                                                       --------                 “
                                                                                                                                                     --
  4a
                              .
                                  --                                        ‘t
                                       ---
                                             -.       *-*
       I
                                                                                                                                                          I
Fi~re        3: Responses of the Lombard Rate and Forecastsof Inflation, Output Growth,
            .Money. Growth, and Exchange Rate Depreciation to an Innovation in the
                                 One-Year Forecastof Inflation

                Responseof lnf]allon?orecast                             ResponseO(OutputGrowthForecast




             Responseof MoneyGrowthForecast                         Responseof ExchangeRateDepreciation
                                                                                                      ForHasi




“r
        .
                                            *------
            -\d4\                       /
                                    /
                     .        ,%0
                         .4




                                                      Response0[ Lombard
                                                                       Rate




                                               e
