                               NBER WO~G           PAPER SERIES




                             A MODEL OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
                                RATE ~DETERM~ATION




                                          Charles Engel




                                       Working Paper 5766



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1996


I appreciate helpfal comments from a number of colleagues in the field. Some of the work on this
paper was completed while I was a visiting scholar at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. The
views expressed in this paper are my own and are not necessarily shared by the Federal Reserve
Bank of Kansas City or the National Bureau of Economic Research. I acknowledge assistance from
the National Science Foundation, NSF grant #SBR-932078. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in International Finance and Macroeconomics, and NBER’s project on International Capital
Flows. We are gratefil to the Center for International Political Economy for the support of this
project. hy opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

01996 by Charles Engel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that fall credit, including O notice, is given to
the source,
                                                                      NBER Working Paper 5766
                                                                              September 1996


                             A MODEL OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE
                                RATE ~DETERMINATION


                                           ABSTRACT


       Economic agents undertake actions to protect themselves from the short-run impact of

foreign exchange rate fluctuations: Nominal goods prices are set in consumers’ currencies, and firms

hedge foreign exchange risk. A model is presented here which shows that these features of the

economy can lead to indeterminacy in the nominal exchange rate in the short run. There can be

noise in the exchange rate, unrelated to any fundamentals, essentially because the short-run

fluctuations do not influence any rational agent’s behavior. Empirical implications of this sort of

noise are explored.



Charles Engel
Department of Economics
University of Washington
Seattle, WA 98195
and NBER
CMENGEL@U.WASH~ GTON.EDU
       Since the collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s, nominal exchange

rates among industrialized countries have been extremely volatile.     The short-run

movements in exchange rates have b=n much more extreme than early proponents of floating

rams (such as Friedman (1953) and Johnson (1972)) envisaged.

       Two notable puzzles that arise in relation to this volatility are:

(1) What accounts for the volatility?      Some of the tharetical   models of the 1970s were

specifically designed to explain how the nominal exchange rate could be much more

volatile than the underlying economic fundamentals (notably Dombusch (1976)).           But these

models have fared very badly empirically.      Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b), and

subsequently many others, have documented the failure of these models in explaining

short-run movements of exchange rates.       While the models are more successful at longer

horizons (Mark (1995), Chinn and Meese (1995)), the movement of exchange rates at short

horizons seems independent of the movement in what are hypothesized to be the underlying

economic fundamentals (Flood and Rose (1995)).

(2) Despite the huge variability in nominal exchange rates, international trade does not

appear to have b=n greatly adversely affwted (see, for example, Kroner and Lastrapes

(1993)),   On the contrary, there has been a steady opening of markets and expansion in

the volume of trade.

      The story of this paper is simple:     In the short run, nominal exchange rate changes

have essentially no rd   effwts.   But, since a change in the exchange rate does not

affect any agent’s behavior, the level of the exchange rate is indeterminate.      Purely

extrinsic noise causes the exchange rate to fluctuate around the equilibrium value

determined by the fundamentals.

      There are two essential elements to the model presented here.         First, recent work

has noted that nominal exchange rate fluctuations have little effect on the prices

                                                1
consumers pay (Knetter (1989, 1993), Engel (1993), Engel and Rogers (1996)).             There

appears to be forces of both pricing to market and nominal price stickiness at work in

international markets.   Producers charge different prices for similar goods in different

markets.   A German producer might charge one price for its product at home, and another

prim for sale in the U.S.      The reasons for this type of price discrimination have b~n

explored extensively in r=nt     literature (see, for example, Krugman (1987), Dombusch

(1987), Marston (1990)).    Prices may not respond to exchange rate changes either for

reasons explored in the “pass-through” literature, or because there are menu-costs to

changing prices (such as in Mankiw (1985)).

      While nominal price stickiness has bwn a feature of a long line of models of

exchange rates, generally the price stickiness in these models is of a different sort

than has ban   observed in the data.       Dombusch (1976), for example, assumes that

exporters set prices in their own currencies.     If the dollar depreciates relative to the

mark, imports from Germany become more expensive for Americans in the Dombusch

formulation.   But, the evidence suggests that, because firms price to market, they set

the price in the currency of the country that buys the good.        German firms set the price

of their exports to the U.S. in dollar terms.        A change in the exchange rate has no

effect on that price in the short run. 1

      There is an effmt on the profits of a German firm, however, if the dollar

deprmiates and the German firm’s export price is fixed in dollars.        The revenue per item

sold will decline in mark terms.      The German firm’s profits are adversely tifected.       But,

that leads to the second essential element of the model in this paper.      Firms can hedge

against exchange rate fluctuations.    A sufficiently insured firm can fully hedge against

losses from exchange rate fluctuations that are purely noise.

      1   Some of the evidence in the pricing-to-market literature suggests that U. S firms
are different than other firms in their pricing behavior. But, Rangan and Lawrence
(1993) argue that this is an incorrect inference based on faulty data.

                                                 2
         Ind4,    in the simple model presented here, all fluctuations in the exchange rate

are extrinsic.    The exchange rate moves at the whim of foreign exchange traders.          But

that noise affects nobody.      Consumers are unaffectd   because the prices they face are

fixed and unresponsive to exchange rate changes.       The exchange rate risk that firms face

is fully diversifiable.   The firms simply make contracts that s~ify     that the winners

from exchange rate changes pay off the losers.      Since the exchange rate fluctuations have

no other real effects, the firms desire these contracts -- their expected return is

unchanged by the contracts, but the risk from exchange rate fluctuations is eliminated.

         The model in this paper is different than other raent   models of exchange rate

indeterminacy (e. g., King, Wallace and Webcr (1992), Manuelli and P-k           (1990)).   Here,

the indeterminacy arises from two specific observable features of the international

economy -- pricing-to-market and hedging of exchange rate risk. The idea of this paper

does build naturally on the notion that pricing to market increases exchange rate

volatility in equilibrium (Krugman (1989), Betts and Devereux (1996)).       In the model of

this paper, there is “excess” volatility, in the sense that purely extrinsic noise

affects the exchange rate.

         Section 1 presents a simple static general equilibrium model of two countries with

a large number of firms selling products at home and abroad.       The model is one with

flexible prices and a determinate exchange rate.    Its purpose is to determine the

expected prices and exchange rates that firms and consumers face.       In section 2, we

rquire    that prices be set in advance of the determination of the exchange rate.     Prices

will be set at the quilibrium    level from section 1. Firms will also make contracts to

hedge the risk of the exchange rate ending up at some level other than the expected rate

from the model of section 1. The exchange rate will be seen to be indeterminate.

         Section 3 discusses some of the empirical implications of this model.    One is that

there will be little relation betwmn exchange rates and fundamentals in the short run,

                                                3
but that they will be closely related in the long run,   Other possible avenues for

empirical work for future versions of this paper are discussed.    The section also

mnsiders implications of this model for other issues, such as the responsiveness of

trade to exchange rate changes, and the choice of nominal exchange rate regime.

         There is one major determinant of exchange rates that the model ignores -- the role

of speculation in stabilizing the exchange rate.   In the model, the exchange rate is

influenced by extrinsic noise in the short-run, which implies that there is an expected

profit opportunity for speculators who bet that the exchange rate will return to its

fundamental value.     This speculation ought to help nail down the exchange rate.     On the

other hand, hundreds of studies of forward foreign exchange rate market efficiency have

documented the empirical regularity that the forward rate is a biased predictor of future

spot rates, and have made essentially no progress in explaining this bias with models of

rational risk-averse economic agents (SW Hodrick (1987) and Engel (1996) for

comprehensive surveys. ) It is difficult to reject the conclusion that foreign exchange

market s~ulators     do allow expected profit opportunities to go unexploited.   But, this

paper does not attempt to tackle that difficult subjwt: it sidesteps it completely.   It

s=ms likely, however, that the issues raised here concerning how economic agents protmt

themselves from the effats    of foreign exchange rate fluctuations could play a role in

future research into understanding the efficiency or inefficiency of international

capiti    markets.




1. The Equilibrium Model



         The model is of two countries, call them the U.S. and Germany, that are identicd

in the sense that consumers have the same utility functions, producers have the same

                                               4
production functions, and the economies are of the same size.        This is a model with no

uncertainty.



Consumer$

       Consumers in the U.S. maximize

               U=nQ      1 l-R + &.(M’d/p)l-R    + &(l-L)l-R.             o<   @<l

       where



       In this function, ~ is consumption of good i.      The range from O to 1/2 are

produced irl the U. S., and the goods indexed from 1/2 to 1 are produced in Germany.            Md is

the nominal quantity of money demanded by Americans.            L is supply of labor.

      P is defined by



      Some points about the utility function can be briefly noted.        All goods enter

utility symmetrically.     The restriction that #1lie between zero and unity is nmessary

for an equilibrium with monopolistic producers of each good.         Rd    balances appear in the

utility function as a simple way of capturing the transactions motive for holding money.

R can be interpreted as the measure of relative risk aversion for consumers.2

      The budget constraint faced by an American is

      f}i~di    + Md =wL+M+              IT,

The price of good i is pi. All of these prices are expressed in terms of dollars.       The

wage rate paid in competitive labor markets is w.       All individuals receive a transfer of

money, M.      Finally, all individuals are endowed with equal ownership in each of the

American firms.     II is the amount of profits paid to the representative American.


      2  See the discussion on risk aversion and risk neutrality with multiple goods in
Engel (1992).

                                                 5
        The first-order conditions for goods, money and labor demands imply:

        qi = @i/P)-l’@Q,

        Md = PQelm,

        L = 1 - Q(P/w)lm.

        Symmetridy,       the optimization problem faced by Germans is to maximin

               u“ = &Q    ●l-R   + &.(M*d/p”)l-R       +   &(l-L*)l-R.             0<0<1

subject to

        ~~~q~di + M“d = w*L* + M* + IT”.

Two things to note:       Germans hold marks.      There is no currency substitution.         Also, the

budget constraint is expressed in terms of marks.

        Goods, money and labor demands for Germans are given by:

        q; = (p~/P”)-l’@Q*,
        M“d = P*Q*elm,

        L* = 1 - Q“(P”/w*)lm.

Firms

        For i < 1/2, goods are produced in the U. S.; and for i > 1/2, goods are produced by

German firms.       Each good is producd     by a monopolist.            The production function is simply:

        Yi = ;L,.

        Firms set prices for Americans in dollar terms and for Germans in mark terms.                 In

this s~tion,    this has no particular importance, but it will come into play in the next

section in which we assume nominal price stickiness.

        We assume the population in each country is unity, so that demand for firm i‘s

product from Americans is ~ md from Germans is q:.                  So,

        ~=q+        q;.

        The Americm firms maximize

        ‘i = pi~, + ‘PTql - Wa(qi+q;)

                                                   6
Here, s is the dollar price of marks.        We have expressed the firm’s objective in nominal

terms, but as there is no uncertainty in this model, this makes no difference.

       The firm can charge different prices to the two markets.        There is no possibility

for arbitrage by consumers,         The optimal prices for the firm are:

       Pi=     E’
       p; = ~.

These are the standard mark-up pricing rule for a monopolist facing demand curves with

constant elasticities.

       For i > 1/2, the German firm sets prices for its own market and for the American

market.      Its pricing rule is:




       We note that profits are distributed to the consumer-owners of the firms:

       TI = 1~’2nidi,

       IT” = f~,2n~di.



Euuilibnum

      Equilibrium requires in each country that money demand equaI money supply and labor

demand equal labor supply.          Each firm operates along the demand curve that it faces, so

each goods market will be in equilibrium for optimizing firms.         The aggregate budget

constraint in each country must also be satisfied.

      From the money market equilibrium conditions, we have

      Md = M;         M“d = M*.

      Given that the money market is in equilibrium, the aggregate American budget

constraint can be written as:


                                                   7
       .f}i~di    =wL+n.

       From the definition of profits
       ~ = ~~nidi     = J~@iqi+sptqt)dl      - wL.

       So, the budget wnstraint can be rewritten as

       f~,2pi~di =   ~~sp~q~di.


Seen this way, the budget constraint in the U.S. is the constraint that the value of the

its imports, f~,zpl~di, equals the value of its exports, f~sp~q~di.

       Solving for the equilibrium yields:
                            a
       L=     L“ =
                     a+(a/(l-@))l’R;

       q.                   1.
              q: =
                     a+(a/(l-@))lm’

       pi = Me-]m(a+(a/(l-@)) lm); p; = M*e-lm(a+(a/(l-@)) lm);

       w.     l-@M~-lm(a+(~/( l.@))lm); w“ = ~l-@M*e-lm(~+ (a/(l-@))lm);
               a
       and


             M-



2.   Price stickiness and exchange rate indeterminacy



       Now we will consider an alternative view of markets, in which firms must set

nominal prices first, and then financial markets determine the exchange rate.

       Recent empirical work suggests that prices are sticky in terms of the consumer’s

currency.    We will assume stickiness of this sort.    Implicitly, we assume that there are

some menu costs to changing prices, although the menu costs are not modeled explicitly.

       In the model of this section, firms must choose prices before the wage rate and the

exchange rate are rdized.        There is no intrinsic uncertainty in the model,   The

                                                  8
exogenous variables (such as the money supplies) are not subject to random shocks.                           But

there can be extrinsic uncertainty.                The exchange rate’s value is a random variable that

does not depend on the exogenous fundamentals.                            We will derive the properties of the

distribution of that random variable.

        Consumers make their choices with full certainty about the wonomic environment.

They know all goods prices, the wage rate, the exchange rate, firms’ profits, etc.                         So,

their optimization problem is exactly the same as the one described in section 1. Their

demand curves are the same as in that section.

        For the firms, we assume that each American firm can buy units of a contract of the

following {orm: if the actual exchange rate, s’, is greater than T, the equilibrium

exchange rate from section 1, the firm gives (~ - 1) to the insurer for each dollar of

insurance the firm has purchased.                  Likewise, if s’ is less than T, the firm receives -($

- 1) from the insurer for each dollar of insurance.

        We will also assume that if s’ is greater than T, that each foreign firm receives

(1 - ~)   from the insurer for each mark of insurance they buy, and they pay -(1 - $)

when s’ is less than T.

        We note that the profits of the domestic firm are given by:

        ~i = pi% +       S’ p~qf   -   WU(~+Cl~)      -   (~   -   l)xi   -   coher-



e       xi is dollars of insurance that the firm purchases and C is the cost of the

insurance contract.       There is a similar function for the expected profits of the foreign

firm:

               pi%
        n;=—         +   pfqf - w“a(~+q~)            +    (1 - ~)x~ - C*(x~).
                s’

        We now claim an ~uilibnum                   is given by:

        % = ~i~ q; = ~;;


                                                               9
       C(p:q;)     = o, C*Y
                            [1      = o;


       and s’ is a random draw from a distribution in which E(ln(s’ )) = In(s).

In the notation above, a “ -”      refers to the equilibrium value of the variable from Section

1.

      To show this is an equilibrium, we will see that at these values consumers

(domestic   and foreign) and firms (domestic and foreign) have no incentive to change their

behavior.

      First note that in this quilibrium

      ‘i = Piqi     +   ‘PIqT      - Wa(~i+~~).
Profits for the domestic firm are exactly the same as in section 1, Likewise, for the

foreign firm in equilibrium,

      =* = Piqi
       I   —        + P~~T       - ‘“a(~i+qf),
             x

which is exactly the same level of profits the firm received in section 1 in equilibrium.

      So, consider the problem facing a domestic consumer.           The profits it receives, ~,

are the same as in wtion        1; it receives the same money transfer, M, from the

government; and, the wages and prices it faces are the same as in swtion 1. Hence, it

will choose the same quantities of each good, and the same quantity of money; and, it

will supply the same quantity of labor.          A similar argument holds for foreign consumers.

      Turning to the firms, first consider the US. firm, which must chwse prices and xi



                                                    10
before the exchange rate is known,       We assume that the managers of the firm are concerned

not only with the expectd       profits, but also are concerned with the uncertainty about

profits.    Americans cannot buy shares in German firms, and vice-versa.         So, Americans

cannot diversify exchange risk through their portfolio holdings.      Hence, the owners of

the firms dirwt the managers to diversify the risk so as to maximize the owners’

expected utility.

         Assume for the moment that s’ is distributed    such that E(s’ ) = T.     Then, the

ex~ted      profits for the U.S. firm in the proposed equilibrium are

         E(mi) = Piqi + T P;q; - w a(qi ‘q;).

Note that the expected profits are not a functio[l of the amount of insurance purchased.

The firm can eliminate all risk and not affect its expected profits if it purchases xi =

T p~q~. In this case, the firm’s profits are independent of the actual exchange rate, s’.

The firm’s profits will be known with cefinty,        so the firm chooses its price to

maximize its profits, given by:



Since this is exactly the problem the firm faces in section 1, it chooses ~ = ~ i; q: =



         A similar argument would apply to the German firm.

         Since consumers’ choices are the same as in section 1, and producers choices are

the same, clearly the same values of ~, q;, pi, p;, w and w“ will be ~uilibrium          values.


         We still n~     to show that C( T P ~~ ~) = O and, C“ ~


the total payout by American firms is
                                                                [1
                                                                Y
                                                                      = O. To see this, note that




       f~(s’-~)~~~~di.

The total receipts by German firms, expressed in dollar terms are



                                                 11
       f’
            112
                  (~’-~)riqidi
                             Y“


The total payout by American firms equals the total rweipts by German firms, since

       ‘~~~;~~di                   = ‘~,~Pi~idi~
by the equilibrium wndition from wtion                  1.

       The net payout is zero, irrespective of the rdization              of the exchange rate, s’.

If the administrative costs of providing insurance are zero, and the insurance market is

competitive, the price of the insurance will qual its cost -- zero -- in equilibrium,

      This demonstrates that an equilibrium exists in which consumers’ purchases are the

same as the equilibrium quantities in section 1, prices and wages are the same as in

swtion 1, profits for all firms are the same as in section 1, and employment is the same

as in section 1. All of this is independent of the actual level of the exchange rate,

s’ . So, there is nothing that ties down the exchange rate -- it is indeterminate.

      Something has been swept under the rug in the derivation of the equilibrium above,

but now it must be brought out into the open.

      Suppose E(s’ ) = x, as we postulated when solving the U.S. firm’s problem.                      Then,

clearly, the American firm’s expected profits under un~rta.inty with no insurance

contract are the same as their actual profits in section 1. This firm would fully insure

against exchange rate fluctuations if the insurance were frm.

      But, the foreign firm’s ex~ted               profits in this case are higher than its certain

profits when the exchange rate equals x.                To sw this, note that when the exchange rate

equals T, its revenues from sales to the domestic country, expressed in foreign currency

                  Tiqi       But
terms are —.                       9
           T

      F,


            [1
             ~i,~i
                  s
                         >
                              Piqi
                                  T’
                                        if E(s’) = T,




                                                         12
 bwause E(l/s’ ) > l/E(s’ ) by Jensen’s inequality.

         Why might the firms diversify all of their exchange rate risk, as postulated in the

 equilibrium?    First, note that the firms would want to diversify a pretty large fraction

 of this risk even though the expected return from the risky situation is greater than in

 the nskless situation.

         Suppose, for example that s’ were distributed such that E(ln(s’ )) = ln( T ) -- which

is how the equilibrium is described above.      (If the equilibrium distribution of exchange

rates has this property, the hedging problem faced by American and German firms is

symmetric. ) Then the Appendix shows that assuming ln(s’ ) is normally distributed, a risk
                                              2R-(1/~)
averse firlll would want to insure a fraction ~o          f the profits, where R is the

coefficient of relative risk aversion and ~ is the fraction of expected revenues derived

from foreign sales.

         Reeent empirical studies of foreign exchange markets suggest that models using

ex~ted      utility analysis have a hard time explaining the size of the foreign exchange

risk premium unless consumers are assumed to be very risk averse (see Engel (1996)).           So,

to calibrate the share of profits that are hedged in the ex~ted    utility framework, we

should choose a large value of R.      For example, Mark (1985) estimates a value greater

than 50.    If 7 = 1/2, then the firms would hedge 98 per cent of the risk.      If R equals

ten, 90 per cent of the risk is hedged.

      If there is a small cost for consumer-owners to monitor the exchange rate, the

owners will instruct firm managers to hedge 100 per cent of the exchange rate risk.

      If it were not for the effat of exchange rates on their firms’ profits, consumers

would have no reason to know the exchange rate.        They face prices and wages denominated

in their own currency.     If the firm did not hedge all of the exchange rate risk, the

consumers would have to monitor exchange rates in order to know what dividends they are

supposed to receive from the firm.     If they did not know the exchange rate, the managers

                                               13
might lie to the owners about the effwt of the exchange rate on the profits -- for

instance, claiming a loss from exchange rate fluctuations when in fact there was a gain

(so the managers could pocket the difference.)

         If the managers were instructed to hedge all exchange rate risk, the profits of the

firm would be independent of the exchange rate.          Even though 100 % hedging is not optimal

if monitoring costs are zero, we have shown that it is nearly so.        When there are some

small monitoring costs, it will be optimal for the owners to instruct the firm managers

to hdge     all exchange rate risk.

         Note that it is important that the exchange rate is centered on the quilibrium

exchange rate.     That is, E(ln(s’ )) = ln( T ).    If the mean of the exchange rate were much

different than its fundamental value from section 1, then either the American firms or

the German firms would find they would want to hedge far less than 100 per cent of the

exchange rate risk, bmause there would be a trade-off between risk and return.          For

example, if E(ln(s’ )) was much greater than ln( g ), domestic firms’ expected profits would

increase significantly as the fraction of profits hedged was smaller.      The implication

here is that even though the exchange rate is indeterminate in the model, the

indeterminacy is of a particular form.      The noise in the exchange rate is not systematic,

so that E(ln(s’ )) = in(T).

         The argument for indeterminacy rests on firms hedging 100 per cent of the risk.        If

they did not, then s’ affects firms’ profits.       This would in turn have an income effect

for consumers which would affect their demands.          But, then the equilibrium would depend

on s’.     But, if owners want to avoid the cost of monitoring the exchange rate, so they

have the managers hedge 100 per cent of the exchange rate risk, the exchange rate will be

indeterminate.




                                                    14
3.     Empirical Implications and Directions for Future Research



            The model here is static.   As was noted in the introduction, a fully dynamic model

would n~          to capture the behavior of foreign exchange spulators.    We do not attempt

that here.       If we abstract from international capital markets, allowing no borrowing or

lending,3 then the dynamic model would be the static model repeated period by period.

        The model does have a useful and interesting empirical implication.      The basic

result here is that in any period, the log of the exchange rate is equal to its

fundamental value plus a mean-zero extrinsic error term:

        ln(~      = f, + ct.

        Now, suppose that the fundamentals have a unit root.        The previous equation implies
that the exchange rate and the fundamentals are cointegrated.        In the long run they move

together.

        Nonetheless, the short run correlation in their changes could be quite low.     Note

that

        ln(~+l)-ln(s~    = f,+I-f, + c,+~ - ct.

If f, follows a random walk,

        f1+1 = ft + q+,,

then the correlation between ln(~+ ,)-in(s) and ft+~-f[ is equal to




where m: is the variance of ~ and a; is the variance of CL. This correlation could be

fairly small if the variance of the extrinsic noise, r:,    were large.

        This observation is consistent with the recent literature on empirical exchange


        3And, if cash balances are taxed away at the end of the period, as in Grilli and
Roubini (1992).

                                                  15
 iate models.     While it has ben shown that in the short run the relation betw=n the

 exchange rate and the fundamentals is tenuous (Meese and Rogoff (1983a, 1983b) and

 Frankel and Meese (1987)), recent work shows tnat in the long run exchange rates and

 fundamentals are related (Chinn and Meese (1995), Mark (1995), and NlacDonald and Taylor

(1994)).     This model also implies that there is excess volatility of the exchange rate,

in the sense of Huang (1981), or bubbles as defined by Mwse (1986).

          Another implication of the model is that the volume of trade does not change much

in response to changes in the exchange rate.         Of course, this is exactly the empirical

observation that motivated the entire literature on exchange-rate pass-through.

          Flood and Rose (1995) have noted that the volatility of the exchange rate is

unrelated to the volatility of fundamentals.    Specifically, when nominal exchange rates

are fixed or targeted within narrow bands, the fundamentals are no less variable than

when exchange rates are floating.      That finding is exactly consistent with the model

presented here.     A further implication of the model in this paper is that the choice of

nominal exchange rate regime does not much matter for short-run considerations.            Exchange

rate volatility does not concern any agents because it does not affect consumers’ prices,

and firms hedge away the exchange rate risk.

       The model presented in this paper raises several interesting issues for further

research:

      We take the menu-cost pricing as exogenously given.           However, it seems plausible

that nominal prices of imported goods would respond less to nominal exchange rate changes

if the exchange rate changes were not based on changes in fundamentals.           As we have

noted, these exchange rate fluctuations tend to be transitory.      In dynamic models of

menu-cost pricing, firms tend are less likely to change prices in response to transitory

shocks.     This presents the possibilityy of an interesting source of feedback betw~n    menu-

cost pricing and exchange-rate instability.    On the one hand, a principle source of the

                                                16
short-run indeterminacy of the exchange rate in our model is the menu-cost pricing.               But,

firms may be more likely to choose menu-cost pricing in the face of short-run

nonfundamental fluctuations in exchange rates.

       We have ignored the effects of exchange rate fluctuations on the values of foreign-

held assets in our model.       This may not be a bad approximation, given the extreme home-

bias in asset holdings that has been noted.      Perhaps the model presented here could even

help explain that home bias.       Empirical models have indicated that the variance of

investors’ portfolios could be substantially reduced with more international

diversification.4    But, those estimates may overstate the gains from diversification.      It

is likely that the econometrician overstates the conditional variance of returns from

domestic assets, because the ~onometrician       does not use all the information that

investors use to calculate expected returns.     On the other hand, if a great dd     of the

short-run uncertainty in exchange rates is pure noise, then the econometrician probably

does not much overstate the variance of returns on foreign assets.       The net effect of

this is that the ~onometrician     probably overstates the variance of portfolios that are

biased toward home assets relative to internationally diversified portfolios.

       Finally, the model does not address how the exchange rate is determined and who

determines it.      The exchange rate is pure noise, unrelated to fundamentals.     But, a more

complete story might include the behavior of the “chartists” of Frankel and Froot (1990).

Their chartists are speculators whose expectations are not rational, but are determined

by “charts” of past behavior of the nominal exchange rate.        Since the actual level of the

exchange rate is not important to the “fundamentalists” in our model, who have protectd

themselves from exchange rate noise by setting nominal prices ahead of time and hedging

the effeets of foreign exchange fluctuations on profits, a complete dynamic model might

have a role for the chartists.

       4   For example, see Tesar and Werner (1994)

                                                 17
                                                                   Appendix

                                            Derivation of Share of Profits Hedged



      Take the representative’s indirect utility function to be a function of firms’

total revenue, since ultimately the firm owner r=ives                                          all of the revenue either as

profit or wages.            Let TR denote total revenue, so:

      TR =          Z   +    S’Z*     -   (S’-   T)AZ*,


where z      ❑   pq, z* = p“q”, and A is the share of foreign revenues hedged.

      First, note

      U(TR) s U(E(TR)) + U’ (E(TR))(TR-E(TR))                                             + jU’’(E(TR))(TR-E(TR))2.

      Then,

      E(U(TR)) ~ U(E(TR)) + ;U’’(E(TR))va-rWR)

                        =   U(Z      +      T Z*A    +    (1-A)   z*E(s’    ))       +    ~U’’(E(TR))((l-A)Z*)   2Var(S’   ).


      If s’ is normally distributed, we have:

      E(s’ ) = E(el”(s’’)                  = eE(ln(s”)            + ‘1’2)vU(1n(s’ ‘).

      With E(ln(s’ )) = ln( T ), we have

      E(sJ       ) = ~ e(ljz)v~(ln(s’                )) ~ T (1 +~Var(ln(s’ )).

      Also, Var(s’ ) + T 2Var(ln(s’ )).

     The first-order condition, then, is
     dE(U(m))
     ~=

     U’ (E(TR))[~T                  z“Var(ln(s’ ))] - U“(E(TR))Z “2T 2Var(ln(s’ ))(l-h)                          = O,

      where we have assumed U“’ (E(TR))Var(TR) s O.

     From the first-order condition, we have

     -j + yR(l-a)               = O,

                            -E(TR)U’’(E(TR)) ~d ~ ~ T                            ●   “.
     where R s
                                                    &


                                                                           18
                       2R-(1/v)
      This implies h = ~.

      Since exchange rates are log-normally distributed, and E(ln(s’ )) = ln( x ), the

hedging problem of the foreign firms is symmetric.    In our model 7 is approximately equal

to 1/2.




                                            19
                                         References


Betts, Caroline, and Michael B. Devereux, 1996, Exchange rate dynamics in a model of
      pricing-to-market, University of British Columbia, working paper.

Chinn, Menzie D., and Richard A. Meese, 1995, Banking on currency forecasts: How
     predictable is change in money?, Journal of International Economics 38, 161-178.

Dombusch, Rudiger, 1976, Expectations and exchange rate dynamics, Journal of Political
    Economy 84, 1161-1176.

Dombusch, Rudiger, 1987, Exchange rates and prices, American Economic Review 77, 93-106.

Engel, Charles, 1992, On the foreign exchange risk premium in a general quilibrium
     model, Journal of International Economics 32, 305-319.

Engel, Charles, 1993, Rd exchange rates and relative prices: An empirical
     investigation, Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 35-50.

Engel, Charles, 1996, The forward discount anomaly and the risk premium: A survey of
     recent evidence, Journal of Empirical Economics 3, 123-192.

Engel, Charles, and John H. Rogers, 1996, How wide is the border?, American Economic
     Review, forthcoming.

Flood, Robert P., and Andrew Rose, 1995, Fixing exchange rates: A virtual quest for
     fundamentis, Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 3-37.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Kenneth A. Froot, 1990, Chartists, fundamentalists, and the
     demand for dollars, in Anthony Courakis and Mark Taylor, eds., Private behavior and
     government policy in interdependent countries (Clarendon Press, Oxford).

Frankel, Jeffrey A., and Richard Meese, 1987, Are exchange rates excessively variable?,
     NBER Macrwonomics       Annual 2, 117-162.

Friedman, Milton, 1953, The case for flexible exchange rates, in M. Friedman, Essays in
     positive economics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Grilli, Vittorio and Nouriel Roubini, 1992, Liquidity and exchange rates, Journal of
       International Economics 32, 339-352.

Huang, Roger, 1981, The monetary approach to exchange rates in an efficient foreign
    exchange market: Tests based on volatility, Journal of Finance 36, 31-41.

Johnson, Harry G., 1972, The case for flexible exchange rates, in H.G. Johnson, Further
     essays in monetary monomics (Allen and Unwin, London).



                                            20
King, Robert G.; Neil Wallace; and, Warren E. Weber, 1992, Nonfundamenti          uncertainty and
     exchange rates, Journal of International Economics 32, 83-108.

Knetter, Michael, 1989, Price discrimination by U.S. and German exporters, American
     ~nomic    Review 79, 198-210.

Knetter, Michael, 1993, International wmparisons of pricing-to-market behavior, American
     Economic Review 83, 473-486.

Kroner, Kenneth F., and William D. hstrapes, 1993, The impact of exchange rate
     volatility on international trade: Reducd form estimates using the GARCH-in-ma
     model, ~oumal of International Money and Finanm 12, 298-318.

Krugman, Paul, 1987, Pricing to market when the exchange rate changes, in S. Amdt and
    J.D. Richardson, eds,, R4-financial linkages among open economies (MIT Press,
    Cambridge, MA.).

Krugman, Paul, 1989, Exchange rate instab~lity (MIT Press, Cambridge).

MacDonald, Ronald, and Mark P, Taylor, 1994, The monetary model of the exchange rate:
    hng-run relationships, short-run dynamics and how to beat a random walk, Journal of
    International Money and Finance 13, 276-290.

MLnkiw, N, Gregory, 1985, Small menu costs and large business cycles: A macroeconomic
    model of monopoly, Quarterly Journal of Economics 100, 529-539.

Manuelli, Rodolfo E. and James Peck, 1990, Exchange rate volatility in an equilibrium
    asset pricing model, International Economic Review 31, 559-574.

Mark, Nelson B., 1985, On time varying risk premia in the foreign exchange market: An
     econometric analysis, Journal of Monetary Economics 16, 3-18.

Mark, Nelson B., 1995, Exchange rates and fundamentals: Evidence on long-horizon
     predictability, American Economic Review 85, 201-218,

Marston, Richard, 1990, Pricing to market in Japanese manufacturing, Journal of
     International Economics 29, 217-236.

Meese, Richard, 1986, Tests for bubbles in exchange markets: A case for sparkling rates?,
    Journal of Political Economy 94, 345-373,

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1983a, Empirical exchange rate models of the
    seventies: Do they fit out of sample, Journal of International Economics 14, 3-24.

Meese, Richard, and Kenneth Rogoff, 1993b, The out-of-sample failure of exchange rate
    models: Sampling error or misspecification?, in J. Frenkel, ed., Exchange rates and
    international macroeconomics (University of Chicago Press, Chicago).

Rangan, Subramanian and Robert Z. Lawrence, 1993, The responses of U.S. firms to exchange
    rate fluctuations: Piercing the corporate veil, Brookings Papers on Economic
    Activity 2, 341-379.


                                           21
Tesar, Linda L. and Ingrid M. Werner, 1994, International equity transactions and U. S,
     portfolio choice, in Jeffrey A. Frankel, ed., The internationalization of equity
      markets (University of Chicago Press).




                                           22
