                               NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         DO MARKETS RESPOND MORE TO MORE
                           RELIABLE LABOR MARKET DATA?
                           A TEST OF MARKET RATIONALITY




                                         Alan B. Krueger




                                       Working Paper 5769




                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   September 1996



I thank Alan Blinder, David Card, Charles Jones and Bill Parks for helpful discussions, and Eric
Wang for excellent research assistance. I have also benefitted from helpfil comments from seminar
participants at the BLS, CEA, Princeton University and Lehigh University, The Princeton Center
for Economic Policy Studies provided partial financial support. Naturally, I solely am responsible
for all views presented in this paper and any errors. This paper is part of NBER’s research program
in Labor Studies. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

O 1996 by Alan B. Krueger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including O notice,
is given to the source.
                                                                        NBER Working Paper 5769
                                                                                September 1996


                            DO MARKETS RESPOND MORE TO MORE
                              RELIABLE LABOR MARKET DATA?
                              A TEST OF MARKET RATIONALITY


                                            ABSTRACT



        Since 1979, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has nearly quadrupled the size of the

sample used to estimate monthly employment changes.            Although first-reported employment

estimates are still noisy, the magnitude of sampling variability has declined in proportion to the

increase in the sample size. A model of rational Bayesian updating predicts that investors would

assign more weight to the BLS employment survey as it became more precise.               However, a

regression analysis of changes in interest rates on the day the employment data are released finds no

evidence that the bond market’s reaction to employment news intensified in the late 1980s or early

1990s. For the time period as a whole, an unexpected increase of 200,000 jobs is associated with

an 8 basis point increase in the interest rate on 30 year Treasury bonds, and a 9 basis point increase

in the interest rate on 3 month bills, all else equal. Additionally, announced hourly wage increases

are associated with higher long-tern interest rates, while announced changes in the unemployment

rate and revisions to past months’ employment estimates have a statistically insignificant effect on

long-term interest rates.

Alan B. Krueger
Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
akrueger@pucc .princeton.edu
        Much existing work on the efficient markets hypothesis tests whether “new information”

affects market valuations, and whether “old information” has no impact on market valuations.

For example, Pearce and Roley (1985) find that deviations between the announced and expected

money supply affect the S&P 500 on the announcement day, while the expected money supply

has no effect. Related work on inflation amouncements has been done by Schwert (1981), Urich

and Wachtel (1985), McQueen and Roley (1993), and others.            This approach to testing the

efficient markets hypothesis, however, leaves open the possibility that markets may under or over

react to new information. 1

        This paper uses an alternative approach to test whether markets respond efficiently to new

information.   The test is based on the fact that the survey the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS)

uses to estimate payroll employment was greatly expanded and improved in the 1980s. The BLS

employment survey provides the first government economic statistics each month, and is widely

reported on and watched by financial players. Stevenson (1996), for example, recently noted,

“In the markets, the monthly employment report has become the single most important indicator

of economic strength, potential inflation and Fed strategy. ” Most importantly for our purposes,

the sample size of the BLS survey increased nearly four-fold between 1979 and 1995. Because

the sample size was increased, data from the survey became more reliable over time. The Root

Mean Square Error (RMSE) of estimated employment fell from 121,000 in 1979 to 71,000 in

1994.   The central question raised in this paper is: Did the bond market respond more to

unexpected movements in the announced employment data as the data became more reliable?




    lShiller (1979) of course, provides a test of whether Iong-tem interest rates are too volatile.
Other work tests f;r mean reversion in asset price movements, or for calendar effects, or for
weather effects (for examples, see DeBondt and Thaler, 1985, Reinganum, 1981, and Saunders,
1993).
                                                2

       Before examining the market responses to employment data, in the next section I describe

the BLS Current Employment Statistics (CES) program in more detail. An unusual feature of

this program is that the population mean employment is eventually revealed from a complete

count of unemployment insurance payroll tax records, the so called “benchmark employment

figures. ” A comparison of the survey results to the benchmark figures provides evidence that

the reliability of the monthly releases has indeed improved as the sample size increased. Another

finding is that the median prediction of professional forecasters is highly correlated with the

survey estimates and with the benchmark figures, and is close to an unbiased estimate of the

actual employment change. Interestingly, the median forecast has some abili~ to predict the

ultimate benchmark employment numbers even after conditioning on the survey estimate, This

finding suggests that analysts can derive a better estimate of true employment movements by

combining the forecast and survey estimates.

       The remainder of the paper examines the relationship between the employment data

releases and interest rates. Section 11presents a theoretical model showing that ratioml Bayesian

investors would place more weight on the employment survey as the size of the sample increases.

Another reason the employment data might cause a greater response in the market over time is

that many observers believe the Federal Reserve Board shifted its focus away from money supply

targets and toward employment monitoring in the mid 1980s,2 Indeed, most forecasters did not

begin making employment forecasts until 1985, and there is no “consensus” estimate of




    2Cook and Kom (1991) provide some evidence of a switch in the short-tern interest rate’s
reaction to employment news after the change in Fed policy. One anomalous finding in their
results, however, is that the strongest reaction to employment news occurred in the 1980-82
period.
                                                 3

employment growth prior to 1985. If the shift in the Fed’s emphasis was not motivated by

improvements in the employment data, this change in monetary policy may confound the

relationship between employment data and market reactions. Thus, a finding of increased market

responses to the employment numbers as the sample size increased may reflect a rational

response to more precise data, or a reaction to the change in the Fed’s policy, or both. But a

finding of a constant response to employment news would present a puzzle for two reasons.

       As expected, results presented in Section III and IV indicate that movements in the BLS

survey data have a significant and sizable effect on the 30 year Treasury bond yield and on short

term Treasury bill yields on the day the employment numbers are released.         An unanticipated

increase of 200,000 jobs is associated with about a 4 to 8 basis point increase in the long bond

yield, and a larger increase in the short-term bond yield. Contra~ to expectations, however, the

effect of reported employment changes on interest rates was at least as strong in the early 1980s

as it was in the mid 1990s. This finding is quite surprising in view of the widely held belief that

financial markets only followed the employment releases after the Fed shifted its focus away from

the money supply in the mid 1980s,

       Four additional findings are noteworthy. First, interest rates are not significantly affected

by amouncements      of revisions to past months’ employment data; ordy the latest month

employment change seems to matter.         Second, announced increases in hourly pay have a

statistically significant, positive impact on interest rates.     Third, unexpected changes in

unemployment are insignificantly related to long-term interest rates, but significantly related to

short-term rates.   Fourth, the long-term interest rate is significantly related to the forecasted

employment growth conditioml on the deviation between the forecast and the employment
                                                 4

survey. This latter finding results from a positive correlation between the forecast error and the

employment forecast, as the forecast has an insignificant effect on the bond yield when the

forecast error is not conditioned on. Because investors cannot condition on the employment news

in advance of the employment release, this finding is not evidence of an inefficient market.



I. Evaluation of BLS Employment Data

       The BLS conducts the CES survey of business establishments each month to make timely

estimates of nonfarrn employment, hours of work, and pay .3 The survey pertains to the pay

period covering the 12th day of each month. The CES data for the previous month are typically

released at 8:30 AM on the first Friday of each month, although the data may be released on

other days if the first Friday falls on a holiday (e. g., July 4th) or if there is insufficient time

between the survey and first Friday of the month (e.g., March). On the release date, the BN

reports the first estimate of employment for the previous month, as well as the first revision to

the employment estimate from two months ago and the second revision to the estimate from three

months ago. In addition, the BLS reports information from the household survey (the Current

Population Survey), which includes the monthly unemployment rate.

       The sample of establishments underlying the CES survey is drawn from unemployment

insurance (UI) tax records.      The sample is a stratified sample, with strata consisting of

geographic location, establishment size, and industry cells. Sampled establishments may stay in

the survey for several years and even decades. The BLS uses the survey data to make a “linked

relative” estimate of employment, in which only establishments that are in the survey in two



    3For a detailed description of the CES survey, see BN (1996).
                                                5

adjacent months are used to estimate the change in employment.      This method was selected to

take advantage of the high month-to-month covariance in employment within establishments. To

adjust for births of establishments that are not captured in the sampling scheme, the BLS adds

a “bias” factor to the survey estimate each month. 4 The bias factor is based in part on a model

of births of establishments.   Additionally, after about a 7 month lag the BLS receives a census

of employment based on the universe of UI payroll tax records. This count also is used to adjust

the bias factor. Each June the complete count of employment from the UI files is used to make

a “benchmark adjustment” to the previously released employment data; in principle, the

benchmark data are the population mean for nonagricultural employment. 5

       Beginning in the late 1970s, the BLS greatly increased the sample of establishments that

were surveyed to improve geographic and industry coverage, Additionally, steps were taken to

increase the response rate; most importantly, the BN moved to an automated system in which

respondents could answer the survey by pushing the buttons of a touch-tone telephone. Both of

these efforts led to a higher sample size. Figure 1 shows the sample size used to estimate the

first employment report each month since 1979. The sample increased from an average of

68,000 respondents in the first quarter of 1979 to an average of 239,000 in the first quarter of

1996. Under random sampling, this increase in the sample size would be expected to reduce the



    4The bias factor is set at the beginning of each quarter, and remains fixed for the quarter.

     5The benchmark adjustment is made to the March data, and wedged in uniformly for the
previous 12 months. In making the benchmark adjustment, the BLS also uses additional sources
to count the small number of nonagricultural workers who are not covered by unemployment
insurance. This study uses benchmark data through February 1995. In June 1996, the BLS
released more recent benchmark data, but also changed its seasonal adjustment method to take
account of 4 or 5 week intervals between survey dates. Because forecasts are based on the older
seasonal adjustment method, the most recent benchmark data are not used.
     D




                                                         L




,—
k




Q
E
u                                                    a
m
                                                     n
         I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I   I
                                                 6

standard error of the estimates by 47 percent.

        Table 1 reports summary statistics for seasonally adjusted monthly employment changes.b

The first-reported employment change, denoted el, is the difference between the first report of

employment for the latest month and the second repofi of employment for the preceding month.

For example, if the data are released in September, the first-reported change would be the first

estimate for August minus the second estimate for July. The second report is the revised August

estimate minus the third estimate for July (denoted ez), and this figure would be released in

October. The third report would be available in November, and is the third estimate of August’s

employment minus the third estimate of July’s (denoted e3). The revised employment reports

incorporate data from sampled establishments that responded late. The benchmark employment

change is the final estimate from the UI files (denoted p), which I take to be the population

mean.

        The forecasted employment change (denoted ~ is the median employment change

forecasted by market specialists surveyed by Money Market Services International (MMS). The

MMS employment data only are available from January 1985 forward.            Consequently, I have

constructed my own monthly forecast (denoted fC) for 1979-96 by recursively estimating a

regression of the first-reported employment change on lags of the preceding six months of

employment changes and the number of new unemployment insurance claims in the week

containing the 12th of the month. The sample used to estimate the 1979 forecasting equation

consists of monthly observations from December 1969 to December 1978. The coefficients of




    ‘Because market forecasts are for seasonally adjusted data, and because most discussion
focuses on the seasonally adjusted data, all of the data used in this paper are seasonally adjusted.
                                                 7

the forecasting equation were re-estimated each year, rolling the sample forward to include the

latest 12 months of data. The most current coefficients are used to forecast employment each

year.   The sample used to construct each month’s forecast covers a time period before that

month’s employment data were released.

        Several conclusions are evident from Table 1. First, the mean employment change is

fairly close among all of the estimates. Second, the data are quite noisy. The average absolute

revision between the first-reported employment change and the final benchmark figure is 89,000;

the standard deviation of the revisions is 115,000. Third, over the period when the MMS data

are available, the average of the median forecasts is fairly close to the average first report of

employment growth, so the median forecast provides essentially an unbiased estimate. Fourth,

the standard deviation of the forecast errors (i.e., the first-reported employment change minus

the MMS forecast) is substantial, suggesting a good deal of news is revealed on the day the

employment numbers are released.

        The MMS forecast is reasonably strongly correlated with the BLS estimates of

employment growth. “Table2 shows that the MMS forecast has a correlation of .73 with both

the first report of employment and the fiml benchmark number. A regression of the first report

of the employment change on the forecasted change yields the following coefficient estimates,

with standard errors shown in parentheses: 7


(1) :    = -38.45 +      1,25 f       R* = .54       p = -.03 .
           (18.64)       (: 10)                          (.09)




     ‘The equation was estimated using the Cochrane-Orcutt procedure to correct for possible
first-order serial correlation. The sample size is 121 monthly observations.
                             0
                             0


I
I




                        ON
                        OCD
                         . .
                        do




                   Omrl
                   OPU
                    . .          .
                   Aoo




              Ommd
              Omrw
               ,..               .
              dooo




         Oa    aem
         Omarul
          . . . .                .
         doooo




I Oel-lmmm
I Ocncn    aPa
I    .    .    .    .    .       .
I   400000
I
I
I
I   ————
       ————
          —-—
I                  A
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
                                                 8

Although the median forecast is virtually mean unbiased, movements in the forecast tend to

understate movements in the employment survey. This result generates a positive correlation

between the forecast error and the forecast itself.

       To further explore the predictive power of the MMS forecast, I regressed the benchmark

employment (population mean) on the first report and MMS forecast. The results, which are

presented in equation (2) below, indicate that the forecast has surprising explanatory power, even

conditional on the survey data. Combining the survey data and the MMS forecast yields a more

accurate prediction of the benchmark data. Equation (2) suggests that when the survey estimate

of employment growth deviates substantially from the forecasted amount, the survey data are

likely to be adjusted toward the forecasted amount. 8 Indeed, in 65% of the months when the

survey data exceeded the forecast the survey data were adjusted downward in the benchmark

revision, and in 64% of the months when the survey data were less than the forecast, the survey

data were adjusted upward.

        A

(2)     # = 20.33 + .59el + .33f               R2 = .71        p = -.47
            (28.92) (.06)   (.14)                                  (.08)


       According to Table 2, the correlation between the MMS forecast and the constructed

forecast is .83, suggesting that, to some extent, professional forecasters base their predictions on



    ‘Further evidence that the survey may exaggerate swings in employment comes from
regressing the benchmark employment change on el. This regression yields a coefficient of .76
on el, with a standard error of .05, suggesting that large movements in first reported employment
growth tend to be adjusted toward the mean in the benchmark revision. This finding and the
positive effect of the forecast in equation (2) may partially result from smoothing due to revised
seasonal adjustment factors in the benchmark data. But a qualitatively similar set of results is
found when the third reported employment change is used instead of the benchmark dab, so ex-
post seasonal adjustments are not the entire sto~.
                                                  9

a model similar to the one used to derive the constructed forecast. The constructed forecast is

also positively correlated with the BLS data, but not as strongly as the median of the professional

forecasters. In contrast to the results for the MMS forecast, when equation (1) is estimated using

the constructed forecast, the coefficient on the constructed forecast is less than 1. It is also worth

noting that when equation (2) is estimated using the constructed forecast instead of the MMS

forecast, the coefficient on the survey employment rises, and that on the forecast falls. 9 In sum,

the constructed forecast is not as strong a predictor of employment growth as the median MMS

forecast, but nonetheless is reasonably correlated with the BN data.

       Another issue concerns revisions to previous months’ data. As far as I know, forecasters

do not systematically try to predict BLS revisions to earlier months’ employment data, even

though the revisions are often substantial (see Table 1), To explore the time-series properties

of the revisions, I regressed the second report of the employment change for a given month on

that month’s first-reported change, and the third-reported change on that month’s second-reported

change. In both cases, the intercept was insignificantly different from zero, and the coefficient

on the previous report was very close to one. 10 Because the successive reports appear to follow

a random walk, the deviation between the second and first report of employment growth (or the

deviation between the third and second report) probably provides a reasomble estimate of the

unanticipated revision.




    91fthe sample is restricted to the same months used for equation (2), the coefficient on the
constructed forecast is .20.

     10Aregression of el on ez yields a coefficient of .98 with a standard error of .026, and a
regression of ez on eg yields a coefficient of .98 with a standard error of .014.
                                                 10

Improved Precision?

        Table 3 examines whether the precision of the first-reported employment data improved

as the sample size increased. Although it is a simplification of the BLS’s estimation procedure,

the functional form used in these models was derived under the assumption that a univariate mean

was estimated from a randomly selected sample. Specifically, write the variance of the mean (x7


of a sample of n observations, xl,... x~, as vaflx~ = E(I-u)2 = u2/n, where p is the population

mean and # is the variance of x. Taking logarithms of each side yields:



(3)   log E(F-p)2 = log(u2) - log(n).


Intuitively, the sampling variance should decline in proportion with the increase in the sample

size. In the CES program, the benchmark employment can be thought of as the population

mean, and the first report as the sample mean.

        Column 1 of Table 3 presents a regression of the log of the squared deviation between

the benchmark and first-reported employment change on the log of the sample size at the time

of the first report.   As equation (3) predicts, the coefficient on the log of the sample size is

insignificantly different from -1, indicating that the sampling variability has declined at about the

rate one would expect (with random sampling) as the sample size increased. 11 To check

whether the results just reflect a coincidental trend toward less variable employment data, in

column 2 a linear time trend is added to the model.        The coefficient on the log sample size



     1lIn results not reported here, I estimated the model in column 1 using the log of the squared
deviation between the first report and the second or third report as the dependent variable. The
coefficient on the log sample size in these equations was also insignificantly different from -1,
indicating a decline in the magnitude of revisions as the sample size increased.
     Table      3:     Tests of          Employment               Data    Reliability                 as   Sample           Size      Grows



                                                                          Dependent             Variable

Explanatory                      *lL                                     *lL                                                       ~[ f-ulz
Variable                                                (2)                                          (4)                    (:)0               (6)



Constant                    23.69                36.05                    35.52               73.97                    -17.80            -11.91
                            (4.10)              (14.24)                   (9.98)             (24.97)                   (10.65)           (25.09)

Log n                        -1.31              -2.42                     -2.25                -5.67                     2.14                  1.61
                             (0.35)             (1.28)                    (0.82)               (2.20)                   (0.88)                (2.21)

Trend        (months)             ---                0.008                                       0.021                         —-              0.003
                                                    (0.009)                                     (0.013)                                       (0-013)
R2
                                  .06                 .07                      .05               .07                         .05               .05

Sample Size                       193                 193                      135                135                         121               121



Notes : e, is the                first         employment            change          report;          p is       the     final         benchmark

employment             change;          f is    the      median          forecast          of     the      employment               change       from

MMS.         Log n is       the         log    of     the     number         of      establishments                  used     by BLS to

estimate         the     first          employment            change.             Sample        period          is     1979:1-1995:3                 in

columns         1 and      2,     1985:1-96:3                in    columns           3 and      4,      and     1985:1-95:2              in

columns         5 and      6.      One observation                   was dropped                in      columns         5 and         6 because

the     deviation          between            p and         f is    O; if         this     is     set      to    1,     the        results       are

qualitatively              similar.             Standard            errors           are   in parentheses.
                                                  11

increases in magnitude in this model, although its standard error increases substantially as well.

Furthermore, the coefficient on the time trend suggests that the sampling variability increased

over time, although this coefficient is not statistically significant.

       As a further check on these results, I regressed the squared deviation between e~ and p

on 1/n and an intercept. The coefficient on 1/n in this regression is an estimate of #, and the

intercept in this regression should be O. The coefficient on l/n was large (1.4 x 109) and

statistically significant, whereas the intercept was small and statistically insignificant.

       If the employment survey became less noisy over time, then one would expect the forecast

errors to decline.   Columns 3 and 4 of Table 3 test this hypothesis with the MMS data. As

expected, the results indicate that the forecast error has declined with the increase in the sample

size. ‘2 An alternative interpretation, however, is that forecasts have improved as forecasters

have become more sophisticated.      This hypothesis is explored in Columns 5 and 6, which use

the log of the squared deviation between the forecast and the benchmark employment numbers

as the dependent variable. The motivation for estimating this model is that, if the forecasts have

improved, they should do a better job predicting the population mean as well as the sample

mean. Contrary to this prediction, however, the forecast errors around the population mean have

actually increased as the sample size increased.

       As a final test of the improved reliability of the data, I have re-estirnated equation (2) also

including an interaction between the survey employment and its underlying sample size. This

interaction term was statistically significant (t= 2.5) and positive, indicating that the survey data

became a stronger predictor of the population mean as the sample size increased, conditional on



    ‘2Similar results were obtained using the constructed forecast instead of the MMS forecast.
                                                     12

the forecast. Taken together, these results suggest that the noise in the survey estimates declined

as the sample size increased.



II. A Model of Bayesian Investors with More kise               Data

       Intuitively, one would expect rational investors to place more credence in the BLS survey

of employment growth as the survey became more reliable.                     This intuition can easily be

formalized for the case of Bayesian updating.               For example, assume that the underlying

employment change data are normally distributed, with variance #, and unknown mean p. Also

assume that the distribution of priors about p is normally distributed, with variance V2and mean

f. Suppose a random sample of n observations is drawn from the population, and the average
                                                                     A
of this sample is denoted e. The mean of the posterior distribution (p) after the sample mean is

observed is:

                                           fi=                        nv 2
                           (4)                                                  e.
                                                   U2 7.,   2 f+   iS2 + nv2

Equation (4) specifies the posterior estimate of the mean as a weighted average of the mean prior

expectation and the sample average (see DeGroot, 1975; pp. 269-271). For fixed values of c?

and V2, the relative weight assigned to the sample mean increases as the sample size increases.

       Notice that one can re-write the posterior estimate as:


                                 ~ .     nv2
                   (4’ )                         Z(e-f)+f      .      1        (e-fl +f
                                       02 + nv                     1 + #/n



where $ is the ratio of # to V2. Deviations between the survey estimate and the prior

expectation receive more weight as the sample size increases, and as ~ decreases.
                                                13

       It seems reasonable to take the consensus estimate of professional forecasters as a measure

of the mean of the prior distribution, and the first-reported employment change as the sample

mean. If n were fixed, the regression results in equation (2) would provide an estimate of the

optimal “Bayesian weights” to assign to the prior and to the sample average (el). However, n

is not fixed. The optimal Bayesian weight to apply to the forecast error in equation (4’) can be

estimated directly by Nordinear Least Squares (NLS). Specifically, I used NLS to estimate the

parameter ~ in equation (4’), using the benchmark data as the dependent variable (p), el as the

sample average, the MMS forecast as f, and the BLS sample size as n. 13 Plugging in actual

values of n, the results imply that the optimal Bayesian weight to apply to deviations between the

forecast and employment survey was 0.32 in 1979, 0.47 in 1985 and 0.66 in 1996.

       Next consider how the precision of the employment survey might affect the bond market.

An increase in employment is typically interpreted as a sign that the labor market is tightening,

and that wage-push inflation may follow.       Because the bond yield is positively related to

expectations of future inflation, any news raising the probability of higher inflation would be

expected to increase the bond yield.     Moreover, equation (4) indicates that an increase in

surveyed employment growth of a given magnitude will lead investors to revise their expectations

of true employment growth by a greater margin if [he sample size is larger. Consequently, the

bond market would be expected to react more to unexpected blips from the survey if the survey

is based on a larger sample size.

        Formally, assume the bond yield is a function of expected employment growth, g(~), and

that g‘ >0.   The market’s reaction to a given change in survey employment as the sample size


    13The coefficient estimate of ~ equalled 127,101, with a t-ratio of 3.81.
                                                  14
                            A

increases is given by62g(p)/6n6e, which is:


(5)   62g(~)/6n6e = g“(~~~e)(~~bn) + g’(62~6n6e) > 0,


Notice that ifpriors are unbiased, the first term drops outinexpectation     because d~~n = Oif

e = f. From (4), the second term is clearly positive, indicating a larger reaction of the bond

yield to a given increase in the survey estimate of employment growth, when the survey estimate

is based on a larger sample size. If go is linear, the market reaction to the employment surprise
                                         .
would increase in proportion to          1    all else equal. The next two sections test whether
                                      1 +*/n’
interest rate reactions to employment news have varied with the precision of the employment

survey.



III. Wimating      Market Reactions

          Table 4 presents several Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression models simply relating

the close-to-close change in the benchmark 30 year Treasury bond yield to the announced change

in survey employment (el) on the day the employment news is released. Because a consensus

forecast of employment growth is not available until 1985, results are first presented for a larger

sample without subtracting forecasted employment growth from announced employment growth.

To facilitate comparison to models that adjust for expectations, two       time   periods are used:

January 1979 to April 1996, and Februa~            1985 to April 1996.     Although some of the

employment news was anticipated, the results indicate that an increase in employment is

associated with a statistically significant increase in the bond yield.    In column 1 or 4, for

example, an increase in employment of 200,000 jobs is associated with a 4 basis point increase
            Om     mmmmrm                  m     m   w
            Pm     mcommdd                 a     0   U-1
            00     Oomamrl                 *     0   A
             ,,     . .     . .    .   .
                    1-     mmmm
                           mm     1-
      0
      0
      A
            w+     mw                      u     m
      x     mm
            00
                   Wm.
                   00.
                                           m
                                           m
                                                 o
                                                 0
             . .     . .    .
                    1-




            mm
      ‘u    do      .
      c     00
             . .
                                                                    $do
      :
      ti




      0                                          0
                   rw      Nul    Aw       A
      m            Am      m+rm            m     0
                   00      mm     mco      U-I   0
      G              . .    . .    . .
      -d            1-     mm     mm
                           mm      1-



            or                                   0   fl
            md                                   0   u)
            00                                   0   A
             ,.
       .,
w
      al
o

            me                             m         Ii
            +0                             w         w
            00                             m         l-l
             . .




                                  al
 ..   ti”                         JJ
*     c1                          a
                                  !4




                   x
                                                           Ornd
                   a-      4                               !Z   -I-14
                                                15

in the bond yield.    As shown below, the response is about twice as large if one looks at

unanticipated employment changes.

       To test whether the market reactions have become stronger as the CES sample size

increased, the models in columns 2 and 5 also include an interaction between the first-reported

employment change and the optimal Bayesian weight, defined as el x            1    where ~ was
                                                                           1 +#ln’
estimated by NLS as previously described. Contrary to what one would expect with Bayesian

updating, this interaction term is statistically insignificant and slightly negative. The Bayesian

weight is a nonlinear function of the sample size. To explore the robustness of this interactive

effect, I estimated two alternative functional forms: (1) interact the employment change with the

linear sample size; (2) interact the employment change with the log sample size.           In both

specifications, the interaction was negative and statistically insignificant. Further evidence that

the market reaction did not intensified as the sample size increased comes from estimating the

model in column (1) on two subsamples, one covering 1979-84, and one covering 1985-96. The

coefficient (and standard error) on el for the 1979-84 sample is .021 (.006), compared to .018

(.005) for the post-1984 period.

       The other variables in the model are individually and jointly statistically insignificant.

The change in the unemployment rate and change in the hourly wage of production/

nonsupervisory workers, which are also announced on the day the employment data are released,

have small and statistically insignificant effects.    A 0.5 percentage point increase in the

unemployment rate is associated with a 1.8 basis point decline in the yield rate, while a 6 cent

increase in the hourly wage is associated with a 2,0 basis point increase in the yield. rate.

Additionally, dummy variables indicating the day of the week the data were released and a
                                                  16

quadratic time trend are jointly insignificant.

       Only unanticipated news should affect financial markets.       To adjust for expectations,

results in Table 5 use the MMS data to calculate the employment change forecast error (el-~.

The estimates are based on data for 1985 to 1996. Comparing column (1) of Table 5 to column

(4) of Table 4 indicates that an unanticipated increase in employment has a larger impact on the

bond yield than does the total increase in employment.      An umnticipated increase of 200,000

jobs is associated with a 7.6 basis point increase in the bond yield. If the market applies the

optimal Bayesian weights to the employment survey, the interaction between employment growth

and the (nonlinear function of the) sample size in column (2) would be significant and positive,

and the forecast error itself would be insignificant.    Again, however, the interaction term is

negative and statistically insignificant, providing no evidence of a stronger reaction to more

precise data. 14

       Figure 2 provides a scatter diagram of the change in the bond yield versus the unexpected

change in employment.      An upward sloping relationship is apparent. 15 There is no obvious

change in the relationship over time. A bivariate regression of the change in the interest rate on

the forecast error using the 1985-89 sample yields a slope of .053 (s.e.=.011),   whereas the same

regression using the 1990-96 sample yields a slope of .033 (s.e. =. 007). As a rough check on

the power of the estimates, suppose the effect of employment surprises had increased by 40



    14Si.rnilar results are found if the linear sample size or log of the sample size is interacted
with the employment surprise.

     15Notice that Figure 2 displays little evidence of a nonlinear relationship between the change
in the interest rate and employment surprises. More formal statistical tests based on fitting a
quadratic in the forecast error and a linear spline that allows for differential effects of positive
or negative employment shocks also supported a linear relationship.
           0s
           mN
           00   .




                                   I z
                                    m




                           m
                           m   d
                           m   m




                               0
                               0
                               m




    m=
    mo
    0. 0
      w


3
0




           o
           M
           m




                    & 0“
       Figure 2: Change In 30 Year Treas. Bond Yield vs. ForecasI Error




 2!)


                           0
                   0      90
                   96


  0

                                                  ‘~P   m  95.
               45       -:-.”93
                               0
                                    “~~   l-J
                                            670   8a3   g2  g4
                        91920 95    Q@ 0 940
              0
              90               90    ’590     88
-20




-40
       -4bo              -2bo                                    200
                                      Forecast Error
                                                 17

percent since 1985-89, i.e., to a coefficient of .074 (= 1.4 x .053). The 1990-96 estimate is

statistically different from .074, so the data likely would have the ability to discriminate between

effects of this magnitude.

       To further explore changes in the responsiveness of interest rates to unexpected

employment news over time, bivariate regressions of the change in rates on the employment

surprise were estimated for each two year period. Figure 3 illustrates the predicted change in

rates associated with an unexpected increase of 200,000 jobs based on these regressions.          If

anything, the responsiveness of the interest rate to employment news declined in the late 1980s,

and may have rebounded somewhat in 1995-96. But since the standard error of each of these

estimates is about 3 basis points, too much should not be made of individual points.

       McQueen and Roley (1993) find that interest rate reactions to real economic news are

invariant to the state of the business cycle, in contrast to stock market returns. A similar pattern

holds for employment surprises in these data: an interaction between the unemployment rate and

forecast error is insignificant if it is added to the model in column 1. Thus, business cycle

effects are unlikely to confound any effect of more precise data.

       Column 3 of Table 5 indicates that deviations between the unemployment rate and the

MMS consensus forecast of the unemployment rate are statistically insignificant. Previous studies

that have found a significant relationship between the bond rate and unexpected changes in

unemployment generally have not controlled for the effects of employment changes (e. g.,

Hardouvelis,   1988 and Prag, 1994).       If the model in column 3 is estimated without the

employment forecast error, the coefficient on unexpected changes in unemployment becomes -14,

with a t-ratio of -3.5. Thus, the negative correlation between unexpected employment growth
L
o
L
L

w




o




    .-
     4




         1   I   I   I   I
                         1
                             I
                             1
                                 I,   I,
         I   I   I   I
                                                  18

and unexpected unemployment rate changes (r = -.26) may partially drive earlier findings of a

significant effect of unemployment shocks on the bond rate. As discussed below, another issue

involves bond maturity: short-term rates are more sensitive to the unemployment rate.

       Because forecasts of wage changes are not available before the last few years, the wage

change is included as a regressor in column 3 without subtracting off expectations. 16

Announced changes in the hourly wage of production and nonsupervisory workers have a

statistically significant effect in these models. A 6 cent increase in the hourly wage is associated

with about a 3 basis point increase in the 30 year bond rate. Notice, however, that when the

employment surprise is excluded from the model (see column 7), wages changes have an

insignificant and small effect.

       Revisions to the two previous months’ employment numbers, which are released along

with the unemployment rate and the latest employment data, also have a statistically insignificant

effect. Nonetheless, the magnitude of the effects of the revisions are sizable, about half the size

of the effect of the latest month’s data. As mentioned earlier, the second and third revisions to

the employment changes appear to follow a random walk, so the revisions could be viewed as

largely unanticipated.

       In column (6) the MMS employment forecast is included in the model along with the

forecast error. Surprisingly, the forecast has a statistically significant effect. This result is also

found in the more parsimonious model in column (8). When the forecast error is omitted from

the model, however, the ‘forecast is insignificant.     Thus, the positive correlation between the




     lGExperfientation with modelling wage changes as an autoregressive process, and using
residuals from this process as an explanatory variable in Table 5, yielded similar results.
                                                 19

forecast error and the forecast drives this result. 17 Because the forecast error is not known in

advance of the employment release, this finding does not conflict with the efficient markets

hypothesis.

       To look over a longer time period, Table 6 uses the constructed forecast in place of the

MMS median forecast. The models were estimated with data from 1979 to 1996. The forecast

error based on the constructed forecast has a smaller impact on the bond yield than does the

MMS forecast error, but is nonetheless statistically significant. 1* An unexpected increase in

employment of 200,000 jobs is associated with a 4 basis point increase in these models. The

interaction between the constructed forecast error and the sample size again yields an insignificant

effect. If the model in column 4 is estimated with a sample limited to the post-1984 period, the

coefficient on the forecast error is insignificantly different from that estimated with the pre-1985

sample, though larger.

       A curious result emerges when the constructed forecast is included as a regressor in

columns 6 and 8. Here, the forecast has a statistically significant, positive impact on the bond

yield. Recall that the MMS forecast had a negative and significant effect in this specification.

The reason for the opposite signs on the two forecasts is that the constructed forecast is

negatively correlated with its forecast error, while the MMS forecast is positively correlated with



    17Tosee this, write ~ = bf and ~ = c(e, -t> + df, where constants have been suppressed
for simplicity. By the omitted-variable-bias formula, b = d + cm, where r is the coefficient
from an auxiliary regression of (eI-f) on f. If b = O, then d = -CT. In this case, d is negative
because c and T are positive.

    18Unlilcein Table 5, the deviation between the announced unemployment rate and the MMS
unemployment rate forecast is statistically significant in these models. This results in part
because the constructed employment forecast is a weaker predictor than the MMS forecast, and
in part because the unexpected unemployment rate has a smaller effect in the post-1984 period.
                                   al
                                   z
                                   E
                                   ,-
                               w   %
                               w   0




                               m
                               .




               *               m
                               m
               0   0




                               .
                               w
                       .




                               .
                               m




CQz
-0
00
     w




         L.Y
                           +
                                                  20

its forecast error.   Notice that another surprising result is that the constructed forecast borders

on statistical significance when the forecast error is excluded from the equation (see column 9).

        One possible explanation for the frequent statistical significance of the forecast is that the

standard errors of the estimates are understated, perhaps because homoskedasticity is assumed

in calculating the OLS standard errors. To explore this possibility, White (1980) standard errors

were calculated for all the models in Tables 5 and 6. The heteroskedasticity -consistent standard

errors for the forecast and forecast error tended to be slightly smaller than the OLS standard

errors, however, so the more conservative OLS standard errors are reported in the tables.



IV. Short-term Treasury     B~s


        Although the focus of this paper is on responses to amounted employment news in the

long-term bond market, I have also examined responses in the market for short-term Treasury

bills. Table 7 presents results using as the dependent variable the yield change for 3 month or

1 year Treasury bills. The sample covers 1985-1996, and the estimated models are comparable

to those in Table 5 (i.e., they use the MMS employment change forecast).

        The interest rate changes associated with unanticipated employment news is greater for

the short term maturities than for the 30 year bond. An unexpected increase of 200,000 jobs is

associated with a 9.4 basis point increase in the interest rate for 3 month bills, and a 14 basis

point increase for 1 year bills. There is no evidence that the market reaction to unanticipated

employment changes has increased as the BLS sample size increased; indeed, for the 3 month

Treasury bill the interaction term between the (nonlinear function of the) sample size and the

employment forecast error is negative and statistically significant. If the constructed forecast is
      .
-iW
ho
00
      G




                     0
                     0
                o    0




                         m
                         m




                     o
                     0
                     0




                o
           WY   M
          --    tu
                                                21

used to look at a longer time period, this interaction term is negative but insignificant.    Thus,

like long-term interest rates, short-term rates do not exhibit a more intense reaction to

employment news after the news became more precise.

       Three results differ somewhat from the long-term market. First, the MMS forecast has

a statistically insignificant and small effect on the short term interest rate. Cook and Kom (1991)

find a similar result for short-term rates.   Second, changes in the hourly wage have a larger

effect on short-term rates: a 6 cent increase in the hourly wage is associated with a 4 basis point

increase in the interest rate on the 3 month bills and a 5 basis point increase in the interest rate

on 1 year bills. Third, as others have found, unexpected changes in the unemployment rate have

a statistically significant effect on short-term rates: a 0.5 percentage point increase in

unemployment is associated with roughly a 6 basis point increase in short-term rates.



V.   Extemions

       A number of extensions of the basic results were explored. First, to test whether bond

markets react to the employment news with a lag, the effect of the employment announcement

on the change in the next trading day’s yield was examined. Specifically, I estimated the models

in Tables 4-6 using as the dependent variable the change in the bond yield for the next trading

day. These results provided no indication that the employment news had a lagged effect on long-

terrn bond yields: neither the employment numbers nor their deviation from forecasts had a

statistically significant impact on bond yields in these models. Curiously, however, the change

in the hourly wage had a statistically significant, positive effect in these models.

       Second, it is often alleged that markets over react to the employment data on the day the
                                                 22

data are released, and then correct for this over reaction on the following trading day. Although

the results described in the previous paragraph are inconsistent with this view, to further test this

hypothesis I correlated the residuals from the models in Tables 4-6 with the next day’s yield

changes. If larger than predicted movements in yields on announcement days are corrected the

next day, this correlation would be negative. The results of this exercise yielded numerically

small, statistically insignificant and typically positive correlations, however.

       Third, if some market participants have advance knowledge of the BLS data, the news

may affect the markets prior to the announcement date. To test for this possibility, I regressed

the change in the yield on the day before the employment amouncement                on the forecast

errors. 19 When the models in Table 5 were estimated using the post-1984 sample, the

unexpected soon-to-be-amounted       changes in employment and unemployment had statistically

insignificant and small effects. Surprisingly, however, when the models in Tables 4 and 6 were

estimated for the 1979-96 sample using the previous day’s yield change as the dependent

variable, the changes in the unemployment rate, employment and hourly wage often were

statistically significant. These findings do not necessarily imply that the BU data were leaked

to some investors prior to their amouncement date, however. It is possible, for example, that

the Fed -- which is notified of the employment data prior to their release -- acts on this

information, and that the markets respond to the Fed’s actions without direct knowledge of the

BLS employment data.

       Lastly, it is worth comparing these results to a recent study by Jones, Lament, and




    ‘9The employment data typically are known to the BLS only one or two days before the
announcement date.
                                               23

Lumsdaine (1996), which examines the effect of CES amouncement dates on volatility in the 5,

10 and 30 year bond markets. Jones, Lament, and Lumsdaine find that the variance of the daily

excess return is about 50 percent greater in all three markets on announcement days than on non-

amouncement days. My results indicate that the R-square of the employment surprises, revisions

to past months data, wage change and unemployment rate, is about 30 percent (using the MMS

forecast data) for long term bonds, and about 50 percent for short-term bills, suggesting that the

news conveyed by the employment report can account for a good deal of the excess volatility on

amouncement dates.



VI.   Summiuy and Conclmion

       The three main findings of this paper are: (1) the precision of the BLS’s first estimate of

nonfarm employment growth improved as the sample size increased; (2) announcements of

unanticipated employment changes strongly affected daily interest rate movements from 1979 to

1996; (3) the effect of unanticipated employment changes on interest rates does not appear to

have increased over time, as the BLS employment data became more reliable and as the Federal

Reserve Board shifted its focus to employment indicators. Although the latter finding may seem

surprising, there is additional evidence suggesting that financial markets paid at least some

attention to the BLS employment amouncements before the mid 1980s. Table 8 reports the

percent of times an article in the New York Times cited the BLS employment release data the

day after the announcement date in a story regarding the bond or stock market. After 1983, the

employment data were noted as influencing the financial markets virtually every day after they

were released.   In the 1979-83 period, the employment news was cited as influencing the
                                    Table 8

Percent        of   times      the   New York     Times cited the
BLS employment              release       in connection  to the
bond      or   stock    market        on the        day    after         the   release



                                                               Either Bond
                             Bond          Stock               or Stock
 Period                      Mkt .         Mkt .               Market


 1979-83                       27%             33%                  45%

 1984-88                       97              78                   98

 1989-93                      100              92                  100

 1994-96*                      97              97                  100



*1994-96        data    are     through      June         of   1996.
                                                24

financial markets less frequently, but was still mentioned on 45 percent of post-announcement

days.

        One possible explanation for the apparent constant market reaction to more precise news

is that the markets were not aware of the increased precision of the BLS employment survey.

This is certaidy possible, but there were news articles written about the improvements in the

BLS data in the 1980s. Moreover, the BLS reports the sample size and sampling variability of

the employment survey in every issue of Em~lovment and Eamin~s, so it is not difficult to learn

that the series improved. Market forecasters have a tremendous amount of information regarding

the construction of the BLS data; for example, many are knowledgeable of the magnitude of the

quarterly bias adjustment.   It would be somewhat surprising if they were not aware of the

expansion of the survey.

        Another possibility is that the amount of additional information available to market

participants increased during the same time period the precision of the employment survey

increased, so the employment survey provided less new information than otherwise would be the

case. 20 There is little evidence that the quantity or quality of other labor market data improved

over this period, however,   For example, the BLS’s closely-watched survey of manufacturing

turnover was eliminated in the early 1980s, and the sample size of the CPS was cut from 65,500

to 53,600 households in the 1980s. More generally, Abraham (1996) reports that the BN’s

budget was constant in real terms since 1978, so it is unlikely that there was a major increase

in other labor market data in this period. Finally, the finding that MMS employment forecasts

have not improved relative to the benchmark data suggests that private forecasters were unable



    201nterms of equation (4), this hypothesis is equivalent to a decrease in V2.
                                                 25

to make more precise forecasts over time.

       At this stage, it seems anomalous that the bond market did not respond more to more

reliable employment data. Kahneman and Tversky (1982) document that, compared to optimal

Bayesian updating, it is common for individuals to place too much weight on recent information

and too little weight on their prior data. The findings of this study may reflect this broader

phenomenon,     From the present results, however, it is not possible to determine if the market

over or under reacts to employment news. It is possible that the market over reacted to the news

initially, and that the current reaction is efficient. Alternatively, it is possible that the market

over reacted initially, and continues to over react today.     But in either scenario, the results

suggest that investors did not rationally respond to changes in the precision of relevant

information.

       Before the conclusion that financial markets do not rationally respond to more accurate

information is generally accepted, it would be useful to see this hypothesis tested further by

examining the effects of changes in other data series.     For example, there have been (or are

planned) changes in the quality of the Employment Cost Index, Consumer Price Index, Produce

Price Index, and National Income and Product Accounts. Other countries also have changed the

quality of their economic statistics over time. The present type of analysis can be perfomed

using the experiments provided by changes in these other data series.
                                            27


Schwert, G. William. 1981. “The Adjustment of Stock Prices to Information About Inflation. ”
The Journal of Finance 36(l): 15-29.

Shiner, Robert J. 1979. “The Volatility of Long-Term Interest Rates and Expectations ModeIs
of the Term Structure. ” Journal of PoIitical Economy 87 (6), pp. 1190-1219.

Stevenson, Richard W. 1996. “In Eye of the Storm, the Fed Governors Stay Calm. ” The New
York Times. (June 8): 31.

Urich, Thomas and Paul Wachtel. 1985, “The Effects of Inflation and Money Supply
Announcements on Interest Rates. ” The Journal of Finance 39 (4), September, pp. 1177-88.

White, Halbert. 1980. “A Heteroskedasticity-Consistent Covariance Matrix Estimator and a
Direct Test for Heteroskedasticity. ” Econometrics 48, 817-38.
