NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ESTIMAT~G
THE WELFARE EFFECTS
OF DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

Shane M, Greenstein
Pablo T. Spiller

Working Paper 5770

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 1996

We would like to thank Tim Bresnahan, Ariel Pakes, Mike Riordan and seminar participants at the
Telecommunications
Policy Research Conference, University of Illinois, NBER IO and NBER
Productivity workshops, Rutgers University and Northwestern University for their comments and
suggestions. Greenstein thanks the hospitality of the Institute for Management, Innovation and
Organizations at the Haas School of Business, UC Berkeley, where he visited when this project
began. Patrick Moreton and Susan McMaster provided research assistance at different stages in this
project. The Ameritech Telecommuriications Program at the University of California, Berkeley, the
Institute for Government and Public Affairs at the University of Illinois, and the National Science
Foundation provided financial support. This paper is part of NBER’s research program in
Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
Q 1996 by Shane M. Greenstein and Pablo T. Spiller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, maybe quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including O notice, is given to the source.

NBER Working Paper 5770
September 1996

ESTIMATING THE WELFARE EFFECTS
OF DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE

ABSTWCT

While much economic policy presumes that more information infrastructure yields higher
economic returns, little empirical work measures the magnitudes of these returns.

We examine

investment by local exchange telephone companies in fiber optic cable, ISDN lines and signal seven
software,

infrastructure

telephone networks.

which plays an essential role in bringing digital technology

to local

We estimate the elmticity of the derived demand for infrastructure investment

faced by local exchange companies, controlling for factors such as local economic activity and the
political disposition of state regulators.

Our model postulates a regulated profit maximizing

local

exchange firm and a regulatory agency with predetermined political leanings in favor of consumer
prices or firm profits.

The model accounts for variation in state regulation and local economic

conditions.
In all our estimates we find that consumer demand is sensitive to investment in modem
infrastructure,

particularly

as represented

by fiber optic cable.

Our estimates

imply that

infrastructure investment is responsible for a substantial fraction of the recent growth in consumer
surplus and business revenue in local telecommunication

Shane M. Greenstein
Department of Economics
University of Illinois, Urbana/Champaign
1206 South Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
gmstn@uiuc.edu

services.

Pablo T. Spiller
Haas School of Business
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
spiller@haas.berkeley. edu

.~U:US[

1996

31.

JVELF.4REBE,VEF~ FRO,III.VFR4STR UCTLRE

Page 1

I. Introdllction
Much recent policy discussion presumes that improvements

in information

infrastructure

lead to large economic returns. Despite the explosive growth in recent commentary
development

about the

and impact of digital infi-astructure, there have been few attempts to estimate the

magnitudes of the economic gains associated with improving information

infrastructure.

This should not be a surprise. Some well known problems in the economics of
technology, infrastmcture

and measurement make this estimation particularly

calculating the economic trade-off between old and new technologies

difficult. First,

or equipment requires

knowledge about the benefits associated with modem facilities relative to those arising from
existing ones. Yet, it is. difficult to measure levels of quality and quantity of infrastructure, let
alone differences between old and new. Second, although infrastructure

improvements

may

reduce the costs of providing new services and increme the quality of old services, the exact
benefits associated with these changes may be difficult to trace. Third, questions about economic
benefits require information
modernization.

about the demand for the incremental improvements

Measuring demand for such change requires information

associated with

about users’ valuation,

which are also hard to learn. Inferences from actual behavior require appropriate models and
extensive data collection. These are not easy to match to each other as the particularities
institutions and markets influence both the availability of data and the appropriateness

of
of the

models at hand. Finally, multiple information technology markets comprise the information
infrastructure, but at best, any study can only focus on a few markets at a time.
In this study we focus on one type of modem itiastructure,

digital technology,

particularly important setting, local telephone service. We measure how investments

in a

in digital

technology influence the demand for -- and economic value of -- local telecommunications
services.

Local telephone networks are a crucial part of the much-anticipated

super-highway.”

“information

The main providers of local telephone sewice in the United States generate

revenues in excess of seventy billion dollars in 1992 and they offer service to over ninety percent
of the US population.

Yet, the benefits associated with modernizing

these firm’s networks

remains sketchy.
More specifically, this study focuses on memuring the impact of modernizing

Local

~U?USI31.

J}’ELF.4REBE:VEFt~ FRO.if 1.VFR4STRCC~RE

1996

Exchange Companies’
the most disaggregate

(LECS) telecommunications

Page 2

infrastructure at the sub-state level, which is

level at which one can measure local phone company infrastmcture. At

this level of aggregation there is a statistical “natural experiment,” i.e., there is a large regional
variation in the quality of local telephone nenvorks across the United States, particularly in the
level of digital technology.

Further, LECS also cover different geographic territory, face different

state regulatory environments,

and operate under very different local economic conditions. Some

of these features vary widely across the US and a few vary widely over time. All this regional
variation provides an opportunity to relate regional variation in infrastructure

quality to regional

variation in telephone demand and revenue, While this variation has been recognized for some
years as a source of many mini-experiments

in telecommunications

across the US, it has been

difficult to translate into a measurement framework. In this study we offer both a novel data
collection effort and a novel modeling framework for taking advantage of this variation.
Several key factors shape our econometric and measurement strategy. First, we need a
model of demand that is consistent with economic theory, flexible enough to lend itse~ to
estimation and related welfare inferences, but robust to a variety of specifications.
to treat the demand for infrastmcture

Our’strategy is

as a derived demand for the input of a regulated firm, where

that input influences the revenues a firm collects. Second, some part of investment behavior
responds to factors such as local economic activity and the political disposition of state ,
regulators. We need to control for these factors, so we collect very extensive data on the
economic and demographic

factors that influence telephone demand. Third, we camot observe

prices, nor the regulated process that determines them, though we can proxy for both. Thus, our
goal is to estimate the elmticity of final user demand for infrastructure investment by their LEC,
but not employ a method that depends on any particular estimate of the price elasticity of
demand.
Our approach attempts to hold measurement problems to the lowest minimum possible,
since geographic variation in the quality of local telephone ne~orks

should lead to related (and

localized) geographic variation in the quality and amount of local telephone revenue.
also differs from previous research in our econometrics
modem infrastructure

This study

treatment of these issues: we treat

as endogenous, we estimate all effects within the structure of a

.+ U: US[31.

1996

regulator/utility

lbrELF.4REBE.YEFITS FRO.\[ 1.VFR4STRUCXRE

Page 3

interaction model, and we offer an expanded list of “controls” (i.e., regressors)

for related economic behavior. Thus, our study advances novel approaches to issues pertinent to
the economics of information infrastructure,

empirical models of regulation and the measurement

of benefits to users from technical change.
?Ve specifically examine investment in fiber optic cable, Integrated Services Digital
Network (ISDN) lines and signal seven software (SS7), infrastructure

which plays an essential

role in bringing digital technology to LEC’s networks (more on the technology below). We
broadly interpret these as measures of a whole range of digital technology which are demand
enhancing. We find that fiber-optic cable greatly enhances LEC demand, but the contribution
from ISDN and SS7 is probably smaller as of 1992, when our data ends. The estimated elasticity
of consumer surplus to fiber optic deployment is never less than 7 percent and is much higher in
some estimates. The elasticity of consumer surplus for ISDN ranges between zero and 16
percent. The elasticity for SS7 is not robustly estimated.
We cannot say how much of the additional revenue brought about by these inwstments
were or were not captured by the LEC or consumers, but these estimates are consistent with large
social returns to investment in digital technology, especially those technologies

related to fiber

optic cable. Our estimates also appear consistent with industry consensus that in the absence of
LEC investment in new technologies,

revenues would have fallen in many localities. It is also

consistent with the view that LECS differed tremendously

in the returns and installation costs

associated with these investments due to local economic conditions,

and that these differences

have narrowed somewhat over time. We also find quantitative evidence that the political and
regulatory environment had a large role in shaping the differences in returns to new infrastructure
across localities.

II. The Economic Consequences

from Modernizing

Infrastructure

In this study, we ask whether variation in the degree of modernization
the US influences economic outcomes in those regions.
of upgrading from a merely fictional

across regions of

What are the additional cost and benefits

system to a state-of-the-art

carrying many additional services? mere has been surprisingly

digital system capable of

little reseach

done on this

~UgUSt

~ ].

JI’ELF.4REBE.VEFI~ FRO.b(l.VFR4STR UCTb-RE

1996

question, though related issues in telecommunications
considerable

Page 4

and infrastructure have received

attention outside the US context. “z

Our approach to this question is in the spirit of a line of new research primarily on
information technology -- and new goods more generally (Bresnahan and Gordon [1996]).;This
research tries to measure the benefits to users from improvements
the underlying (derived) demand for the new technology
literature places emphasis on modeling heterogeneous
improvement.

in technology by estimating

or the new sewice it enables. This

consumer demand for technical

It tries to link estimation and inferences to the underlying utility msociated with

new technology, though no standard technique has yet emerged for making such estimates.
Our goals also relate to an extensive literature on the economic consequences of
infrastructure

investment in modem market economies, where infrastmcture

is broadly defined as

highways, water and sewer systems, schools, hospitals, electrical and transportation

facilities,

and other publicly owned equipment and structures.’ We will not review all these studies here,
and instead, will focus only on recent studies of the modernization

of telecommunications

networks in developed economies, a topic relates most closely to our focus. These studies find
that a large fraction of economic growth maybe attributable to increases in the efficiency of
telecommunications

infrastmcture.5These

studies also argue that some part of regional variation

in economic activity may be attributed to the quality of regional telecommunications
infrastmcture.6
We are sensitive to many of the methodological

concerns raised in these studies. We

adopt a framework that has elements of change embedded in it, albeit in a simple structural
model. Second, our econometrics framework controls for statistical endogeneity. Third, we use a
very disaggregate

analysis, below the state level, but contrast infimtructure

across many

different regions, taking advantage of the statistical variation embedded in cross-regional
differences in telecommunications

network quality. Fourth, unlike previous studies, our

estimation begins to account for some of the institutional

features of telecommunications

politics

and regulatory environment. Fifth, we use a structural model to link our estimates directly back
to parameters of direct economic interest, the benefits to buyers from technical change.

~U:US[

JKELF.JRE BE,VEF~

31.1996

FRO.11I.VFMSTRUCTURE

Page 5

III. Model and Econometrics
We undertake our analysis at the level of the local exchange company at the sub-state
level. This is the most disaggregate level of data available on local telephone infrastructure. This
also takes advantage of the peculiw federalism of local telephone service within the US.
Furthermore,

every state divides its territory be~een

a regional bell operating company and

potentially other local telephone companies, such as GTE or other independents.

Thus, two

different LECS may face different regional demand and regulatory restrictions even if they are
within the same state or within proximate geographic regions.
We observe some of the differences in the quality and quantity of infrastructure between
LECS and match it to LEC specific revenue. We also observe some of the variation in local
demographic

and economic conditions (at the LEC level), as well as some of the differences in

state regulatory environments

between states. However, we are not able to obseme the multiple

tariffs that prevail within each LEC for calls of different distance at different times of the day,
nor the various toll prices for within-state calls. Thus, to make use of LEC-specific data on
revenue and infrastmcture,

we require a method for estimating an infrastmcture

elasticity that

should not depend on observing prices at all.

1. Modei of demand.
We derive a model to guide our estimation, both in terms of selecting appropriate
regressors and of interpreting the coefficients of the final system. Our model has the following
actors: A regulator and a profit maximizing LEC that invests in a single infrastructure variable,
fiber, with a single product (local telephone semice) and price (which, as mentioned, we will not
observe).

The regulatory agency has predetermined

firms. The model, then, accommodates
The key assumptions

political leanings in favor of consumers or

variation in local economic and regulatory conditions.

in the model concern the relationship
.

between itiastructure

and final

demand, We assume that infrastructure rotates outward the demand for telecommunications

as it

leads to the provision of new services. Increases in infi-astructure have the feature of making the
demand for telecommunications

more elastic. Although this assumption

makes intuitive sense

for the technologies we study,’ it is nevertheless a strong parametric assumption.*

}VELF.4REBE.VEF~

August 31.1996

FRO.L[l.VF&STRUCT~RE

Page 6

In particular if we let Q represent quantity demanded then

(1)

where X represents a vector of location specific demographic

and economic variables, I

represents the installed level of fiber and P represents the price of final senice.

Consumer

surplus is given by
P

CS(PX,J

= /Q(lX,P)

P

dp = fl~ /g(~,P)~P

o

0

The effect on consumer welfare from infrastructure

g=
es

CS(PX,12) - cs(Px,l,)

deployment is represented as either:

—

Al,)

c~(~x>~~)

- Xl,)
X1,)

where 1, and Iz measure yesterday’s and today’s level of infrastructure

,

deployment, or as

= EQJ

The first formulation measures the change in consumer surplus attributable to
infrastmcture

deployment as a percent of the end period’s level, holding constant prices .9The

second measures the elasticity of consumer surplus with respect to infrastructure,
constant prices. Under our parametric assumptions,

also holding

the elasticity of consumer surplus with

respect to infrastructure deployment is the same as the elmticity of demand with respect to
infrastructure.
Similarly, the historical effect on revenues from itiastructure
represented as:

deployment maybe

~U:U513

lVELF.4REBE.}’EFI~ FRO.\f [.VF&4STRtiCXRE

1.1996

p X1*)

AR
—=

g(~,p)

R

p fl~~)

-

p X1,)

g(~,p)

Page 7

_

Acs
es

g(~,p)

That is, the percentage change in revenue attributable

to ifiastructure

deployment

relative to final period’s revenue is the same as the percentage change in consumer surplus.’0
Similarly, the marginal revenue associated with another unit of infrastructure

d PQ

;(0

dI

f(n

—=PQ—

is

PQ

= EQ[ —~

which provides one measure of the differences in returns to investment faced by different firms
Under any specification, the key parameters are f(I) and e~I. The goal of our model is to
use standard behavioral assumptions for firms and regulators to derive a minimal set of
parametric restrictions for estimating f(I).

2. Equilibrium

interpretation.

We assume that the regulator and the company play a Nash game. The regulator chooses
price, while the company chooses the level of infraswcture.

Each player chooses its optimal

strategy holding constant the strategy of the other. In equilibrium,
other. We msurne that the regulator maimizes

each is a best response to the

a weighted average of consumer and producer

surplus (current cash flow), while the firm maximizes the present value of the profit stream
associated with investment.
infrastructure

For pedagogical convenience,

we also assume that digital

only enhances demand and does not change operating costs. This is plausible since

most modernizing

infrastructure investment has negligible influence on the marginal costs of

providing telephone service, but does involve substantial

installation expenses.’ 1

Regulators choose prices to reflect the political disposition of the state and the locality.
~eir

utility is given by:

.+ USUS[ 31.

J}’ELF.4REBE.VEFm FRO.\f 1.VFR4STRUCTURE

] 996

UR(X,P,I) = e cs(x,P,~

Page 8

+ n(x,P,~

where 0 must be greater than zero (in our model’s equilibrium

(2)

it will be greater than 1), and

where H reflects the firm’s cash flow, and is given by:

H(x,P,~

‘

P fl~ g(x,P)

- W(I-lO)

(3)

where 10is the initial infrastructure level and W is the unit economic cost of infrastructure. ‘z
M=imizing

the regulator’s utility (i.e., the regulator sets prices) yields:

e -

1 =

-gp(x’p)
p
g(x,P)
‘

(4)

-EQY

r

Regulatory optimization - as in (4) - implies that the equilibrium

price -P* - is a @ction

of 0 and X. The intuition is that regulators choose a price to achieve a desired elasticity of
demand (in line with political demands as represented by 6).]; Finally, substituting
for price (P=R/f(I)g(X,P))

in (4) revenue

we obtain

R = - flfl(e

- 1) ‘(X’P)2
gp(x,p)

(4a)

From (4a), then, we obtain that revenue is a function of I, 0,X and P. But from (4), P is a
function only of X and 0, making R also a function only of I, 0 and X. Equation (4a) implies also
that the Nash equilibrium assumption is not necessary to estimate the revenue equation (4a).
Thus, the estimation of (4a) is robust to any type of investment model assumed.14 That is, the
estimation of (4a) can be done simply by (non-linear) two stage least squares, instrumenting
and I. As we explain below, most of our estimates are simply various specifications
Thus, most of our analysis only requires implementing

for (4a).

two stage least squares methods.

for P

~UZUSI

JI’ELF.4RE BE.\’EFm FRO.111.VFR4STRCCTURE

31.1996

3. Regulation,

prices, andpo[itical

Prices, regulations,

constraints.

and political constraints vary across states. We modi& the generic

model in equation (4a) to account for such heterogeneity.
telecommunications

Pa2e 9

Following quantitative models of

regulation, we make two assumptions

(see, for example, Smart [1995]).

First, regulators set prices based on 6 and XL, where the latter represents a vector of economic
and demographic

factors at the level of the LEC. Second, the bias towards customers, 0, arises

from a complex political process, taking place partially at the state level and partially at the LEC
level. We measure several factors influencing this process. We label them economic and
demographic

variables at the LEC level, XL, economic and demographic

vmiables at the State,

Xs, and other (partially observable) political variables at the state, S. That is,
(5)

Thus, substituting

(5) into (4a), we can rewrite (4a) to obtain
log (R*) = log fl~

4. Functional

+ J(XSJL,S)

Form

If we let f(.) be Cobb-Dougl=,

then
log ~~)

= y log (~

implying that the elasticity of consumer surplus with respect to infrastructure,

e~I, is given by y.

If we let f(.) be translog then

log tin)

= y, log (n + Y* [log-(D]*

implying that e~[ varies for different levels of I. ~~, is then given by y, + 2yz log (I).
With the Cobb-Douglas

assumption the revenue equation (4b) becomes:
log

(R*) = ylog (z) + J(xLJ~,s)

With the translog resumption the revenue equation becomes:

(4C)

~U:USl

JVELF.4REB&.VEFm FRO.\f /.VFfiSTRLCTtiRE

31.1996

log

5. Econometric

(R*)

Page IO

= yllog (~ + y2(log (~)z + J(XLJ~>S)

considerations.

We first propose to estimate our model using a two stage least square estimation of (4c),
which allows us to obtain the returns to infras~cture

deployment without imposing cross

equation restrictions arising from a particular investment model. We start by specifying J(X~, X~,
S)= 5’X~ + 6zX~ + 5;S + ~. Thus, we estimate the Cobb-Douglas

log (R*)

specification

as

= ylog (~ + 61XL + b2X~ + 63S + El

(4d)

In equation (4d) XL, X~ , arid S are exogenous, while R and I are endogenous.
I with w, where w is a vector of exogenous LEC-specific
y is the object of interest and is econometrically

infrastructure

We instrument for

installation cost factors.

identified in the above. A similar and obvious

argument holds for the translog specification for f, where two coefficients for y will be
estimated.
Some related observations: First, estimating (4d) requires that prices not be a function of
infrastructure,

as we have assumed all along .15Second, price elasticities are not identifiable from

(4d), because X, plays a role in the determination

of 6 and in the determination

demand.]b Third, the constants in XL,X~ and S or W are not identified.

of final

Fourth, the argument

leading to (4d) suggests that the list of control variables in XL, X~ , and S should be extensive,
trying to capture factors influencing regional variation in telephone demand in the absence of
digital itiastructure.

Further, the factors measuring our basic demographic

exogenous to both the determination of R and I. Fifth, the Cobb-Douglas

instruments must be
function assumes that

all LECS face the same infrmtructure elasticity. This assumption is virtually a necessity for this
study, since the data are not sufficiently rich to allow the estimation of LEC specific
infrastructure

elasticities. Sixth, there is no econometric

guarantee that the estimate for y will be

positive, though there is a presumption in the model that it is positive. ” Thus, a natural test for
the infrastructure

fiction

is whether the estimated coefficient differs horn zero. Seventh, the

~U~USl

}I”ELF.4
RE BE,VEFm FRO.LIlaYF&STRCCXRE

31.1996

Pa:e I 1

above specification presumes positive Is, as we use the expression log(I). 1sFinally, under the
usual data limitations we cannot argue that we filly measure all infrastructure investment, and
that our estimates imply that investment in fiber-optic cable by itself leads to some percent
increase in revenues at all LECS. We can argue, however, that investment in fiber, which is one
necessary part of digital infrastmcture,
digital technologies

positively correlates with investments in a whole range of

which are revenue enhancing. This precaution informs the interpretation

below.

6. Investment

bejzavior

To explore some of the features of investment we solve for the profit maximizing level of
infrastmcture

under the assumption that the features of the environment which influence LEC

investment do not change. This is the most natural model (of the many possible) for illustrating
the determinants

of cost. This is sufficient for our purposes since we do not use this investment

model for any welfare inferences.

r

At time t, firms maximize the net present value of profits given by

(6)

where b is the firm’s discount rate and W are LEC-specific
installing infrastructure.

factors that influence the cost of

Assuming stationarity of X and (3over time, and that W is known, then

by (4) P is then stationary, and we can solve (6) to obtain an optimal I at time t.’g
The firm’s first order condition with respect to I is then given by

(7)

where A is a term including discount rates and other factors. By substituting
and performing other manipulations,

equation (7) can be remanged

to yield

revenue for price,

.

~U~USt

~ 1,

JVELF.4REBE.YEFITS FRO.\f ;.\-FMSTRCCTCRE

1996

Page 12

(7a)

From (7a), the equilibrium level of infiastmcture,

I*, is a function of W, ~~,, X, and P and

discount factors. Assuming a Nash equilibrium, then, I = I* and P = P*. By equation (4), P* may
be solved independently

of the value of I*, while I* must account for P* by equation (7). Hence,

assuming a unique solution from combining (4) and (7) and solving for I* and P*, I* becomes an
implicit functions of ~~,, W, (3and X, while P* is an implicit function only of only (3and X,
Although this model may be too simple to describe actual regulator/firm interactions,
is useful for estimating some of the bmic determinants
identification

issues in our econometrics estimation.

it

of installation costs. It also highlights

If we wish to estimate (4d) simultaneously

with an investment equation, then by (7a) it follows that we must estimate an investment
equation of the form

(7b)

log (I*) = log (R*) + log (y) – log (W) + constant

where the above has assumed a Cobb-Douglas

specification

for f~). Letting W = aw + ~, we use

non-linear three stage least squares to estimate (4d) and
log (I*)

= log (R*)

+ log (y) – ~W + constant

If we estimate a WO equation system consisting

+ E2

(7C)

of (4d) and (7c), we not only improve the

efficiency of our estimate of y, but also, given the functional form and investment model
~surnptions,

estimate the distribution of costs across firms, and their evolution.

These additional

benefits, though, come at a price because of the limited flexibility of equation (7c).

7. E.rtensions to multip[e inpufi.
Since many infrmtructure technologies are complement~,
simultaneously.

it is important to measure

infrastmcture

investment in several technologies

Assume that NO types of

infrastmcture,

1, and Iz, influence demand. Let Q=f(I, ,Iz)g(X,P) and Wi = Cost of installing a

~U:USI31.

unit of

JVELF.4REBE.VEF~

1996

FRO.111.YFR45TRCCXRE

Page 13

Ii, I= 1,2. T’hen the investment decision has two first order equations,

(7)

Assuming a Cobb-Douglas

formulation for f(.), and after performing various substitutions we

obtain the system of equations which easily generalizes to more than two infrastmcture variables:
log (R*)

= yllog (Ilj

log (~,”) = log (R*)

(4e)

+ yzlog (lz”) + 61X~ + 62X~ + 53s + ~1
+ log (y) – awi +

We only estimate the Cobb-Douglas

COnStUnt

+ E2,

specification of the infrastmcture

i=1,2

(7d)

function for multiple

inputs ,20
r

8. Sltmmary.
Our estimates will provide a measure of the impact of infrastructure deployment on
consumer welfare. There are two key identification

conditions. First, the determination

by whatever political and regulatory process, must occur independently
infrastructure

-- though the investment in infiastmcture

telephone demand must be multiplicative

of price,

of the level of

may be a function of price level. Second,

in (almost) any function of infrastructure

in order to

lead to closed, simple and ultimately measurable relationships between revenue levels and
infrastructure

levels. These observations are useful for choosing instruments.

9. Specl~cation.
We estimate three specifications

of the basic system. Our basic specification for (4d), and

(7c) when applicable, will assume a Cobb-Douglm

benefit function and use the following

variables:

XL= {constant, log total LEC population, fraction LEC urbanized, fraction rural, log LEC per

August 31.1996

lVELF.4REBE.VEFfX FRO.\l 1.VFR4~R tiCTCRE

Page 14

capita income, year dummies, small LEC (state employment

in this LEC less than 10

percent), log population density, city of half million, city of quarter of million, fast
growing area}.
X~ = {constant, state GNP growth, log state/local per capita income, fraction of state
employment in finance, insurance, and real estate}.
S = {constant, non-elected regulator, democrat majority of regulators, interaction of not-elected
and democrat majority, vote for Dukakis in 1988, governor democrat, legislature
democratic, legislature republican, governor and regulator from same party, governor and
regulator and legislature from same party}.
w = {constant, log of LEC construction wages, log of LEC level of construction employment,
LEC growth in level of employment in construction,

year dummies, holding company

dummies, log of stock of fiber in 1986, translog in population

In our second specification of the Cobb-Douglas

and land }.

benefit finction

we include qine holding

company dummies in XL. These dummies stand in for holding company specific differences in
the growth of revenues, In our third specification we use the same covariates as listed above
(without the holding company dummies), and estimate a translog. We only do this for fiber-optic
cable, where the larger sample size describing firms’s deployment
degrees of freedom. For reasons explained below, each specification

of fiber yields sufficient
will be estimated on two

different measures of revenue. One measures only local telephone revenue within the LEC. The
other includes access charges horn long distance telephone calls, which forms a significant
fraction of many LEC’S revenues. ~is

results in six specifications

for the estimation using only

fiber optic cable and four specifications for the estimation using fiber, ISDN and SS7 together.
We employ this number of specifications in order to explore the robustness of the inferences to
different specifications.

IV. Data
We undertake our analysis at the local exchange company at the sub-state level. Every
RBOC has a state company and many states divide its telephone franchise territory between one

.~U:US[

JI”ELF.4RE
BE.VEFm FRO.LII,}’FR4STR tiC~RE

1996

~ i.

of the RBOCS and other national and local companies.

Page 15

We use three main sources of information

to understand these firms. For local-exchange company specific information&d
infrmtmcture

data on

we use an augmented version of the data developed by Greenstein, McMaster and

Spiller [1995] (GMS) and Greenstein and Spiller [1995]. For data on political and regulatory
v~ables

we use the Book of the State published by the Council of State Governments, and we

use the Yearbooks of the National Association of Regulatory

Utility Commissioners.

GMS gathered demographic characteristics for each of the LEC’S territories in each state
for the period since divestiture.

Because demographic

information

is available until 1992, and

most of the relevant digital infrastmcture data start to be reported in 1986, the GMS data set
covers the period 1986-1992.

GIMS also gathered infrastructure

statistics for all those LECS that

file annually with the FCC. They file using forms M and ARMIS 43-03,43-04

and 43-07

(Alaska, and Hawaii were excluded). There are 101 local exchange carriers in each year of the
GMS data,z’ which results in a data set with a m~yimum of 707 observations.
information

The demographic

was collected at the county level, and was then assigned to the dominant parrier

within its boundaries according to maps showing the local exchange carriers’ territories in each
state.p The county data are then aggregated to the company level within each state.2; The main
source of the demographic (county level) data is the Annual Estimates of tie US Bureau of
Economic Analysis, Department of Commerce, “Regional Economic Information Systems
tiual

CD,” and the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Employment

and Earning Annual Reports.

1. Infraslructlire.
We construct our sample from the largest local exchange companies (LECS) within the
United States at the sub-state level.z’ Data on miles of fiber optic cable covers 1986 until 1992
and is available for all companies -- RBOC, GTE, Contel, and many independents.z5 Data on
number of ISDN Iines,zb and SS7 switches covers 1988 until 1992 and is ordy available for the
RBOCS, GTE, Contel and very few independents.z7 As described in the three previous footnotes,
each of our infrastmcture variables measures increasing digitalization

of a modem telephone

network.
All three of these infrastructure variables grew rapidly over our sample period (if

August 31.1996

lVELF.4REBE.VEFITSFRO.111.VFR4STRCC~RE

Page 16

somewhat unevenly across companies and across time) and continues to grow today. For
example, the median number of fiber miles for all 101 LECS in 1992 was 22,371. Most LECS
increased the number of miles of fiber in their networks, with many smaller LECS starting from
very low levels in the mid 1980s. The median multiple increase was four times from its level
from 19S8. me total number of fiber miles (this includes both “lit” and “dark” fiber) at the 101
LECS was 6,385,578 in 1992.

2. Revenl[e.
We supplement these data with information on LEC revenues, as reported to the FCC.
This data are also collected as far back as 1986, but contain irreconcilable
between 1987 and 1988.28 ~is

changes in definitions

is the most binding constraint on our sample. It begins with 1988

and ends in 1992. Many small independent LECS do not report revenue at all and a few do not do
so until the later years in our sample.z9
As a measure of a LEC’S revenue we collected net operating revenue (“category 550” in
the FCC reports), which contains both revenue for local calls and access charges. We also
collected revenue for basic local service (“category 520” in the FCC reports), which contains no
access charges but does contain several other miscellaneous

categories of revenue. The first

category of revenue more closely fits our model of LEC revenue. However, access charges form
a significant fraction of LEC revenue and have recently been changing as they come under
greater regulatory scrutiny and competitive pressure. We test the sensitivity of our results to the
definition of revenue.
For each specification we will report ~o

different estimates, one using all revenue and

one using only local revenue. Among the balanced panel, casual inspection shows some variation
in revenue from one year to the next, but on average very little change in inflation adjusted levels
of revenue at most LECS over the five years. About half the sample saw an increme while the
other half saw a decrease -- usually this was not more than 5-10 percent in either direction, but a
few LECS did experience as much as 20% change in revenue.

3. Local a~zdState dentograpllics.

~U~USt31.

IVELF.4REBE.VEF~ FROJI 1.\-FR.4STRGCTtiRE

1996

Page 17

Local and state demographic and economic variables come from the BEA reports for
economic activity at the county level. We matched these reports against LEC territory maps, as
explained in GIMS [1995]. This provides data on total population, their composition,
employment

wages,

and other economic activity at the LEC level.

For the instruments

in the two-stage least square estimates and for our marginal cost

equations we use different features of construction markets -- their size, level of wages and recent
growth. The memure of size controls for scale, construction
costs, and construction

wages controls for construction

employment growth controls for capacity constraints or downturns that

either raise or lower expenses. We include time dummies to reflect widely reported declines in
the costs of inputs and installation, particularly among fiber and ISDN. We include holding
company dummies to reflect differences in the ability of firms to install digital equipment. We
exclude the independent

company dummies in the full sample and Contel and the independent

dummies in the partial sample. We include multiplicative
population,

reflecting both economies and diseconomies

economies and diseconomies

specifications

of costs in land and

in network configuration.

Th,ese scale

are associated with population size and geographic scope of sewice

territory. We also estimate an equation with inherited fiber in 1986; this stands in for inherited
costs advantages in installing digital equipment.
For our revenue equation, we include total population and some of its features from BEA
estimates. The US census distinguishes between urbanized, suburban and rural population.
Suburban population lives in cities between five and fifty thousand total population.

We include

the fraction of the population of each type and exclude the fraction suburban. From BEA data we
include local per capita income, state per capita income, population density, state growth, and the
fraction of the state economy devoted to FIRE (finance, insurance and real estate). All these
measure the propensity of population and regional economy to use more telephone services and
political pressure to increase or decrease prices, We also include a dummy for whether a LEC is
very small (covers less than 10 percent of the state’s employment);
to be predominantly

we expect these small LECS

rural and protected by the regulatory process with higher prices or higher

access charges. We include time dummies, omitting the initial year.
We also add a dummy for whether the LEC contains a city within its boundaries with a

IVELF.4REBEiVEFf7S FRO.L[I,YFR4STRUCTLrRE

August 31.1996

Page 18

population over half a million, according to the 1990 US Census.;o While these areas are
geographically

minute relative to a typical LEC geographic territory, they play a central role in

many regional economies, drawing population from surrounding territory daily for work, serving
as the hub and coordinator of much outlying economic activity in the periphery. We also use a
dummy for whether the LEC contains a city over a quarter million. Finally, we add a dummy for
whether the LEC covers an area designated as one of the fifty fastest growing SMSAS in the US
in the 1980s, again from the US census.~l

4. Po[iticai variables.
For every year we collected the political Wlliation of all state regulators in the state
agency in charge of telecommunications,

if known; othewise

we report the political party of the

governor that appointed the regulator. The source is the Yearbooks of the National Association
of Regulatory Utility Commissioners.

We used the Book of the States (VOL 25-29), Tables 2.1

and 3.2, for counts for the political affiliation of every legislator in the house and sen~te, as well
as the governor. We dropped Nebraska and Washington DC from the sample because neither
contains a bicameral legislature .32We include dummies for whether democrats are a majority in
tie state regulatory agency or not.;3 We also include dummies for whether the regulators are
elected on not (appointed = 1), as positive political theory predicts that the method of
appointment

should influence telecommunications

regulatory behavior (See e.g., Smart [1995]).

We also interact regulatory majority with election/appointment.
We further include the fraction of the popular vote for Dukakis in 1988 as a measure of
the political leanings of the state. Further, we include three dummies for the political affiliation
of the governor (Democrat = 1) and also for the legislature when both houses are from the same
party. The omitted category is any non-aligned legislature.

Finally, we include NO dummies for

political alignment, which may influence the ease with which political institutions
and commitment

make changes

to regulatory policy and indirectly determine a firm’s revenue (see Sm~

[1995], and Levy and Spiller [1994]). One dummy takes on the value of one when the regulatory
agency and the governor me from the same party, the other takes on the value of one when the
regulatory agency, the governor and the legislature are from the same party.;~

~U:U5[31.

J1’ELF.4REBE.VEFm FRO.\f I,VFR4STR CCTL’RE

1996

Page 19

5. Final data set.
Afier applying the selection criteria described above, the full sample (containing
information only about fiber) has 458 observations for 1988-1992. The partial sample
(containing information about fiber, ISDN and SS7) has 308 observations for 1989-1992. Both
are unbalanced panels, with complete obsemations

for the RBOCS and GTE, and many

incomplete observations for other independents. Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for all
endogenous and exogenous variables, putting the instruments
demographic variables. We also report the infrastmcture

in the same category as local

variables for the partial sample. Since

there were no significant differences between the descriptive statistics for the exogenous
variables for the full and partial sample (except in the firm dummies, as noted), we only report
the results for the full sample.

X Estimation

and results

r

Since the two and three stage estimates of the revenue equation are not that different, we
focus on the two stage least square estimates for most of the discussion and present the three
stage least square results at the end to discuss the cost side. The larger sample (N=458) is used
for the model using only fiber. The smaller sample (N=308) estimates the model using fiber,
ISDN and SS7. Since we estimate the model on these unbalanced panels we interpret the
estimates accordingly, We view each year’s cross section of data as providing independent
observations on the same underlying relationship. Each Table presents four sets of estimates, WO
different specifications

of revenue equation for two different revenue variables. Thus, all of our

conclusions about welfare results from itirastructure

are supported by either set of the revenue

equation estimates. Only the conclusions about cost indexes require the cost equations in the
three stage estimates.

1. Revenue equation estimates
In Table 2 the infrastructure coefficient (only on fiber), which we interpret as the
elasticity of demand with respect to fiber, is significant and large. The estimates range from 0.06

~U:US[31.

JVELF.4RE BE.VEF~

1996

FRO.\f 1.YFR4STRtiCTURE

to 0.11. The coefficients on fiber are always positive and significant.

Page 20

The first two columns of

Table 1 in the appendix presents translog estimates for the basic specification and we summarize
the results in the bottom of Table 4.;5 The range of the estimates do not differ much horn their
values in Table 2, where the elasticities were assumed constant across all specifications. Hence,
we conclude that the translog specification for fiber adds little additional information in this
specification.
We now ~

to the multiple infrastmcture

estimates, found in Table 3 and summarized in

Table 4. Table 3 contains even higher estimates for elasticity for fiber than in Table 2, ranging
from 0.08 to 0.18. The coefficients on ISDN are always positive and only significant when we
include the holding company dummies.

Their low value is zero and their high is 0.16 in column

3 of table 3. The coefficients on SS7 are always negative except in column 4. This may indicate
that investment in SS7 is too positively collinear with investment in ISDN and fiber to be
informative.

These results may also indicate that the bulk of the diffision

of SS7 and ISDN takes

place too late in our data to have much effect on revenue. Updating this to more recent years
could yield quite different estimates, if recent publicity is to be believed. Further explorations
with translog specifications

did not yield any additional insight and are not shown.;b In the

discussion below we explore the implications of the magnitude of these estimates and their
interpretation.

A consemative

conclusion so fti is that fiber infrastructure

enhancing demand, but that the others, by themselves,

contributes to

do not do so at all or not greatly.

We now discuss the estimates of the coefficients on the controls, which do not largely
differ between Tables 2 and 3. The control variables help predict revenue, largely in the predicted
direction. We first briefly review local demographics.

Total population does increase revenues,

but at an elasticity less than one. Higher fractions of urbanized and rural populations do lead to
higher revenues (relative to suburban populations),

but the coefficient magnitudes are usually

higher for the rural arem in most estimates; in other words, trading a set fraction of urbanized for
rural population, holding constant population size, increases revenue. However, trading either
one for a moderately small town will decrease revenue significantly.

Small territories have higher

revenue, probably reflecting higher prices going to small rural areas. Population density is never
significant. The time dummies and sometimes the city hubs dummies (city with one quarter

~U:USl31.

1996

IFELF.4REBE.YEF1~ FRO.\[ 1.VFR45TRCCTURE

million) generally have the expected signs and are ofien significmt.

Page 21

me time dummies indicate

a secular decline in revenue over time in the absence of other changes, though they vary widely
in their rates from one set of estimates to another. It is also difficult to make any robust
inferences from the LEC dummies in the revenue equation.
Of the state demographics,

the log of state to local per capita income keeps its sign and

significance, though it varies in range. It says that the LEC benefits most when its per capita
income is much higher than the state average, and benefits least when the LEC is much lower
than the state average. When they are roughly the same, as when one LEC dominates most
territory within a state, then there is little effect. This coefficient perhaps indicates that the LEC
with much higher per capita income for the state contains concentrations

of high-income

generating economic activity for the state, such as would be found in the major city within a
state. The coefficient on finance, insurance and real-estate activity (FIRE) also tends to be
positive and significant in most specifications,

as expected. The difference between being in the

high and low FIRE state can have a large influence on LEC revenue.;’ State GNP gro~h

does

not matter.
The coefficients on political variables contain several interesting estimates. First,
revenues are lowest when elected republicans are in charge of the regulatory commission, when
revenues may be lowered by as much as 30% or more. In all other situations (including
appointed republicans), the commission has roughly the same effect on revenues. Revenues are
also lower in states with high votes for Dukakis, but the magnitude of the effect is not too large
except between the extremes. Beween
0.34 to 0.56, Utah and Massachusetts,

the extremes revenues carI vary as much as 40°i0 (from
respectively).

None of the remaining political variables are

statistically significant in Table 2 and 3, though we note hints of several intriguing pattems.;s
Summarizing the state political variables, it seems that the regulatory agency and the political
leanings of the state have the largest effect on revenue, but the political affiliation of the different
state actors also plays a role in some circumstances.

We have more to say in the analysis below,

but we conclude tentatively that the political variables are important control variables to include
in the specification.

.

J}’ELF.4REBE.VEFnS FRO.LIL\ ’FRAgRUCXRE

August 31.1996

2. Calculating

buyer and seller benefits from infrastructure

Page 22

investment

We now use our coefficient estimates to calculate the benefits to producers from actual
infimtructure

investment.

We calculate the change in a period’s demand attributable to (actual)

infimtructure

relative to some bme demand year. We calculate this for every LEC in our sample

and then present summaries of these calculations. This calculation assumes that prices do not
change (e.g., because regulators compel it), which makes these estimates too optimistic if postinvestment prices fall or too pessimistic if they rise (from the LEC’s perspective) .39As noted in
the earlier section, this is not a true profit calculation, since we are not accounting for costs of
infras~cture

deployment, nor are we accounting for anticipated changes in prices (i.e.,

anticipated by the firm) in response to infrastmcture

deployment.

We also noted above that we may use the same measure to calculate the benefits to
consumers from actual infras~cture

investment. This same measure provides the change in

consumer surplus attributable to infimticture

deployment

this calculation is too pessimistic if post-investment

relative to a base year. For consumers

prices actually fall or too optimistic if they

actually rise.
Table 5 presents estimates of the welfare benefits from infrastmcture
the estimates from Table 2 and Table 3. These are consewative

investment, using

estimates, using the low

estimates from each table. In each case, we show the estimates we use. Since we have data on
fiber investment for all 101 LECS who report to the FCC, we use the whole sample (which is
slightly larger than the sample used for estimation of the coefficients).do This table compares
1992 with 1988. The next set of calculations uses a midrange estimate for fiber and a low
estimate for ISDN. We exclude SS7 since it is rarely significantly different from zero. We have
less data on ISDN for the 101 LECS. We are only able to make these calculations over 82 LECS
(which is also slightly ltiger than the sample used for estimation).”

These two sets of

calculations compare 1992 with 1989.
In all the simulations in Table 5, the percent demand due to infrastructure

investment is

substantial. Table 5’s estimates show 10 percent of LEC demand on average was due to
investment in fiber. The median percent was 9 percent, indicating little skewness in the benefits
across LECS. In the simulations using two infrastructure

estimates, the estimates of the gain from

~U:US[

IVELFARE BE,\’EFm FRO.\[ I,VFR4STRCC~RE

~ 1.1996

infrastructure

Page 23

investment are much higher than in Table 2. This is partially a result of the higher

coefficient estimate for fiber (.11 vs .07), but also due to the addition of one more type of
infrastmcture,

ISDN. me mean and median increase in demand is 13 percent, with considerable

range of experiences across the LECS (s.d. = .08).
These are large estimates.
investment

As a consequence,

in ISDN and fiber-optic cable by

we can not reasonably argue that
were responsible

themselves

for over ten percent of

revenue enhancement at all LECS. It is more likely that activity in a whole range of digital
technologies
enhancing.

accompany investment in fiber and the totality of all this investment was demand
Moreover, we cannot say how much demand enhancing investment was or was not

captured by the LEC due to regulated changes in prices. However, our estimates do appear
consistent with industry consensus that in the absence of LEC investment in new technologies,
revenues would have fallen in many localities.
We now discuss the implications of Table 5 for inferences about consumer welfare. In all
the estimates, the enhancement to consumer surplus from infrastructure

investment is the same as

the demand elasticity, which is large. Thus, we conclude that a high percentage increase in
consumer surplus, as much as a ten percent or more, is due to recent investment in digital
infrastructure

investment and the inves~ent

activities correlated with it.

Since an estimate of the percentage surplus attributable to infrastructure

is scale free, it is

difficult to interpret without any base estimate for total consumer surplus, which is not
recoverable in our model. For expository ease we translate our estimate of the elasticity of
consumer surplus to ifiastructure

into its price-equivalent

change. More specifically, for a

constant elasticity of demand -- that is, Q = Af(I)P= -- we calculate the extent to which prices
must have declined to provide the same consumer surplus change as provided by actual
infrastmcture

investment, fixing I at its later value. If the estimated percentage increase in

consumer surplus due to ifiastructure

investment is given by O/OdC,then the percentage price

decline that provides the same amount of consumer surplus is given by %dP = [1 - %dC] {l/[]<Jl1, where e >1 is the elasticity of demand.~z Since we do not know the value of the elasticity of
demand, we calculate %dP under different resumptions

about demand elasticities (i.e., e = 1.5,2

or 2.5). This is sufficient for our purposes, which is to illustrate the degree of the welfare changes

.~U:US[

J}’ELF.4
RE BE.YEFI~ FRO.lf I,VFR4~RCCX’RE

31.1996

Page ?4

implicit in the estimates.
These calculations are also in Table 5. Not surprisingly,

as demand becomes more elastic

a smaller price decline achieves the equivalent amount of consumer surplus.

At most LECS the

increase in consumer surplus is equivalent to a decline of prices on the order of 12 and 8 percent
if demand elasticities are 2.0 and 2.5. The median is smaller, 10 and 6 percent respectively. The
estimates from Table 5 lead to higher gains to consumers than the estimates from table 2. Once
again, looking at the conservative estimates that exclude SS7, we see that the price equivalent
declines are 15 and 10 percent if demand elasticities are 2.0 and 2.5. For the elasticity of 1.5 the
equivalent price declines are much larger, but are not shown.~; No matter how we calculate it,
these gains are equivalent to substantial price declines. Since these are conservative methods we
conclude that the welfare benefits from infiastmcture

investment during the 1988-1992 period

were large.

,

3. Tile marginal retnrns from infrastrl[cture investment

Our model also provides insight into the diffusion of advanced digital infrastructure ,by
quantifying the LEC’S incentives to invest in more infrastructure.
examine the marginal benefit to the LEC from more infrastructure.
specification

dR/dI =

(~)~QI,

where we estimate

~Q[.

We can use our static model to
Under the Cobb-Douglas

A Similar calculation for tie translog also

can be done. While investments in sunk assets are not entirely a static problem for the LEC, this
“as if’ exercise still yields usefil insight into the incentives influencing the diffusion of digital
infrastmcture.

This exercise only requires estimates of y and not cost estimates.

Table 6 presents the estimates for different values of the elasticity of demand with respect
to fiber. The first three estimates show different values for y that span the lower range of
infrastructure

elasticity estimates found in tables 2 and 3. The last shows a comparison with the

translog estimates from Table 1 in the appendix. The table calculates the returns to one year’s
revenue from an additional “fiber-mile”, standardizing

in 1987 dollars. The table only examines

the LECS owned by the Regional Bell Operating Companies, who did most of the investment in
fiber in the United States.
The table shows that for a low estimate of the el~ticity

to infrmtructure

by 1992 the

~U:USt31.

IVEI!F.4REBE,VEFI~ FRO.1[1.YFR45TRCCTCRE

1996

Page 25

median marginal return on another fiber mile was $662 in current revenue for our lowest
estimates of alpha. Even among the RBOCS there wm considerable variation in these returns.
The first quartile received $472 and third $835. The mean is slightly higher than the median,
showing a slightly skewed distribution. For the higher estimates of y, the same patterns holds
with all values increasing proportionately.
The Table shows a dramatic the change over the five year period. The median marginal
return falls rapidly over the period. By 1992 it is at one quarter its level of 1988. This pattern
does not depend on the estimate for y (partly due to the Cobb-Douglas

assumption we use for

f(I)), The variation also declines sharply across all the LECS over the same period, again
irrespective of the estimate of y we use. This change largely reflects the reduction in the amount
of skewness in marginal returns. The LECS are becoming more alike over time.
In the bottom we present the same simulations

using the most consemative

translog

estimate (where the mean elasticity is 0.6 over the sample and growing slightly over time). The
results do not differ much from the Cobb-Douglas

specification

The marginal returns to infrastmcture fall dramatically

in their main qualitative features.

over time and the range across firms also

falls, though the magnitudes do differ somewhat. Hence, we conclude that these patterns are not
a feature of the functional form we resume for the benefit function.
These estimates are consistent with a relatively straightfomard

diffusion model. As the

user-costs of installing infrastmcture fell rapidly over the period, phone companies installed the
lower cost input deeper into their network, into places where its marginal return was lower. It is
reasonable to conjecture that the narrowing marginal returns are being driven by learning,
experience and knowledge spillovers. As all companies became fmiliar
technology,

the oppo~nities

with the new

for investment necessarily narrowed be~een

companies.

4. TJte ‘~riend[iness” of different states
The final interesting feature of the revenue estimates is associated with the political
variables. In our simple model of revenue, the factors associated with political factors measure
the state’s regulatory stringency. This stringency then influences prices and revenue, This line of
causation is distinct from economic and demographic

factors, which influence both the political

~UgUS[

11’ELF.4REBE.VEFITS FRO.L[1.vFR4STRL’CWRE

31.1996

Page 16

motivation for setting a level of prices and the aggregate quantity demanded at a certain price
level.
The theoretical model suggests that we may break out the component of revenue
associated with the political factors in the state. Table 7 shows our implementation

for 1988 and

1992.Using table 2, we compute the sum of the “political” coefficients multiplied times the
variables for each state.~g We then take the difference be~een
that year, standardizing

this sum and the maximum for

the “friendliest” state at zero. We determine the rank of the state in that

year by the average of the estimates from the two columns. We do this for all jurisdictions

except

Nebraska and Washington D.C.’j For comparison, we also show the lMerrill-Lynch rankings for
regulatory friendliness towards electrical utilities, as used by Joskow, Rose and Wolfram [1996].
These estimates show large differences be~een

states in the degree of friendliness. The

difference between the minimum and the maximum is as much as -.5 in some estimates, which
translates into over a 30% decline in revenues due to political variables. The mean is generally
around -.25, which translates into a 16°/0decline in revenue. These differences will have a large
influence on infiastmcture

investment behavior and the returns to infrastmcture

undei any,

investment model. Under the investment model proposed in (7b), for example, the effects of
regulatory friendliness would be quite pronounced.qb We conclude that this index is indirect
evidence that the regulatory environment has an important quantitative effect on company
investment in infrastmcture.
The Tables shows stability in the ranking of states over these five years. Most of the
changes reflect changes in the state political actors. The states that stay in the top fifieen in both
samples are Alabama, California, Delaware, Idaho, Illinois, Maine, Mississippi,

Nevada, South

Carolin~ and Utah. The states that stayed in the bottom fifteen in both years are Colorado,
Louisiana, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Oregon, and South Dakota. No states
moved from the bottom to the top. The states that move from the top to bottom include North
Carolina and Oklahoma. This relative stability in state rankings, combined with the effect the
regulatory environment

can have on investment -- as shown above -- is intriguing empirical

evidence for the commitment

to regulatory policies by potentially changing political institutions.

As a related aside, we have generally found that in any given year our index does not correlate

IVELF.4REBE.VEF~

.Au:ust 31.1996

with the Merrill-Lynch

FRO.\[ I,YFR4gR CCTL’RE

Page 27

index for electrical utilities.~’

These results, while admittingly a crude measure of regulatory friendliness, do suggest
the importance of political factors in shaping the environment

in which firms invest. We suspect,

however, that we are reaching the natural limits of our reduced form approach to variation
befiveen political institutions. With more time-variation
of regulatory mechanisms,

Ner

or perhaps more structure on the model

research may be able to identi~ the influence of political

actors and institutions with more precision.

5. Cost eq[latio~r estimates
Several different estimates of the investment equation were estimated. Appendix 2 and 3
contain the revenue and investment equations for the Cobb-Douglas

specifications

shown

previously. Appendix 2 estimates this only for fiber on the full sample. Appendix 3 shows
estimates for a multi-input specification using only fiber and ISDN, not S S7. SS7 was excluded
based on the results in Tables 3, which indicated that the elasticity on SS7 was rarely positive or
.
non-zero. h

investment equation was also added to the basic specification of the translog

benefit function. These are shown in columns 3 and 4 of Appendix 1 along with the other
translog estimates. Table 8 summarizes the main findings.
The firm dummies identi~ large differences in the costs of installing fiber. The results
are summarized in Table 8 where the coefficient estimates have been transformed into their
corresponding

cost index values. ~ese

indexes do not represent the full cost of installing

infrastructure,

only the costs that are not otherwise accounted for by other variables, but vary

over time or across firms. We present a range of estimates, reflecting the extreme highs and lows
among the variety of specifications.
Table 8 does not indicate that the RBOCS (Regional Bell Operating Companies) have
much lower costs than the Contel, GTE or the independents.
across specifications

The firm dummies differ too much

to draw such a conclusion. However, among the RBOCS, Bell Atlantic,

Nynex and Pacific Bell all have lower costs for installing fiber than the remaining firms. The
degree of cost advantage, however, differs widely across specifications and samples. For ISDN,
the RBOCS have much lower costs than either GTE or Contel.

~U~US[31.

J!-ELF.4M BE,VEF~ FRO.11I,VFMSTRL’CTCRE

1996

The

Page 28

time dummies, as expected, indicate a large secular decline in the cost of installing

fiber. Table 8 shows an 80% decline in costs over five years when the full sample is used, while
it shows over a 64°/0 decline over four years from the partial sample. This accords with the
obsemed behavior and publicity about some of the large investment programs recently
undertaken by LECS. It is also consistent with the results in Table 6 showing a decline in
marginal revenue over time. In addition, Table 8 shows a decline in the costs of ISDN of over
85V0 over four years, also consistent with the recent gain in momentum

to difise

ISDN to

business users.
Certainly the rapid fall in these estimates partly reflects that the true economic costs of
installing digital technologies,

including the costs of material and construction,

came down

dramatically in the late 80s, However, since the price of materials associated with fiber optic
cable and related technologies

(such as repeaters) was not falling as rapidly over this time

penod,~s material prices alone cannot form the entire explanation. Thus, we conjecture that our
estimates reflect the joint workings of many secular factors that influence the costs of
installation, including, but not restricted to the cost of materials, like declines in the costs of
acquiring knowledge on how to install new technologies

efficiently and quickly; experience in

solving installation problems; costs of training, and other factors that influence the user cost of
installation. Further, we suspect that this reflects a well-known
the first strands are the most dificult

feature of fiber in the local loop --

to lay along any given route, but once these initial costs are

sunk, additional fiber miles me much emier.
Despite these dramatic changes, secular declines in cost ue not the only factor at work
explaining heterogeneity

on the cost side. Other implications

about costs come directly from

appendix 2 and 3. In virtually every estimation the land and population variables are significant.
In fiber there are increasing costs in larger territories and decreasing costs in larger populations
(over the relevant ranges of the data). However, these scale effects eventually slow at very high
population levels or large terntones

and definitely interact. ISDN shows weak diseconomies in

large population areas, though no sensitivity to geographic size.
The performance of the remaining cost variables is mixed.

Overall the variables on

construction markets does not predict the costs of laying fiber except in appendix 2’s estimates.

Au~u5t31,

IVELF.4M BE.YEFITS FRO.L[1.VFRJ5TRUCTURE

1996

Page 29

There, higher wages raise the cost of installation, as does recent growth in construction markets
(perhaps reflecting capacity constraints).

Construction

market variables also do not predict the

costs of installing ISDN. It is also interesting to note that the inherited experience from a high
stock of fiber in 1986 does seem to provide advantages across all the types of infrastmcture
investment. According to Appendix 2, it seems to lower the costs of installing fiber. According
to appendix 3, it does not seem to influence the costs of installing fiber, but it does lower the
costs of installing ISDN.

VI. Conclltsion
When economic policy focuses on information

infrastructure, the presumption has been

that more is better. While this may be right to the first order, in this paper we claim that whether
it is right or not will only be known from detailed case studies.
In this study we examined investment in fiber optic cable, ISDN lines and signal seven
software, infrastmcture which plays an essential role in bringing digital technology to local
telephone networks. We chose to study local telephone service because these are an important set
of users and investors in the burgeoning “information

super highway.” We estimated a model

composed of a regulator and an LEC, that allowed us to estimate the elasticity of final user
demand for infrastmcture

investment by their LEC, controlling for factors such as local

economic activity and the political disposition of state regulators.
In all our estimates we find that consumer demand is sensitive to investment in modem
infrastmcture

as represented by fiber optic cable. We find that, as of 1992, fiber-optic cable

enhances LEC demand. Sometimes our estimates show that ISDN lines do as well, but SS7
generally does not. The estimated elasticity of consumer surplus to fiber optic deployment is
never less than 6 percent and much higher in some estimates. me elasticity of demand for ISDN
ranges widely between zero and 16 percent. The elmticity for SS7 is rarely robustly estimated. In
all our estimates these magnitudes lead to the conclusion that infrastmcture

investment is

responsible for a substantial fraction of the growth in consumer surplus and business revenue.
As far as local telephone markets are concerned, we see many research aspects to develop
further. We have subsumed the regulatory behavior into our reduced form estimates and not used

AU:USt31.

1996

}}’ELF.4ti BE.VEFITS FRO.111.YFR4STRUCTURE

Page 30

reported information on the diffision of regulatory reforms and their adoption by state agencies.
Nor have we filly modeled the complex dynamic bargaining that goes on between state
regulators and LECS over infrastructure and pricing. Infrastructure

expenses are (literally and

figuratively) sunk, while regulatory agencies might offer only weak commitments

to LECS to

recover revenue on these investments. Finally, in this paper we have only characterized consumer
heterogeneity

in a reduced form way. Providing more structure could help us identi& the

different effects of infrastmcture deployment on business and residential consumers, urban and
rural customers, etc. Separating these effects should help us identify the magnitude of the welfare
returns to consumers and producers from infrastructure

investment, and sharpen the policy

implications.
Besides local telephone networks, many related information technology markets are
potential subjects for the study of the benefits associated with new digital technology.

It is well

known that the long distance telephone companies and the competitive access providers have
made extensive investments in fiber optic cable and related digital technologies.
known that private fires are also making large investments

It is also well

in user-owned networks, which

combine computing and communication

technology

in user-customized

arrangements. These

digital networks are both complementary

and substitute to the public infrastmcture

network,

further increasing the complexity of any welfare analysis. Only such careful studies will reveal
whether the results we found for local telephone markets hold for other modem digital
infrastructure in a wide array of markets.

~U~U513

1.1996

JI’ELF.4REBE.VEF~ FRO.lf i.\ ’FR-lSTRUC~RE

Page 31

References
Bresnahan, T. F. [1987], “Measuring the Spillover from Technical Advance: Mainframe
Computer in Financial Sewices,” American Economic Review, March. pp 742-755.
Bresnahan, T.F. and R. Gordon [1996], The Economics
Press.

of lVew Goods, University of Chicago

Brown, K. and S. Greenstein [1995], “How much Better is Bigger, Faster& Cheaper? Buyer
Benefits from Innovation in Mainframe Computers in the 1980s. ” NBER Working Paper number
5138,
Congressional Budget Office [199 1], How Federal Spending for Infrastructure and Other Public
Investment Aflects the Economy, Washington DC: Government Publication Office.
Cronin, F. J., E. K. Colleran, P. L. Herbert, and S. Lewitzky, [1993a]j “Telecommunications
Infrastructure Investment and Economic Development,” Telecommunications Policy, Au2ust, pp
415-430.
Cronin, F. J., E. K. Colleran, P. L. Herbert, and S. Lewitzky, [1995b], “Telecommunications and
Growth, The Contribution of Telecommunication Infrastmcture Investment to Aggre~ate and
Sectoral Productivity,” Telecommunications Policy, December, pp 677-690.
Dholakia R. R., and B. Harlam [1994], “Telecommunications
and Economic Development:
Policy, 18(6), pp. 470-477.
Econometric Analysis of the US Experience,” Telecommunications
Deiwert, E. [1986], The Measurement of the Economic Bene~ts of Infrastructure
Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems Series VO1.278.

Services.

Greenstein, S., S. McMaster and P. T. Spiller [1995], “The Effect of Incentive Regulation on
Local Exchange Companies’ Deployment of Digital Infrastructure,” Journal of Economics,
Management, and Strate~,
Greenstein, S., W. Sosa-Escudero and P. T. Spiller (1 996) “The Adoption of Regulatory Reform
in Post-Divesti hue Local Telecommunications Rule-Making.” lMimeo, University of Illinois.
Greenstein, S and P. T. Spiller [1995], “Modem Telecommunications
Infrastructure and
Economic Activity: An Empirical Investigation.” Industrial and Corporate Change, 4(4), pp.
647-665.
Hardy, A [1980], “The Role of the Telephone in Economic Development,”
Policy, 4(4), pp 278-286.

Telecommunications

AU:US[31.

1996

1~ELE4REBE,VEFI~ FRO.\f l,VFMgRtiCX~

Page 32

Hendel, I. [1995], “Estimating Multiple-Discrete Choice Models: h application to
Computerization Returns,” Technical working paper no 168, NBER, Oct.
Hausman, J, hd T. Tardiff [1995], “Valuation and Regulation
Telecommunications,”
mimeo.

of new Services in

Huber, P., M. K. Kellog, and J. Tnome [1993], The Geodesic Net-work 11:1993 Report on
Competition in the Telephone Indusby, Washington DC, The Geodesic Company, 1995.
Joskow, P, N. L. Rose and C. D. Wolfram [1996], “Political Constraints on Executive
Compensation: Evidence from the Electric Utility Industry,” Rand Journal of Economics, 27 (l),
pp165-182.
Kahin, B. [199 1], Building Information Infrastructure:
Research and Education iVetwork, McGraw-Hill.
Kraashauer, J, various years, Fiber Deployment
Washington DC.

Issues in the Development of the lVational

Update, Federal Communications

Leh W. and R. Nell [1989], “ISDN and the Small User: Regulato~
Working Paper # 175, Stanford University.

Commission,

Policy Issues.” CEPR

Levy B. and P Spiller [1994], “The Institutional foundation of Regulatory Commitment: A’
Comparative Analysis of Telecommunications,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organizations.
Lewis, T.R. and D.E.M. Sappington [1991], “Oversight of Long-ten
Regulators,’’32, No.3, International Economic Review, pp:579-600.

Investment by Short-lived

McMaster, S. [1995], Telecommunications in a ne w era of Competition: Fiber Optics,
Regulatory Barriers, and Competition, Unpublished Dissertation, University of Illinois.
lMunell, A. H. [1992], “Infrastmcture Investment and Economic Growth,” Jollrnal of Economic
Perspectives, 6(4), Fall, pp. 189-198.
Mueller, M. [1993], “Telecommunications as Infrastructure:
Conzmunica[ions, 43(2), Spring, pp. 147-159.
National Research Council [1996], The Unpredictable
Academy Press.

A Skeptical View,” Journal of

Certain@, Washington, D, C.: National

Roller, H. and L. Waverman [1996], “Endogenous Gro~h
infrmtmcture Investment,” mimeo, OECD, May 1994.

and Telecommunications

.August 31. [996

IVELF.4M BE.YEFm FRO.\I I.VFRISTRL-CWRE

Saunders, R., Warford, J. and Wellenius, [1983], Telecommunications
Development, Baltimore, MD: John Hopkins University Press.

Page 33

and Economic

Selander, H. [1990], “The Economics of Fiber to the Subscriber,” Public Utilities Fortnightly,
August 16, 1990
Smart, S., [1995], “The Consequences of Appointment Methods and Party Control for
Telecommunications
Pricing,” Journal of Economics and ~Uanagement S[rate~.
Spiller, P. T., and S. Urbiztondo, “Political appointees vs. career civil servants: A multiple
principals theory of political bureaucracies,” 10, European Journal of Political Economy,
pp:465-497.
Tardiff, T., and W. Taylor [1993], “Telephone Company Performance under Alternative Forms
of Regulation in the US,” Working Paper, NEW, Cambridge MA., September, 1993.
Taylor, W., Zarkadas, D. Zona. [1993], “Incentive Regulation and the Diffision of new
Technologies in Telecommunications, “ Ninth International Conference of the ITS.
Teske, P. [1995], American Regulatory Federalism & Telecommunications
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Trajtenberg, M. [1990], Economic Analysis of Product Innovation,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
Williams, F. [1991], The New Telecommunications:
York: The Free Press.

Infrastructure,

The Case of CT Scanners,

Infrastructure for the Information Age, New

US Department of Commerce [1991], The NTIA lnfiastructure Report: Telecommunications
the Age of Information, NTIA special publication, 91-26, Washington, DC: Government
Publication Office.
Yates, Marshall [1990], “Promise of Fiber Optics,” Public Utilities Fortnightly,

in

August 16, 1990.

~USUS[31.

1996

IVELF.4M BE.VEF~ FRO.\[ 1.VFti5TRCCTURE

Page ;4

ENDNOTES

1. There is a relatively developed literature on the influence of telecommunications
infrmtructure investment on developing and rural economies. This literature is usually
concerned, however, with the level of penetration rates and quality of basic service. See, for
example, Hardy [1980] or Saunders et al [1983]. Reviews of earlier work in telecommunication
are usually about modernizing the post-lWI
US telephone system. See Mueller [1993] for a
“skeptical” review. Also see Roller and Waverman [1994] for a cross-country comparison closer
to our focus on modem telecommunications networks.
2. For a variety of perspectives on information infrastmcture policy see Commerce Department,
NTIA [1991], Kahin [1991], National Research Council [1995], Teske [1995], Williams [1991].
For tier
discussion of policies associated with inducing telecommunications infrastructure
investment, see Greenstein, McMaster and Spiller [1995], Huber [1993], ‘Kraashaur [1995], Lehr
and Nell [1989], McMmter [1995], Selander [1990], Tardiff and Taylor [1993], Taylor, Zarkadas
and Zona [1993], or Yates [1990].
3. See Bresnahan [1987] for an analysis of the impact of computers on the financial services
industry; Hausman and Tardiff [1995] for an analysis of the demand for Voice Messaging
Services in telecommunications; Trajtenberg [1990] for an analysis of the returns to hospitals
from improvements in CT scanner technology; Hendel [1995] for an analysis of the benefits to
business users from improvements in PC technology; and, Brown and Greenstein [1995] for an
analysis of large computer system user benefits from technical change.
4. See Munell [1992] Aschauer [1990], Deiwart [1986] and Greenstein and Spiller [1995] for a
broader review of infrastmcture studies inside and outside of telecommunications.
5. DRI used an input/output approach to measure the contribution of telecommunication to
economic efficiency, in particular, improvements in sectoral total factor productivity. DRI
estimates that there wm a $46.5 billion dollar resource saving (in 1990 dollars) due to increased
efficiency in the supply of telecommunications equipment and semice (see Cronin et al [1993a,
1993b]). They find that about 25V0of productivity growth over the late 1970s to 1990s was
attributable to improvements in telecommunications productivity and consumption efficiencies.
These effects are especially pronounced in finance, transportation, trade, real estate and
petroleum refining. Cronin et al [1993a] perform a similar analysis for a more disaggregate
sample, a cross section of counties in Pennsylvania, and confirm the findings made with more
aggregate data.
6. Dholakia and Harlam [1994] examine variation in telecommunications quality across the 50
states. They find a positive relationship between investment in telecommunications and
economic activity, controlling for other factors such as state education, energy consumption, and
other inputs to the local economy. In a predecessor to this paper’s study, Greenstein and Spiller
[1995], using the same unit of analysis as in this paper, examine the influence of
telecommunications infrastmcture on local economic activity in nvo sectors, finance, insurance

~U:US[

31.1996

J1’ELF.4REBE.YEFIn FRO.1[l,h”FR4STRUCTURE

Page 35

and real-estate (FIRE) and manufacturing. They find that modem infrastructure is associated with
large increases in FIRE, but not manufacturing. Their interpretation is that administrative activity
tends to use the public network intensively while manufacturing does not.
7.The increase in price sensitivity may arise from two complementary effects: Increases in
infrastmcture brings to the network users who are more price sensitive. Second, increases in
infrastmcture brings about higher volume uses of the network, making the demand more elastic
overall. Both occur when the installation of digital infrmtructure enables new services, or when
modem infrastmcture permits the trmsmission of data with greater speed and reliability,
inducing higher volumes of traffic.
8. For reasons explained below, short of directly estimating demand functions, this assumption
is needed to be able to estimate the aggregate effect of infrastructure deployment at the LEC
level.
9. Comparing consumer surplus growth to last period’s levels rather than first period’s levels is a
more consewative measure, particularly when infrastructure is growing rapidly.
10. Notice that this is not a profit calculation, as we have not considered installation costs.
11. As noted below in several footnotes, most of our inferences are robust to the assumption
about the minor effect on operating expenses. Relaxing the assumption, however, unnecessarily
complicates the exposition of the model and adds little additional insight.
12. Note that if operating expenses are reduced in proportion to investment then these additional
savings will be equivalent to a lower per-unit cost of infrastructure, i.e., a lower W.
13. Notice hat ~~p, the negative of the elasticity of demand, must be positive by definition.
Hence, 0 must be greater than 1 in equilibrium.
14. Our estimation strategy for learning the degree of revenue enhancement due to infrastmcture
investment would be unaltered even if infrastructure lowers operating expenses. That is, if
equation (3) were modified to include an additional term related to operating expenses, we would
still end up with a bmic relationship in the form found in (4).
15 ,If P were functions of I, then we would not be able to perform the move from (4a) to (4b), and
hence, y would not be identifiable from (4d).
16.We could only identifi price elmticities from (4) under the strong restriction that XL is not an
underlying determinant of political objectives, 6, which seems implausible.
17.This restriction becomes difficult to satisfy with more complex specifications
function (e.g., such as translog or multiple inputs).

of the benefit

~U:USI31.

1996

IVELF.4REBE,YEFIZ FRO.11I.VFRASTRCCWRE

Page 36

18 .Sorne infrastructure variables in a few LECS violate this msurnption, particularly in the early
years of the data. Thus, we add one unit of fiber to all LECS fiber levels.
19. We assume a firm that ma..imizes the present value of profits, while regulators area
succession of individuals with a one period horizon. For analyses of the implications of
multiperiod firms being regulated by single period regulators, see Lewis andSappington(1991
).
See also Spiller and Urbiztondo (1994) for analyses of the endogeneity of regulators’ horizons.
20. The complexity of the translog estimation, and the requirement

to impose positive

elasticities, would make such an extension extremely complex. As we found with this study’s
data, the additional complexity of the translog for a single input generated little additional
insight.
~ 1.OnlY comp~ies

that em over $1()(1million in revenue are required to report to the FCC.

22.GMS collected all forty eight state maps from the states’ regulatory commissions
telephone companies.

and main

23 .Although it is often the case that more than one carrier is operating in a county, over the entire
state these discrepancies tend to average out, thus eliminating any major biases.
24. Though GTE and Contel merge during 1991, we continue to treat them as separate
obsemations every year in our sample.
25. Fiber optic cable enables high volume traffic and is widely considered to be an essential part
of the modem digital telephone system. Fiber optic cable is a high speed, high quality
transmission mechanism that is limited in capacity only by the available terminal and repeater
technology. It is purified silica glass using laser chips. Erbiurn-doped fiber amplifiers enhance
the capacity to tens of thousands of gigabit-kilometers per second. Further digital technologies,
deployed in conjunction with fiber, enable a variety of new services and more reliable as well as
higher quality data senices over phone lines. We measure the deployment fiber in “fiber-miles”,
which is the equivalent of a strand of fiber laid over one mile (For further discussion, see
Kraashaur [1995]). In practice, many strands are laid over the same routes, so one thousand miles
of fiber optic cable does not cover one thousand geographic miles. This should be thought of as a
measure of the carrying capacity along communication lines. The typical patterns of deplo yment
at an LEC occurred first beween “feeder plants”, i.e., between central office and a business or a
remote terminal, where the volume of use is largest. Even as late as 1992, very little had yet been
deployed directly to residences,
26. Integrated Services Digital Nelsvork, ISDN, involves installing lines and switches using a
series of technical specifications designed to eme the movement of data traffic between two
points over telephone lines. At its simple technical level ISDN is an international standard that
allows voice, data, text, and video communications to travel simultaneously down the same
transmission path. More practically, its use will be facilitated by the implementation of other

~U:USI31.

1996

1}’ELF.)RE BE.\’EF~

FRO.\ f li\rFRASTRUCXRE

Page 37

digital technology and the adoption of SS7. It is an engineering concept that contemplates a
public, end-to-end switched digital network in which time division switches and digital
transmission paths accommodate multiple services originating at subscriber locations. While
ISDN has been proposed for many years, its diffusion within the United States did not accelerate
until the late 1980s and early 1990s. Even then, there were large differences across LECS due to
widely-reported inter-company differences in efficiencies, regulatory-imposed rules on prices for
installation and service, and regional differences in the demographics of local demand.
27. SS7 is a type of software for routing calls and data. It uses the existing backbone and switch
network more efficiently, allowing greater use of the telephone network for data traffic. At a
technical level, Signaling System 7 (SS7) is an CCITT standard for out-of-band signaling that
conforms to ISDN standard specifications. More to the point, it is software that facilitates the
use of ISDN, creating two channels within a single line. This improves the efficiency of a
network because less capacity is tied up in the process of comecting a call.
28. The changes are due primarily to the treatment of revenue from cellular services.
29.This data field produces a slightly unbalanced panel among some small independent
operators, but is complete for the RBOCS and for GTE.
30. Our other demographic data, while covering extremely diverse geographic/economic areas
across the entire US, measure cross sectional differences with country-level averages, so we
cmot easily construct this variable directly from BEA statistics.
31. In practice, this tends to primarily identifi LECS that cover sprawling suburb-oriented
belt communities, which were the fastest growing areas in the 1980s.

sun-

32. DC also has a mayor, not a governor. Nebraska state politicians do not need to declare their
political affiliations. These features make their political situation not easily comparable.
33. Due to the presence of independent regulators in a few regulatory agencies in a few years, a
non-majority of democrats does not necessarily imply a majority of republicans. We tried
standardizing on either party and found that it did not influence our inferences.
34. In this data set, this is about the most one can identi~ about political alignment. The
alignment of governor and legislature occurs virtually at the same time as alignment with the
regulatory agency. Similarly, the alignment of the legislature and the regulator occurs virtually
always with aligrunent with the governor. For further discussion of these issues, see Greenstein,
Sosa and Spiller [1996].
35. The range of estimates are computed over all years over the entire sample, including
Washington DC and Nebraska. Since the amount of fiber grows over time, so too does the
elasticity, but not greatly since the coefficient is so small.

~U:USI31.

1996

IVELFAM BE,Y-EF~ FRO.\l I.VFRISTRCCTL!RE

Page 38

36. These are available for the authors on request. In general, only the coefficients on fiber
yielded consistently positive itiastructure
elasticities.
37. The high FIRE states include W, CA, CT, DE, FL, IL, MA, NJ and NY.
38. The sign on democratic governor is always negative and the coefficient on republican
legislature is always lower than the coefficient on democratic legislature (and sometimes
significant). Also, phone companies seem to be worse off when all the legislature and the
governor are aligned instead of split (sometimes this is also significant).
39. In other words, we calculate [f(12) - f(I 1)] / [f(12)], where fo is given to us by our elasticity
estimates and 11 and 12 is given to us by actual investment by LECS at different time periods.
Period one is either 1988 or 1989, depending on the sample, and period two is 1992.
40. This is partly because we can include Nebraska and Washington DC in the welfare
calculations, but also because we do not need to exclude observations due to the absence of
revenue data, as was necessary for the estimation.
41. For the same reasons described in the previous footnote.
42. If the elmticity of demand is constant, then the percentage of consumer surplus attributable to
a recent decrease in price is 1 - (P1/Pz)( 1=), which leads to the fomula stated in the text.
43. Some of the simulations using 1.5 price elasticity stretch the realm of credibility since it is
difficult to imagine that the elasticity of demand will stay constant for very large changes in
prices.
44. This list includes eve@ing
in the category of S. The results were not especially sensitive to
the set of two-stage estimates we used. We did not use the estimates with LEC dummies because
these dummies will also partly reflect political expectations.
45. As noted, both are excluded due to their unusual political institutions. It is interesting to note,
however, that if we treat Nebraska as a “unified Republican legislature and governor” and
compare it with other states, it generally rises to the near the top in our friendliness measure. This
is consistent with perception that the state government goes to g-rest lengths to encourage the
telemarketing industry within the state.
46. Combining the estimates of y from (4d) with (7c) yields an equilibrium sensitivity of
infrastructure to political friendliness (PF) as follows: d(log(I”))/d(PF) = PF/( 1-y), where PF
equals the estimates of&S horn equation (7c). For example, for y = 0.1, d(log(I”))/d(PF) =
1.15;S. For a political friendliness index of -0.25, this derivative is -0.28.
47. Note that in the M-L index, a lower number is friendlier, while in our index a higher number
is fiendlier. Hence, if they were to provide the same measure they \vould be negative correlated.

~U=US[31.

1996

11’ELF,4REBE.VEFIn FRO.L! I,VFRrlSTRUCTURE

48. We thank Edwin Dean and Henry Guyot of the BLS for tracking dow
us and bringing this to our attention.

Pase 39

these price series for

TABLE 1

DESC RIPTIVE

STATISTICS

EN DOGENOUS

AND E XOGEN OUS VARIABLES

~

VAR ABL

H

wm

w

m

m

ALL REVENUE
LOG LOCAL REVENUE
LOG(I+ FIBER),FULLSMPL
LOG (l+FIBER), PARTIALSMPL

12.75
11.88
9.?4
9.73

1.42

7.25

15.86

1.64
2.09

6.09

15.16

3658.46

S08

0.00

13.02

4276.78

458

2.00

0.00

13.02

2996.11

308

LOG ( l+ISDN)

3.12

2.68

0.00

8.10

2.36

2.28

0.00

6.58

961.74
727.77

308

LOG (1+SS7)

0.46

0.28

0.00

0.94

208.95

458

FR4C RUWL

0.37

0.20

0.02

0.86

167.71

458

LOG POPULATION

7.02

1.40

2.81

10.17

3216.82

458

9.60

0.16

9,13

10.03

4395.92

458

LOG

458

5838.40

308

LO CAL DEMOG RAPHICS
FR4C

URBANIZED

NCOME

LOG PERCAPITA

3MALL (ST EMPLOYMENT

0.27

0.44

0.00

1.00

124.00

458

4.52

1.19

1.58

7.11

2072.00

458

9.41
0.39

1.21

5.67

11.47

4308.57

458

0.49

0.00

1.00

180.00

458

:ITY OF HALF MILLION

0.19

0.39

0.00

1.00

85.00

458

FAST GROWING

0.16
~.;~

0.37

0.00

1.00

75.00

458

0.15

2.06

2.69

1069.33

458

4736.92

45s

LOG POPULATION

< 10VO

DENS

LOG LAND AREA
:ITY OF QUARTER MILLION
AREA

LOG CONSTRUCTION

WAGES

LOG CONSTRUCTION

EMPLOY

10.34
0.21

1.45

5.59

13.54

9.83

-31.41

101.99

94.48

4.83

3.26

0.00

10.83

2213.22

458

NDEPENDENT

0.18

0.38

0.00

1.00

73.00

458

GTE
kMEIUTECH

0.28

0.45

1.00

130.00

458

0.05

0.23

0.00
0.00

1.00

25.00

458

3ELL ATLANTIC

0.07

0.25

0.00

1.00

3ELL SOUTH

0.10

0.30

0.00

1.00

30.00
45.00

458

~YNEX

0.07

0.25

0.00

1.00

CONSTRUCTION
LOG (l+FIBER)

GROWTH
IN 1986

,

45S

458
458

0.02

0.15

0.00

1.00

30.00
10.00

0.05

0.23

0.00

1.00

25.00

458

0.14

0.35

0.00

1.00

65.00

458

jTATE GNP GROWTH

1.33

2.;0

-7.77

9.62

611.15

458

.OG STATE/LOC

0.04

0.10

-0.16

0.40

16.80

0,07

0.01

0.05

0.12

32.63

458
458

NOT ELECT

0.69

0.46

0.00

1.00

315.00

458

COMM ~JORI~

0.65

0.48

0.00

1.00

299.00

458

0.42

0.49

0.00

1.00

193.00

459

‘ACIFIC BELL
jOUTH~STERN

BELL

JSWEST
.

458

>TATEDEMOGRAPHICS

‘WC

PCAPINC

ST GNP N FIRE

~
:OMMISSION
IEMOCRAT

{OT EL & DEM COMM MAJ
DUKAKIS

0.45

0.05

0.34

0.56

207.63

458

30 VERNOR DEMOCRAT

0.54

0.50

0.00

1.00

248.00

458

WPUBLICAN

0.10

0.31

0.00

1.00

48.00

458
458
458

;TATE VOTE

)EMOCF!AT

LEGISLATURE
LEGISLATURE

4LIGN REG, GOV
JLIGN REG, GOV AND LEGIST

0.63

0.48

0.00

1.00

290.00

0.80
().29

0.40

0.00
0.00

I .00

0.45

I .00

368.00
131.00

458

TABLE 2

FULL SAMPLE.

458 OBSERVATIONS.

1988-1992

FIBER ONLY
TWO STAG E LEAST SQU ARES
REVENUE

EOUAT

ON
U

m

m

?0 LEC DUMMIES

JO LEC DUMMIES

W/LEC DUMMIES

~

F
IGAMMA ON FIBER
POLITICAL

~

EST

S. ERR

~

0.09

0,04 **

0.10

0.05

**

0.11

0.06 **

0.09 **

0.52

0,10 **

0,37

0.10 **

0.52

0,11 **

0.11 **

0.51

0,12 **

0.28

0.11 **

0.47

0.13 **

-0.50

0,12 **

-0.34

0.11 **

-0.49

0.12 **

S.ERR

T

0,06

0.04 *

0.37
0.30

S.ERR

T

~

W/LEC DUMMIES
S.ERR

VARIABLES

COMMISSION

NOT ELECT

DEM COMMISH MAJORITY
NOT EL& DEM COMM MAJ

-0.33

STATE VOTE

DUKAKIS

-2.10

0.11 **
0.54 **

-2.10

0.59 **

-1.15

0.86

-0.82

0,95

DEMOCRAT

-0.07

0.07

-0.11

0,08

-0.09

0.09

-0.11

0,09

0.08

0.07

0.10

0.08

-0.05

0.12

-0.04

0.13

ALL LEG REP

-0.10

0.10

-0.12

0.11

0.04

0.20

0.09

0,22

ALIGN REG, GOV, LEG

-0.12

0.07

-0.07

0.08

-0.07

0.10

-0.03

0,11

0.06

0.07

0.08

0.08

0.03

0.08

0.04

0.08

0.00

0.01

GOVERNOR

~

ALL LEG DEM

STATE GNP GROWTH

0.00

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

-2.23

0.47 **

-3.32

0.51 **

-1.77

0.56 **

-2.21

0.61 **

10.52

2.84 **

14.15

3.10 **

7.69

3.10 **

10.63

3.41 **

FRAC URBANIZED

1.07

0.25 **

1.39

0.28 **

1.17

0.27 *“

1.45

0.30 **

FRAC RURAL

1.77

0.30 **

2.07

0.33 ““

1.57

0.31 **

1.83

0.34 **

LOG POPULATION

0.71

0.05 **

0.67

0.06 **

0.68

0.06 **

0.64

0,07 **
0.38 “*

LOG STATE/LOC

PCAPINC

FRAC ST GNP IN FIRE
LOCAL

DEMOGRAPHICS

LOG PERCAPITA
LOG POPULATION

INCOME
DENS

SMALL (ST EMP < 10Yo)

0.30

-0.47

0.32

-0.24

0.35

-0.83

-0.09

0.03 **

-0,07

0.04 *

-0.09

0.04 **

-0.03

005

0.20

0.08 **

0,15

0.08 *

0.17

0.08 **

0.12

0.09

0.12

DUMMY 89

-0.06

0.07

-0.04

0.08

-0.06

0.07

-0.02

0.08

DUMMY 90

-0.1 I

0.08

-0.05

0.09

-0.11

0,08

-0.03

0.09

DUMMY 91

-0.17

0.09 *

-0,09

0.10

-0.17

0.10 *

-0.06

0,11

DUMMY 92

-0.19

0.09 **

-0.07

0.10

-0.24

0.10 **

-0.08

0.11

0.48

0,07 **

0.60

0.07 “*

0.51

0.07 **

0.60

0.08 **

0.22

0.07 **

0.08 **

0.39

0,09 **

CITY OF QUART MILLION

0,33

0.08 **

0.32

-0,27

0.08 **

-0.11

8,91

2.90 **

8.23

GTE
INDEPENDENTS

CITY OF HALF MILLION

-0.10

FAST GROWER
CONSTANT.

REV EC)

5.07

0.08
2,66 *

0.09

-0.24

0.10 *“

3.09 **

1.74

3.40 **

0.00

0.12

0.13

0.14

0.24

0.13 *

0.41

0.15 **

-0.30

0.19

-0.02

0.20

BELL ATLANTIC

0.05

0.16

0.27

0.18

AMERITECH
BELL SOUTH

0.05

0.17

0.41

0.19 *“

NYNEX

0.18

0.16

0.45

0,18 **

PACIFIC BELL

0.05

0.21

0.50

0.23 ‘“

0.05

0.17
0.18

0.45
0.20

0,19 **

-0.10

SOUTHWESTERN
USWEST

BELL

0.19

TABLE 3

PARTIAL
FIBER.

SAMPLE.

3090 BSERVATIONS,

1989-1992

ISDN. SS7

TWO STAGE LEAST SO UARES
RE

o

ENUE EOU

F

LOCAL

m

.OCAL

iO LEC DUMMIES

~0 LEC DUM MIES

W/ LEC DUMMIES

W/LEC DUMMIES

~

GAMMA ON FIBER

I

GAMMA ON ISDN

SERR
-

~

~

SERR
-

~

~

SERR
-

~

~

.

S.ERR

g

0.08

0,04 *

0.08

0.05 *

0,16

0,06 *’

0.18

0.06 *

0.00

0,04

0.03

0,04

0,16

0.06 *’

0.13

0.07 *

-0.04

0.05

0.10

0.01

0.10

-0.01

GAMMA ON SS7

POLITICAL

u

0.05

-0.03

VARIABLES
0.41

0,12 **

0.54

0.13 *“

0,40

0,12 *’

0.52

0.12 *

0.49

0.13 **

0.68

0.14 **

0,52

0.13 *’

0.69

0.14 *’

NOT EL& DEM COMM MA.

-0.39

0.13 **

-0.51

0.14 **

-0,43

0,14 *’

-0.49

0.14 *’

STATE VOTE

DUKAKIS

-2.16

0.68 **

-2.38

0.74 **

-2.61

1,05 *“

-2.22

1.09 *’

DEMOCRAT

-0.03

0.08

-0.04

0.09

-0,04

0.09

-0.06

0.10

-0.01

0.08

0.03

0.09

-0,05

0.13

-0,02

0.14

COMMISSION

NOT ELECT

DEM COMMISH

GOVERNOR

MAJORITY

ALL LEG DEM
ALL LEG REP

-0.11

0.10

-0.14

0.11

-0,30

0,21

-0,26

0.22

ALIGN REG, GOV, LEG

-0.12

0.09

-0.09

0.09

-0,17

0.11

-0.09

0.12

0.00

0.08

-0.02

0.09

0,12

0.09

0,08

0,09

-0.01
-2.79

0.01

-0.01

0.02

0,01

002

0,01

0,02

0.61 **

-4.33

0.66 **

-2.28

3.06

3.60

7.21

3.88 *

3.61

FRAC URBANIZED

1.26

0.31 **

1.29

0.34 **

FRAC RURAL

1.42

0.36 **

1.63

0.38 **

LOG POPULATION

0.86

0.07 **

0.89

0.08 **

INCOME

0.24

0.39

-0.19

0.42

DENS

-0.09

0.04 **

-0.06

-0.18

0.61

0.11 **

0.65

0.04
0.12 **

ALIGN REG. GOV
STATE DEMOGRAPHICS
STATE GNP GROWTH
LOG STATE/LOC

PCAPINC

FRAC ST GNP IN FIRE

-3,32

0,70 *’

4.18

9.28

4.32 *’

1,49

0.38 *ti

1.71

0.39 *:

1.75

0.48 *1

1.92

0.49 *:

0.78

0.09 *4

0.77

0.10 *’

0.04

0.51

-0.58

0.53

0.05 *4

-0.13

0.54

0.12 *4

0.59

0.05 *’
0.12 *’

0.10 *4

-0.16

0.11

0.68 *4

LOC AL DEM OGRAPHICS

LOG PERCAPITA
LOG POPULATION

SMALL (ST EMP < 10%)
DUMMY 90

-0.05

0.07

0.00

0.08

DUMMY 91

-0.12

0.09

-0.06

0.09

-0.20
-0.34

0.15 *4

-0.30

0.16 *

DUMMY 92

-0.13

0.16

0.04

0.18

-0.51

0.32

-0.47

0.33

0.10 *

0.18

0.10 *

0.07

0.12

0.06

0.13

0.10

0.06

0.10

CITY OF QUART MILLION

0.18

CITY OF HALF MILLION

-0,02

0.08

0.05

FAST GROWER

-0.07

0.08

-0.21

0.34

3,59

5.57

CONSTANT,

REV EC)

GTE

0.09
0.09 **
3.87

0.06

-0.39

0.12 *’

0.27

4.80

8.85

4.96 *

0.12

0.13

0.29

0.14 *’
0.32 *:

-0.24

0.11 *“

0.90

0.31 *“

1.04

\MERITECH

-0.54

0,26 *“

-0,14

0,27

3ELL ATLANTIC

-0.54

0.30 *

-0.33

0,31

3ELL SOUTH

-0.42

0.23 *

NDEPENDENTS

‘ACIFIC BELL
SOUTHWESTERN
JSWEST

-0.03

0.24

0,21

0,31

0.22

-0.40

0,24 *

0,03

0,25

-0.22

0,23

0,23

0,24

-0,49

0,25 *

-0,12

0.26

0.00

NYNEX
BELL

TABLE

4

POINT ES TIMATES OF INFRAS TRUCTURE
TWO STAGE LEAST SOU ARES ESTIMATES

ELASTICITIES

COBB-DOUGLASS
FIBER

iNO LEC DUMMIES
FIBER ONLY, FULL SAMPLE
FIBER, ISDN, SS7, PARTIAL SAMPLE

ISDN

SS7

0.08

0.00

-0.01

0.08

0.03

-0.04

0.16

-0.03

0.13

0.01

ALL REVENUE

0.06

LOCAL REVENUE

0.09

ALL REVENUE
LOCAL REVENUE
ALL REVENUE

0.10

LOCAL REVENUE

0.11

ALL REVENUE
LOCAL REVENUE

0.16
0.18

I W/LEC DUMMIES

FIBER ONLY, FULL SAMPLE
FIBER, ISDN, SS7, PARTIAL SAMPLE

TRANSLOG
FIBER

NO LEC DUMMIES
FIBER ONLY, FULL SAMPLE

FIBER ONLY, FULL SAMPLE

ALL REVENUE
MEAN VALUE

0.06

ST. DEVIATION

0.01

MIN

0.02

MAX

0.07

LOCAL REVENUE
MEAN VALUE

0,08

ST. DEVIATION

0.02

MIN

0,01
0,11

MAX

Page 1

TABLE

ESTIMA TED GAINS FROM INFRASTRUC

5

TURE
m

~V

~EDtAN

FIBER : GAMM A =0.07
PERCENT DUE TO ~FRASTRUCTURE

0.10

0.08

0.09

EQUIVALENT

% PRICE DECL~E,

e = 2.0

0.12

0.12

0.10

EQUIVALENT

% PRICE DECLINE,

e = 2.5

0.08

0.07

0.06

0.13

0.08

0.13
0.15
0.10

FIBER. ISDN: GAMivIA = {0.11. 0.02}
PERCENT DUE TO ~FRASTRUCTURE
EQUIVALENT

% PRICE DECL~E,

e = 2.0

0.16

0.08

EQUIVALENT

% PRICE DECLINE,

e = 2.5

0.10

0. Oj

TABLE

M~ RGINAL
REG IONAL
J98 8-1992

VEN

6

F A FIBER

BELL OP ERATING

CO MPANIE~

1988

19s9

1990

1991

1992

AVER4GE

9376.9

2358.6

1546.4

1032.9

706.4

STANDARD

31133.4

1371.3

700.3

412.9

;44.9

GAMMA = 0.7
DEVIATION

FIRST QUARTILE

2051.1

1578.9

1067.5

768.S

472.7

MEDIAN

2762.6

20?2.4

1370.4

3885.5

2581.8

1775.9

930.9
1227.3

662.0

THIRD QUARTILE

835.9

GAMMA =0.1 1
AVER4GE
STANDARD

DEVIATION

FIRST QUARTILE
MEDIAN
THIRD QUARTILE

14735.1

3706.3

2430.1

1623.1

1110.1

48923.9

2154.9

1100.5

648.9

542.1

3223.1
4341.3

2481.1

1677.5

1208.0

742.7

2193.7
4057.1

2153.5
2790.6

1462.8
1928.6

1040.3

4717.1

3092.8

2065.8

1412.8

2742.6

1400.6

825.8

689.9

3157.8
4064.7

2135.0

1537.5

945.3

2740.8

5163.5

3551.7

1861.8
2454.6

1324,0
1671.8

7011.7

2079.8

1409.4

968.2

687.6

20803.5

1003.3

550.6

366.6

298.5

6105.7

1313.6

GAMMA = 0.14
AVERAGE
STANDARD

DEVIATION

I 18753.7
62266.7

FIRST QUARTILE

4102.2

MEDIAN

5525.5
7770.9

rHIRD QUARTILE
rR4NSLOG,

MEAN(GAW)

4VERAGE
STANDARD

DEVIATION

= 0.06

FIRST QUARTILE

1922.8

1446.7

1011.2

744.1

489,1

WEDIAN

2466.4
3187.8

1340.6
1615,S

913.9
1064.4

650.1

rHIRD OUARTILE

1816.3
2428.6

786.7

TABLE

THE POLITICAL
STATE

FRIENDLESS
NDEX1988

7

OF STATE REGULATORS,
RANK IN 88 M-L NDE

1988-1992

NDEX1992

WNK

IN 92 M-L INDEI

ALABAMA

-0.07

6

7

-0.16

ARIZONA

-0.18

19

10

-0.17

9

9

ARKANSAS

-0.26

31

11

-0.35

31

10

CALIFORNIA

-0.08

7

7

-0.17

8

5

COLOR4D0

-0.31

38

9

-0.40

39

8

CONNECTICUT

-0.30

?7

6

-0.31

27

5

DELAWARE

-0.04

3

6

5

6

16

3

5

FLORIDA

0.00

1

5

-0.14
-(),~~

GEORGIA

-0.19

21

9

-0.28

24

7

IDAHO

-0.14

13

11

-0.13

4

7

ILL~OIS

-0.08

8

7

-0.17

12

13

INDIANA

-0.20

23

7

-0.18

20

10

11
~~

5

IOWA

-0.17
-o.~s

KANSAS

-0.28

33

11

.().25

TO

8

KENTUCKY

-0.2?

29

6

-0.32

30

6

LOUISIANA

-0.29

36

14

-0.39

37

13

MAINE

-0.11

12

7

-0.09

2

7

WRYLAND

-0.32

;9

10

-0.41

40

6

~SSACHUSE1’TS

-0.40

45

9

-0.25

21

6

MICHIGAN

-0.20

22

8

-0.18

13

10

M~ESOTA

-0.39

44

4

-0.24

17

7

MISSISSIPPI

-0.15

13

0.00

1

7

MISSOURI

-0.48

14
47

8

-0.57

46

‘8

MONTANA
gEVADA

-0.27

?2

13

-0.30

26

‘i2

-0.10

11

8

-0.19

14

8

NEW HAMPSHIRE

-0.15

15

13

-0.24

18

7

NEW JERSEY

-0.46

46

7

-0.38

35

7

-0.39

38

8

-0.43

41
43

8
4

25

9

7

NEW MEXICO

-0.23

28

WEW YORK

-0.34

41

9
11

NORTH CAROLINA

-0.09

9

4

NORTH DAKOTA

-0.20

25

9

-0.46
.0.29

2HI0

-0.17

18

9

-0.15

6

10

3KLAHOMA

-0.10

7

-0.62

47

10

3REGON

-0.36

10
43

9

-0.38

36

6

‘PENNSYLVANIA

-0.28

34

8

-0.37

33

9

WODE

-0.20

24

10

-0.53

45

10

SOUTH CAROLINA

-0.03

2

7

-0.12

3

5

:OUTH DAKOTA

-0,25

42

9

-0.44

42

9
8
9

ISLAND

rENNESSEE

-0.23

27

10

-0.32

29

rExAs

-0.06

7

-0.; 1

28

JTAH
JERMONT

-0.06

5
4

-0.29

35

dIRG~IA

-0.15

16

7

-0.24

19

5

WASH~GTON

-0.34

40

7

-0.36

32

6

WST

26

11

11

4

-0.47
.o,~l

44

WISCONS~

-0.22
.(),~~

~OMING

-0.17

13

-0.26

15
~~

9

VIRGINIA

30
17

7

-0.17

10

8

5

-0.38

;4

7

I

TABLE

COMPARISON

OF ESTIMATED

COST INDICES
APPENDIX

INPUT

8

2

APPENDIX

3

3

ISDN

FIBER

FIBER

APPENDIX
ALL

LOCAL

ALL

LOCAL

ALL

LOCAL

CONTEL

1.00

1,00

1.00

1.00

1.00

1.00

GTE

1.37

1.58

1.42

1.61

0.61

0.65

NDEPENDENT

2.13

2.39

3.18

3.49

0.66

0.63

AMERITECH

0.92

1.45

0.69

1.10

0.08

0.12

BELL ATLANTIC

0.62

0.86

0.44

0.64

0.03

0.63

0.99

0.04
o.~~

REVENUE

BELL SOUTH
NYNEX

1.14

1.75

0.58

0.76

0.50

0.67

0.16
(),12

PACIFIC BELL

0.47

0.61

0.43

0.62

0.15

0.90

1.31
1.09

0.66
0.45

0.96
0.68

0.15

0.19
(),~o

0.06

0.08

30 UTHWESTE~

BELL

USWEST

0.72

1988

1.00

1989

0.55

1.00

1.00

I990

0.35

0.67

1991

0.27

0.48

0.39
o.~1

I992

0.19

0.35

0.13

0.26

APPENDIX

~Fz

B

FIBER

VATIONS.

1

1988-1

ONLY

TWO AND THREE

STAG E LEAST SOUA RES

COBB-DOUGLAS.

TRANSLOG

SPEC IFICATION

——..—..- .— ——-- .—---~ v
TIO
R
TYPE OF REVENUE
SPECIFICATION

u
NO LE C DU~lNllES

~
&
NO LEC DUNINIIES ~

~
WI L
~s

rYPE OF NIODEL

TWO STAGE

TWO STAGE

~

~

-SERR

~

H-T

~
m=

I

m-I

GAMMA ON FIBER

0.02

0.05

0.01

0.06

0.00

0.00

0.00

0.00 *

GAklMA2

0.00

0.00

0.01

0.00 *

0.01

0.00 **

0.01

0.00 ‘*

0.36

0.09 **

0.50

0.10 **

0.29

0.08 **

0.35

0.08 ‘+

0.21

0.09 **

0.32

0.09 **

-0.27

0.09 **

-0.34

0.10 **

ON FIBER

POLI TIC.AL VARIABLES
COMMISSION NOT ELECT
DEM COMM MAJORITY
NOT EL& DEM COMM MAJ

0.30

0.11 **

0.50

0.12 **

-0.31

0.11 **

-0.46

0.12 **

-2.12

0.54 **

-2.13

0.58 **

-1.78

0.47 **

-1.65

0.49 **

-0.07

0.07

-0.11

0.08

-0.03

0.06

-0.06

0.07

ALL LEG DEM

0.07

0.07

0.09

0.08

0.10

0.06

0.09

0.06

ALL LEG REP

-0.10

0.10

-0.12

0.10

-0.08

0.08

-0.10

0.08

ALIGN GOV, REG, LEG

-0.13

0.07 *

-0.10

0.08

-0.10

0.06

-0.06

0.07

0.12

0.08

0.00

0.06

0:03

0.07

0.00

‘ 0.01

STATE VOTE

DUKAKIS

DEMOCRATIC

GOVERNOR

ALL REG, GOV

0.08

0.07

STATE DEMOG RAPHICS
STATE GNP GROWTH
LOG STATE/’LOC PCAP~C
FRAC ST GNP ~ FIRE

0.01

-0.01

0.01

-2.07

0.49 **

-3.03

0.53 **

-1.69

0.43 **

0.00
-2.24

9.91

2.87 **

13.06

3.11 **

6.70

2.49 **

8.03

0.00

0.01

0.45 **
2.58 **’

LOC AL DEMOG RAPHICS
FR4C URBANIZED

1.02

0.25 **

1.30

0.28 **

1.11

0.24 **

1.34

0.25 **

FRAC RUR4L

1.63

1.82

0.35 **

1.89

0.29 **

2.02

0.31 **

LOG POPULATION

0.68

0.33 **
0.06 **

0.62

0.06 **

0.67

0.06 **

0.58

0.06 **

~COME

0.06

0.30

-0.57

0.32 *

0.29

DENS

-0.08

0.03 **

-0.05

0.04

ST EMP <1 o~o)

0.20

0.08 **

0.15

LOG PERCAPITA
LOG POPULATION
5~LL

(FR4C

0.08 *

0.54

0.27 **

0.04

-0.09

0.03 **

-0.06

0.21

0.06 **

0.16

0.07
0.08 **

-0.13
-0,22

0.07 *

0.03 *
0.07 **

-0.07

0.07
0.08 *

-0.11

0.09

3UMMY91

-0.14
-o.~ 1

-0.11
-0.21

0.10 **

-0.16

0.10

-0.30

0.09 **

-0.31

0.10

>UMMY 92

-0.26

0.11 **

-0.19

0.12

-0.35

0.10 **

-0.37

0.11 **

0.44

0.08 **

0.;6

0.06 **

0.40

0.07 **

0.07 **

0.53
o.~g

0.08 **

0.20

0.08 **

0.16

0.06 **

0.07 **

-0.26

0.08 **

-0.09

0.07

0.2?
-(),2()

0.07 **

2.50

4,94

2.64 *

3UMMY

89

3UMMY 90

DIN

OF QUARTER

MIL

CITY OF HALF MIL
?ASTGROW
20NSTANT,

-0.09
REV EQ

5.93

0.08
2.75 **

-0.06

10.46

0.08

2.99 **

1.43

0,08 **

APPENDIX

F~
F~

1

-1992
Y

TWO AND THREE

STAGE

c~ B

T

CosT EO UATION.

J,EAST SC)UARES
PECI

ICATION

FIBER
u

TYPE OF REVENUE
SPECIFICATION

{0 LE C DUMNIIES NO LEC DUMMIES

VI LEC DUNIMIES

TYPE OF N1ODEL

nVO STAGE

rHREE STAGE

TWO STAGE

EST
CONSTANT,

-0.38

COST EQ

LOG CONSTRUCT
LOG CONSTRUCT
CONSTRUCTION

0.65

0.24 *’

0.45

0.24 *

EMPLOY

0.16

0.14

0.16

0.14

0.00

0.00

0.00

-0.16

0.28

-0,18

0.00
13,~9

0.01

0.03

0,01

0.03

-0.02

0.30

-0.21

0.31

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.02
0.03
0.14 **

LOG POPULATION
SQ

LOG LAND AREA
LOG LAND AREA SQ
LOG LAND AND LOG POP

-0.01

0.03

0.01
0.30
0.6?

0,14 **

0.52

0.18 **

GTE

0.61

0.14 *
0.14 *“

AMERITECH

0.20

0.18

0.22

CONTEL

BELL ATLANTIC
BELL SOUTH

0.17

0.05

0.17

0.15

0.18

0;42

0.18 **

0.04

PACIFIC BELL
BELL

USWEST
LOG (l+FIBER)

-0.21
-0.32

NYNEX
SOUTHWESTERN

~

1.52

WAGES
GROWTH

LOG POPULATION

S.ERR

N 1986

0.16 *4
0.24

-0:11

0.17

0,21

0.25
0.18

-0.17

0.18

0,09

-0.15

0.16

0.14

-0.05

0.01 *“

0.17

-0.05

0.02 **

DUMMY 89

-0.38

0.09 *“

-0.36

0.09 **

DUMMY 90

-0.77

0.09 *4

-0.72

0.09 **

DUMMY 91
DUMMY 92

-1.03
-1.36

0.09 **
0,09 **

-0.95
-1.25

0.10 **
0.09 **

APPENDIX

~FUL

P

FIBER

2

988-1992

ONLY

THREE

STAGE

. . . .. . ...-

LEAST SOU AR ES

. . . . .-. -.,

TYPE OF REVENUE

&

LOCAJ,

m

SPECIFICATION

NO LEC DUFI~IIES

~

}Vl LEC DU ~IMIEs

S.ERR ~

~
GAMMA ON FIBER
POLITICAL

~

S.ERR ~

0.07

0.04 **

0.11

0.04 ““

~

LOCAL
\Vl LEC DUNINIIES

$.ERR ~

0.10

0.05

*

~
0.11

$. ERR

~

0.05

*

VARIABLES
0.35

0.09 *“

0.48

0.10 **

0.41

0.09 ‘“

0.55

0.10 **

DEM COMM MAJORITY
NOT EL & DEM COMM MAJ

0.28

0.10 **

0.45

0.11 **

0.33

0.10 **

0.50

0.11 **

-0.32

-0.46
-~.~o

0.60 ““

-0.51
-~o~

0.11 **

0.56 **

-0.38
-~.lo

0.10 **

-2.16

0.10 **
o,j~ **

0.11 **

STATE VOTE

-0.06

0.07

-0.07

0.08

-0.06

0.07

-0,08

0.08

ALL LEG DEM

0.09

0.07

0.12

0.09

0.07

0.13

ALL LEG REP

-0.09

0.09

-0.10

0.10

-0.10

0.09

-0.11

0.10

ALIGN GOV, REG, LEG

-0.11

0.07

-0.07

0.08

-0,12

0.07 *

-0.10

0.08

0,02

0.07

0.02

0.07

0.04

0.07

0.04

0,07

0.00

0.01

0.00

0.01

0.00
-2,43

0.56 **

11.72

3.06 **

COMMISSION

NOT ELECT

DUKAKIS

DEMOCWTIC

GOVERNOR

ALL REG, GOV
s~

RAP

LOG STATE/’LOC PCAP~C

0.00
-1.23

FRAC ST GNP ~ FIRE

10.39

AL DEM

0.07 *

I

STATE GNP GROWTH

~

0.07 *

0.65 **

0.01
0.45 **
1.73 **

-3.27

0.49 **

-1.99

13.63

2.95 **

8.78

0.52 **
2.82 **

0.01

APHICS

FRAC URBANIZED

0.92

0.24 **

1.11

0.26 **

0.94

0.25 **

1.09

0.27 **

FRAC RUUL

1.69

0.29 **

1.91

0.31 **

1.53

0.29 **

1.72

‘0.31 **

LOG POPULATION

0.71

0,05 **

0.05 **

0.70

0.06 **

0.66

0.07 **

0.31

0.04

0.33
0.04 **

-0.39

0.35

0.03 *

-0.03

0.04

LOG PERCAPITA

~COME

0.26

0.29

0.67
-().~o

DENS

-0.09

0.03 **

-0.06

0.21

0.07 **

LOG POPULATION

SMALL (FRAC ST EMP < 10YO)
DUMMY 89

-0.07

DUMMY 90

-0.13

DUMMY 91

-0.19
-1).~1
0.46

DUMMY 92
CI~

OF QUARTER

MIL

CI~

OF HALF MIL

0.16

0.08 **

-0.10
0.19

0.08 **

0.07

-0.06

0.08

-0.07

0.07

0.08 *

-0.08

0.08

-0.13

0.09 **

-0.13

0.09

-0.19

0.09 **

-0.11

0.10

0.07 **

0.57

0.07 **

0.16

0.08 *

-0.04

0.08

0.08 *

-0.06

0.09

-0.10

0.10

-0.24

0.09 **
0.10 **

-0.1 I

0.11

0.49

0.07 **

0.56

0.07 **

0.34

0.07 **

0.22

0.08 **

0.39

0.08 **

-0.11

0.07

-0.26

0.08 **

-0.16

-0.30

0.08 **

3.82

2.57

6.55

2.7S **

5.89

0.08 **
2.93 **

8.04

3.19 **

0.12

0.15

0.13 *

0.40

0.13
0.14 **

-0.24

0.18

0.08

0.19

BELL ATLANTIC

0.06

0.15

0.31

0.17 *

BELL SOUTH

0.02
(),21

0.16

0.40

0.17 **

0.15
o.~()

0.50

0.16 **

0,50

0.22 **

0.16
0.16

0.51
0.39

0.17 **

FASTGROW
CONSTANT,

REV EQ

NDEPENDENT
4MERITECH

NYNEX

US WEST

0.07 **

0.01
o.~~

GTE

PACIFIC BELL
SOUTHWESTERN

0.23

0.05
BELL

0.09
0.02

0.18 **

APPENDIX

FULL SAME’LE. 4580 BSERVATIONS,
FIBER
T~S

CosT

2

198 8.199~

ONLY
T

R

EOUA TION
u
~
iO LE C DUMN1lES NO l,EC DU hIfi[IEs

TYPE OF REVENUE
SPECIFICATION

EST
CONSTANT,

COST EQ

-1.96

LOG CONSTRUCT

WAGES

1.04

LOG CONSTRUCT

EMPLOY

0.24

S. ERR

~

2.]6

0.34 **
o.~()

~

$, ERR
-1.56

2.17

0.93
o.~5

0.?0

~

0.35 **

u

~

WI LEC DUfil~lIES

W/ LEC DUNINIIES

~

$. ERR

-1.52
1.01
o~4

~

2.16
0.34 **
o~o

H-I

-1.46

2.22

0.93
o.~~

0.35 **
()~o

0.01

0.00 *

0.01

0.00 *

0.01

0.00 *

-1.80
o.~~

0.35 **

-1.s7

0.35 **

0.35 **

-1.s7

0.36 **

0.02 **

0.23

0.02 **

-1.s1
1).~~

0.03 **

1.16

0.42 **

1.00

0.43 **

1.14

0.02 “*
0.42 **

0.23

LOG LAND AREA

1.01

0,43 **

LOG LAND AREA SQ

0.01

0.03
0.04 **

0.01

0.01

0.03

0.01

-0.17

0.03
0.04 **

CONSTRUCTION

GROWTH

LOG POPULATION
LOG POPULATION

SQ

LOG LAND & LOG POP

0.01

-0.19

GTE

0.31

WDEPENDENT

0.75

AMERITECH

-0.09

BELL ATLANTIC

-0.48

0.00

0.21 **

0.31

0.21

0.48

0.21 **

0.87

0.21 **

0.80

0.21 **

0.99

0.22 ‘%

0.26

0.37

0.27
0.26

-0.11

0.26
0.25 *

0.37

0.27

-0.09

0.26

0.25 *

-0.15

0.?6

0.27 **
0.25

-0.50
-0.76
-0.09

0.35 **
o,~7

-0.31

().14
0.02 **
0.12 **

-0.55

0.24 **

PACIFIC BELL

-0.77

0,35 **

-0.49

-0.11

0.27

0.27

0.35
(),27

-0.33

0.24

0.08

025

BELL

USWST

-0.46
0.14

-0.04

0.02 *

-0.04

0.02 **

-0.04

DUMMY 89

-0.60

0.12 **

-0.59

0.12 **

-0.60

DUMMY 90

-1.04

0.12 **

-1.00

0.12 **

DUMMY 91
DIJMMY 92

-1.29
-1.69

0.12 **

-1.22
-1.58

0.13 **
0,12 **

-1.04
-1.29

LOG (l+FIBER)

IN 1986

0.03
0.04 **

0.46

NYNEX
SOUTHWESTERN

-0.16

0.21
0.21 **

0.56
-o.~s

0.13

BELL SOUTH

-0.18

0.04 **

0.12 **

-1.69

0.26
o~4 **

0.65

0.27 **

-0.15

0.25

-0.3s

0.36

0.3s

0.2s

0.17

0.25

-0,05

0.02 **

-0.59

0.12 **

0.12 **

-0.99

0.12 **

0.12 **
0.12 **

-1.22

0.13 **

-1.58

0.12 **

APPENDIX

3

PAR TIAL SAMP LE. 309 OBSER VATIONS , 1988-1992
FIBER. ISDN
RE

~s
RE VENUE

EOUATION

TYPE OF REVENUE

U

SPECIFICATION

~
N

~
NO LEC DUM MIES
HUT
o.~8

GAiMMA ON FIBER

=-I

H-I

0.19
2,45

0.11

0.04 **

0.42

0.06 **

0.19

0.05 **

0.03

0.03

0.44

0.06 **

0.19

0.05 **

0.41

0.30

0.47

0.11 **

0.30

0.09 **

0.39

0.10 **

0.4s

0.3:

0.56

0.12 **

0.37

0.10 **

0,50

0.10 **

-0.38
.~.11

0.34

-0.43
.~.17

0.13 **

-0.34

0.10 **

-0.39

0.58 **

-1.68

0.57 **

-1.63

0.11 **
0.60 **

-0.04

0.20
021

-0.03

0.08

-0.0 I

0.06

-0.02

0.06

0.06

0.08

0.00

0.07

0.04

0.07

-0.10

0.10

-0.08

0.08

-0.09

0.08

0,06 *

0.00

GAMMA ON ISDN

msMT

~
\Vl LEC DUMN[lE.S WI LEC DUNINIIE~

~
COMMISSION

NOT ELECT

DEM COMM MAJORITY
NOT EL& DEM COMM MAJ
STATE VOTE

DUKAKIS

DEMOCRATIC

GOVERNOR

1.53

ALL LEG DEM

-0.01

ALL LEG REP

-0.10

ALIGN GOV, R.EG, LEG

-0.12

0.26
o.~ 1

-0.05

0.08

-0.11

-0.07

0.07

0.00

0.21

-0.08

0.08

0.04

0.06

0.o1

0.07

-0.01
-2,78

0.04

-0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.01

1.56 *

-3.67

0.59 **

-1.55

FRAC ST GNP ~ FIRE

3.13

9.21

5.01

3.50

-0.18

0.50 **
~,90

0.01
-2.37
4.41

3.09

L
A DE
~s
FR4C URBANIZED

1,27

0.77 *

1.08

1.25

0.28 **

1.35

0.30 **

FRAC RUWL

1.40

1.28

1.34

0.31 **

1.51

0.33 **

:OG POPULATION

0.85

0.89
0.16 **

0.30 **
0.34 **

0.83

0.06 **

0.72

0.07 **

0.72

0.07 **

0.21

0.87

-0.02

0.19

-0.06

0.3:
0.04 *

0,56

0.10 **

ALL REG, GOV
STATE DEM OGRAPHICS
STATE GNP GROWTH
LOG STATE/LOC

:OG PERCAPITA

PCAPINC

INCOME

-OG POPULATION
SMALL (FR4C
3UMMY

DENS

ST EMP < 10VO)

90

3UMMY91
IUMMY

92

-0.09
0.60

0.10

0.34

-0.19

-0.19

0.04 **

-0.14

0.04 “*

0.09 **

0.47

0.10 **

0.07 **

-0.22

0.08 **~

0.10 **

-0.40

0.10 **

-0.55

0.14 **

-0.05

0.18

-0.05

0.07

0.4?
-().27

-0.12

0.20

-0.14

0.0s *

-0.46

0.27 **

-0.66

0,13 **

0.36

-0.15

0.25

-0.12

0.18

0.20

0.09 **

0.10

0.09

0.09

0.04

0.08

0.04

0.07

0.05

-0.12

0.08

-0.23

0.08 **

4.3?

3.15

5.77

3.?4 *

3TE

0.12

0.12 **

0,84

0.11
1).~; **

0.29

NDEPENDENT

1.06

-0,61

0.22 “*

-0.19

0.24 **
o.~~

UIIY OF QUARTER

MIL

UITY OF HALF MIL

-0.02

0.25
o.~ 1

?ASTGROW

-0.07

0.21

-0.15

3.6?

7.87

4.53

DONSTANT, REV EQ

4MERITECH

0.10

0.54 **

0.08 *
3.03

3ELL ATLANTIC

-0.67

0.24 **

-0.41

3ELL SOUTH

-0.52

0.19 **

-0.12

~YNEX

-0.12

0.18

‘ACIFIC BELL
;OUTH~STERN
JSWEST

BELL

0.09
0.07

0.25 *
o,~()

0.19

0.19

-0.53

0.20 **

-0.13

0.22

-0.34
-0.66

0.18 *
0.21 **

0.08

0.19

-0.30

0.22

I

APPENDIX

PARTIAL

SA MPLE.

3090 BSERVATIONS.

3

1988-1992

~
THREF

STAGE LEAST

SC)UARES

COST EOUATION. IBE

F

CONSTANT,

COST EQ

LOG CONSTRUCT

WAGES

0.10

0.59

-0.05

LOG CONSTRUCT

EMPLOY

0.09

0.34

0.03

0.36
o.~()

0.00

0,01

0.00

0.01

CONSTRUCTION

GROWTH

LOG POPULATION
LOG POPULATION

SQ

LOG LAND AREA
LOG LAND AREA SQ
GTE

0.13
0.09
0.00
-1.26
().14

0.35
o,~()

-0,01

0.00
0.36 ‘“

0.00
- I -~~

0.36 **

0.02 **

0.23

0.02 **

-1.17

0.60 *

-1.19

0.?6 **

0.?4

0.04 **

0.24

0.02 **

1.25

0.65 *

1.13

0.39 **

1.12

0.;9

0.04
.o~6

0.05

0.03

0.04

0.03

-0.23

0.03
0.04 **

0.25

0.31

0.48

0.19 **

1.16

0,07 **

0.03

0.36
o~o
0.01

*“

1,09

0,39 **

-0.24

0.04 **

0,03
-1).~~

0.03
0.04 **

0.35

0.19 *

0.54

0.19 **

1.19

0.59 *

1.25

0.40

0.10

-0.34

0.?6 **
o~4

0.36 **

-0.37

0.36 **
o.~4

1.43

AMERITECH

0.12

0.24

BELL ATLANTIC

-0.83

0.38 **

-0.45

0.23 *

-0.80

0.23 **

-0.42

BELL SOUTH

-0.47

0,41

-0.01

0.25

-0.45

0.25 “

0.00

NDEPENDENT

0.23 *
().25

NYNEX

-0.70

0.36 **

-0.41

0.22 *

-0.68

0.21 **

-0.32

0.22

PACIFIC BELL

-0.84

0.51 *

-0.48

-0.86

0.31 **

-0.47

-0.41

0.41

-0.04

0,31
o,~5

-0.42

0.24 “

0,01

0.31
0.25

-0.80

0.37 **

-0.39

0.22 “

-0.80

0.22 **

-0.37

0.23 *

0.03

SOUTHWESTERN

BELL

USWEST
LOG (l+FIBER)

~

1986

0.03

0.04

0.02

90

-0.39

0.16 **

-0.36

DUMMY 91
DUMMY 92

-0.74
-1.05

0.17 **

-0.69
-0.97

DUMMY

0.17 **

0.02
0.10 **
0.10 **
0.10 **

-0.39

0.10 **

-0.36

0.02
0.10 **

-0.74
-1.05

0.10 **

-0.69
-0,97

0,10 **
0.10 **

0.02

0.02

0.10 **

APPENDIX

~
PART1

3

1988-1992

FIBER. lSDN
~

AST

UARE

COST EOUAT ON. S N

w
tV/LEC DI_Jll~[IEs

F
-4.54

16.93

0.62

4.37

;.87 **

LOG CONSTRUCT

WAGES

-0.63

0.59

-0.72

0.75

8.58
-o~4

0.72

-0.35

0.73

LOG CONSTRUCT

EMPLOY

-0.24

0.34

-0.30

0.43

-o,~~

0.39

-0.30

0.40

0.01

0.01

0.00

0.01

0,01

0.01

0.60 *

0.01
1.53

0.01

1.71
-0.07

0.04 *

-0.09

1.44

0.65 *

CONSTANT,

COST EQ

CONSTRUCTION

GROWTH

LOG POPULATION
LOG POPULATION

SQ

LOG LAND AREA
LOG LAND AREA SQ

-0.06
-0.02

GTE

-0.42

WDEPENDENT
AMERITECH

-0.17
.~.j6

0.76 **

0.88

0.05 *

-0.14

0.69

1.09

0.05 *“

-0.14

0.70
0.05 **

0.98

0.82

0.10

0.75

0.15

0.77

-0.06

0.06

-0.04

0.06

-0.05

0.06

0.07

0.04

0.09

0.16

0.31

-0.40

0.39

-0.37

0.39

0.59

-0.38

0.75

0.40 *

-2.04

0.50 **
0.48 **

0.10
-2.26

0.74
0.49 **

-1.82

0.50 “

-3.11
-1.73

0.48 **
0.51 **

-2.77
-’1.26

0.4s **
o,52 *+

-1.23

0.45 **

-b.88
-1.65

0.46 *
o,65 *A

0,05

0.08 **

0,15

0.08 *

-0.19

0.40

0.34

0.76

BELL ATLANTIC

-3.49

0.38 *

-3.04

BELL SOUTH

-1.92

0.41 *

-1.42

NYNEX

-1.46

0.36 *

-1.30

-1.87

0.51 *’

-1.59

0.65 **

-2.06

0.64 **

-1.84

0.41 *

0.52 **

-1.91

0,52 **

0.37 *’

0.47 **

-2.82

0.51 **
0.46 **

-1.45

-2.82

-1.59
-2.44

-2.38

0,47 **

-0.16

0.04 *’

-0.18

0.05 **

-0.17

0.05 **

-0.17

0.05 **

PACIFIC

BELL

SOUTH~STERN

BELL

USWEST
LOG (l+FIBER)

lN 19S6

0.52 **
0.45 **

DUMMY

90

-0.94

0.16 *’

-0.91

0.21 **

-0.94

0.21 **

-0.91

DUMMY
DUMMY

91
92

-1.56
.~.o~

0.17 *;
0.17 *’

-1.51

0.22 **
0.22 **

-1.58
-2.00

0.21 **
0.21 **

-1.52

0.21 **
o,~~ **

-1.93

0.22 **

-1.93

.

