NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INFLATION TARGETING: LESSONS
FROM FOUR COUNTRIES

Frederic S. Mishkin
Adam S. Posen

Working Paper 6126

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 1997

We thank Ben Bernanke, Donald Brash, Kevin Clinton, John Crow, Peter Fisher, Charles Freedman,
Andrew Haldane, Neal Hatch, Otmar Issing, Mervyn King, Thomas Laubach, William McDonough,
Michel Peytrignet, Georg Rich, and Erich Spoerndli for their helpful comments. We are grateful to
Laura Brookins for research assistance. The views expressed in this study are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System,
Columbia University, the National Bureau of Economic Research, or the Institute for International
Economics. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Economic Fluctuations and Growth

and Monetary Economics. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 1997 by Frederic S. Mishkin and Adam S. Posen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries
Frederic S. Mishkin and Adam S. Posen
NBER Working Paper No. 6126
August 1997
JEL No. E5
Economic Fluctuations and Growth
and Monetary Economics

ABSTRACT
In recent years, a number of central banks have announced numerical inflation targets as the
basis for their monetary strategies. After outlining the reasons why such strategies might be adopted
in the pursuit of price stability, this study examines the adoption, operational design, and experience

of inflation targeting as a framework for monetary policy in the first three countries to undertake
such strategies—New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom. It also analyzes the operation of
the long-standing German monetary targeting regime, which incorporated many of the same features

as later inflation-targeting regimes. The key challenge for all these monetary frameworks has been

the appropriate balancing of transparency and flexibility in policymaking. The study finds that all

of the targeting countries examined have maintained low rates of inflation and increased the
transparency of monetary policymaking without harming the real economy through policy rigidity

in the face of economic developments. A convergence of design choices on the part of targeting
countries with regard to operational questions emerges from this comparative study, suggesting some

lines of best practice for inflation-targeting frameworks.

Frederic S. Mishkin
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
and NBER

frederic.mish1dnny.frb.org

Adam S. Posen
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
aposen@iie.com

Introduction
The key issue facing central banks as we approach the end of the twentieth century is what
strategy to pursue in the conduct of monetary policy. One choice of monetary strategy that
has become increasingly popular in recent years is inflation targeting, which involves
the public announcement of medium-term numerical targets for inflation with a

commitment by the monetary authorities to achieve these targets. This study examines
the experience in the first three countries that have adopted such an inflation-targeting
scheme—New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom—as well as in Germany,
which adopted many elements of inflation targeting even earlier. Through close
examination of the experience with inflation targeting, both how targeting operates and
how these economies have performed since its adoption, we seek to obtain a perspective on

what elements of inflation targeting work as a strategy for the conduct of monetary policy.
Before looking in detail at the individual experiences of these countries, we first
discuss the rationale for inflation targeting and the design issues that arise in implementing
an inflation-targeting strategy. Then, after the case studies of the individual countries, we
provide some preliminary evidence on the effectiveness of inflation targeting in these

countries and conclude with an assessment of the inflation-targeting experience.

1

monetary policy that is more expansionary than expected. As a result, policymakers who

have a stronger interest in output than in inflation performance will try to produce
monetary policy that is more expansionary than expected. However, because workers and
firms make decisions about wages and prices on the basis of their expectations about policy,
they will recognize the policymakers' incentive for expansionary monetary policy and so
will raise their expectations of inflation. As a result, wages and prices will rise.
The outcome, in these time-inconsistency models, is that policymakers are actually
unable to fool workers and firms, so that on average output will not be higher under such
a strategy; unfortunately, however, inflation will be. The time-inconsistency problem

suggests that a central bank actively pursuing output goals may end up with a bias
to high inflation with no gains in output. Consequently, even though the central
bank believes itself to be operating in an optimal manner, it ends up with a suboptimal
outcome.

McCallum (1995b) points out that the time- inconsistency problem by itself does
not imply that a central bank will pursue expansionary monetary policy that leads to
inflation. Simply by recognizing the problem that forward-looking expectations in the
wage- and price-setting process create for a strategy of pursuing unexpectedly expansionary
monetary policy, central banks can decide not to play that game. Nonetheless, the
time-inconsistency literature points out both why there will be pressures on central banks
to pursue overly expansionary monetary policy and why central banks whose commitment
to price stability is in doubt can experience higher inflation.
A fourth intellectual development challenging the use of an activist monetary

policy to stimulate output and reduce unemployment unduly is the recognition that price
stability promotes an economic system that functions more efficiently and so raises living
standards. If price stability does not persist—that is, inflation occurs—the society suffers
several economic costs. While these costs tend to be much larger in economies with high
rates of inflation (usually defined to be inflation in excess of 30 percent a year), recent work
shows that substantial costs arise even at low rates of inflation.
The cost that first received the attention of economists is the so-called shoe leather
cost of inflation—the cost of economizing on the use of non-interest-bearing money (see
Bailey [1956)). The history of prewar central Europe makes us all too familiar with the
difficulties of requiring vast and ever-rising quantities of cash to conduct daily transactions.
Unfortunately, hyperinflations have occurred in emerging market countries within the last
decade as well. Given conventional estimates of the interest elasticity of money and the
real interest rate when inflation is zero, this cost is quite low for inflation rates less than
10 percent, remaining below 0.10 percent of GDP. Only when inflation rises to above
100 percent do these costs become appreciable, climbing above 1 percent of GDP (Fischer
1981).

Another cost of inflation related to the additional need for transactions is the
overinvestmenr in the financial sector induced by inflation. At the margin, opportunities to
make profits by acting as a middleman on normal transactions, rather than investing in
3

productive activities, increase with instability in prices. A number of estimates put the
rise in the financial sector share of GDP on the order of 1 percentage point for every
10 percentage points of inflation up to an inflation rate of 100 percent (English 1996).
The transfer of resources out of productive uses elsewhere in the economy can be as large
as a few percentage points of GDP and can even be seen at relatively low or moderate rates
of inflation.
The difficulties caused by inflation can also extend to decisions about future

expenditures. Higher inflation increases uncertainty about both relative prices and the
future price level, which makes it harder to arrive at the appropriate production decisions.
For example, in labor markets, Groshen and Schweitzer (1996) calculate that the loss of
output due to inflation of 10 percent (compared with a level of 2 percent) is 2 percent of
GDP. More broadly, the uncertainty about relative prices induced by inflation can distort
the entire pricing mechanism. Under inflationary conditions, the risk premia demanded on
savings and the frequency with which prices are changed increase. Inflation also alters the
relative attractiveness of real versus nominal assets for investment and short-term versus
long-term contracting.5
The most obvious costs of inflation at low to moderate levels seem to come from the
interaction of the tax system with inflation. Because tax systems are rarely indexed for
inflation, an increase in inflation substantially raises the cost of capital, causing investment

to drop below its optimal level. In addition, higher taxation, which results from inflation,
causes a misallocation of capital to different sectors, which in turn distorts the labor supply
and leads to inappropriate corporate financing decisions. Fischer (1994) calculates that the
social costs from the tax-related distortions of inflation amount to 2 to 3 percent of GDP at
an inflation rate of 10 percent. In a recent paper, Feldstein (1997) estimates this cost to be
even higher: he calculates the cost of an inflation rate of 2 percent rather than zero to be
1 percent of GDP.
The costs of inflation outlined here decrease the level of resources productively

employed in an economy, and thereby the base from which the economy can grow.
Mounting evidence from econometric studies shows that, at high levels, inflation also
decreases the rate of growth of economies. While time series studies of individual countries
over long periods and cross-national comparisons of growth rates are not in total agreement,
the consensus is that, on average, a 1 percent rise in inflation can cost an economy 0.1 to

0.5 percentage points in its rate of growth (Fischer 1993). This result varies greatly with
the level of inflation—the effects are usually thought to be much greater at higher levels.6
However, a recent study has presented evidence that the inflation variability usually
associated with higher inflation has a significant negative effect on growth even at low
levels of inflation, in addition to and distinct from the direct effect of inflation itself7
The four lines of argument outlined here lead the vast majority of central bankers
and academic monetary economists to the view that price stability should be the primary
long-term goal for monetary policy.8 Furthermore, to avoid the tendency to an inflationary

bias produced by the time-inconsistency problem (or uncertainty about monetary policy

4

goals more generally), monetary policy strategy often relies upon a nominal anchor to serve

as a target that ties the central bank's hands so it cannot pursue (or be pressured into
pursuing) a strategy of raising output with unexpectedly expansionary monetary policy. As
we will see, this anchor need not preclude clearly delineated short-term reactions to
financial or significant output shocks in order to function as a constraint on inflationary
policy over the long term. A number of potential nominal anchors for monetary strategy can
serve as targets.
CHOICE OF TARGETS
One nominal anchor used by almost all central banks at one time or another is a target

growth path for a monetary aggregate such as the monetary base or Ml, M2, or M3. If

velocity is either relatively constant or predictable, a growth target of a monetary
aggregate can keep nominal income on a steady growth path that leads to long-term price
stability. In such an environment, choosing a monetary aggregate as a nominal anchor has
several advantages. First, some monetary aggregates, the narrower the better, can be
controlled both quickly and easily by the central bank. Second, monetary aggregates can be
measured quite accurately with short lags (in the case of the United States, for example,
measures of the monetary aggregates appear within two weeks). Third, as pointed out in
Bernanke and Mishkin (1992), because an aggregate is known so quickly, using it as a
nominal anchor greatly increases the transparency of monetary policy, which can have
important benefits. A monetary aggregate sends almost immediate signals to both the
public and the markets about the srance of monetary policy and the intentions of
policymakers, thereby helping to (lx inflation expecrations. In addition, the transparency of
a monetary aggregate target makes the central bank more accountable to the public to keep
inflation low, which can help reduce pressures on the central bank to pursue expansionary
monetary policy.
Although the targeting of monetary aggregates has many important advantages in
principle, in practice these advantages come about only if the monetary aggregates have a

highly predictable relationship with nominal income. Unfortunately, in many countries,
velocity fluctuations have been so large and frequent in the last fifteen years that the
relationships between monetary aggregates and goal variables have broken down. Some
observers have gone so far as to argue that attempts to exploit these relationships have been
a cause of their breakdown. As a result, the use of monetary aggregate targets as a nominal

anchor has become highly problematic, and many countries that adopted monetary targets
in the 1970s abandoned them in the 1980s. Not surprisingly, many policymakers have been
looking for alternative nominal anchors.
Another frequently used nominal anchor entails fixing the value of the domestic

currency relative to that of a low-inflation country, say Germany or the United States, or,
alternatively, putting the value of the domestic currency on a predetermined path vis-à-vis
the foreign currency in a variant of this fixed exchange rate regime known as a crawling peg.
The exchange tate anchor has the advantage of avoiding the time-inconsistency problem by
5

precommitting a country's central bank so that it cannot pursue an overly expansionary
monetary policy that would lead to a devaluation of the exchange rate. In addition, an
exchange rate anchor helps reduce expectations that inflation will approach that of the country
to which its currency is pegged. Perhaps most important, an exchange rate anchor is a monetary
policy strategy that is easily understood by the public.
As forcefully argued in Obstfeld and Rogoff(1995), however, a fixed exchange rate

regime is not without its costs and limitations. With a fixed exchange rate regime, a
country no longer exercises control over its own monetary policy. Not on'y is the country
unable to use monetary policy to respond to domestic shocks, but it is also vulnerable to
shocks emanating from the country to which its currency is pegged. Furthermore, in the
current environment of open, global capital markets, fixed exchange rate regimes are
subject to breakdowns that may entail sharp changes in exchange rates. Such developments
can be very disruptive to a country's economy, as recent events in Mexico have
demonstrated. Defending the domestic currency when it is under pressure may require
substantial increases in interest rates that directly cause a contraction in consumer and
investment spending, and the contraction in turn may lead to a recession. In addition, as
pointed out in Mishkin (1996), a sharp depreciation of the domestic currency can produce
a full-scale banking and financial crisis that can tip a country's economy into a severe
depression.
An inflation target (or its variant, a price-level target) clearly provides a nominal
anchor for the path of the price level, and, like a fixed exchange rate anchor, has the

important advantage of being easily understood by the public. The resulting transparency
increases the potential for promoting low inflation expectations, which helps to produce a
desirable inflation outcome. Also, like a fixed exchange rate or a monetary targeting
strategy, inflation targeting reduces the pressure on the monetary authorities to pursue
short-run output gains that would lead to the time-inconsistency problem. An inflationtargeting strategy also avoids several of the problems arising from monetary targeting or
fixed exchange rate strategies. For example, in contrast to a fixed exchange rate system,
inflation targeting can preserve a country's independent monetary policy so that the
monetary authorities can cope with domestic shocks and help insulate the domestic
economy from foreign shocks. In addition, inflation targeting can avoid the problem
presented by velocity shocks because it eliminates the need to focus on the link between a

monetary aggregate and nominal income; instead, all relevant information may be brought
to bear on forecasting inflation and choosing a policy response to achieve a desirable
inflation outcome.
Inflation targeting does have some disadvantages. Because of the uncertain effects of

monetary policy on inflation, monetary authorities cannot easily control inflation. Thus, it
is far harder for policymakers to hit an inflation target with precision than it is for them to
fix the exchange rate or achieve a monetary aggregate target. Furthermore, because the lags
of the effect of monetary policy on inflation are very long—typical estimates are in excess of
two years in industrialized countries—much time must pass before a country can evaluate

6

the success of monetary policy in achieving its inflation target. This problem does not arise

with either a fixed exchange rate regime or a monetary aggregate target.
Another potential disadvantage of an inflation target is that it may be taken
literally as a rule that precludes any concern with output stabilization. As we will see in the
cases later in our study, this has not occurred in practice. An inflation target, if rigidly
interpreted, might lead to greater output variability, although it could lead to tighter
control over the inflation rate. For example, a negative supply shock that raises the inflation
rate and lowers output would induce a tightening of monetary policy to achieve a rigidly
enforced inflation target. The result, however, would add insult to injury because output
would decline even further. By contrast, in the absence of velocity shocks, a monetary
aggregate target is equivalent to a target for nominal income growth, which is the sum of
real output growth and inflation. Because the negative supply shock reduces real output as
well as raises the price level, its effect on nominal income growth would be less than on
inflation, thus requiring less tightening of monetary policy.
The potential disadvantage of an inflation-targeting regime that ignores output
stabilization has led some economists to advocate the use of a nominal income growth
target instead (for example, see McCallum [1995a) and Taylor [1995]). A nominal income
growth target shares many characteristics with an inflation target; it also has many of the
same advantages and disadvantages. On the positive side, it avoids the problems of velocity
shocks and the time-inconsistency problem and allows a country to maintain an
independent monetary policy. On the negative side, nominal income is not easily
controllable by the monetary authorities, and much time must pass before assessment of
monetary policy's success in achieving the nominal income target is possible. Still, a
nominal growth target is advantageous in that it explicitly includes some weight on a real
output objective and thus may lead to smaller fluctuations in real output.9

Nonetheless, nominal income targets have two very important disadvantages
relative to inflation targets. First, a nominal GDP target forces the central bank or the
government to announce a number for potential GDP growth. Such an announcement is
highly problematic because estimates of potential GDP growth are far from precise and

they change over time. Announcing a specific number for potential GDP growth may thus
indicate a certainty that policymakers may not have and may also cause the public to
mistakenly believe that this estimate is actually a fixed target. Announcing a potential
GDP growth number is, therefore, likely to create an extra layer of political complication—
it opens policymakers to the criticism that they are willing to settle for growth rates that

are too low. Indeed, it may lead to the accusation that the central bank or the targeting
regime is antigrowth, when the opposite is true—that is, a low inflation rate is a means to
promote a healthy economy that can experience high growth. In addition, if the estimate for
potential GDP growth is too high and it becomes embedded in the public mind as a target,
the classic time-inconsistency problem—and a positive inflation bias—will arise.

7

The second disadvantage of a nominal GDP target relative to an inflation target is

that the concept of nominal GDP is not readily understood by the public, thus making it
less transparent than an inflation target. No one speaks of "headline nominal GDP growth"
when discussing labor contracts. In addition, because nominal and real GDP can be easily
confused, a nominal GDP target may lead the public to believe that a central bank is
targeting real GDP growth, with the attendant problems mentioned above.

8

Part II.

Design Issues in the Implementation
of Inflation Targets

Part I has outlined the reasons why several countries have chosen to base their monetary
strategies on the targeting of inflation. It also raises a set of issues about the design of an
inflation-targeting regime. Before examining in detail how inflation targeting has worked in
the countries we examine here, we briefly outline the choices policymakers face in designing
an inflation-targeting strategy. The fundamental question is how best to balance

transparency with flexibility in operation, given the uncertainties of monetary policy and
the economic environment. The simpler and tighter the constraints on policy, the easier
it is for the public to understand and hold policy accountable, but the harder it is for policy
to respond to events and maintain credible performance. Choices about target design are
therefore critical in setting this balance appropriately.
In the case studies that follow, we will see that the design choices for an inflationtargeting regime fall into four basic categories: definition and measurement of the target,
transparency, flexibility, and timing.
DEFINITION AND MEASUREMENT OF THE TARGET
Because inflation targeting by its very nature requires a numerical value for the target,

setting such a target requires explicit answers to several questions about how the target is
defined and measured.
What does price stability mean in practice? Inflation targeting requires a quantitative statement

as to what inflation rate is consistent with the pursuit of price stability in the next few
years. Because of innovation and changing tastes, all inflation measures have a net positive
bias. For example, measurement error for consumer price index (CPI) inflation in the
United States has been estimated to be in the range of 0.5 to 2.0 percent at an annual rate
(Shapiro and Wilcox 1996; Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index
1996). Another factor to be taken into account in setting the target level of inflation is the
asymmetric dangers from deflation. That is, through financial and other channels, the costs
to the real economy from undershooting zero inflation outweigh the direct costs to the
economy from overshooting zero inflation by a similar amount. These potential costs might
warrant a price stability objective in which the inflation rate, corrected for any measurement
error, might be set slightly above zero.
What inflation series should be targeted and who should measure it? A target series must be

defined and measured. The series needs to be considered accurate, timely, and readily
understandable by the public, but it may also need to exclude from its definition individual

price shocks or onetime shifts that do not affect trend inflation, which is what monetary
policy can influence.

9

Price-level or inflation target? Both price-level and inflation targets imply a targeted path
for the price level. A price-level target sets the path for the price level so that if inflation is

above the targeted rate in one period, it must be below the targeted rate in the next period
in order to hit the price-level target. By contrast, an inflation target allows for "base drift,"
in which bygones are bygones, and the miss on the inflation target does not need to be
offset. Relative to an inflation target, a price-level target has the advantage of helping to pin
down price-level expectations over very long time horizons, but it may increase the volatility of

the price level over shorter time horizons.
TRANSPARENCY

An important rationale for inflation targeting is that it promotes transparency in monetary
policy. Two questions need to be answered if transparency is to be achieved.
Hou' should inflation targets be used to communicate with the public and the markets? Inflation

targets can be an effective way of increasing transparency by communicating information to
the public and the markets about the stance and intentions of monetary policy. A variety of

institutional arrangements, published materials, testimony, and speeches can help in this
communication process and can emphasize the forward-looking nature of monetary policy.
In addition, clear, regular explanations of monetary policy by central banks can build public
support for and understanding of the pursuit of price stability.
How should central banks be held accountable for target performance? Because monetary policy has

such important effects on the public, inflation targeting cannot be done without democratic
accountability. The extent to which this accountability takes the form of structured
discussion rather than political pressure can in part be determined by target design. Who
should set the inflation target: the government, the central bank, or both together?
FLFxIBILYn'
As McDonough (1996a) suggests, price stability is a means to an end—the creation of a
stable economic environment that promotes economic growth—rather than an end in itself.
Control over inflation that is too tight might be costly in terms of higher output variability.
Thus, the design of an inflation-targeting regime must answer questions about how much
flexibility should be built into it.
What deviations from the inflation target should be allowed in response to shocks? As the discussion of

the merits of an inflation target versus a nominal income growth target suggests, a rigid
inflation target may not be sufficiently flexible in response to some shocks. Because both
policymakers and the public care about output fluctuations, and the ultimate reason for
price stability is to support a healthy real economy, an inflation-targeting regime may need
escape clauses or some flexibility built into the target definition to deal with supply and

other types of shocks.
10

Should the target be a point or a range? Because of shocks to the inflation process and

uncertainty about the effects of monetary policy, inflation outcomes will have a high degree
of uncertainty even with the best monetary policy settings. Should an inflation target have a

range to allow for this uncertainty? Estimates of this uncertainty are quite high (see, for
example, Haldane and Salmon [1995) and Stevens and Debelle [1995)), and so an inflation
target band would have to be quite wide—on the order of 5 or 6 percentage points—in

order to allow for this uncertainty. However, a band this wide might cause the public and
the markets to doubt the central bank's commitment to the inflation target. An alternative
approach is a point target, which—in order to address the uncertainties of inflation
outcomes—would be accompanied by discussion of the shocks that might drive inflation away
from the target goal.
Should inflation targets be varied over time? If there is substantial inertia in the wage- and price-

setting process and inflation is initially very high, the monetary authorities might want to
avoid a rapid transition to the price stability goal. In this case, they might well choose a
transition path of inflation targets that trends downward over time, toward the price
stability goal. Similarly, even if the price stability goal were achieved, shocks to the
economy might move the economy away from this goal, again raising the issue of whether
the inflation targets should be varied over time. Varying inflation targets over time may

thus be used as another tool to increase the flexibility of the inflation-targeting tegime
so that it can cope with supply and other types of shocks to the economy.
TIMING
Two questions arise with respect to the timing of inflation targets:
What is the appropriate time horizon for an inflation target? Because monetary policy affects

inflation with long lags, monetary policy cannot achieve a specific inflation target
immediately, but instead achieves its goal over time. Also, economic shocks can occur in
the intervening period between policy and effect. Monetary policymakers must thus decide
what time horizon is appropriate for meeting the inflation target.
When is the best time to start implementing inflation targets? To establish credibility for an

inflation-targeting regime, it may be important to have some initial successes in achieving the

inflation targets. This suggests that certain periods may be better than others to introduce
inflation targets. Furthermore, obtaining political support for the commitment to price
stability underlying an inflation-targeting regime may be easier at certain times than at

others, so choosing the correct time to implement inflation targeting may be an important
element in its success or failure.

11

CASE STUDIES

We will see that these four categories of decisions about operational design are recurring
themes in the case study discussions that follow. What is striking is the extent to which a

number of the target-adopting countries have converged on a few design choices, perhaps
indicating an emerging consensus on best practices.
The case studies are structured as follows. The first section outlines why and under
what circumstances the targeting regime was adopted. The next section describes the
operational framework of the targeting regime. The third section describes the actual
targeting experience. The final section provides a brief summary of the key lessons to be
drawn from each countrys experience. The case studies begin with Germany because it was
one of the first countries (along with Switzerland) to implement many of the features of an

inflation-targeting regime, even though Germany is not an inflation targeter per se.
Although Germany focuses principally on monetary aggregates as the target variables, there
is much to learn from its experience, which has been longer than that of the other countries
discussed here. The remaining case studies then proceed according to the order in which the

countries adopted inflation targeting: New Zealand, then Canada, and finally the United
Kingdom.

12

Part IlL

German Monetary Targeting:
A Precursor to Inflation Targeting

Many features of the German monetary targeting regime are also key elements of inflation

targeting in the other countries examined in this study. Indeed, as pointed out in Bernanke
and Mishkin (1997), Germany might best be thought of as a hybrid" inflation targeter, in
that it has more in common with inflation targeting than with a rigid application of a

monetary targeting rule. The German experience with monetary targeting, which spans
more than twenty years, provides useful lessons for the successful operation of inflation
targeting, and this is why we study the German experience here.
Several themes emerge from our review of Germany's experience with monetary

targeting:1

• A numerical inflation goal is a key element in German monetary targeting, suggesting
that the differences between monetary targeting as actually practiced by Germany and
inflation targeting as conducted by other countries are not that great.

• German monetary targeting is quite flexible: convergence of the medium-term
inflation goal to the long-term goal has often been quite gradual.
• Under the monetary targeting regime, monetary policy has been somewhat responsive
in the short run to real output growth as well as to other considerations such as the
exchange rate.
• The long-term goal of price stability has been defined as a measured inflation rate
greater than zero.

• A key element of the targeting regime is a strong commitment to transparency and to
communication of monetary policy strategy to the general public.

THE ADoRrIoN OF MONETARY TARGETING
The decision to adopt monetary targeting in Germany, though prompted by the breakdown
of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate regime, was a matter of choice. Germany was
not under any pressure at the time to reform either its economy in general or its monetary
regime in particular—in fact, the breakdown of Bretton Woods was in part due to the
extreme relative credibility of the German central bank's commitment to price stability and
the concomitant appreciation of the deutsche mark. Under these circumstances, the loss of
the exchange rate anchor was not the sort of credibility crisis where macroeconomic effects
demanded an immediate response, as demonstrated by the slow (two-to-three-year-long)
move to the new regime.
Close analysis of the historical record suggests that two main factors motivated the
adoption of monetary targeting in Germany. The first factor was an intellectual argument
in favor of a nominal anchor for monetary policy grounded in an underlying belief that
monetary policy should neither accommodate inflation nor pursue medium-term output
13

goals.2 The second factor was the perception that medium-term inflation expectations had
to be locked in when monetary policy eased as inflation came down after the first oil shock.
The generalization over time of this latter motivation—that monetary targeting provides
a means of transparently and credibly communicating the relationship between current

developments and medium-term goals—was the guiding principle of the newly adopted
framework in Germany.
On December 5, 1974, the Central Bank Council of the Deutsche Bundesbank
announced that 'from the present perspective it regards a growth of about 8% in the central
bank money stock over the whole of 1975 as acceptable in the light of its stability goals."3
The Bundesbank considered this target to "provide the requisite scope ... for the desired
growth of the real economy," while at the same time the target had been chosen "in
such a way that no new inflationary strains are likely to arise as a result of monetary
developments." Since 1973, the Bundesbank had used the central bank money stock (CBM)
as its primary indicator of monetary developments, but never before had it announced a
target for the growth of CBM or any other monetary aggregate.4 Although this was a
unilateral announcement on the part of the Bundesbank, the announcement stressed that "in
formulating its target for the growth of the central bank money stock [the Bundesbank) found
itself in full agreement with the federal government."
Although its statements at the time do not make the point explicitly, one of the
Bundesbank's primary concerns appears to have been that public misperceptions might
entrench high inflation expectations. At the beginning of 1975, the Bundesbank faced the
task of continuing to ease monetary policy in view of the already apparent weakness in the
economy, without giving the impression that its resolve to bring down inflation was
diminishing. Recent experience had shown that wage-setting behavior in particular was
mostly unaffected by the Bundesbank's efforts to reduce inflation:
Wage costs have gone up steadily in the last few months, partly as after-effects of
[earlier) settlements . . . which were excessive (not least because management and
labor obviously underestimated the prospects of success of the stabilization policy).
Despite the low level of business activity and subdued inflation expectations, even in
very recent wage negotiations two-figure rises have effectively been agreed.
(Deutsche Bundesbank 1974b, December, p. 6)

The credibility issue arose, therefore, in the context of the Bundesbank's desire to stop the
pass-through ofa onetime shock to the price level; this concern for getting the public to
distinguish between first-round and second-round effects of a price shock and to avoid
locking in expectations of high inflation characterizes the efforts of the inflation targeters
as well.

From this perspective, the German monetary target seems to have been adopted, at
least in part, to create a necessary means of communication about inflation uncertainty.
After CBM had grown by 6 percent during 1974, the Bundesbank announced a target
growth rate of 8 percent for 1975:
14

An acceleration of money growth was intended to stimulate demand and provide the
monetary scope necessary for the desired real growth of the economy. On the other

hand, the target was also intended to show that no precipitate action would be
taken to ease monetary conditions, in order not to jeopardize further progress
towards containing the inflationary tendencies. (Deutsche Bundesbank 1976a, p. 5)

It is worth noting, however, that this explanation and the statement cited in the previous
paragraph were made after the targets were announced, not contemporaneously with the
announcement.
THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
Our historical and institutional analysis in this section and the following one (which

discusses German monetary policy in the 1990s) independently confirms the impression of
German monetary policymaking raised in Bernanke and Mishkin (1992) and argued by later
econometric observers. Thai is, the Bundesbank does not behave according to a reduced-

form-reaction function as though price stability were its sole short-to-medium-term policy
goal, or as though the monetary growth—goal correlation were strong enough to justify
strictly following the targets, ignoring wider information.5 In fact, in the following
discussion we bring out the operational reality and implications: that the monetary targets
provide a framework for the central bank to convey its long-term commitment to price
stability.
From 1975 until 1987, the Bundesbank announced targets for the growth of central

bank money (CBM). CBM is defined as currency in circulation plus sight deposits, time
deposits with maturity under four years, and savings deposits and savings bonds with
maturity of less than four years (the latter three components are weighted by their
respective required reserve ratios as ofJanuary 1974). CBM is different from the monetary
base in that banks' excess balances are excluded and the weights of deposits subject to
reserve requirements are historical, not current, ratios.
Since 1988, the Bundesbank has used growth in M3 as its intermediate target. M3
is defined as the sum of currency in circulation, sight deposits, time deposits with maturity
under four years, and savings deposits at three months' notice. Apart from not including

savings deposits with longer maturities and savings bonds, the major difference
between M3 and CBM is that the latter is a weighted-sum aggregate, while the former is
a simple sum. By definition, therefore, CBM moves very closely with M3. Because the
weights on the three types of deposits are fairly small,6 the only source for large divergences
between the growth of the two aggregates is significant fluctuation in the holdings of

currency as compared with deposits. This potential divergence became critical in 1988,
in the face of shifting financial incentives, and again in 1990-91, after German monetary
unification.
The Bundesbank has always set its monetary targets at the end of a calendar year for

the next year. It derives the monetary targets from a quantity equation, which states that
the amount of nominal transactions in an economy within a given period of time is
15

identically equal to the amount of the means of payment times the velocity at which the

means of payment changes hands. In rate-of-change form, the quantity equation states that
the sum of real output growth and the inflation rate is equal to the sum of money growth
and the change in (the appropriately defined) velocity. The Bundesbank derives the target
growth rate of the chosen monetary aggregate (CBM or M3) by estimating the growth of
the long-run production potential over the coming year, adding the rate of price change it
considers unavoidable (described below), and subtracting the estimated change in trend
velocity over the year.
Two elements of this procedure deserve emphasis. First, the Bundesbank does not

employ forecasts of real output growth over the coming year in its target derivation, but
instead estimates the growth in production potential.7 This "potential-oriented approach"
is based on the Bundesbank's conviction that it should not engage in policies aimed at
short-term stimulation. This approach allows the Bundesbank not only to claim that it is not
making any choice about the business cycle when it sets policy, but also to dc-emphasize any
public discussion of its forecasting efforts fot the real economy, further distancing monetary
policy from the course of unemployment. The transparency of the quantity approach,
therefore, gets certain items off the monetaty policy agenda (or at least moves in that
direction) by specifying the central bank's responsibilities.
The second noteworthy element of the Bundesbank's procedure for deriving the
target growth rate of its chosen monetary aggregate relates to the concept of "unavoidable
price increases," where prices are measured by the all-items consumer price index (CR1).
These goals for inflation are set prior to the monetary target each year and specify the
intended path for inflation, which in turn motivates monetary policy.

In view of the unfavorable underlying situation, the Bundesbank felt obliged until
1984 to include an "unavoidable" rate of price rises in its calculation. By so doing, it
took due account of the fact that price increases which have already entered into the
decisions of economic agents cannot be eliminated immediately, but only step by
step. On the other hand, this tolerated rise in prices was invariably below the current
inflation rate, or the rate forecast for the year ahead. The Bundesbank thereby made it
plain that, by adopting an unduly "gradualist" approach to fighting inflation, it did
not wish to contribute to strengthening inflation expectations. Once price stability
was virtually achieved at the end of 1984, the Bundesbank abandoned the concept
of "unavoidable" price increases. Instead, it has since then included ... a mediumterm price assumption of 2%. (Deutsche Bundesbank 1995c, pp. 80-1)
The setting of the annual unavoidable price increase thus embodies four normative
judgments by the Bundesbank. First, a medium-term goal for inflation motivates policy
decisions. Second, convergence of the medium-term goal to the long-term goal should be
gradual since the costs of moving to the long-run goal cannot be ignored. Third, the
medium-term inflation goal has always been defined as a number greater than zero. Fourth,
if inflation expectations remain contained, there is no need to reverse prior price-level rises.

16

The target for 1975 was a point target for CBM growth from December 1974 to
December 1975. Since this target definition was susceptible to short-term fluctuations in
money growth around year-end, the targets from 1976 to 1978 were formulated as point
targets for the average growth of CBM over the previous year.
In 1979, two changes to the target fbrmulation were made. First, with the exception of
1989, all targets have been formulated in terms of a target range of plus or minus 1 or 1.5

percent around the monetary target derived from the quantity equation.
In view of the oil price hikes in 1974 and 1979-80, the erratic movements in "real'
exchange rates and the weakening of traditional cyclical patterns, it appeared
advisable to grant monetary policy from the outset limited room for discretionary
maneuver in the form of such target ranges. To ensure that economic agents are
adequately informed . . . the central bank must be prepared to define from the start as
definitely as possible the overall economic conditions under which it will aim at the
top or bottom end of the range. (Schlesinger 1983, p. 10)
In moving to a target range rather than a point target, the Bundesbank believed that, by
giving itself room for response to changing developments, it could hit the target range; in
fact, the tone of its explanation suggests that it was conferring some discretion upon itself
rather than buying room for error in a difficult control problem.
The second change made in 1979 was to reformulate the targets as growth rates of
the average money stock in the fourth quarter over the average money stock in the previous
year in order to indicate "the direction in which monetary policy is aiming more accurately
than an average target does' (Deutsche Bundesbank 1979b, January, p. 8). Chart 3 (p. 98)
depicts quarterly growth rates of CBM (through 1987) and M3 (thereafter) over the fourthquarter level of the previous year and the targets since 1979 (the earlier targets are omitted
because they were not formulated in terms of year-on-year rates).
The Bundesbank has repeatedly stressed that situations may arise where it would
consciously allow deviations from the announced target path to occur in order to support
other economic objectives. These allowances are beyond and in addition to those implicit in
the setting of a target range and of a gradual path for movements in unavoidable inflation.
A case in point is the year 1977, when signs of weakness in economic activity, combined
with a strong appreciation of the deutsche mark, prompted the Bundesbank to tolerate the
overshooting of the target. As said at the time:
However, the fact that the Bundesbank deliberately accepted the risk of a major
divergence from its quantitative monetary target does not imply that it abandoned
the more medium-term orientation which has marked its policies since 1975. .
There may be periods in which the pursuit of an "intermediate target variable," as

reflected in the announced growth rate of the central bank money stock, cannot
be given priority. (Deutsche Bundesbank 1978a, p. 22)
The main reason why CBM was initially chosen as the target aggregate was the
Bundesbank's perception of CBM's advantages in terms of transparency and communication
to the public. The Bundesbank explained its choice of CBM in the following words:
17

[CBM] brings out the central bank's responsibility for monetary expansion especially
clearly. The money creation of the banking system as a whole and the money creation
of the central bank are closely linked thtough currency in circulation and the banks
obligation to maintain a certain portion of their deposits with the central bank.
Central bank money, which comprises these two components, can therefore readily
serve as an indicator of both. A rise by a certain rate in central bank money shows not
only the size of the money creation of the banking system but also the extent to
which the central bank has provided funds for the banks' money creation. (Deutsche
Bundesbank 1976a, p. 12)

Although at any point in time CBM is a given quantity from the Bundesbank's
point of view because of the minimum reserve requirements, the choice ofCBM
nevertheless also reflects the monetary policy stance in the recent past. It is worth noting
that this use of CBM to publicly track the monetary stance is consistent with the
Bundesbank's focus on having minimum reserve requirements (as seen in the Bank's
advocacy of such requirements for the unified European currency). The information being
conveyed by CBM in this context, however, is not so much to prevent either the public or
the central bank from making a large mistake about the unclear stance of monetary policy
(a major concern in the framework design of inflation targeters such as Canada), but to give
rapid feedback about the state of monetary conditions in general. The mindset is that
monetary control provides useful information about policy and lowers policy uncertainty.
The Bundesbank's confidence that it can explain target deviations and redefinitions
to the public is reflected in the design of its reporting mechanisms. There is no legal
requirement in the Bundesbank Act or in later legislation for the Bundesbank to give a
formal account of its policy to any public body. The independence of the central bank in
Germany limits government oversight to a commitment that the Deutsche Bundesbank
shall advise the Federal Cabinet on monetary policy issues of major importance, and shall
furnish it with information upon request" (Act Section 13). The only publications that the
Bundesbank is required to produce are announcements in the Federal Gazette of the setting
of interest rates, discount rates, and the like (Act Section 33). According to Act Section 18,
the Bundesbank may at its discretion publish the monetary and banking statistics that
it collects.
The Bundesbank chooses to make heavy use of this opportunity. On the inside front
cover, the Monthly Report is described as a response to Section 18 of the Bundesbank Act, but

it does much more than report statistics. Every month, after a "Short Commentary" on
monetary developments, securities markets, public finance, economic conditions, and the
balance of payments, there appear two to thur articles on a combination of onetime topics
(for example, 'The State of External Adjustment after German Reunification") and
recurring reports (for example, "The Profitability of German Credit Institutions" [annual]
and 'The Economic Scene in Germany" [quarterly]). Each year in January, the monetary

target and its justification are printed (between 1989 and 1992, the target and justification
were available in December). The Annual Report gives an extremely detailed retrospective of
18

economic, not just monetary, developments in Germany for the year, lists all monetary
policy moves, and offers commentary on the fiscal policy of the federal government and the
LAnder.8 Between these two publications, and regularly updated "special publications" such
as The Monetaty Policy of the Bundesbank (an explanatory booklet), no Bundesbank policy

decision is left unexplained with respect to both its immediate impact and its short- and
long-term effects.
The Bundesbank's commitment to transparency does not come without self-

imposed limits on its accountability. Two limitations in particular provide a strong
contrast to the inflation report documents prepared by central banks in Canada, the
United Kingdom, and other countries in recent years. First, no articles in the Monthly Report
are signed either individually or collectively by authors, and the Annual Report has only a
brief foreword signed by the Bundesbank President (although all Council members are
listed on the pages preceding it). Speeches by the President or other Council members are
never reprinted in either document. This depersonalization of policy is to some extent made
up for by the enormously active speaking and publishing schedule that all Council
members (not just the President and Chief Economist) and some senior staffers engage in,
but the fact of depersonalized reports still weakens the link between the main policy
statements and the responsible individuals.
The second limitation on accountability is that the Monthly Report and the Annual
Report always deal with the current situation or assess past performance9—no forecasts of
any economic variable are made public by the Bundesbank, and private sector forecasts or
even expectations are not discussed. The Bundesbank makes itself accountable on the basis
of its explanations for past performance, but it does not leave itself open to be evaluated as a
forecaster. In fact, its ex post explanations, combined with its potential GDP and normative
inflation basis for the monetary targets, enable the Bundesbank to shift responsibility for
short-term economic performance to other factors at any time. Nevertheless, those same
monetary targets are seen by the Bundesbank as the main source of accountability and
transparency because they commit the Bundesbank to explaining policy with respect to a
benchmark on a regular basis.
GERMAN MONETARY POLICY UNDER MONETARY TARGETING
The history of the German experience with inflation and monetary targeting up until 1990
has been discussed elsewhere (for example, see Bernanke and Mishkin [1992) and Neumann

and von Hagen [1993]). Rather than review the entire history of German monetary

targeting, we start by highlighting events through the 1970s and 1980s that are
illustrative of certain themes discussed above—particularly the treatment of the
monetary targets not as rigid rules but as a means of structured transparency for monetary
policy.

Then, the bulk of our discussion focuses on the challenging episode of German
monetary unification. In that instance, the Bundesbank successfully handled a (by
definition) onetime inflationary shock of great magnitude and politically sensitive
19

developments in the real economy through flexibility and communication. Close
examination of this episode also illustrates how the Bundesbank has operated its monetary
targeting regime in the 1990s and provides a baseline for the three inflation targeters we

examine next. Charts 1-4 (pp. 97-8) track the path of inflation, interest rates, monetary
growth, GDP growth, and unemployment before and after monetary union.
It is fair to generalize that in the 1970s and 1980s the Bundesbank frequently overand undershot its annual monetary targets; it reversed overshootings in most but not all
cases. In addition, the Bundesbank responded to movements in other variables besides
inflation. From the beginning of CBM targeting in 1975, the Bundesbank was aware of the
risk that "central bank money is prone to distortions caused by special movements in
currency in circulation" (Deutsche Bundesbank 1976a, p. 11). In 1977, the Bundesbank
allowed CBM growth to exceed the target in the face of an appreciating deutsche mark and
weak economic activity.10 At that early time, only two years after the adoption of the
targets, the Bundesbank relied on the power of its explanation that 'there may be periods in
which the pursuit of an 'intermediate target variable' . . cannot be given priority,"
.

acknowledging the importance of intervening real and foreign exchange developments in
its decision making (Deutsche Bundesbank 1978a, p. 2).
In 1981 and early 1982, CBM grew much more slowly than M3 because of
weakness in the deutsche mark, leading to large-scale repatriation of deutsche mark notes
and an inverted yield curve that caused portfolio shifts out of currency into high-yielding
short-term assets. Accordingly, the monetary target for 1981 of 4 to 7 percent was
undershot (Chart 3, p. 98); since during this period the Bundesbank was pursuing a
disinflationary course, and pro-gress was being made on the inflation front, the central bank did
not act to bring money growth up into target range.
In 1986 and 1987, the reverse situation—a strong deutsche mark combined with

historically low short-term interest rates—led to CBM growth of 7.7 percent and
8 percent, respectively, while M3 grew at 7 percent and 6 percent during those two
years, so that all measures exceeded the target monetary growth range. The Bundesbank's
allowance of this overshooting could be seen as part of the results of the Plaza Accord on the
Group of Seven exchange rates as well. The latter development prompted the Bundesbank

to announce a switch in 1988 to monetary targets for the aggregate M3:
The expansion of currency in circulation is in itself of course a significant
development which the central bank plainly has to heed. This is, after all, the most
liquid form of money . . . and not least the kind of money which the central bank
issues itself and which highlights its responsibility for the value of money. On the
other hand, especially at times when the growth rates of currency in circulation and

deposit money are diverging strongly, there is no reason to stress the weight of
currency in circulation unduly. (Deutsche Bundesbank 1988b, March, "Methodological
Notes on the Monetary Target Variable 'M3," pp. 18-2 1)

The fact that the Bundesbank changed the target variable when CBM grew too fast,
but did not do so when it grew too slowly, can be interpreted as an indication of the

20

importance chat the Bunclesbank attaches to the communicative function of its monetary
targets. Allowing the target variable to repeatedly overshoot the target because of special
factors to which the Bundesbank did not want to react might have led to the misperception
on the part of the public that the Bundesbank's attitude toward monetary control and
inflation had changed.1'
An econometric argument has been made by Clarida and Gertler (1997) that the

Bundesbank has displayed an asymmetry in reacting to target misses; that is, it usually
raises interest rates in response to an overshooting of the target, but it does not lower
interest rates in response to an undershooting. In any event, the switch in targeted
monetary aggregates was not accompanied by any other alterations in the monetary
framework, and the perceived need for the switch did not seem to occasion much concern.

In short, as long as the underlying inflation goal was met over the medium term, the
existence of the monetary targets rather than their precise functionality was sufficient.
As noted in the previous section's discussion of unavoidable price increases (later
termed normative levels of price increase) underlying the Bundesbank's monetary targets,
the Bundesbank has tended to pursue disinflation gradually when inflationary shocks
occur. The Bundesbank's response to the 1979 oil-induced supply shock was very gradual
and publicly stated to be so—the Bundesbank set its level of unavoidable price inflation for
1980 at 8 percent, clearly below the then-prevailing rate, but also clearly above the level of
price inflation that was acceptable over the longer term. The target inflation level was
brought down in stages, eventually returning to the long-run goal of 2 percent only in
1984. Even though the underlying intent was clear, each year's target unavoidable inflation
level (as well as the monetary target and interest rate policies determined by that level) was
actually set only a year ahead, allowing the Bundesbank still further flexibility to respond to
events and to rethink the pace of disinflation. Although what turned out to be four years of
marked inflation reduction is hardly an instance of the Bundesbank going easy on inflation,
it is an illustration of flexibility and concern for the real-side economic effects of German
monetary policy.
The economic situation in the Federal Republic of Germany during the two years

prior to economic and monetary union with the German Democratic Republic (GDR) on
July 1, 1990, ("monetary union") was characterized by GDP growth of around 4 percent
and the first significant fall in unemployment since the late 1970s (Chart 4, p. 98). After a
prolonged period of falling inflation and historically low interest rates during the mid1980s, inflation had increased from -1 percent at the end of 1986 to slightly more than

3 percent by the end of 1989. The Bundesbank had begun tightening monetary policy in
mid-1988, raising the repo rate in steps from 3.25 percent in June 1988 to 7.75 percent
in early 1990. After the first M3 target of 3 to 6 percent had been overshot in 1988 by
1 percent, the target for M3 growth of around 5 percent in 1989 was almost exactly
achieved, with M3 growing at 4.7 percent. M3 growth was certainly not high in view of
the prevailing rate of economic growth.
21

In response to the uncertainties resulting from the prospect of German
reunification, long-term interest rates had increased sharply from late 1989 until March
1990, with ten-year bond yields rising from around 7 percent to around 9 percent in less
than haIfa year. Combined with a strong deutsche mark, this rise in long-term interest rates
allowed the Bundesbank to keep official interest rates unchanged during the months
immediately preceding monetary union. In the immediate aftermath of monetary union it
kept official interest rates unchanged as well, despite the fact that the effects of the
massively expansionary fiscal policy accompanying reunification were beginning to propel
GDP growth to record levels.

To some enent, the Bundesbank's decision to keep official interest rates unchanged
for the first few months following monetary union was due to the fact that the inflationary
potential resulting from the conditions under which the GDR mark had been converted
into deutsche marks was very difficult to assess. The Bundesbank had been opposed to the
conversion rate agreed to in the treaty on monetary union (on average about 1 to 1.8) and

had been publicly overruled on this point by the federal government.t2 The money
stock M3 had increased almost 15 percent because of monetary union. The rate of
conversion chosen turned out to be almost exactly right. While GDP in the former GDR
was estimated to be only around 7 percent of the Federal Republic's once reunification took
place, with the vast government transfers to the east all of the money was absorbed (see

Konig and Willeke [1996)). During the first few months following monetary union, the
Bundesbank was preoccupied as well with assessing the portfolio shifts in east Germany in
response to the introduction not only of a new currency, but also of a new financial system
and a broad range of assets that had not previously existed there.
As the east German banks were adjusting to their new institutional structure, and
velocity was destabilized by portfolio shifts in east Germany, monetary data that included
east Germany were hard to interpret. The Bundesbank therefore continued during the
second half of 1990 to calculate monetary aggregates separately for east and west
Germany, based on the returns of the banks domiciled in the respective parts. Although
M3 growth in west Germany accelerated in late 1990 as a result of the moderate growth
rates during the first half of the year, growth ofM3 during 1990 of 5.6 percent was well
within the target range of 4 to 6 percent.
During the fall of 1990, the repo rate had approached the lombard rate, which
meant that banks were increasingly using the lombard facility for their regular liquidity
needs and not as the emergency facility for which the Bundesbank intended lombard loans
to be used. On November 2, 1990, the Bundesbank raised the lombard rate from 8 to
8.5 percent as well as the discount rate from 6 to 6.5 percent. Within the next few weeks,
however, banks bid up the interest rate (Mengentender), and the repo rate rose above the
lombard rate, prompting the Bundesbank to raise the lombard rate to 9 percent as of

February 1, 1991. With these measures, the Bundesbank was reacting to both the volatile
GDP growth rates and the faster M3 growth in the last part of 1990. Inflation had until
then remained fairly steady, but it seems likely that the Bundesbank at that point was
22

probably expecting inflationary pressures to develop in the near future given the fiscal
expansion, the overstretched capacities in west Germany, and the terms of monetary union.
At the end of 1990, the Bundesbank announced a target range for M3 growth of
4 to 6 percent fot the year 1991, applying a monetary target for the first time to the whole

currency area. The target was based on the average all-German M3 stock during the last
quarter of 1990. As this stock was still likely to be affected by ongoing portfolio shifts in east

Germany, the target was subject to unusually high uncertainty. It is worth noting that
neither the basic inputs into the quantity equation that generates the Bundesbank's money
growth targets' normative inflation nor the potential growth rate of the German economy

was changed.'
Following German unification, the monetary targets set by the Bundesbank were
decidedly ambitious as they left normative inflation, on which these targets are
based, unchanged at 2% during this period, even though it was obvious from the
outset that this rate could not be achieved in the target periods concerned.
(Issing 1995a)

This statement was one of policy—the reunification shock did not fundamentally
alter the basic structures of the German economy. Moreover, this statement communicated
to the public at large that any price shifts coming from this shock should be treated as a
onetime event and not be passed on to inflationary expectations.
This stance required faith in the public's comprehension of, and the Bundesbank's
ability to credibly explain, the special nature of the period. It is important to contrast this
adherence to the 2 percent medium-term inflation goal with the Bundesbank's response
to the 1979 oil shock, when, as already noted, unavoidable inflation was ratcheted up to
8 percent and brought down only slowly. There are two explanations for the difference in
policy response in the 1990-93 period, neither of which excludes the other: first, the
monetary unification shock was a demand rather than a supply shock, and so the
Bundesbank was correct not to accommodate it; and second, after several years of monetary
targeting, the Bundesbank's transparent explanations of monetary policy had trained the
public to discern the differences between onetime price-level increases and persistent
inflationary pressures. In any event, the Bundesbank was clearly allowing its short-term
monetary policy to miss the targets in pursuit of the longer term goal.
Following the Bundesbank's target announcement stressing its continued adherence
to monetary targeting after reunification and the lombard rate increase on February 1,

long-term interest rates started falling for the first time since 1988. In hindsight, it is
apparent that this was the beginning of a downward trend that continued until the bond
market slump in early 1994. Although the highest inflation rates were still to come, at this
point financial markets were apparently convinced that the Bundesbank would succeed in
containing, if not reducing, inflation in the long run. By making it clear that it would not
accommodate further price increases in the medium term, the Bundesbank bought itself
flexibility for short-term easing without inviting misinterpretation. This link between
transparency and enhanced flexibility, of course, depends upon the central bank's
23

commitment to price stability being credible, but it emphasizes how even a credible central

bank may gain through institutional design to increase transparency.
Until mid-August 1991, the Bundesbank left the discount and lombard tates
unchanged, while the repo rate steadily edged up toward the lombard rate of 9 percent. CPI
inflation in west Germany had still remained around 3 percent during the first half of 1991,
while GDP growth remained vigorous. M3 growth, by contrast, was falling compared with
its upward trend during late 1990, in part because of faster than expected portfolio shifts
into longer term assets in east Germany.
These portfolio shifts, as well as the sharper than expected fall in the GDR's

production potential, led the Bundesbank for the first time ever to change its monetary
target on the occasion of its midyear review. The target for 1991 was lowered by 1 percent,
to 3 to 5 percent. The fact that monetary targets are rarely reset is critical to any change
being accepted without being perceived as a dodge by the central bank.
In this instance, the Bundesbank was able to invoke the implicit escape clause built
into the semiannual target review. That formalized process, which required a clear
explanation for any shift in targets, gave a framework for the Bundesbank to justify its
adjustment. The discipline of the monetary targeting framework displayed the framework's
disadvantages as well: that is, the difficulty of meeting short-run targets stemming from the
instability of money demand and the inability to forecast changes in the monetary
aggregate's relationship to goal variables.
As the repo rate approached the lombard rate again, the Bundesbank, on August 16,
1991, raised the lombard rate from 9 to 9.25 percent and the discount rate from 6.5 to
7.5 percent. The discount rate was raised to reduce the subsidy character of banks'
rediscount facilities, which the Bundesbank had tolerated as long as the east German banks

relied mostly on rediscount credit for the provision of their liquidity.
Despite the fact that GDP growth started to slacken during the second half of 1991,
M3 growth accelerated. To some extent, the faster growth of M3 was a result of the by-then
inverted yield curve, which led to strong growth of time deposits and prompted banks to
counter the outflow from savings deposits by offering special savings schemes with attractive
terms. This period was the first time that the yield curve had become inverted since the
early 1980s and since the Bundesbank had been targeting M3. In this situation, the conflict
arose for the Bundesbank that increases in interest rates were likely to foster M3 growth.
This problem was all the more acute since banks' tending to the private sector was growing

unabated despite the high interest rates, probably, to a large extent, because loan programs
were subsidized by the federal government in connection with the restructuring of the east
German economy and housing sector.
This conundrum, of the Bundesbank's instrument tending to work in the "wrong"

direction, brought the underlying conflict of monetary targeting to the fore—the target
must be critically evaluated constantly in relationship to the ultimate goal variable(s).
However, if the target is cast aside regularly with reference to changes in that relationship

24

or to special circumstances indicating a role for other intermediate variables, it ceases to serve

as a target rather than solely as an indicator.

Strictly defined, the use of a money growth target means that the central bank not
only treats all unexpected fluctuations in money as informative in just this sense, but
also, as a quantitative matter, changes its instrument variable in such a way as to
restore money growth to the originally designated path. (Friedman and Kuttner
1996, p. 94)
The acceleration in late 1991 notwithstanding, M3 grew by 5.2 percent during 1991, close
to the midpoint of the original target and just slightly above the revised target.
On December 20, 1991, the Bundesbank raised the lombard and discount rates by
another 0.5 percent, to 9.75 percent and 8 percent, respectively, their highest levels since
World War II (if the special lombard rates from the early 1970s are disregarded).

In the light of the sharp monetary expansion, it was essential to prevent
permanently higher inflation expectations from arising on account of the adopted
wage and fiscal policy stance and the faster pace of inflation—expectations which
would have become ever more difficult and costly to restrain. (Deutsche Bundesbank
1992a, p. 43)
The rhetoric invoked here by the Bundesbank is important to appreciate. Both
government policies and union wage demands could be (and were) cited for their
inflationary effects, that is, their pursuit of transfers beyond available resources. The
Bundesbank may not have been able to override Chancellor Helmut Kohl's desired
exchange rate of ostmarks for deutsche marks, or his "solidarity" transfers, but the
Bundesbank Direktorium was comfortable in making it clear that the Kohl government
and not the Bundesbank Direktorium should be held accountable for the inflationary
pressures; the Bundesbank Direktorium took accountability for limiting the second-round
effects of these pressures.

In addition to this division of accountability, the Bundesbank also clearly expressed
some concern about the persistence of inflationary expectations and (if necessary) the cost of
lowering them, thereby making clear its recognition of the substantial costs of disinflation
even for a credible central bank. Finally, the Bundesbank's emphasis on the ultimate goal—
medium-term price stability and inflation expectations—did not lead it to cite measures of

private sector expectations directly—something, as we will see, many inflation targeters
began doing at this time.
The December 20 increase in the lombard rate proved to be the last. During the
first half of 1992, the repo rate slowly approached the lombard rate and peaked in August at

9.7 percent before starting to fall from late August onward, as the Bundesbank started to
ease monetary policy in response to the appreciation of the deutsche mark and emerging
tensions in the European Monetary System; of course, the decision to ease also coincided
with the rapid slowdown in German GDP growth. The monetary targets for 1992 and

25

1993 would not be met, but the challenge to German monetary policy from reunification
was over.

Thus in 1992, for example, when the money stock overshot the target by a large
margin, the Bundesbank made it clear by the interest rate policy measures it
adopted, that it took this sharp monetary expansion seriously. The fact that, for a
number of reasons, it still failed in the end to meet the target . . has therefore
ultimately had little impact on the Bundesbank's credibility and its strategy. (Issing
1995b)
.

Monetary policy transparency was explicitly linked to flexibility during reunification, at
least according to Bundesbank Chief Economist Otmar Issing, and that flexibility was
exercised to minimize the real economic and political effects of maintaining long-term price
stability.
Over the past five years or so, however, M3 has continued to prove itself a

problematic intermediate target, even after reunification. The Bundesbank's own
explanations for the sizable fluctuations in annualized M3 growth since 1992 (Chart 3,
p. 98) suggest that demand for M3 behaves more and more like that for a financial asset
rather than that for a medium of exchange. While the Bundesbank, in justifying deviations

from the M3 targets, has begun giving greater prominence to reports on 'extended money
stock M3," a still broader aggregate that includes some recently growing forms of money
market accounts, it has given no signs of readiness to switch target aggregates again (see
Deutsche Bundesbank [1995b, July, p. 28)).
The Bundesbank has repeatedly described itself as "fortunate" because financial
relationships have been more stable in Germany than in other major economies that have
tried monetary aggregate targeting. It has attributed this successful experience to the selfdescribed earlier deregulation of financial markets in Germany and the lack of inflationary
or regulatory inducement for financial firms to pursue innovations. The targets continue as
a structured framework by which the Bundesbank can regularly explain its monetary
policy, even as the targets go unmet for periods of several years)4
In the December 1996 Monthly Report, the Bundesbank announced that it would set
a target of 5 percent annualized growth in M3 in both 1997 and 1998. This is the first
time since Germany adopted monetary targeting in 1975 that ii has announced a multiyear
monetary target. The explicit reason given for the multiyear target is to allow German
monetary policy flexibility to respond to expected volatility in the currency markets in the
run-up to European Monetary Union (EMU) in 1999, which would make these the last
German monetary targets. Clearly, domestic price stability is balanced with other goals for
the next two years and beyond, and flexibility, when viewed as publicly justifiable, is
valued. Moreover, given the lags between movements in German monetary policy and their
effects upon output and inflation, it is clear that the only variables that the Bundesbank can
reasonably hope to influence significantly prior to EMU in 1999 are the evolving Exchange
Rate Mechanism (ERM) parities.

26

The target range for M3 growth in 1997 will be 3.5 to 6.5 percent; the target range
for 1998 will be announced at the end of 1997, apparently in response to the difference
between actual M3 growth in 1997 and what is needed to achieve the 5 percent average.
Bundesbank President Hans Tietmeyer indicated at the news conference announcing the

new targets that the rate of annualized M3 growth in 1997-98 may be computed against
the fourth quarter of 1995 rather than of 1996, because "comparison with the last quarter
of 1996 can be a distortion." In 1996, M3 growth did exceed the Bundesbank's target
range of 4 to 7 percent, with much of the difference being attributed to movements in narrow
money in the last quarter as private households participated in the oversubscribed purchase
of newly issued Deutsche Telecom stock. It is important to note as well, however, that 1996
inflation was at its lowest level in Germany since the adoption of monetary targets
(1.4 percent growth in CPfl—and that the Bundesbank cut all three of its instrument interest
rates to historical nominal lows—even as M3 growth exceeded the stated target.
The endgame nature of the current German monetary situation illustrates a point
that is relevant for all inflation targeters with a fixed term for their targeting regime, a
point that has not been relevant for Germany until now. When the end of the targeting
regime is tied to a specific event—such as an election or a treaty commitment—it is not
clear how much discipline the target imposes as that time approaches. A central bank
could be less strict about target adherence in the early years of the period, making the
claim that it will make up for temporary overshootings later. Yet, when this later time
arrives, the commitment to return the targeted variable to a level required under the
targeting regime will in effect predetermine the path of policy. The central bank is then
unable to respond to economic events as they unfold unless it abandons the target.
In addition, the central bank may not be highly accountable for its monetary policy
if the targeting regime is unlikely to be kept in place. If the central bank cannot be held
accountable, then how can its target commitment be fully credible? This is not to suggest by
any means that the Bundesbank will go "soft" on inflation in the run-up to EMU, but rather
that it is best if target time horizons can be credibly extended before their expiration. As
we will see in the case studies for both Canada and the United Kingdom, there was a need
to reassure the public that targets would be maintained past election dates (and changes
of political power).
KEY LESSONS FROM GERMANY'S EXPERIENCE

Germany's twenty years of experience with monetary targeting suggests two main
lessons that are applicable to any targeting regime in which an inflation goal plays a
prominent role. First, a targeting regime can be quite successful in restraining inflation
even when the regime is flexible, allowing both significant overshootings and
undershootings of the target in response to other short-run considerations. Indeed, German
monetary targeting, although successful in keeping inflation low, must be seen as a significant

departure from a rigid policy rule in which substantial target misses would not be tolerated.
27

Second, a key element of a successful targeting regime is a strong commitment to
transparency. The target not only increases transparency by itself, but also serves as a
vehicle to communicate often and clearly with the public and to promote an
understanding of what the central bank is trying to achieve. We shall see that these key
elements of a successful targeting regime—flexibility and transparency—have been present
not only in the German case, but also in successful inflation-targeting regimes in other
countries.

28

Part IV

New Zealand

New Zealand was the first country to adopt formal inflation targeting. In discussing its
experience, we stress the following design choices and themes:

• Inflation targeting in New Zealand followed legislation that mandated a Policy Targets

Agreement (PTA) between the elected government and the newly independent
central bank, which resulted in a jointly decided numerical target for inflation.
• Inflation targeting was adopted only after a successful disinflation had largely taken
place.

• Rather than using the headline consumer price index (CPI), the central bank uses a
core-type price index to construct the inflation target variable; the variable
excludes not only energy and commodity prices, but also, in particular, the effects
of consumer interest rates as well as other prices on an ad hoc basis.
• The same entity that is accountable for achieving the inflation target, the Reserve Bank
of New Zealand, also defines and measures the target variable when "significant" firstround impacts from terms-of-trade movements, government charges, and indirect
taxes arise. The ultimate long-run target variable of CPI inflation, however, is
compiled by a separate agency, Statistics New Zealand.

• Although New Zealand's inflation-targeting regime is the most rigid of the inflationtargeting regimes discussed in this study, it still allows for considerable flexibility: as
in Germany, the central bank responds to developments in variables other than
inflation, such as real output growth.
• Accountability of the central bank is a key feature of the inflation-targeting regime;
the Governor of the central bank is subject to possible dismissal by the government if
the target is breached.

• The inflation target is stated as a range, rather than as a point target—with the
midpoint of this range above zero.—.-again suggesting, as in the German case, that the
long-term goal of price stability is defined as a measured inflation rate above zero.
• Strict adherence to the narrowness of the inflation target range and the one-year time

horizon of the target has resulted in two related problems: 1) a control problem—
that is, the difficulty in keeping inflation within very narrow target ranges—and 2) an
instrument instability problem—that is, wider swings in the policy instruments, interest
rates, and exchange rates than might have been desirable.
THE ADOPTION OF INFLATION TARGETS
The present framework for the conduct of monetary policy in New Zealand is explained

by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989. The Act was introduced into
Parliament by the government on May 4, 1989, was passed by Parliament on December 15,
and took effect on February 1, 1990. It assigns to the Reserve Bank the statutory objective "to
formulate and implement monetary policy directed to the economic objective of achieving

and maintaining stability in the general level of prices" (Section 8))

29

Although inflation targeting was the institutional means chosen to implement the
Reserve Bank's commitment to price stability, the Act only put into the statute the need for
a visible nominal anchor. Section 9 of the Act requires the Minister of Finance and the

Governor of the Reserve Bank to negotiate and make public a Policy Targets
Agreement, setting out "specific targets by which monetary policy performance, in relation
to its statutory objective, can be assessed during the period of the Governor's term" (Lloyd

1992, p. 211). The first VIA, signed by the Minister of Finance and the Governor on

March 2, 1990, specified numerical targets for inflation and the dates by which they had
to be reached.
The passage of the Act and the establishment of numerical inflation targets have
been the result of a slow process that started in July 1984. The then newly elected Labour
Government embarked on a wide-ranging effort to reform the government's role in the
New Zealand economy, tackling at the same time fiscal, monetary, structural, and external
issues based on the view that these different aspects of economic policy were interrelated
and thus had to be mutually coherent (for an overview of the reform measures, see Brash
[1996bj). There was a general sense of crisis over New Zealand's economic policy at the time,
based on concerns that the country's performance had been significantly lagging that of other

members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and that

neither of the major party's old policies would work. As far as monetary performance went:

New Zealand experienced double digit inflation for most of the period since the
first oil shock. Cumulative inflation (on a CPI basis) between 1974 and 1988
(inclusive) was 480 per cent. A brief, but temporary, fall in inflation to below
5 per cent occurred in the early 1980s, but only as the result of a discortionary wage,
price, dividend and interest rate freeze. Throughout the period, monetary policy
faced multiple and varying objectives which were seldom clearly specified, and only
rarely consistent with achievement of inflation reduction. As a result of this
experience, inflation expectations were deeply entrenched in New Zealand society.
(Nicholl and Archer 1992, p. 118)
Although the Reserve Bank stated that "a firm monetary policy is seen as an essential
prerequisite for lower, more stable interest rates and inflation rates over the medium-term"
(Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1985a, p. 451), at the start of the general reform
movement there was no focused discussion of what exactly the objective(s) of monetary
policy in the new economic environment should be. Initially, there was some indication
of interest in intermediate targeting of monetary aggregates,2 but this topic was never
pursued and in recent years the Bank has stressed that no useful link exists between these
aggregates and inflation.

At the time of the signing of the first PTA in March 1990, the Reserve Bank of
New Zealand, backed by the Labour Government (which had been reelected in August
1987), had succeeded in bringing underlying inflation down from almost 17 percent at the
beginning of 1985 to within the 5 percent range "although a number of one-off factors
meant that only limited progress [on disinflation) was made" during 1989 (Reserve Bank
30

of New Zealand 1990, p. 6). 'The increase in GST [the goods and services tax in July 1989)
pushed up the [headline) inflation rate and proved detrimental to inflation expectations.

The GST damage was . . . compounded by the impact of strong commodity prices'
(Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1990, p. 7). The decision to announce inflation targets
occurred after most of the disinflation had already taken place. As we will also see in
Canada, the announcement fortuitously was timed to cut off a rise in inflationary
expectations and the original target was easily met.
THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
Most of the operational aspects of New Zealand's inflation-targeting framework are

governed by the PTAs, since these agreements (and the targets they set) represent the only
legal implementation of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989. The challenge for
institutional designers in New Zealand was twofold: to determine, fIrst, how far institutional

change could take a very small natural-resource-based open economy to desired

macroeconomic outcomes, and second, how to maintain appropriate public understanding
of and support for counterinflationary policies after the initial reform impetus met with
difficult developments. In general, New Zealand has opted to build in legal and formal
means of introducing flexibility in its monetary framework. This choice of design opens
the possibility of frequently announced changes in monetary policy variables and time
horizons—with detailed legal accountability—albeit at some real cost in transparency to
the general public. Within the exercise of this flexibility, the Reserve Bank still has had
to balance the remaining constraints necessary for credibility with the realities of the world
economy.

From the start, the eventual goal of price stability was defined in practice as
achieving a rate of measured annual inflation of between 0 and 2 percent in the All Groups
(that is, headline) CPI. The target was always intended to be a true range, with both the
floor and ceiling to be taken seriously, but no special emphasis was placed on the midpoint.
For example, in September 1991, policy was explicitly eased to avoid undershooting the
range to encourage perceptions that the bands of the range were hard (Nicholl and Archer
1992, p. 124). Hitting the target remains an extremely ambicious goal because of the
narrowness of the range and its centering so close to zero measured inflation—conditions
that are costly to maintain in the face of external or commodity price shocks. The result has
been that the actual inflation rate has remained near the top of the range for much of the
time since the adoption of targets, with the public focus being on the 2 percent (ceiling)

target rather than the 1 percent midpoint (the intended target).
Unlike Switzerland, a similarly small open economy that chose not to adopt a target
range given the difficulties of controlling inflation exactly (especially so close to zero
measured), the Reserve Bank clearly did not want to admit the likelihood of control problems, at

31

least initially. As noted below, at the end of 1996 the band was widened, in part because the

Reserve Bank recognized these difficulties. As a beginning for discussion, the Bank uses the CPI

because it is the most widely known and the best understood index. . . The
above-zero rate of inflation specified reflects index number problems, the survey
methodology, and the difficulty of adjusting for new goods or for improvements in
quality. Effectively, a judgment has been made that 1 percent CPI inflation is
consistent with stability in the general level of prices." (Nicholl and Archer 1992,
p. 120)
.

The first PTA admitted that this headline CPI "is not an entirely suitable measure
of [the prices of goods and services currently consumed by households] since it also
incorporates prices and servicing costs of investment-related expenditures," most notably
prices of existing dwellings, but the Agreement concluded that "the CPI will, for practical

purposes, be the measure used in setting the targets" (Section 2). The most difficult
challenge for the Reserve Bank of New Zealand in communicating with the public about
the target definition has arisen from the inclusion of interest rates in the headline CPI, as
that is the main source of divergence from the target series. In the 'Underlying Inflation"
section of its August 1991 Monetary Policy Statement, the Bank stated that headline CPI "is
the basic yardstick against which the Bank should be assessed" (Reserve Bank of New
Zealand 1991, p. 17). It then stressed its emphasis in the recent past on controlling
"underlying inflation" and continued:
Unfortunately, because the nature of such shocks cannot be fully specified in
advance, and because the impact of shocks can often not be measured precisely, it is
not possible to specify a single, comprehensive definition of "underlying inflation."
To some extent, interpretation of the impact and significance of the shocks is a
matter of judgement, and hence requires clear explanations by the Bank to support
any numerical estimates. (Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1991, p. 19)
In practice, therefore, the Bank has developed a measure of underlying inflation that
it relies upon to exclude any of these shocks. (The first-round effect of interest rate changes on
prices is automatically excluded in a series published by Statistics New Zealand, while other
adjustments are left to the Bank.) Underlying inflation has been reported regularly
alongside headline inflation by the New Zealand press as well as by the Reserve Bank, and
there has been little confusion as the public has been educated over time (even as the two series

diverged by as much as 2 percent in later years and have occasionally moved in opposite

directions). This need to exclude items from the CPI series and then make sure the public
understands why this action is legitimate is a challenge that all inflation targeters face.
Even when a headline CPI series is used in inflation targeting, there is still a need to explain
why the central bank should not respond to some deviations from the target (for example,
identifiable temporary deviations from the trend such as hikes in the value-added tax).
It is useful to stress that this definition of underlying inflation has its advantages for

New Zealand as the classic example of a small open economy. Without the terms-of-trade
32

provision in the PTAs, for example, it is hard to see how monetary policy could limit
variation in inflation to a meaningfully narrow range without causing severe disruption
in real activity. Yet the judgmental aspect of this measure of inflation—that the Bank
decides whether a given shock has a "significant' impact on the price level—is also
potentially problematic. The most problematic aspect is that the Bank itself is in charge of
defining the measure of inflation that determines whether the Bank has been successful in
achieving the announced targets, an arrangement that undermines the seeming impartiality
of the mechanism meant to hold the Bank accountable for achieving price stability.4
Another consequence of the Bank's efforts to communicate clearly and usefully
about the distinction between headline and underlying inflation has to do with time
horizons. Since the underlying inflation measure is not defined as a continuous series, but
rather one with its composition changing at irregular intervals, this distinction adds to the
potential confusion. It is worth pointing out, moreover, that the timing of the PTAs
themselves—and therefore of the inflation target, however defined—is arbitrary, with the
first interval lasting only six months and the latest lasting indefinitely. In light of the shift
to open-ended targets, it is also worth noting that while the PTAs are not necessarily tied to
the electoral cycle—set to expire with a given parliamentary majority—neither are they
themselves statutorily insulated from such a cycle, and a new government could potentially
renegotiate with the Bank as desired. The realization of this possibility, which occurred
when the time horizon and range of the target were reset in December 1996, is discussed
below.

A final aspect of timing is that neirher the government nor the Bank has targeted
the price level rather than the rate of inflation; the decision makers are letting bygones in
earlier price-level rises be bygones. Either interpretation of price stability would have been
consistent with the original Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act, as pointed out by Bryant
(1996, p. 8). Since at the conclusion of the second PTA inflation had been within the
o to 2 percent range for one year, both the third and fourth PTAs required the Bank merely
to "formulate and implement monetary policy to ensure that price stability is maintained"
indefinitely.
In practice, each of the PTAs has included a list of shocks in response to which the Bank

is required to "generally react ... in a manner which prevents general inflationary pressures
emerging" (Section 3): that is, the PTAs have escape clauses to accommodate first-round
effects on prices but not to allow the passing on of these prices to a second round. These
shocks include:

• a movement in interest rates that causes a significant divergence between the
change in the CPI and the change in the CPI excluding the interest costs
component. This clause of the third VFA replaced the earlier provision for a significant
divergence between the CPI and a price index treating housing costs on an
internationally comparable basis;

• significant changes in the terms of trade arising from an increase or decrease in either
import or export prices;
33

• an increase or decrease in the rate of the goods and services tax (GST) or a significant
change in other indirect taxes;
• a crisis such as a natural disaster or a major disease-induced fall in livestock numbers
that is expected to have a significant impact on the price level; and

• a significant price-level impact arising from changes to government or local authority
levies.

The Bank has consistently excluded from its measure of underlying inflation the effect of

interest rate changes on mortgage and credit charges (relying on a series from Statistics
New Zealand). It has also excluded the direct effects of any changes in indirect taxes and
government and local authority levies when their impact on the CPI was judged to be
significant (defined as an impact of at least 0.25 percent in any twelve-month period). Of
course, this assessment of significance requires some decisions about modeling tax effects,
and the Reserve Bank has chosen only to respond to those tax changes that were clearly
driven by a policy decision.6 The natural disaster escape clause has so far not been invoked.

The terms-of-trade escape clause, however, has been applied in the discretionary manner
allowed for in the PTAs. Twice, in 1990-91 and in 1994, oil price changes were excluded

from the calculation of underlying inflation, while timber prices were excluded in 1993-94.
Caveats and escape clauses are meant to balance the Reserve Bank's inflation goal
with other goals, particularly real economic goals in the face of supply shocks:
(A) detailed examination of what has been written about the caveats makes clear,
the fundamental rationale for the caveats is that, in certain specified circumstances,
the Reserve Bank should be paying attention to consequences for variables such as
output and employment rather than concentrating singlemindedly on the inflation rate.
(Bryant 1996, p. 24)

There was an absence of multiple stated objectives for the Reserve Bank, with only price
stability listed in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989, and only supply shocks
admitted as a potential reason for deviation. There were five reasons given for this singleminded fbcus: 1) monetary policy affects inflation only in the long run, 2) because monetary
policy is only one instrument, it can deal with only one short-run goal at a time, 3) multiple

objectives allow policy to change, which lowers credibility and raises inflationary

expectations, 4) objectives partly undertaken by other government agencies if also
pursued by the Reserve Bank could compromise the Bank's autonomy, and 5) multiple
objectives reduce transparency and accountability since poor performance can then be
attributed to the pursuit of the other objective (see Lloyd [1992) for a representative
discussion). The explicit escape clauses were the only exception.
Whenever an inflation goal below current levels is to be achieved within a specified

time horizon, this path of disinflation implies a judgment about the acceptable costs for
achieving the lower inflation rate within the time frame. Because this choice affects the
well-being of the public, it is inherently apolitical decision. That is why, in the New
Zealand context, the choice was not left solely to the Reserve Bank. In this spirit, both the
34

first and second PTAs envisaged a gradual transition to price stability over the three years
following their signing and both called on the Bank to "publish a projected path for
inflation for each of the years until price stability is achieved' (Section 5b).
The initial Policy Targets Agreement signed in March 1990 called for achievement
of 0-2 percent inflation by December 1992 and maintenance of price stability
thereafter. Partly as a result of a view that the output and employment costs of the
speed of adjustment implicit in this time frame were too high, the new government
elected in October 1990 deferred the target date by one year.7 (Nicholl and Archer
1992, p. 120)
Clearly, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand under the 1989 Act was designed to
operate as a very rule-based central bank. Notice the contrast between the PTA framework
in New Zealand and that in Germany. Rather than seek an agreement with the government,
the Bundesbank, when necessary, takes responsibility for setting the path of disinflation on

its own, and then justifies that path directly to the general public.
In the time since the initial Policy Targets Agreement, the Reserve Bank has taken
great pains to emphasize that the link between the real economy and monetary policy still
exists in the short run, and that determining the speed of disinflation is the government's
choice (and not the Bank's).8 In the Reserve Bank's own words:
It should be emphasized, however, that the single price stability objective embodied
in the Act does not mean that monetary policy is divorced from consideration of the
real economy. At the technical level, the state of the real economy is an important
component of any assessment of the strength of inflationary pressures. More
importantly, inflation/real economy trade-offs may need to be made on occasion,
particularly in the context of a decision about the pace of disinflation. . . . The main
trade-offs are essentially political ones, and it is appropriate that they be made clearly
at the political level. The framework allows trade-oils in areas such as the pace of
disinflation, or the width of target inflation ranges, to be reflected in the PTA with
the Governor. The override provision can also be used, if required, to reflect a policy
trade-off.9 (Lloyd 1992, p. 210)
Also, the Reserve Bank admits that there is still a short-run objective of financial
stability, as all major central banks acknowledge.1° "The Bank now has effective

independence to implement monetary policy in pursuit of its statutory objective, without
limitations on the technique except that the choices made must 'have regard to the
efficiency and soundness of the financial system" (Nicholl and Archer 1992, p. 119). The
key point of this extended discussion of the true intent and functioning of the Bank's escape
clauses, time horizons for targets, and beliefs about the relationship of monetary policy to
goals other than price stability is to drive home the fact that even the Reserve Bank of New

Zealand—the most extreme of all the inflation-targeting countries in its use of formal
institutional constraints on monetary policy—is in operation not as constrained or as single-

minded in its pursuit of price stability as some would have it.11

35

Since target adoption, the Reserve Bank has never assigned intermediate target
status to any variable except the inflation target itself. It has consistently assigned low

weight to developments in monetary and credit aggregates, reiterating that, since the
beginning of the reforms in 1985, it is hard to establish any informative link between these
aggregates and inflation. Over the past six years, in its public statements, it has paid the
most attention to the trade-weighted exchange rate and the level and slope of the yield
curve as part of an information-inclusive strategy:
In building its forecasts of inflation pressures, the Bank has, over the last year or so,
taken increasing account of the role of interest rates. Over the years, a better sense has
emerged of the strength of the interest rate effect on demand, and hence inflation.
Short-term interest rate developments are now playing a greater role in the
implementation of policy between formal forecast reviews, alongside the prominent
role played by the exchange rate. (Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1995, p. 8)

This analysis of the yield curve emphasizes an interpretation of it as assessing
monetary policy's stance or effect, rather than as a way of backing out an implicit inflation
forecast. Inflation is chosen as the target just because it is the most practical nominal anchor
available to New Zealand at this time—there is no reason a PTA could not be set up around
another intermediate target.
The judgment to date has been that a target specified in terms of the final inflation

objective (suitably defined) is preferable to an intermediate monetary aggregate
target, mainly because empirical work had not been able to identify any particular

money aggregate which demonstrated a sufficiently close relationship with
nominal income growth and inflation. (Lloyd 1992, p. 213)
In June 1987, well before the announced target adoption, the Bank started to
conduct quarterly surveys of businesses' and households' expectations concerning a
number of economic variables, among them inflation, and has regularly reported on
developments in inflation expectations obtained from these as well as other surveys. Since
then, the Reserve Bank has invested a great deal of effort and interest in the survey, which
covers ten different macroeconomic variables and draws the majority of its respondents from
the financial and business sectors. Questions arid responses from the survey are published in the

Reserve Bank ofNewZea/andBu//etin (discussed below). Price uncertainty, the Bank's greatest
concern (rather than the point estimate of private sector inflation forecasts), is measured by

the standard deviation of directly observed price-related expectations (Fischer and Orr

1994, p.l62).
All of these inflation-related data items and forecasts are assembled for public
reading. Section 15 of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989 requires the Bank to
produce, at least every six months, a policy statement that reviews the monetary policy of
the previous six months and outlines how monetary policy is to be implemented over the
next six months consistent with the Bank's stated inflation objective. These semiannual
Monetary Policy Statements must be published and submitted to Parliament, and they
may be discussed by a parliamentary select committee.
36

They must review the implementation of monetary policy over the period since
the last Statement, and detail the policies and means by which monetary policy will
be directed towards price stability in the coming periods. The reasons for adopting
the specified policies must also be given. The annual report provides a vehicle for
accountability and monitoring of the Bank as a whole (not just in terms of monetary
policy). This is also tabled in Parliament. The Governor and/or Deputy Governors
are questioned by the Parliamentary Select Committee for Finance and Expenditure
on both the Monetary Policy Statements and the annual reports. (Lloyd 1992, p. 214)
As noted, the Reserve Bank publishes an Annual Report and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand

Bulletin with topical articles, reprinted speeches, and official statements. (Since the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989, articles in the Bulletin have for the most part been

attributed to their authors, encouraging more accountability and greater open discussion
rather than presenting Bank policy as dew ex machina.) However, one major limitation
remaining on the flow of information involves the collection and reporting of the various
inflation series on a quarterly rather than monthly basis; it is not clear whether this reflects
inherent data limitations in the New Zealand context or an intent to further smooth out
noisy shifts in the inflation rate (and potential reactions by the markets) beyond those
embodied in the 'underlying" series and the various explanations.
Despite the tendency to classify the Reserve Bank's legal independence as akin to
that of the Bundesbank or the Federal Reserve System, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand and
its Governor actSly face a much different situation. 'This is not independence as the
Bundesbank would understand it, since the target is to be set by the government and the
Bank is responsible to the government for achieving it. The Bank is an agent, not a
principal" (Easton 1994, p. 86). Put differently, while the two central banks share a similar
goal, similarly defined, the Bundesbank's position is consistent with it being a trusted (and
only informally or voluntarily accountable) institution. However, the structure of the Reserve
Bank of New Zealand is consistent with its being an agency of the government held
regularly to account. This is not a criticism of the Reserve Bank, either by observers or by

the original legislators.

The New Zealand reforms were motivated partly by orthodox economics and the
desire to apply its precepts to government. However, they were also influenced
by the political "New Right," which, on philosophical grounds, sought a smaller
role for the public sector than perhaps could be justified from conventional
economic theory alone. (Easton 1994, p. 78)
In addition, tighter constraints may have been necessary because of the past poor
performance of New Zealand's monetary policy and the weaker public support for low

inflation. The upshot for inflation targeting in New Zealand is that there is very little
exercise of short-mn discretion except as allowed by the caveats in the PTAs; moreover, that

limited discretion must be accompanied by formal cx post communications with the
government. Accordingly, although these statements are made public in the Monetary Policy

37

Statements, and in an active communication program beyond the Statements as pursued by

the Bank, in New Zealand the burden of explanation falls less upon direct, transparent
communications with the public than it does in countries where discretion is less
constrained. This means that government support, rather than the power of the Reserve
Banks explanations to the public, is the source of flexibility.
NEW ZEALAND MONETARY POLICY UNDER INFLATION TARGETING
This section summarizes the main events in New Zealand's monetary policy in the 1990s.
It is based on the Bank's Monetary Policy Statements as well as on OECD Economic Reports and

various newspaper reports.12 Charts 5-8 (pp. 99-100), which track the paths of
inflation, interest rates, the nominal effective exchange rate (henceforth the exchange rate),
GDP growth, and unemployment in New Zealand both before and after inflation targeting,
suggest that the period since New Zealand's adoption of inflation targets can be usefully

divided into three episodes.
The first, from target adoption in March 1990 to March 1992, is characterized by
inflation thlling to within the 0 to 2 percent range, initially high interest rates (which later fell

rapidly), a gradual decline in the exchange rate, negative GDP growth, and rising
unemployment. During the second episode, from the second quarter of 1992 through the
first quarter of 1994, inflation fluctuated within the upper half of the 0 to 2 percent range,
interest rates continued to fall, the trend in the exchange rate was reversed, GDP growth
rose sharply, and unemployment declined at a moderate pace. The third episode spans the
last three years, when the Reserve Bank faced its greatest challenges since target adoption,
and draws most of our attention. This situation since the second quarter of 1994 has been
one of rising inflation and interest rates, continued appreciation of the exchange rate,
sustained high GDP growth rates, and rapidly falling unemployment. During this episode,
the inflation target was breached twice briefly, and was in fact reset as a result of an election.

The first episode begins with the initial Policy Targets Agreement, signed on
March 2, 1990, stipulating that price stability, defined as annual inflation within the 0 to
2 percent range, was to be achieved by the year ending December 1992, and that each
Monetary Policy Statement released by the Bank should contain a projected path for inflation

over the following five years. The first Monetary Policy Statement, released in April 1990,
specified that a 3 to 5 percent target range for inflation be reached by December 1990, a
1.5 to 3.5 percent range by December 1991, and a 0 to 2 percent range by December 1992
and thereafter. At this time, the Bank expected the economy to continue its gradual

recovery during 1990 from the 1988 recession. The December 1989 figure for underlying
inflation, excluding the effects of the 2.5 percent increase in the goods and services tax
(GST) effective July 1, 1989, was 5.3 percent, and the Bank saw no need for changes in
short-term interest rates at this point to achieve the first range in December 1990.
The two major surprises over the period through January 1991 covered by the
second and third Monetary Policy Statements were the oil price shock in the wake of the Iraqi
invasion of Kuwait and the continued weakness of the New Zealand economy. In August
38

1990, the Bank tightened monetary policy somewhat in response to what it called the 'fiscal
slippage" evident in the budget released in July. In October, it announced that the tatget

range for December 1990 should apply to CPI inflation excluding oil prices. The oil price
adjustments wete then used as a pedagogic occasion for the Bank to speci& that in the

future, targets would apply to underlying inflation. As it turned out, inflation including oil
prices over the year to December 1990 was 4.9 percent—inside the original target range—
but by then the target ranges had been changed.
Following its victory by a large margin in the general election on October 29, 1990,
the new majority National (right) Government signed a new VFA with the Bank on
December 19, extending the disinflation process by one year. As noted above, this extension

was due to the elected government's belief that rapid disinflation had already proved too
costly in real terms. This view was widely held, and the domestic financial sector was
extremely outspoken in characterizing the 0 to 2 percent inflation target range as a
dangerous "obsession."t3 Nevertheless, before the election both the Labour and the

National Parties (the two main parties in the then-majoritarian, rather than
proportional representation, parliamentary system) supported maintaining the inflation
targets at their original level.14 These developments illustrate the many ways in which an
inflation target can be adapted without a change in the primary target definition, with the
time horizon being a critical determinant (as explained above) of how tightly the target
constrains policy.

The February 1991 Monetaty Policy Statement specified the inflation target range at
2.5 to 4.5 percent by December 1991, 1.5 to 3.5 percent by December 1992, and 0 to
2 percent by December 1993 as the new path toward price stability. Already in mid-

November 1990, the Bank started to allow the ninety-day bank bill rate to fall
substantially in response to lower than expected inflationary pressure due to only modest
effects of the oil price increases, sluggish domestic growth, and what was seen as the new
government's support of the goal of price stability. (The bill rate is indicative of the

stance of the Reserve Bank's monetary policy, but unlike a true policy instrument it is
not directly controlled by the Bank.15) By mid-January 1991, the bill rate had fallen to
under 11.5 percent from 14.6 percent in August 1990.
By August 1991, the Bank had expressed its surprise at the speed at which inflation

was falling. Growth in wage settlements was low, unit labor costs were essentially

unchanged, the exchange rate was stable, and import prices were flat, reflecting the
recession in a number of major economies. Whereas in its February 1991 Monetaty Policy
Statement the Bank had expected headline inflation to be slightly above the midpoint of the

2.5 to 4.5 percent range by the next December, in the quarter to June it was already down
to 2.8 percent, and the Bank's forecast for the year up to December 1991 was 2 percent.

Likewise, underlying inflation (with mortgage interest rates, oil prices, and indirect taxes
and government charges removed) was down to 2.6 percent by June and was expected to fall

below 2.5 percent by the end of the year. The Bank stated that "this outcome will reflect the

39

firm policy stance maintained throughout [1990], and some imprecision in the process of
controlling inflation" (Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1991, p.43).
By late September, the Bank started to ease monetary policy sharply 'when it
became clear that, in the absence of this action, underlying inflation for 1992 was likely to
fall below the 1.5 to 3.5% indicative range" (Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1992a,
pp. 5-6). In order to maintain the floor on the range as part of the explicit commitment
(without seeming to be motivated by any apparent fears of deflation), the Reserve Bank
allowed the ninety-day bank bill rate to fall to 8.8 percent over the next three months and
the exchange rate to depreciate sharply. Already by October, the New Zealand dollar
was at its lowest level against the currencies of its trading partners in five years, but the
Bank and the Prime Minister explained to the public that the depreciation would not
imperil the achievement of future inflation targets because of the forecast and the nature
of the depreciation.!6 In December 1991, headline and underlying inflation were down to
1 percent and 1.7 percent, respectively, roughly 1 percent below the forecasts from August.
"The contraction in the domestic economy (which itself was more marked than anticipated)
impacted on inflationary pressures to a greater extent than had been expected" (Reserve
Bank of New Zealand 1992a, p. 10). Also, world prices had been lower and the exchange
rate held firm for longer than had been expected. Mostly as a result of the exchange rate
depreciation, the Bank expected underlying inflation to peak at around 3 percent by early
1993 and then to fall back to 1.2 percent by the end of that year.
The June 1992 Monetary Policy Statement heralds the beginning of the second

episode, stating that the Bank is now focusing on ensuring that price stability is
consolidated, rather than on still trying to achieve significant reductions in inflation" (Reserve

Bank of New Zealand 1992b, p. 13). In the year from March 1991 to March 1992, headline
and underlying inflation had fallen to 0.8 percent and 1.3 percent, respectively. The domestic
economy had entered the recovery in recent months and the Bank therefore saw that its task
now was to maintain price stability in an environment of moderate growth. The continued
favorable outlook for inflation and the reduction in inflation expectations, as documented
by the Bank's surveys, had allowed the Bank to accommodate some further easing, with
the ninety-day bank bill rate falling to 6.6 percent. The Bank's forecasts for underlying
inflation for the end of 1992 and for 1993 were now at 2 percent and 1 percent, respectively,
reflecting primarily downward revisions in expected unit labor costs and import prices. The
turning point in the exchange rate, in January 1993, was foreshadowed by the Bank's
assessment that "over the longer run ... if the inflation rates of our trading partners .
remain higher than that in New Zealand, some appreciation of the nominal exchange rate
would be entirely consistent with the maintenance of price stability" (Reserve Bank of New

Zealand 1992b, p. 35)17
Some unrest in the currency market following the release of the December 1992
Monetary Policy Statement prompted a moderate tightening action by the Bank, reflected in
a rise in the ninety-day bank bill rate from 6.4 percent to 7.8 percent. Apart from this
brief incident, the period from mid-1992 until the end of 1993 is best described by the

40

absence of any challenges to monetary policy. The domestic economy continued its recovery

without any notable inflationary pressures appearing. The ninety-day bank bill rate fell
below 5 percent in December 1993. Private sector inflation expectations remained by and
large unchanged, and the Bank's inflation forecasts one and two years ahead remained

comfortably inside the 0 to 2 percent range. Donald Brash had been reappointed Governor of

the Reserve Bank on December 16, 1992, reflecting the Reserve Bank's perceived strength,
while the National Party barely survived the next election, holding on to a one-seat
majority in Parliament. At the end of 1992, a new PTA was signed between the Bank and
the National Party, specifying that the Reserve Bank must maintain underlying CPJ within
the already achieved 0 to 2 percent range.

As the most recent period in New Zealand monetary policy began, continuing
domestic expansion and appreciation of the exchange rate shifted the risks of future
inflation from external to domestic sources. With hindsight, it is clear that inflationary
pressures started to develop in early 1994. In December 1993, the Bank noticed indications
that the recovery might be stronger than anticipated, but still considered it "premature"
to tighten policy. Its forecast of underlying inflation by the end of 1994 and 1995 was at
0.8 percent and 1.8 percent, respectively. One recurring topic covered in the Monetary
Policy Statements during the period since early 1994 is the Bank's uncertainty about the level

of growth that the New Zealand economy could sustain without creating inflation. The
structural reforms initiated since 1985, primarily the liberalization and opening of
markets to international competition and institutional changes in the wage-setting
process, were presumed to have made it more difficult for price and wage inflation to
develop. Combined with an assumed increase in the credibility of the monetary policy
framework, the reforms could have allowed higher growth rates to be sustained without
igniting inflation than was the case during previous business cycles. Forecasting the actual
size of these effects proved to be difficult.
Inline with the seeming thrust of these effects, the average ninety-day bank bill
rate dropped from 5.5 percent in the December 1993 quarter to 4.9 percent in the March
1994 quarter, even as it became clear that GDP had grown 5 percent during 1993. Over the
second quarter of 1994, monetary policy started to respond to the unexpected strength of the
economy, and the average ninety-day bank bill rate rose to 6.2 percent through June. GDP
was growing at a rate of 6 percent per year with all sectors displaying rapid expansion, most
notably the construction sector. Capacity utilization had been on an upward path since late
1991, despite strong investment over the preceding years, and employment had grown at
an annual rate of 4 percent since the beginning of the year. By midyear 1994, private sector
economists began to worry that a breach of the target range by headline CPI might give
rise to increasing inflation expectations by the public, even if underlying CPI inflation
remained on target. From June to December, the bill rate rose from 5.5 percent to
9.5 percent. As a result, the yield curve turned negatively sloped again. The exchange
rate had appreciated by 4.5 percent over 1994.
41

At this point, the Bank's assessment was that the economic upturn may have
peaked, and that growth may begin to moderate over the coming year" (Reserve Bank of
New Zealand 1995). However, its forecast of underlying inflation over the next two
years came very close to the 2 percent upper bound, with underlying inflation expected to
stay around 1.8 percent over all of 1995 and headline inflation peaking at 4.2 percent in the
second quarter of 1995, mainly as a consequence of rising mortgage rates. A number of private

fbrecasts disagreed with the Bank's, predicting a target breach in mid-1995. Finance

Minister William Birch found it necessary to respond to press questions about whether
Governor Brash would in fact be dismissed if the target were breached. His response,
unsurprisingly, was that the Reserve Bank's forecasts did not offer any grounds for believing
that the target would be breached.18
The Bank's forecast for both GDP growth and inflation in 1995 proved to have been
too low. In May, the Reserve Bank revised its forecast to predict that underlying inflation
would exceed the 2 percent target ceiling in the second quarter of 1995. But "Mr. Brash
said the Bank remained confident the underlying inflation rate would fall back during the
third quarter of this year, and therefore planned to take no action on a 'temporary' breach"
(Tait 1995). Governor Brash made it clear that the overshooting would not be reversed so

long as there was no trend behind it, but that he did not anticipate expectations to
respond unduly to a "temporary" deviation. This episode illustrates, however, that the
government's view of the inflation-targeting framework in New Zealand consciously
denies the framework's consistency with an "averaging' approach (why else would the
government make an immediate request for the explanation of a 0.2 percent target breach?).
This rigidity, given the inevitability of target breaches due to policy uncertainty, especially
for a narrow target, is problematic.
Although during the second and third quarters of 1995 there were some signs of a
slowdown in economic activity, by the end of the year the outlook had become more mixed,

with some indication that GDP growth would pick up again, leading the Bank to
forecast GDP growth of 1.5 percent in the year to March 1996 and 3 percent in the
year to March 1997. More important, from the Bank's point of view, measured underlying
inflation did in fact rise above the 0 to 2 percent range to peak at 2.2 percent in the second
quarter, with headline inflation tising to 4.6 percent (although both remained below the
outer bounds of private sector forecasts).
Thereafter, headline inflation fell rapidly, as the rise in mortgage rates stemming

from the monetary tightening during 1994 stopped having an effect on the CPI calculation
(an effect that was excluded from the definition of underlying inflation). Underlying
inflation, by contrast, fell to only 2 percent in the year to September 1995, and although in
June 1994 the Bank still had expected underlying inflation to return to 1.2 percent by June
1996, its December 1995 forecast for the year to September 1996 was 1.7 percent. A major
factor behind the increase in underlying inflation was the persistent construction boom,
particularly in the Auckland area, in which construction costs increased by 11.8 percent
over the year to March 1995.

42

This concentration of inflationary pressures in the nontraded sector made the Bank's

monetary policy less effective in slowing prices than past experience indicated because the
exchange rate channel of monetary transmission would have little impact on this sector of

the economy. As a result, keeping inflation within the tight target range required a sharp
rise in nominal interest rates (to more than 9 percent) and a sharp appreciation of the New
Zealand dollar. The required movements of interest and exchange rates can be characterized
as the result of a very small economy running an independent monetary policy when its
economic cycle is out of phase with the major world economies. In addition, these
movements can be a potential source of instrument instability, with resulting economic
dislocations.19 Nevertheless, the key accomplishment that New Zealand observers saw was

that the country had, for the first time in decades, been through a business cycle upswing
of strong growth without a balance-of-payments or inflation crisis at the end of it.

Govetnor Brash did take "full responsibility' for the Bank's not having acted sooner

to stem inflationary pressures, thereby allowing the target to be breached. Citing the
temporary" nature of the breach, however, he said that he would not resign, and Finance
Minister Birch backed him (Hall 1995). Clearly, the dismissal of the Reserve Bank
Governor for breach of the target is not automatic, either in design or in practice. Rather,
dismissal is left to the judgment of the Board and the Finance Minister. However, from the
point of view of an "optimal central banking contract"—as many have characterized the
New Zealand framework—Governor Brash was not penalized for exceeding the specific
number set in the contract.

By October 1995, inflation had subsided, but Governor Brash was sufficiently
chastened by the experience to suggest that he would rather see the Bank have an inflation
target in which the goal was in the center of the range, given the difficulties of forecasting.
'You don't have any room for being wrong at a rate of 1.8 to 1.9 percent" (Montagnon
1995). The gap between how finely it is possible for the Reserve Bank to control inflation and

the narrow range to which the Reserve Bank was committed became the main theme for the

next year. The target breach illustrated the potential for instrument instability, in which the
policy instruments need to undergo wide swings in order to achieve inflation targets narrower
than a small economy's monetary policy can consistently provide.

Since the inflation target goal required of the Bank results from the PTA with the
elected government—and the response (that is, whether or not to dismiss the Governor) to
target breaches also depends upon the government's support—monetary policy became a
highly visible political issue in the run-up to the October 1996 elections. The primary
debate centered on whether the target range should be widened, although some minor parties
considered altering the goal of monetary policy from 1 percent measured inflation. In

December 1995, the Reserve Bank tightened policy again. Most observers characterized
this as a reaction to tax cuts announced by the National Party meant to take effect right

before the elections nine months later; Finance Minister Birch publicly denied this
interpretation, stating that the size and nature of the tax cuts had been discussed with the

43

Reserve Bank before being put through Parliament (Birch 1996). In any event, the issue in the

popular mind had moved from one of low inflation to one of high real interest rates. By
February 1996, Governor Brash felt it necessary to open a speech to the Auckland
Manufacturers' Association with the following remarks:
Over recent weeks there have been a number of media reports of people calling for
the abolition of the Reserve Bank, or the repeal of the Reserve Bank Act, with the
claim that the Bank is an anachronism in New Zealand's free-market economy, that
its operations result in New Zealanders having to pay interest rates which are
among the highest in the world in real terms, and that these interest rates are
pushing up the exchange rate to the huge detriment of exporters and those
competing with imports. There are variations around this theme, depending upon
who is mounting the case, but I think that I accurately reflect the general case.
(Brash 1996b)

While Governor Brash's policies had contained trend inflation sufficiently to justify the
government's support, the differential effects of tight money on traded and nontraded goods
exacerbated the public political fallout of having to maintain high interest rates to achieve
the required tight control. Simply meeting the contract was not enough when the contract
itself came under fire, and even though rewriting the contract was the politicians'
responsibility and not the Bank's, the Bank began to suffer the consequences.
On April 19, 1996, the Board of the Reserve Bank sent a letter to Finance Minister
Birch. It had become clear that the target ceiling would be breached again by midyear, that
headline inflation would rise while underlying inflation would only temporarily rise again,
and that the issue of dismissing the Governor would have to be dealt with once more, even
though again no one felt that policy was too loose or that inflation expectations were
slipping. However, the fact that the Reserve Bank was running into a control problem for the
second time in a year pointed out the difficulties of the third PTA. The Board's letter supported
Governor Brash's performance—carefully basing the argument mostly on the trend of
underlying inflation—and recommended that he continue in his position.
In May, however, the New Zealand First Party—a populist party likely to become a
coalition member for the first time in the November elections once multimember
proportional representation had replaced majoritarian elections20—advocated the addition
of unemployment and growth goals for monetary policy. Between the upcoming likelihood
of an inflation blip and the political uncertainty being tied to monetary policy, long-term
bond yields rose, and the spread between ten-year bond rates in New Zealand and the
United States reached 200 basis points, the highest level since 1992. The Labour Party
made a proposal of its own to widen the band to-i to 3 percent inflation.
In June 1996, the Reserve Bank reported that underlying inflation did in fact
breach the target ceiling of 2 percent in the first quarter, and it forecast that underlying

inflation would reach 2.6 percent in the third quarter. When historically high real interest
rates appeared to be insufficient to maintain inflation within the target range

consistently, the feasibility of the target range was questioned more widely. Private
44

sector economists began to join the opposition parties in advocating a widening of the
target range, predicting that inflation would remain above 2 percent through March 1997.
Of course, the Reserve Bank, among others, feared that a widening of the range might be
interpreted as a weakening of anti-inflationary resolve and would have harmful effects on
credibility and inflation expectations; as noted above, however, even Governor Brash had
come to realize that the control problems of a 0 to 2 percent target range were too great for
monetary policy in the New Zealand economy.

Dr. Brash acknowledged that it would be tempting to say that the 0 to 2 percent
I don't think it is selftarget range was both too low and too narrow. But
evident at all that a wider target would help the real economy," Dr. Brash said. "On
the contrary there are some real risks in doing that." The dangers were that
widening the range would itself raise inflationary expectations, and that the Reserve
bank itself would be slower to react to inflationary pressures. The width of the target
band is only one of the features of the present monetary policy framework to be
questioned of late. (Fallow 1996)
Only successful targeters of long standing, like Germany and Switzerland, appeared
to be able to explain frequent target range misses without changing their ranges. Given the
starting premises of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989 and its inflation-

targeting framework, the need to control inflation tightly every quarter (or to formally
justify the Governor's retaining his position) when New Zealand's monetary policy could
only do so much, created pressure for a more activist monetary policy than was ever
originally intended. Jn particular, the interaction between domestic interest rates oriented
toward fighting inflation and the exchange rate harmed the competitiveness of export
sectors of the economy.
On October 12, 1996, New Zealand held its first mixed-member proportional
representation elections for national Parliament; the outcome was (as expected) indecisive,
with no one party getting more than 50 percent of the vote. The New Zealand First Party
clearly held the balance in making a coalition, negotiating with both the Labour and
National Parties. On October 18, National Party (and caretaker) Finance Minister Birch
publicly indicated that the inflation target (its width, its average level) was on the table
in negotiations with the New Zealand First Party. The October 16 data release showed
underlying inflation remaining above target at 2.3 percent (headline inflation was
2.4 percent), but below some private forecasts that were as high as 2.7 percent. In the
words of one New Zealand business columnist watching the negotiations, "the message:
despite being generally successful,] present Reserve Bank inflation targets are not credible.
They could be changed at any time, depending on the whims of whoever wants most to
drive about in a ministerial LTD. We are back to politicized monetary policy" (Coote 1996).

Meanwhile, the Bank found itself on the horns of its ongoing dilemma. The New
Zealand dollar had risen to an eight-year high against the yen and the U.S. dollar as capital
flowed back into New Zealand after the election. The Bank again was confronted with
difficult choices. Despite the above-target contemporaneous inflation rate and the need to
45

rein in inflationary pressures on the nontraded goods side—and because of the medium-

term trend of underlying inflation and the highly unfavorable circumstances for the traded
goods sectot—there was good reason not to raise interest rates krther. "Unfortunately, in
order to keep overall monetary conditions consistent with maintaining price stability, it
appears we have to accept rather less interest rate pressure than might be ideal, and rather

more exchange pressure than might be ideal,' stated the Bank on October24 (Hall 1996a).
In other words, the Bank was admitting that its control problem of hitting the required
narrow target range forced it into short-run policy trade-offs that it did not want, given the

political constraints of the tight target.
Finally, on Decembet 10, a parliamentary coalition between the National and
New Zealand First Parties was agreed to for a three-year term. Their first substantive
announcement was that the inflation target would be modified. The new Policy Targets
Agreement was signed by the National Party's Finance Minister Birch and Governor Brash
on December 10. The shift effectively underlines the inescapably political nature of a
central bank's accountability under any democratic system: that is, that the goal by which
the monetary framework is evaluated, and in the New Zealand case the exercise of the
option to dismiss the Governor for not attaining the goal, reflect the current elected
officials' preferences.
On December 18, Governor Brash characterized the widening of the inflation target

from 0 to 2 percent to 0 to 3 percent as a modest change: 'We previously aimed at inflation
of 1 per cent. It is now 1.5 per cent" (Hall 1996b). While Governot Brash admitted that
this would allow some easing, he stated that it was already justified by inflation forecasts:
"to the extent that increased inflationary expectations lead to higher prices, higher wage
settlements and so on, the new inflation target gives much less scope for an easing . . . than
might perhaps be assumed" (Tait 1996). To the extent possible, the Reserve Bank was

intent on limiting any damage to its credibility.
Jn an address given a month later (Brash 1997), Governor Brash summarized the
meaning of the new PTA, including the amended inflation target. He emphasized that
"price stability remains the single objective of monetary policy and constitutes the best way in

which the Reserve Bank can contribute to New Zealand's economic development." He noted

that the current state of knowledge in monetary economics left unresolved the debate
between those who advocate a "low, positive inflation" and those who argue for zero
inflation. The Governor continued,
"it is at this stage quite inappropriate to be dogmatic, and in my own view a target
which involves doing our utmost to keep measured inflation between 0 and 3 percent is

certainly consistent with the intention of the legislation within which monetary
policy is operated. . . . Indeed, irrespective of where the mid-point of the target
range should be, there may be some advantage in having a slightly wider inflation
target than the original 0 to 2 percent target. A number of observers have
suggested that a target with a width of only 2 percentage points requires an excessive
degree of activism on the part of the central bank. . . .The tension is between, on

46

the one hand, choosing a target range which effectively anchors inflation
expectations at a low level but which is so narrow that it provokes excessive policy
activism and risks loss of credibility by being frequently exceeded; and on the other,
a target range which does a less effective job of anchoring inflation expectations, but
which requires less policy activism and protects credibility by being rarely
breached. (Brash 1997)
KEY LESSONS FROM NEW ZEALAND'S EXPERIENCE

After close to seven years of inflation targeting, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's

experience provides several important lessons. First, it suggests that the challenge of
bringing down trend inflation and maintaining low inflation expectations is relatively easy
compared with that of tightly controlling the course of inflation within a narrow range,
especially for a small open economy. Furthermore, New Zealand's experience indicates
that strict adherence to a narrow inflation target range can lead to movements in policy
instruments that may be greater than the central bank would like and open the potential
for instrument instability should the pressures from these movements become too great.
In addition, the Reserve Bank has found that excessive restrictions on the exercise
of its discretion and the manner of its explanation of policy—even if in the name of
accountability—can create unnecessary instances in which credibility could be damaged
even when underlying trend inflation is contained. This is due not only to inflexibility, but
also to the Bank's focus on direct, formal accountability to the government rather than a
broader accountability to the general public through transparency.
These lessons about the operation of targeting frameworks do not negate the fact
that inflation targeting in New Zealand has been highly successful: this country, which
was prone to high and volatile inflation before the inflation-targeting regime was
implemented, has emerged from the experience as a low-inflation country with high
rates of economic growth.

47

Part V.

Canada

Canada adopted inflation targeting in 1991, one year after New Zealand. In examining its
experience, we stress the following themes:
• Inflation targeting in Canada was not the result of legislation. However, as in New
Zealand, the inflation target in Canada is jointly determined and announced by both
the government and the central bank.

• As in New Zealand, inflation targeting was adopted after substantial disinflationary
pressures were already evident.

• In Canada, there is a clear-cur separation between the entity that measures the
inflation variable to be targeted (Statistics Canada) and the entity that is accountable
for achieving the inflation target and assessing past performance (the Bank of Canada).
• The consumer price index (CPI) inflation rate has been chosen as the primary target
variable because of its "headline" quality, although a core inflation rate that excludes
energy and food prices and the effects of indirect taxes is also used and reported in
assessing whether the trend inflation rate is on track for the medium term.

• The Canadian inflation-targeting regime is quite flexible in practice, as are all the
regimes we study, with real output growth and fluctuations a consideration in the
conduct of monetary policy. Indeed, in Canada, the inflation target is viewed as a way
to help dampen cyclical fluctuations in economic activity.
• In Canada, as in New Zealand and even Germany, the chosen rate of convergence of
the medium-term inflation goal to the long-term goal has been quite gradual.
• The Canadian inflation target is stated as a range rather than a point target, often with
greater emphasis placed on the bands than on the midpoint.
• The midpoint of the inflation target range, 2 percent, is above zero, as in all the cases
we examine here.

• Although accountability is a central feature of the inflation-targeting regime in
Canada, the central bank is more accountable to the public in general than to the
government directly.
• A key and increasingly important feature of Canada's inflation-targeting regime is a
strong commitment to transparency and the communication of monetary policy
strategy to the public.
• As an adjunct to implementing the inflation-targeting regime, the central bank makes
use of a monetary conditions index (MCI), a weighted average of the exchange rate and
the short-term interest rate, as a short-run operating target.
THE ADOPTION OF INFLATION TARGETS
The adoption of inflation targeting in Canada on February 26, 1991, followed a three-year
campaign by the Bank of Canada to promote price stability as the long-term objective of
monetary policy. This campaign, beginning with then Governor John Crow's Hanson
48

Lecture at the University of Alberta in January 1988, "The Work of Canadian Monetary
Policy" (Crow 1988), had spelled out the reasons for the Bank of Canada's disinflationary
policy of the late 1980s and early 1990s. The campaign had not, however, spelled out the
practical policy implications of what price stability meant in terms of either inflation levels

or the time frame for reaching that goal (Thiessen 1995d; Freedman 1994a, 1995),

On February 26, 1991, formal targets through the end of 1995 "for reducing
inflation and establishing price stability in Canada" were announced. The announcement
was a joint statement by the Minister of Finance, Michael Wilson, of the ruling
Conservative Party, and the Governor of the Bank of Canada, John Crow. Publicity was
maximized by the timing of the announcement, which occurred on the day of the Canadian
government's release of its budget and underscored the government's support of the Bank's
commitment to the goal of price stability. The following month, the Bank released its
Annual Report, 1990, which featured remarks by Governor Crow on the appropriateness of
price stability as a goal for monetary policy and an article entitled "The Benefits of Price

Stability" (Bank of Canada 1991 a). The initiation of the new monetary policy
commitment to inflation targeting had been carefully planned to attract public attention
and to begin building public support.
Yet there had been no advance notice to the public of the policy shift to inflation
targeting by senior Bank of Canada officials. Even in the same Annual Report, 1990, a
one-paragraph mention of the announcement of inflation targets was tacked on the end of
Governor Crow's annual statement, with no mention of the adoption earlier in the piece.
Nor was there an obvious crisis prompting an abrupt shift in policy (such as a devaluation
and exit from a fixed exchange rate system or the sudden breakdown of a declared
intermediate target relationship). Governor Crow had been appointed to his position four
years earlier, and the Conservative Government had been reelected in late 1988, so a change
in policyrnakers also did not explain the shift in policy.
Before the announcement of specific inflation targets, the Bank's repeated declaration

of the price stability goal by itself appeared to have made little headway against the
"momentum" in inflation expectations that had built up (Thiessen 1991; Freedman 1994a).
In fact, in the "Background Note" released at the time of the adoption of the targets,
mention is made of the "unduly pessimistic" outlook for inflation in a number of quarters
(Bank of Canada 1991c, p. 11). Inflation targets were the tactic adopted to reduce sticky
expectations and to bring the stated goal of Canadian monetary policy to fruition.
February 1991, it turns out, was seen by the Bank of Canada as a useful opportunity
to formalize its commitment to price stability. On the positive side, year-over-year CPI

inflation had just dropped to 4.2 percent in the fourth quarter of 1990 (versus a high of
5.5 percent in early 1989), and "the pressures from excess demand that were pushing up
prices from 1987 through 1989 finally eased during 1990" (Thiessen 1991), with economic
growth at its cyclical trough. Because the Canadian economy had slowed—and, although not
realized at the time, had entered a deep recession in 1990—underlying disinflationary
pressures were already becoming apparent at the time the targets were introduced.

49

More important, on the negative side, large risk premiums were being built into
long-term Canadian interest rates because of rapidly growing government and external

debt, political uncertainty, and credibility problems for monetary policy following two
decades of inflation. Furthermore, a new goods and services tax (GST)—an indirect tax
similar to a value-added tax (VAT)—was to take effect at the start of 1991 with an
expected effect on the headline total CPI of 125 percent, and there were fears of further
oil price increases as well. A failure to keep the first-round effects of the indirect tax increase

from initiating a new wage-price spiral would only confirm the public's high inflation
expectations.
The current Governor of the Bank of Canada, Gordon Thiessen, characterized

February 1991 as period of public uncertainty, despite the prior declarations of the price
stability goal (Thiessen 1991, 1995d). Deputy Governor Charles Freedman (1994a) also
stated that one of the Bank of Canada's primary short-run concerns was to prevent an upward
spiral in inflation expectations in the face of these shocks. The Bank went further and seized
the opportunity to distinguish between the temporary shocks and the intended path of
inflation as an instructional precedent for its targeting framework. As the initial
announcement explained: "These targets are designed to provide a clear indication of the
downward path for inflation over the medium term" (Bank of Canada 1991b). To
underscore this intention, the Bank referred to them as "inflation-reduction targets," until

the target range stopped dropping in 1995. Of course, the targets chosen were thought to
be realistically attainable, the logic being that if declarations of the price stability goal were
not enough, failure to achieve the promised amount of progress toward that goal would
certainly be detrimental (Freedman 1995).
The Bank set the first target for twenty-two months after the announcement of
target adoption for the stated reason that six-to-eight-quarter lags in the effect of monetary
policy made any earlier target infeasible. Canada possibly went through a period of
significant inflation uncertainty as a result, and inflation undershot the target range until
early 1993. The targets did not appear believable to the public until later (Laubach and
Posen 1997b). In contrast, New Zealand's and the United Kingdom's target ranges took
effect immediately upon adoption, and these countries experienced little problem with
target misses until their recent cyclical upswings.
The Bank of Canada's intellectual basis for its inflation-targeting approach—and
for its goal of price stability, rather than just low inflation—was what could be termed a
sluggishness as well as an entrenched upward bias to inflation expectations. As articulated
by Governor Crow (1988) in his Hanson Lecture, "In my view, the notion of a high, yet
stable, rate of inflation is simply unrealistic." Offering the hypothetical example of a central
bank tolerating 4 percent inflation, the Governor asserted that a public that sees the
central bank as unwilling to reduce inflation from that level would view any shock that
moved inflation up (say to 5 percent) as unlikely to be reversed, and therefore likely to be
built into inflation expectations. Inflation expectations get an entrenched bias upward when

there is no nominal anchor to keep the goal of price stability in view.
50

The entrenched upward bias of these expectations is cited repeatedly as an empirical

reality of the Canadian economy.t For expectations to change, Governor Crow argued, the

central bank must demonstrate its willingness to pay the costs of disinflating: "But as lower
inflation is achieved, as people are less conditioned by fears of inflation, reducing inflation
and preventing its resurgence becomes less difficult' (Crow 1989).2 'While this belief
explains why the targets announced "provide [a path] for gradual but progressive reductions
of inflation until price stability is reached" (Bank of Canada 1991c, emphasis added), it
begs the question why for three years the Bank simply declared its commitment to price
stability without naming a nominal anchor. It is likely that the Bank was waiting until the

elected government was ready to support fully its commitment to price stability (see, for
example, Laidler and Robson [1993]).
It is also possible to ascribe to the Bank simply an extended decision-making
process that culminated in the opportunity to take advantage of the economic situation of
February 1991. The Hanson Lecture itself was ignored in the Annual Report, 1988, despite
eventually being cited repeatedly in Bank of Canada statements and followed up by "The
Benefits of Price Stability" in the Annual Report, 1990. An appreciation for the possibilities
of targeting seemed to emerge with an even greater lag—in 1989, Governor Crow stated
in a speech reprinted in the Bank of Canada Review, "In my experience, if[an inflation]
target is suggested it is almost invariably whatever the rate of inflation happens to be at

the time. Some target!" (Crow 1989, p. 22).
In any event, the decision to adopt inflation-reduction targets was made to
"buttress" the Bank of Canada's commitment to price stability and to resolve uncertainties
about it (Freedman 1994a). "The targets [were] not meant to signal a shift in monetary
policy. . . . All we [were) doing [was] making clear to the public the rate of progress in
reducing inflation that monetary policy [was] aiming for" (Thiessen 1991, p. 19). The Bank
of Canada did not suggest that the announcement of targets by itself would bring an
immediate payoff in terms of reduced inflation expectations; rather, it saw the benefits
accruing over a long time horizon. Achieving these targets over the medium term would
eventually strengthen public confidence in monetary policy, and inflation control would be

supported by the increased transparency and accountability that inflation targets brought to
the conduct of monetary policy.
THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
When announced in February 1991, the Canadian inflation-targeting scheme was a path for

reducing inflation defined by three commitments for inflation levels at later dates. (In
fact, as mentioned earlier, Bank of Canada officials originally referred to the targets as
"inflarion-reduction targets.") The first was for 3 percent year-over-year inflation (defined
as the change in the CPI) by the end of 1992, twenty-two months after adoption; the second
was for 2.5 percent inflation by the end of June 1994; and the third was for 2 percent
inflation eighteen months after that.
51

The Bank stated at the outset that price stability involved a rate of inflation below
2 percent: A good deal of work has already been done in Canada on what stability in the
broad level of prices means operationally. This work suggests a rate of increase in consumer
prices that is clearly below 2 per cent' (Bank of Canada 1991c). There was no mention,
however, of targeting zero-measured inflation or of a stable price level. The Bank wanted

to see further research before committing to a precise operational definition of price
stability. It indicated that at the end of 1995, the goal would be a rate of measured inflation
of 2 percent, but this rate was not to be consideted equivalent to price stability. From the

outset of targeting, the Bank made a number of statements to indicate that the correct
number for price stability would be defined at a later date, and that there would be further
reductions in the target until price stability was achieved. Later Bank studies would estimate
the positive-mean bias in inflation measurement of the Canadian CPJ to be at most

0.5 percent a year (Bank of Canada 1995, May, p. 4, footnote 1), so more than measurement
error must lie behind the Bank's belief in a greater-than-zero definition.
On the appointment of Governor Thiessen in December 1993, the new Liberal
Government and the Bank extended the I to 3 percent inflation target from the end of
1995 to the end of 1998. The setting of an operational definition of price stability was

again put off until more experience was gained about the performance of the economy at
low rates of inflation. The Bank specified that it was not treating the current targets as the
equivalent of price stability.

There were two reasons for the extension—(i) given that it has been a long time
since Canada has had such low rates of inflation, it would be helpful to have more
experience in operating under such conditions before an appropriate longer-term
objective is determined; (ii) some time is needed to enable Canadians to adjust to
the improved inflation outlook.4 (Freedman 1995)

The Bank attempted in its targets to orient its policies, and public expectations, to
forward-looking concerns for the medium term of one to three years, but accepted that
expectations and the structures that went with them would not be completely changed
(even after three or more years of targeting, and six years by the end of 1998).
The medium-term orientation also informed the Bank's choice of target series. The
rate of change in the CPI was chosen as the primary target rare of inflation because of its
"headline" quality, that is, it is the most commonly used and understood price measure in
Canada. In addition, the CPI had the perceived advantage of coming out monthly, with
infrequent delays and without revisions (one alternative, the GDP deflator, is ofren revised
for multiple-observation periods in Canada). Because of rhe inclusion of food and energy
prices in the CPI, however, the series is volatile; to avoid forced responses to short-run
blips, the Bank of Canada also uses and reports core CPI, which excludes food and energy,
asserting that core CPI and CPI inflation move together in the medium-to-long term.5
"How we will react [to a change in inflation) will depend on whether or not a change in
measured inflation is associated with a shift in the momentum, or underlying trend, of
inflation" (Thiessen 1994b, p. 81).
52

There is no fixed rule by which the Bank is held accountable for performance on

either CPI series over a specified time frame, but given the easy observability of these
measures, persistent deviations from the path set by the targets would be obvious.
Similarly, the Bank of Canada takes out the first-round effects of indirect taxes when
determining whether a current or future change in inflation exceeds the target range in a

manner that justifies a response.6 Even allowing for some slow adaptation of price
expectations, the targets' distinguishing first- and second-round price effects of shocks
are consistent with the Bank behaving in a preemptive manner against inflationary
impulses.

Deputy Governor Charles Freedman's discussion of price developments in 1994
illustrates how the Bank uses this combination of factors in assessing the situation:

In particular, although the 12 month rate of increase in the total CPI through much
of 1994 was virtually zero, the Bank focussed on the fact that the reduction in excise
taxes on cigarettes in early 1994 accounted for a decline of 1.3 per cent in the total
CPI. Operationally, therefore, the emphasis has been placed on the CPI excluding
food, energy and the effect of indirect taxes, which has been posting a rate of
increase between 1 1/2 and 1 3/4 percent. At mid-1994, the date of the second
milestone, the rate of increase of total CPI was at 0.0 percent while that of the CPI
excluding food, energy and the effect of indirect taxes was at 1.8 percent, near the
bottom of the band. (Freedman 1995, pp. 24-5)

The Bank of Canada makes a strong effort to communicate its reading of the
economy and the rationale for its decisions. In doing so, it explains the extent to which the

changes in the CPI reflect purely transitory factors or persistent inflationary pressures.
The Bank of Canada is very concerned about conveying this message clearly since its target
series, CPI inflation, can be sensitive to temporary factors.7
As initially announced, inflation would be permitted to range from 1 percent
above to 1 percent below each of these targets, and then to lie between 1 percent and
3 percent from 1995 on; but the objective to be targeted was the midpoint. In practice,
the Bank never aggressively sought to move inflation from the outer bands toward the
midpoints, even when actual inflation lingered at or below the target floor for an extended
period. Jn fact, "in the revised targets more emphasis is placed on the bands than on the
midpoints" (Freedman 1995). Explicitly, the target range is intended to allow for control
problems.8 While the Bank recognizes that a band of 2 percent width is indeed narrower
than what research has shown to be necessary to capture all the unavoidable variation
from unexpected sources, it also felt that too wide a band would send the wrong message
(Freedman 1994a).
In general, the belief was that the band would provide sufficient flexibility to deal

with supply shocks that were not already taken care of by exclusion of food, energy, and the
first-round effect of indirect taxes.9 No explicit escape clauses were set up for the Bank of
Canada to invoke when larger shocks arose; accommodation of supply shocks (beyond
that of referring to core CPI, rather than headline CPI, deviations from trend) was left to the
Bank's discretion.

53

It is important to note how much looser in spirit this target definition is than the
Reserve Bank of New Zealand's highly specified list of exceptions, which is dependent upon
elected government approval. In many ways, however, the Bank of Canada's definition is a
similar operational response to the same difficulties and shocks to which all small open
economies exporting a large amount of natural resources are subject. The definition of
target inflation in this manner has several implications. First, it commits monetary policy
in Canada to reversing shifts in the trend inflation rate, while allowing price-level shifts in
the face of supply shocks—it is not a framework consistent with price-level targeting.
Second, it grants the Bank of Canada the freedom to act in whatever way it can
transparently justify to the public with reference to the target bands; it does not
prespecifr when the Bank should deviate from target achievement.
Another aspect of the Bank of Canada's framework is that it commits monetary
policy to a somewhat countercyclical bent, in that the Bank must respond to aggregate
demand-driven price increases and decreases that would take inflation out of the target
range. While common to all inflation-targeting regimes that explicitly or implicitly
(in terms of reasonable deviation from a point target) put a floor on inflation goals, this
feature has become more prominent and explicit in the Canadian framework:'°
Some people fear that, by focusing monetary policy tightly on inflation control, the
monetary authorities may be neglecting economic activity and employment.
Nothing could be &rther from the truth. By keeping inflation within a target
range, monetary policy acts as a stabilizer for the economy. When weakening
demand threatens to pull inflation below the target range, it will be countered by
monetary easing. (Thiessen 1996d, p. 2)
The link between developments in the real economy and in prices is not denied by
the Bank of Canada despite the focus on inflation goals. Governor Thiessen, in fact, has
offered an explanation for inflation distinct from those relating solely to monetary factors:
Upward pressure on inflation comes about when excessive spending demands in the
economy, which are not adequately resisted by monetary policy, persistently exceed
the capacity of the economy to produce the goods and services that are being
sought. (Thiessen 1995d)

The trade-off between output and prices—even at times when increasing

counterinflationary credibility might be expected to reduce the cost of disinflation—
explains the gradual way the Bank moved from an initial expected inflation rate of
5 percent at the end of 1991 to a 2 percent target by the end of 1995. Freedman (1994a)
noted that a typical augmented Phillips curve equation was broadly able to track the
decline in inflation, and that this suggested that there was no need to resort to explanations
involving credibility and changes in expectations to explain the pace of disinflation.
However, despite the continued output gap, since that time inflation has not fallen further,
as these equations predict. One reason for this might be that the process of expectations
formation has changed; that is, that the Bank's target is now given substantial weight,

such that expectations have been quite firm at about 2 percent.
54

In any event, the Bank repeatedly holds out the hope in public statements that as
private individuals' and firms' expectations adapt, the cost and time necessary to achieve
and maintain inflation goals will drop." It is fair to ask, however, how long Canada (or any
country) must pursue credible disinflationary, and then counterinflationary, policies before
results can be expected. Clearly, in the case of Canada, more than four years of inflation

targeting, preceded by at least three years of tightening monetary conditions, were not
enough to induce these effects.
Accordingly, the Bank of Canada's justification for the pursuit of inflation targets,
and from there price stability, does not rest upon credibility arguments alone. "In other
words, our objective is price stability, but as a means to the end of good economic
performance rather than as an end in itself' (Thiessen 1994a, p. 85)12 Interestingly,
Governor Thiessen has gone on to extol the benefits of transparency in monetary policy—as
fostered by inflation targeting—as a worthwhile pursuit in its own right.
First, [the central bank) can try to reduce the uncertainty of the public and of
financial markets about its responses to the various shocks. It can do this by making
clear the longer-run goal of monetary policy, the shorter-term operational targets at
which it is aiming in taking policy actions, and its own interpretation of economic
developments. Moreover, by committing itself to a longer-term goal and sticking to
it, as well as by lessening uncertainty about its own responses to shocks, the central
bank may be able to lessen the effect of shocks on private sector behavior. (Thiessen
1995d, p.42)
No other targeting central bank has so explicitly made a virtue of transparency for
its benefit to the economy as well as its role in credibly reducing inflation, although all have
made efforts in this direction. Note that the benefits Thiessen lists in this quotation can stem
from any sustainable longer run goal of a central bank with a consistent operational
framework—neither price stability nor inflation is mentioned. In this context, it is only
logical to conclude that the Bank of Canada feels comfortable dealing with various
short-run challenges without fear of compromising its longer run goals.13
The view of inflation as largely determined by developments in aggregate demand
and supply cited above leads naturally to the wide range of information variables the Bank
considers when setting monetary policy. From 1982, when MI was dropped as the Bank of
Canada's intermediate target, until 1991, when inflation-reduction targets were announced,
the Bank had been actively searching for a substitute among the various broader monetary
and credit aggregates, although '[they had] not found the behavior of any one of them
sufficiently reliable to shoulder the burden of acting as a formal target for monetary policy"

(Crow 1990, p. 36). The move to targeting the goal (or its forecast) rather than an
intermediate variable clearly represented a significant paradigm shift. "In our view,
underlying inflation is affected primarily by the level of slack in the economy and by the
expected rate of inflation," stated Governor Thiessen (Thiessen 1995d, p. 49). Both slack
and expectations are factors that cannot be directly observed and that require many related
variables to assess. In practice, this has implied that:
55

the Bank of Canada has focussed closely on estimates of excess demand or supply (or
"gaps") in goods and labor markets as key inputs into the inflationary process. It
also follows closely such variables as the rate of expansion of money (especially the
broader aggregate M2 + .), the growth of credit, the rare of increase of total
.

,

spending and wage settlements as guides to policy action. (Freedman 1995)
The Bank's May 1995 Monetary Policy Report, setting the format for those that

followed, discusses product and labor markets, inflation expectations, commodity prices,
and the Canadian dollar exchange rate in the section "Factors at Work on Inflation."
Monetary aggregates are not mentioned until later in the report, as the last of "other
indicators" listed in the "Outlook" section. For measures of inflationary expectations, the
Bank considers results from the quarterly survey of the Conference Board of Canada, the
forecasts listed in Consensus Forecasts, and the differential between the returns on thirty-year
conventional and real bonds,14 but it does not conduct its own surveys.
As an adjunct to the direct discussion of the economic forecast and policy
decisions, the Bank of Canada has introduced the concept of a monetary conditions index
(MCI) as a short-run operational target.15 The change in the MCI is defined as the weighted
sum of changes in the ninety-day commercial paper interest rate and in the Group of Ten
trade-weighted Canadian dollar exchange rate, where the weights are three to one. The
three-to-one weighting of interest rate to exchange rate effects on the economy came out of
Bank estimates of the six-to- eight-quarter total effect of changes of each upon aggregate
demand. The MCI was arbitrarily based at 100 in January 1987, and then computed
backward and forward from that point; as a result, the Bank stresses that short-run changes
in the MCI are more meaningful than levels.
The fundamental message of the MCI is to remind the Bank and the public that
there are two monetary channels affecting aggregate demand in the open Canadian
economy at any time. The MCI is therefore a "short-run operational target ... most useful
over a one- to two-quarter horizon" (Bank of Canada 1996, November, p. 21). The MCI is
not a nominal anchor in itself, nor does it imply a commitment to intervene to alter
exchange rates: "Between quarterly staff projections, the MCI provides the Bank with a
continuous reminder that exchange rate changes must be considered when making
decisions about interest rate adjustments" (Bank of Canada 1996, November, p. 21).16
Underlining its tactical role in operations, the MCI is considered only briefly in the
published semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
The Bank of Canada's Annual Report, 1994 was a totally redesigned document

compared with the 1993 edition. The first item discussed under the heading of monetary
policy was the planned introduction of the Monetary Policy Report. As opposed to a densely
printed, very formal-looking document, the Annual Report, 1994 (and all those published
since) was printed in large type, with extensive use of white space and numerous pictures
and graphs. The document was consciously made more user-friendly in tone and
distribution as well as in format. As argued in the next section, this change may be seen as
part of the Bank's ongoing efforts at public outreach and education, goals that gained
56

greater attention when Gordon Thiessen succeeded Governor Crow. Another factor
in the new design may have been the switch in 1995 from "inflation-reduction" to
"inflation-control" targets, with the setting of a target inflation level to be maintained.17
By the Bank's own description, in its Annual Report, 1994:
The new Monetary Policy Report will be designed to bring increased transparency and
accountability to monetary policy. It will measure our performance in terms of the
Bank's targets for controlling inflation and will examine how current economic
circumstances and monetary conditions in Canada are likely to affect future
inflation. (Bank of Canada 1995a, p. 7)

Governor Thiessen also spoke directly to the reader in an informal manner:

Jn carrying out the responsibilities of the Bank, our objective is to promote the
economic and financial welfare of Canada. I hope this description of those activities
will increase the public's understanding of how the Bank has fulfilled its
responsibilities. Communicating what the Bank is up to and why is important if
we are going to maintain the confidence of Canadians. This year we have changed
the Bank's Annual Report. . . This new style of annual report is designed to
provide more information on what the Bank does, thereby providing a better
account of our actions. (Bank of Canada 1995a, p. 5)
This decision was a conscious effort to increase the transparency of policy for the
general public. At the time inflation targets were originally adopted, the Bank stated:

The Bank of Canada will be reporting regularly on progress relative to the inflationreduction targets and on its monetary policy actions in speeches, in the extracts
from the minutes of meetings of the Board of Directors of the Bank of Canada and
of course in the Bank of Canada's Annual Report to the Minister of Finance. In
addition, an analysis of inflation developments relative to the targets will be
published periodically in the Bank of Canada Revieu (Bank of Canada 1991c, p. 15)
The Review switched from monthly to quarterly publication in 1993, however, and the

experience of other inflation-targeting countries, particularly the United Kingdom,

brought home the utility of a separate publication in eliciting and focusing public
discussion. 18
The semiannual Monetary Policy Report has varied slightly in outline in the five

issues published to date, but all include some discussion of recent developments in
inflation, progress in achieving the inflation-control targets, and the outlook for inflation.
To summarize the aim of the Monetary Policy Report:

This report reflects the framework used by the Bank in its conduct of policy. This
framework includes: (I) a clear policy objective; (II) a medium-term perspective
(given the long lags for the full impact of monetary policy actions on the economy);
and (III) a recognition that monetary policy works through both interest rates and
the exchange rate. (Bank of Canada 1995, May, p. 3)

57

The Monetary Policy Report is a very user-friendly periodical aimed at the layperson,
with "technical boxes" explaining various concepts and procedures in a cumulative fashion

(similar to the pedagogical efforts in the United Kingdom's Inflation Report). The format
emphasizes white space and includes summary bullet points in the margins, and the

presentation is limited to less than thirty pages (largely consisting of charts). In addition,
the Report is made available on the internet or by calling a toll-free number, and a four-page
summary (compiling the various summary points) is issued at the same time for those who
do not wish to read the entire document. Again, the Report represents a major shift in tone
and audience from the reporting efforts undertaken in the initial years of inflation targeting
in Canada, when the discussion of inflation performance remained in technical language
and was bundled with other topics in less accessible publications.
Around the same time, there were some other changes in the internal organization
of the Bank of Canada. Most prominently, as summarized in the Annual Report, 1994, 'the
Board of Directors established a new senior decision-making authority within the Bank

called the Governing Council.' The Council, which [the Governor chairs), is composed of
the Senior Deputy Governor and the four Deputy Governors. A major decentralization of
decision-making is being implemented in the wake of the Council's establishment" (Bank
of Canada 1995a, p. 8). Since this change, all issues of the Monetary Policy Report have carried

the note "This is a report of the Governing Council of the Bank of Canada" and listed the six
individuals' names. The movement to collective responsibility, rather than giving the
impression that the Governor embodies the Bank, may be seen as an attempt to increase
public perceptions of accountability after Governor Crow had become personally identified

with the Bank's policy in the early 1990s.'9
The Bank of Canada remains a relatively independent central bank.2° Inline with
its responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy, the Bank of Canada has full
operational independence in the deployment of monetary policy instruments. Thus, the
Bank alone determines the setting of policy-controlled short-term interest rates.
Nevertheless, the Bank is subject to the "doctrine of dual responsibility," putting ultimate
responsibility for the thrust of monetary policy in the hands of the Minister of Finance, and
the Minister can make the Governor follow a particular policy (or move interest rates at a
specific time) by issuing a public directive, with which the Governor and the Bank must comply.

A conflict between the Minister and the Bank, however, has never occurred.
Because the issuance of a public directive would imply that the Minister had lost
confidence in the ability of the Governor to carry out the government's monetary policy, the
directive would likely be followed by the resignation of the Governor. Obviously, such a
situation would almost certainly have serious repercussions for the government. Thus, a
directive would be used only in extraordinary circumstances, and it is not something that
can be used routinely by the government to sway the conduct of monetary policy.
Indeed, it might be argued that the existence of the explicit directive power has
strengthened the independence of the Bank of Canada, compared with a system in which
the procedures for resolving policy conflicts are not spelled out so explicitly. In general,
58

relations between the Finance Ministry and the Bank are quite close. The Minister and the

Governor meet almost weekly (though not on a required schedule), the Deputy Minister of
Finance holds a nonvoting seat on the Bank's Board of Directors, and there are a number of
other less formal contacts as well.21

The Bank of Canada's inflation-targeting framework has been an exceedingly
flexible one, undergoing constant refinement and development, with a marked trend

toward greater transparency over time (discussed in further detail below), The targets
changed from "inflation reduction" to "inflation control" of around 2 percent CPI inflation,

without commitment to a specific long-run definition of price stability. Furthermore,
additional reporting obligations (such as the Monetary Policy Report) were undertaken as were

new, more transparent operational tactics (for example, the reference to the MCI and the

mid-1994 move to target more explicitly an overnight interest rate range of 50 basis
points). At the same time, the backward-looking assessment and the forward-looking
prediction of the target inflation series have always been nuanced by reference to
developments in core CPI, indirect taxes, and exchange rates, without resorting to a
specified ru'e for how and when to judge success. Finally, the Bank of Canada has become
more directly accountable to the public and the markets than to the government directly. In
short, the similarity to the German framework22 and the difference from the New Zealand
framework are striking—despite the apparent closeness of the New Zealand and Canadian
target definitions and economic situations.
CANADIAN MONETARY POLICY UNDER INFLATION TARGETING
This section summarizes briefly the main events in Canadian monetary policy since the
announcement of inflation targets in February 1991. It is based on accounts in the Bank's
Annual Reports and semiannual Monetary Policy Reports (since 1995), speeches and articles
printed in the Bank of Canada Review, some academic studies, the OECD Economic Reports,

and various newspaper reports.
The paths of inflation, interest rates, the nominal effective exchange rate

(henceforth the exchange rate), GDP growth, and unemployment in Canada depicted in
Charts 9-12 (pp. 10 1-2) indicate that the economic background for monetary policy under
inflation targeting can be usefully divided into two basic periods. The first—which ran
from the introduction of targets through the end of 1993—was characterized by significant
economic adjustment by firms and workers as well as declining inflation rates; at times,
headline inflation dropped below the floor of the announced target range. The second—

which runs from the announcement on December 22, 1993, when the inflation-targeting
framework was extended, to the present—has generally been characterized (except in 1994)
by a need to alleviate disinflationary pressures, which have threatened to push inflation
below the target range.
One of the challenges that the Bank of Canada faced during these periods was
political, rather than economic. The Bank's success in reducing inflation and then
maintaining it at a low level was associated by some critics with a high cost in

59

unemployment, although it is by no means clear that the level of unemployment reached at
the time was entirely due to monetary policy or that it would have been entirely avoidable
if monetary policy had been different. The targeting framework for monetary policy has
received support from the public and has thus been endorsed by the two different

governments in power since it was first adopted. However, while all central banks that

adopted inflation targets received some criticism of their priorities from certain quarters,
Canada's critics have probably been the most prominent and vocal in objecting to an
exclusive focus on inflation control and to the low level of the target range.
This experience contrasts with that of New Zealand, discussed above, where there
was basic agreement that the monetary reforms, including the adoption of inflation targets,
were beneficial, but the control problems of the central bank in meeting a tight inflation
target band near zero are what drew attention. The Canadian experience also contrasts with
that of the United Kingdom, discussed below, where the central bank, because of its lack of
independence, did not control the setting of the monetary policy instruments and so was
not an obvious target for public criticism. Instead, the primary challenge for policy in the
United Kingdom arose from the separation between those accountable for forecasting and
assessing inflation performance and those responsible for setting monetary policy.
Accordingly, in this section, we focus upon three critical junctures for the Canadian
inflation-targeting framework. The first critical period came in 1991 at the time of the

adoption of targets, when forces beyond the Bank of Canada's control—world oil markets
and Canadian domestic tax policy—creaced inflationary impulses. The second came in late
1993 when the Liberal Party won a victory in a federal election with a campaign platform
that decried the incumbent Conservative Party's "single-minded fight against inflation."23

The third came in mid-1996, when the then president of the Canadian Economic
Association (and critic of the Bank of Canada) gave voice to a concern about the perceived

excessive tightness of monetary policy in the face of high and rising unemployment.
In all three instances, the Bank of Canada responded by directly engaging in
substantive discourse and increasing its efforts at transparency and public outreach. The
Bank's response should be seen as a success in that the Bank managed to defend its policies
without altering its basic commitment to operational price stability. The fact that the Bank
effectively won over a sufficient number of wage- and price-setters in the first instance, the
Liberal Government in the second, and the general public in the third, demonstrates the

potential of inflation targets—and of transparent accountability more generally—to shape
and enhance the discussion of monetary policy. With the Bank of Canada's competence and
responsibilities clearly defined and tracked, the Bank could justify its policies within a clear
structure. Meanwhile, the Bank's critics were forced to argue openly for looser policy on its
economic merits (or lack thereof) alone.
The first major challenge to Canadian monetary policy after the joint announcement
of inflation targets by Governor Crow and Finance Minister Wilson, on February 26, 1991,
was how to cope with contemporaneous upward pressures on the price level. Most
important, the Canadian federal government had just introduced a GST along with other
60

increases in indirect taxes by federal and provincial governments. The key for the Bank of
Canada's strategy was that these were identifiable, onetime price adjustments with extremely
predictable effects if the price rises were not passed on by the private sector through a round
of price and wage hikes. The Bank had little incentive to raise interest rates, given that it had
been pursuing a policy of easing monetary conditions since the spring of 1990, and growth for
1991 was expected to be minimal because of low U.S. aggregate demand and widespread debt

overhang in Canada.
The Bank used the targets as a means of communicating to the public that these
onetime shocks should not be passed through to trend inflation, keeping the threat of
interest rate rises in the background. Looking back from his perspective at the end of 1991,
Governor Crow stated in the Annual Report, 1991:
The fact that the economy was able to absorb the GST and the other indirect tax
changes without provoking an inflationary spiral—a process of wages chasing
prices, prices increasing further as a result, and so on—has been especially welcome.
Certainly, the Bank of Canada has sought to make absolutely clear that monetary
policy would not finance such a destructive process. The way that the price effects of
the GST have been successfully absorbed has become even more widely recognized
with the recent publication of the January 1992 CPI numbers. (Bank of Canada
1992a, p. 9)

In fact, given the tight monetary conditions that had already been established and
the unexpected sluggishness of the economy, the Bank was able to ease nominal short-term
interest rates 6.5 percentage points between spring 1990 and February 1992, a larger drop
than was seen in inflation. Once the tax effects were taken out of the CPI in January 1992,
headline CPI inflation dropped to 1.6 percent, while core inflation went from 5 percent in
December (still including the GST) to 2.9 percent in January (Bank of Canada 1992a, p. 20).
The Bank's own analysis of the economic situation at year-end 1991 attributed most

of the ongoing sluggishness in the Canadian economy to the global slowdown, largely
because of debt overhang in the rest of the Group of Seven, as well as low commodity prices
for Canadian exports (Bank of Canada 1992a). InJanuary 1992, the Bank announced that it
had come in under its expected rate of inflation of 5 percent at the end of 1991.24 The
target success was described in terms of core CPI (that is, excluding food and energy prices)
rather than the ultimate target, headline CPI, although both were well below target level
(having risen 2.6 percent and 3.8 percent, respectively, over 1991). By February 1992,
inflation had already dropped below the target level of 2 to 4 percent for year-end 1992,

with core CPI 2.8 percent higher than a year earlier, despite a depreciating Canadian
dollar.
The announcement in May 1991 introducing inflation-indexed (real return) bonds,
with payments of interest and principal linked to the CPI, served as an additional indicator
that the authorities intended to avoid inflationary policies in the future. The announcement
was immediately seen (as intended) as an additional incentive for the government and the
Bank of Canada to meet the announced inflation targets.25
61

By October 1991, Bank of Canada researchers suggested that Canada had already
paid most of the cost of bringing down inflation, as measured by sacrifice-ratio
calculations (Cozier and Wilkinson 1991). Some academic economists immediately
responded in the press with concern that the Bank of Canada's estimates of the sacrifice ratio
were low—possibly by as much as 50 percent.26 Appealing to a hysteresis-type argument,

but also indicating some belief that a persistently looser monetary policy could result in

employment gains, these economists predicted that unemployment would remain high. It
is important to note that the Bank's response did not include an attempt to deny that
disinflation beginning before target adoption involved a cost in terms of real activity—in
fact, the release of research on the topic of sacrifice ratios prompted this discussion.
Nevertheless, various officials did, at times, hold out the hope that as Canadian inflation
expectations adjusted under targets, the cost of future disinflations would drop (see the
preceding section).
The debate was therefore about the Bank's policy priority on low inflation, rather
than about the framework of targeting itself. This debate over the relative importance of
low inflation would become a recurring theme, as we explain below, and the existence of
the inflation targets helped to frame the discussion of monetary policy at this general level
rather than allowing a conflict over the interpretation of specific policy movements or the
competency of policymaking.
There was considerable discussion of the relationship between the Bank of Canada's

independence and its inflation-targeting framework in 1991. The Bank of Canada was
included in the Conservative Government's proposals for general federal reform published in

September; the main changes recommended were to simplify the Bank's legal mandate to

emphasize the pursuit of price stability (from its multigoal statement) and to make the
Governor's appointment subject to confirmation by the (to-be-reformed) Senate. The
Manley Committee in the House of Commons27 held hearings on the proposals in
late 1991, but the government was largely occupied with its agenda of constitutional
reforms, then under discussion.
The Bank and others testified that a focused price stability mandate would clarify
the accountability of the Bank, whereas it would be possible to defend almost any policy
under the current vague mandate. The Committee concluded, however, that 'the problem
with a mandate narrowly focussed on price stability is that it would tend to enhance the
Bank's accountability by reducing unduly the Bank's area of responsibility" (Paragraph 88).
In the end, the Manley Committee decided, "The elected government must remain

ultimately accountable for the monetary policy followed" (Paragraph 168). In the end, the
system of dual responsibility and the old legal mandate were maintained.28
By September 1992, the Canadian dollar had fallen to 79 U.S. cents, from 89 U.S.
cents a year earlier, and most of the Bank of Canada's activity was concentrated on exchange
rate and interest rate interventions meant to slow and smooth the downward trend of both
variables. The economy continued to stagnate without falling into recession. The Annual
Report, 1992 noted that the Canadian recovery was much slower than the norm of previous

62

business cycles. Inflation did meet the target on a headline basis, reading 2.1 percent in
December, while the 1.7 percent core inflation fell below the target range of 2 to 4 percent.

Core inflation would remain between 1.3 and 2 percent until the target path's floor caught
up with it in late 1993.
The second critical juncture for the Bank of Canada's targeting framework came
in the summer before the November 1993 parliamentary election, when, in light of the
unpopularity of the ruling majority and rising unemployment, then Prime Minister Brian
Mulroney's Progressive Conservative Party seemed doomed to defeat (although no one
foresaw the eventual size of that defeat). The Liberal Party included in its campaign
platform a criticism of the Conservative Party's "single-minded fight against inflation."29
Although the political attack initially focused on the Conservative Party's goals for
monetary policy, it sparked debate over whether Governor Crow should be appointed to a
second seven-year term when the Liberal Party took office. Market economists did warn the
Liberal Patty leaders through the press that, if Crow was not reappointed, some other
measure would be necessary to reassure markets of the new government's commitment to
low inflation.30

In October 1993, preceding the Liberal Party's victory, Deputy Governor Freedman's
speech at an academic conference on monetary policy stated:

With the unexpected sluggishness of the economy, the rate of inflation fell faster
and further than initially anticipated, and this despite the fact that monetary
conditions were easing for most of the period between the announcement of the
targets and the first target date, the end of 1992. . . [Although inflation was
2.1 percent at the end of 1992, versus a lower band of 2 percent,) it would be
inappropriate to push up the rate of inflation once it had reached the lower band of
the target range, given that the longer-term goal was price stability.3' (Freedman
1994a)
.

On the one hand, this statement underlined both the Bank's unwillingness to
engage in fine-tuning (or perceived attempts at it), and its complementary willingness to
admit forecast errors and the limits of its control of inflation developments. On the other
hand, this stance reaffirmed that the target bands were to be taken more seriously than the
midpoint, and it gave the impression that, even then, inflation outcomes that erred on the
side of being too low would be accepted.32 As we saw in the case of New Zealand, as well as
in the political pressures on the Bank of Canada, an emphasis upon firm target bands makes
explanations of deviations of inflation from the range more difficult to justi& publicly
because the central bank appears to have already admitted and specified the extent of its
required flexibility. The commonly held view is that the deviation must be by the central
bank's choice if it is not due to incompetence.
Moreover, a seeming willingness to allow target undershootings for some time even
at very low rates of inflation—a possibility also raised by the Bank of England's later
interpretation of its target as 2.5 percent or less, discussed in Part VI—raises potential
economic difficulties resulting from the probable asymmetry of the output-inflation
63

trade-off at very low levels of inflation. More recent statements by the Bank of Canada (cited

below), perhaps in reaction to the economic and political experiences we discuss here,

emphasize the advantages for policy of having a floor to an inflation target, which, if taken
seriously, can help to stabilize output fluctuations.
On December 22, 1993, the new government and the Bank made a joint

announcement extending the targeting framework, with the 1 to 3 percent inflation band
to be reached by year-end 1995 now extended through 1998. As noted in the previous
section, the Bank was careful to indicate that this target remained a medium-term goal,
not the achievement of price stability, however defined. It is also worth pointing out that the
new Liberal Government saw the need to extend the target beyond its stated endpoint once
the change of Parliamentary majority had raised fears about the commitment to the regime.
While the Liberal Government could not ultimately guarantee the survival of the
commitment beyond the length of its own majority in the House of Commons, it could act
to push off the endpoint of the regime toward a more open-ended future, thus removing the
endgame pressures discussed earlier in the German case with regard to the run-up to
European Monetary Union in Europe.
The Liberal Government elected in October 1993 had campaigned against the
single-minded pursuit of low inflation. John Crow chose not to be considered for a second
term as Governor, and Deputy Governor Gordon Thiessen was appointed as his successor for
a seven-year term beginning February 1, 1994. As noted, on the appointment of Gordon
Thiessen, the existing 1 to 3 percent range was extended three more years, that is, until the

end of 1998.
In 1994, employment finally rose, largely on the basis of strong export performance.
Exports were helped by a declining Canadian dollar, particularly against the U.S. dollar; the
Canadian dollar had depreciated for the two years up until the 1993 election and had only
temporarily strengthened upon the Liberal majority's reaffirmation of the inflation targets.
Interest rates had risen, not only because of U.S. rate increases, but also because of concerns
over the Canadian fiscal situation and the high level of political power behind separatism in
Quebec. In his last official act as Governor, John Crow used his statement in the Bank's
Annual Report, 1993 (released in March 1994) to call for the reduction of government debt

burdens in order to take pressure off interest rates and exchange rates.
Governor Thiessen would make similar statements about fiscal policy in the years

that followed, albeit more obliquely to start. In general, inflation-targeting central banks,
even independent ones, face a difficult decision in determining what kind of public
statements to issue on government fiscal policy. On the one hand, even the most politically
neutral inflation forecast, or clear assessment of past monetary policy and inflation
performance, requires some estimation of the concurrent fiscal stance and its effects; on the
other hand, a central bank that shifts responsibility for outcomes onto the other
macroeconomic policy lever or that takes an (actual or perceived) ideological stand on
budgetary politics could well undermine its own political legitimacy. Like all the central
banks we consider here, the Bank of Canada tended to limit its discussion of fiscal matters
64

to statements about the fiscal stance broadly, its effect on the exchange rate risk premia on

interest rates, and general encomiums to the ideals of long-run sustainability.
Over 1994, core CPI inflation had fluctuated between 1.5 and 2 percent, well
within the target band. The headline CPI inflation rate had dropped to as low as zero
because of a tobacco excise tax reduction in early 1994. Again, the Bank's judicious use of

core versus headline CPI to distinguish onetime price shifts from trend largely avoided
confusion and the pass-through of first-round effects to wage and price inflation—this time

in what would have been a negative direction. Indeed, in February 1995 headline CPI
jumped from 0 to 1.8 percent after the first-round effect of the federal and provincial
tobacco tax reductions dropped out of the calculations. Since the Bank had already stressed
the onetime nature of the preceding price drop (and the stability of core inflation), it felt no
need to react to this rise when it occurred (see, for example, Bank of Canada [1995, May)).

Meeting the announced target—and therefore maintaining that target's positive
inflation rate rather than driving it toward zero—bolstered the Bank's standing in two
ways: it demonstrated the Bank's competence and its reasonableness with regard to the
pursuit of price stability. In the Annual Report, 1994, Governor Thiessen spoke of the third
successive year of "maintenance of a low level of inflation ... after two decades of high and
unpredictable inflation" and remarked on "the progress that has been made towards price
stability' (Bank of Canada 1995a, p. 5).
When the first Monetaty Policy Report was issued in May 1995, the Bank stated in
the four-page summary that core inflation has been consistently within the Bank's
inflation-control targets band since early 1993." Year-over-year core inflation had risen to
2.7 percent by that month (its highest level since the end of 1991) and then declined,
while headline inflation also peaked at 2.9 percent. After lowering interest rates on three
occasions during the summer, the Bank tightened monetary conditions toward the end of
the year. First, it raised the overnight interest rate in November and early December 1994
in response to rising U.S. rates and the emergence of strong domestic economic data. Later,
it raised rates five times in January and February 1995 to try to stabilize financial markets
in the face of a rapid depreciation of the Canadian dollar during a crisis of confidence
following the Mexican devaluation. By March 1995, monetary conditions as measured by
the MCI were 2 percent tighter because the Canadian dollar had rebounded. Demand for
exports was expected to remain strong through the end of 1995, while domestic demand
declined in response to interest rate rises and government fiscal restraint. The Canadian

economy had grown more strongly than expected in 1994—at a rate of 5.6 percent.

Inflation remained in the upper half of the I to 3 percent target band through
October, largely because of the prior depreciation of the Canadian dollar.4 The Bank
accepted the inflation performance and its future course, and turned to other short-run

concerns. 'Throughout the rest of the second quarter Jj995), it became increasingly
apparent that the economy was not expanding as expected and that an easing of monetary
conditions was warranted" (Bank of Canada 1995, November, p. 4). The Bank was willing
to admit a forecasting error and to link its monetary policy decisions to real economic
65

developments as long as the inflation target was met. It can be argued that the Bank was

able to do so having invested nor only in previous credibility-building disinflations, but
also in educating the public in understanding that monetary policy is forward-looking.
The Bank of Canada first cut interest rates 25 basis points in early May, then
lowered the operational target for interest rates twice in June, while the Canadian dollar
also depreciated. It then cut rates twice more in July and again in August, when the dollar
rose. The Bank expected inflation to remain high within the target band until 1996, when
"added downward pressure coming from greater-than-expected excess slack in the
economy" would bring it into the lower half of the band (Bank of Canada 1995, November,
p. 4). Interest rates were cut on October 31, the day after the Quebec referendum on
sovereignty failed to pass; in December 1995, headline inflation declined to 1,7 percent,
heading into the lower half of the target band and prompting another cut in the overnight
interest rate.
When the output gap remained greater than the Bank's 2.5 percent estimate
through the first two quarters of 1996, contrary to expectations, monetary easing
continued. The overnight rate was cut on January 25 and again on January 31 following a
U.S. federal funds rate reduction. Rates were cut once in March and once in April. Since
October 1995, the MCI had declined the equivalent of 200 basis points to its lowest level
since 1994 (Bank of Canada 1995, November, p.43). Jnflation expectations wete unaffected
by the loosening and remained at historical lows—the Canadian Conference Board Survey of
Forecasters and Consensus Forecasts both displayed downward trends in two-year-ahead
inflation expectations, from around 4 percent in the first half of 1990 to 2 percent in the

second half of 1995. The differential between Canadian "real bonds" and thirty-year
conventional bonds was 3.25 percent, on par with the smallest differential recorded since
the bonds were first issued in 1991.
Most significantly, the Canadian—U.S. short-term interest rate differential turned

negative, while the Canadian dollar remained firm, raising hopes at the Bank that
Canada's inflation-targeting regime had become such a sufficiently independent source of
counterinflationary credibility that the two countries' interest rates might be decoupling.
Given the positive effects of these developments on expectations and inflation, and the
pressing needs of the real economy, the Bank began to emphasize how seriously it took
the floor on its inflation target and the potentially stabilizing effect on real output of so
doing.36

The third critical juncture for Canadian monetary policy occurred in summer 1996,
with the continuing stagnation of Canadian GDP and employment. Criticisms of the Bank
of Canada's policies were given more weight because they were delivered by Pierre Fortin,
the elected president of the Canadian Economics Association. On June 1, 1996, Fortin
delivered a presidential address entitled "The Great Canadian Slump" (Fortin 1996a) to the
annual meeting of the Canadian Economics Association. In his address, he characterized
Canadian economic performance since 1990 as

66

a long slide in economic activity and employment . . . [with the] accompanying
employment and output losses still accumulating, but . . they surpass the losses
experienced by other industrial countries since 1990. The last decade of this century
will arguably be remembered as the decade of The Great Canadian Slump. (Fortin

1996a, p. 761)
After considering and dismissing a number of possible structural explanations for
Canada's economic performance, he forcefully argued that the depression of domestic
demand was largely attributable to interest-sensitive consumer durables and business
fixed-investment demand. "This gives us the clue to the true cause of the great slump of the
1990s: old fashioned monetary and fiscal contraction. I argue that monetary policy has been
the leader, and that fiscal policy was induced by the monetary contraction" (Forrin 1996a,

p. 770).
In Section IV of his address, "Monetary Policy and the Slump," Fortin cites Bank of
Canada statements affirming the Bank's control over short-term interest rates and then
poses a question:

The only serious question is why the Bank of Canada has kept the short-term real
interest rate differential with the United States so large for so long in the 1990s.
The answer to this question has two parts: first, since 1989 the central bank has
focused exclusively on the goal of zero inflation; second, contrary to expectations,
achieving this objective has forced it to impose permanently higher unemployment
through higher interest rates. (Fortin 1996a, pp. 774-5)
The first part of Fortin's explanation is attributed to the Bank of Canada's exclusive
focus on inflation, its religious zeal in doing so, and its excessive independence from
popular preferences and political control (pp. 775-7). The second part of his explanation is
based on his application of the argument of Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996) about a
floor for nominal wage changes at or near zero in the Canadian labor markets.37 If one
believes that workers resist nominal wage cuts strongly, whether for reasons of "fairness" or
other factors, Fortin argues,

the zero constraint can take a large macroeconomic bite when the median wage
change itself is around zero, as was observed over 1992-4. . . But if inflation is to
fall to a very low level, such as the 1.4 per cent of 1992-6 in Canada, and is to stay
there, the proportion of wage earners that are pushed against the wall of resistance
to wage cuts must increase sharply. The long-run marginal unemployment cost of
lower inflation in this range is not zero, but is positive and increasing. (Fortin
1996a, p. 779)
.

He goes on to state that the Bank of Canada not only has misjudged the output-inflation
trade-off at low inflation rates, but also "has displayed a strong deflationary bias that has not
reflected the true state of knowledge on the benefits of zero inflation, the true preferences of
the Canadian population, and the spirit and letter of the Bank of Canada Act, which reflects
those preferences by asking for a reasonable balance between the inflation and
unemployment objectives" (Fortin 1996a, p. 781).
67

Fortin acknowledges that 'the Bank of Canada has made every effort at explaining
this strategy through public speeches, appearances in Parliament, research papers, Annual
Reports, and, more recently, Monetary Policy Reports. But it is also true that these attempts
have more often been exercises in advocacy of a controversial and extreme policy orientation

than genuine dialogue with the public" (Fortin 1996a, p. 781). His two primary policy
recommendations are to make the Bank of Canada more like the U.S. Federal Reserve
System (in his description), with five governors holding staggered terms, and to raise the

inflation target's midpoint 1 percent, to 3 percent (Fortin 1996a, p. 781).
In the press discussion that ensued, including Fortin's own summary of his
arguments for mass readership, permanent and transitional costs of achieving low inflation
were repeatedly confused.38 Without coming down on either side of the argument, we note
that the Canadian—U.S. interest rate differential had dropped along with interest rates more
broadly, suggesting that the Bank of Canada was successful in containing inflation. In
addition, this suggests that the Bank of Canada had eased monetary conditions because the
considerable slack in the real economy implied disinflationary pressures that might cause
inflation to drop below the target range. Whether the Canadian economy had borne too
great a cost in lost output during the transition process to be justified by the benefits of
lower inflation—despite the Bank of Canada's acknowledgments of the cost of disinflation
and conscious gradualism documented above—is an issue that merits discussion.
At the time, however, with the public record of the Canadian inflation-targeting
framework's goals, actions, and results available for all to see, discussion was limited to
debate over the costs and benefits of low inflation and did not address topics of ideology or
of competence. This focus forced participants to take an explicit stand (as Fortin did) on
defining the goal of monetary policy. The Bank of Canada's response was to articulate
further its rationale for the existing 1 to 3 percent inflation target. In a speech to the
Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales in Montreal on October 9, 1996, Governor Thiessen
put the debate in exactly these terms while addressing Fortin's argument (without
mentioning him by name):
A distinction should be made here between reducing inflation and maintaining it
at a low level. Reducing inflation requires a downward adjustment in inflation
expectations and may entail transition costs, which is not the case with simply
maintaining low inflation. It is generally agreed that the gains achieved by reducing
inflation exceed transition costs when inflation is high. Where opinions are more
divided is on the question of how far inflation should be reduced. Some fear that if
inflation falls below a certain threshold, the economy will be deprived of a
lubricant. . . I must say that this argument assumes a degree of money illusion
.

that I find difficult to reconcile with the observed behavior of wages in
inflationary periods. . . . Recent experience will provide us with more useful
information in [the wage behavior during periods of slow wage growth]. We have
therefore undertaken new research on this question. . . . Since this research is just
getting under way, I will confine myself here to reporting that our preliminary
examination of the major wage agreements concluded between 1992 and 1994
68

does not lend evident support to the thesis of inflation as lubricant. (Thiessen
1996d, p. 3)
There are three key points to make about Governor Thiessen's remarks: first, the

costs of disinflation are once again forthrightly acknowledged; second, the argument is
made on the basis of empirical claims, with the Bank assuming the burden of having to
provide supporting (or opposing) research; and third, the discussion is centered on the
appropriate level of inflation to target and the pace at which that level should be reached,
not on what the goals of monetary policy should be. Later in his remarks, Thiessen attributed
the stalling of the expansion in 1994 and 1995 to increased interest rate risk premia due to

international market fluctuations and to political uncertainties about Canada. 'In such a
context [of high interest rates), the benefits of low inflation were slow to be felt" (Thiessen
1996d, p. 7). Referring to the easing of monetary conditions since that time and the decline
in the Canadian—U.S. interest rate differential, he stated, "It shows that keeping inflation
down is a low-interest-rate policy and not, as some critics have often claimed, a

high-interesr-rate policy" (Thiessen 1996d, p. 7).
A month later, Thiessen gave another speech responding even more directly to the
Fortin argument, titled "Does Canada Need More Inflation to Grease the 'Wheels of the
Economy?"39 He opened by characterizing

some ideas you have probably heard about recently. . . . The suggestion is that the
Bank, with its focus on bringing inflation down, is largely responsible for Canada's
sluggish pace of economic expansion and stubbornly high unemployment in the
1990s. . . Moreover, in this view, a monetary policy that emphasizes price stability
will somehow always be too tight to allow the economy to achieve its full
potential in the future." (Thiessen 1996a, p. 63)
After making an extended argument that most of what slowed the Canadian
economy in the early 1990s was the combination of externally induced high interest rates
and widespread structural change in response to globalization and technical changes, and
that the economy was now poised to pick up over the long term, Thiessen made explicit his
vision of the relationship between maintaining low inflation and economic growth:

In fact, when the Bank takes actions to hold inflation inside the target range of
1 to 3 per cent, monetary policy operates as an important stabilizer that helps to
maintain sustainable growth in the economy. When economic activity is expanding
at an unsustainable pace . . the Bank will tighten monetary conditions to cool
things off. But the Bank will respond with equal concern, by relaxing monetary
conditions when the economy is sluggish and there is a risk that the trend of
inflation will fall below the target range. (Thiessen 1996a, p. 67)
.

Having drawn the policy implication of the distinction between disinflating
and maintaining low inflation given an announced inflation target, Thiessen then
reiterated his belief that the process of wage setting in a low-inflation environment would
be flexible enough to allow for occasional wage reductions in industries that required it,
69

thus countering the view that zero inflation would be costly to the economy because of
downward nominal wage rigidity.40
The purpose of our extended treatment of this third critical juncture in Canadian
monetary policy since the adoption of inflation targets is not to give credence to one side of

the argument, or even to the existence of the argument itself, but rather to emphasize the
form the argument took. The existence of the inflation-targeting framework channeled
debate into a substantive discussion about appropriate target levels, with all sides having to
make explicit their assumptions and their estimates of costs and benefits while working
from a common record of what the goal had been and how well it had been met.
Interestingly, although this argument gave a potentially far better-grounded means
of attacking the Bank's stance than that utilized in the 1993 elections, the run-up to the
1997 elections has, in contrast, not included criticism of the Bank of Canada as a major
issue. 'What this difference indicates most of all is that the failure of political accountability
claimed by Fortin in "The Great Canadian Slump" address did not exist—rather, this
difference indicates that the Bank's form of response, as with previous challenges, had to be
through its acknowledged communications efforts. Indeed, the Bank won support through
its response, its responsiveness, and its record.
KEY LESSONS FROM THE CANADIAN EXPERIENCE

The Canadian experience suggests that an inflation-targeting framework that shares the
ultimate goals of the New Zealand framework but relies on a different operational structure
can be highly successful. The key lessons are as follows: First, although some have argued
that tight constraints upon or contracts for central banks are necessary to establish
counterinflationary credibility, as in New Zealand, inflation has been low under the

Canadian inflation-targeting regime, which is characterized by close informal links
between the Bank of Canada and the Ministry of Finance and a greater emphasis on
accountability to the general public than on meeting specified contracts. Canada's good
inflation performance occurred even in the face of negative supply shocks, such as VAT
increases and depreciations of the exchange rate induced by fiscal and political
developments. Indeed, the Bank's concerted efforts at transparency may have helped the
public to distinguish between onetime shocks and movements in trend inflation.
Second, inflation targeting has worked to keep inflation low and stable in Canada
even though the inflation-targeting regime is more flexible, similar to Germany's, with
misses of the target range less explicitly tied to punishment. This flexibility has allowed the
Bank of Canada more room to deviate from the targets when unforeseen shocks occur. As in
the German case, a key component of Canada's success with inflation targeting is the Bank
of Canada's strong and increasing commitment to transparency and the communication of
monetary policy strategy to the general public.
Third, Canadian inflation targeting has been seen by the central bank as helping to
dampen business cycle fluctuations, because the floor of the target range is taken as

seriously as the ceiling. Indeed, at times, the Bank of Canada has been able to justify
70

easing of monetary conditions in the face of a weak economy by appealing to the inflation
targets, with the confidence that this easing would not lead to expectations of higher
inflation in the future. Thus, inflation targeting did not force the Bank to forswear all
responsibility for stabilization of the real economy.

71

Part VI.

United Kingdom

The United Kingdom followed Canada in adopting inflation targeting, but under quite
different circumstances. In discussing its experience, we focus on the following themes:
• Like the other countries examined, the United Kingdom adopted inflation targets after a
successful disinflation. Unlike these countries, however, the United Kingdom took this
step in the aftermath of a foreign exchange rate crisis in order to restore a nominal
anchor and to lock in past disinflationary gains.

• In the United Kingdom, there is less attempt to treat inflation targeting as a strict
rule than in New Zealand, making the targeting regime more akin to the German and
Canadian approach.
• As in the other inflation-targeting countries, monetary policy in the United Kingdom
also responds flexibly to other factors, such as real output growth.

• Like Canada, but unlike New Zealand, the United Kingdom separates the entity that
measures the inflation target variable (Office for National Statistics) from the entity that
assesses whether the target has been met (the Bank of England).

• In the United Kingdom, the headline consumer price index (CPI) is not used in
constructing the inflation target variable; the target variable excludes mortgage
interest payments, but does not exclude energy and food prices or other adjustments.
• Initially, the Bank of England targeted an inflation range, but then shifted to a point
target.
• Because the British central bank lacked independence until the May 1997 election, it
was accountable for meeting the inflation targets but did not fully control decisions
about the stance of monetary policy.' Indeed, up until May 1997, the Bank was limited
to providing the principal forecast of inflation and assessing past inflation performance.
As a result, the Bank functioned as the Chancellor of the Exchequer's counterinflationary
conscience.

• In part because of its weaker position before May 1997, the Bank of England focused
its inflation-targeting efforts on communicating its monetary policy strategy and its
commitment to price stability, relying heavily on such vehicles as the Inflation Report,
an innovation that has since been emulated by other inflation-targeting countries.
Although the relationship between the Bank of England and the Chancellor of the
Exchequer has now changed, the United Kingdom's targeting framework prior to the granting
of independence in May 1997 is an important example to consider in the design of inflation-

targeting frameworks in general. (We briefly discuss the post—May 1997 regime at the end

of this case study.) In particular, our analysis indicates that the split between the monetary
policy decision maker and the primary public inflation forecaster had significant
implications for the performance of U.K. monetary policy between October 1992 and
May 1997; future actions of the newly independent Bank of England will support or
disprove our belief about the importance of this relationship to target performance.
72

ADoPTIoN OF THE INFLATION TARGET
The Chancellor of the Exchequer, Norman Lamont, announced an inflation target for the United

Kingdom at a Conservative Party conference on October 8, 1992.2 Three weeks later, at his
annual Mansion House Speech to the City (Lamont 1992), he "invited" the Governor of the
Bank of England to publish a quarterly Inflation Report detailing the progress being made in
achieving the target, an invitation that the Governor accepted.

The adoption of a target was an explicit reaction to sterling's exit from the
European Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) three weeks before. The Chancellor wished to
reestablish the credibility of the government's commitment to price stability, which had
seemed to gain from the pound's two years in the ERM (as primarily measured by interest
rate differentials with Germany and spreads in the U.K. yield curve). Given the United
Kingdom's history of trying and abandoning a series of monetary regimes in the post—
Bretton Woods period, there was considerable potential for damage to credibility, both at
home and abroad, from the aftermath of the Black Wednesday foreign exchange crisis in
September 1992 and a currency devaluation of more than 10 percent.
There had been no prior public discussion on the part of either the Treasury or the
Bank about setting inflation targets. While the pound was maintaining parity in the ERM,
of course, such talk would have been irrelevant because the United Kingdom was committed

to attempting to match the Bundesbank's inflation performance. As the exchange rate
crisis approached, revealing the existence of a fallback plan could have been dangerous.
Accordingly, the announcement of an inflation target of 1 to 4 percent per year in October

1992, unaccompanied by an explanation of the methods for monitoring and achieving
this performance, had a certain amount of shock value. Perhaps this approach was seen as
underlining the commitment by plunging ahead in a decisive manner. It is important to
emphasize that the Chancellor announced the policy adoption at a partisan, though public,
forum, and he committed the nation to the targets only "through the end of the present
parliament," that is, May 1997. In other words, this was a policy of the ruling Conservative
majority, and could not be given a life independent from their own commitment—except
to the extent that the framework's success could earn support from the public and
opposition parties.
When, in September 1992, the government was faced with the choice between

attempting to defend the exchange rate at length (with at least a major downward
realignment inevitable) and leaving the ERM, it opted for the latter despite the damage to
credibility. The unwillingness of the U.K. monetary policymakers to raise interest rates to
defend the currency beyond Black Wednesday—in contrast to, say, Italy or Sweden—
suggests that their commitment to the ERM was not very strong.
It thus seems fair to say that the United Kingdom's adoption of an inflation target
presented two elements of continuity and one of change with respect to the monetary
regime of ERM membership. First and foremost, there was no change in the objective of

monetary policy—price stability. The explicitness of this goal and its primacy, however,
had increased over the 1990s. By the time the pound exited the ERM, the government had
73

made clear that it did not wish to be let free from discipline, merely from the conflict
between German and British business cycles. Second, the strategy followed to achieve this

objective had to have credibility with the public through a transparent means of
communicating the stance and success of policy.
The main change for the United Kingdom, having abandoned both monetary and
exchange rate targets, was the strategic decision not to employ any intermediate target
variable in the setting of policy. In fact, in Chancellor Lamont's speech announcing the
inflation-targeting policy, he took pains to make clear that money growth and exchange rate
measures would be monitored but would not determine policy.3 A speech delivered by the
Bank of England Governor, Robin Leigh-Pemberton, on November11, 1992, made the point

abundantly clear:
Experience leads us to believe that monetary policy cannot be conducted with
reference to a single target variable. The overriding objective of monetary policy
is price stability. Therefore policy must be conducted with reference to our
expectations of future inflation. . Consequently, policymakers should make use
of every possible variable, with the importance attached to any given variable at any
point in time dependent on its value as a guide to prospective inflation.
(Leigh-Pemberton 1992, p. 447)
.

Thus, targeting the inflation goal directly was seen as the only practical way to

achieve the goal. This conclusion, however, still left open the question of how to make this
new policy credible, especially after the exit from the visible restraint of the ERM. In his
speech, the Governor continued: "But in such an eclectic framework it is possible for the
underlying rationale of policy to be lost in a welter of statistical confusion. That is why we
have opted for a policy of openness."
This last point, reflecting a belief that efforts at effective ongoing communication

with the public—not the announcement of a simple goal alone—are required for
credibility, is the operational core of the United Kingdom's inflation-targeting framework.
Nevertheless, while the framework emphasizes accountability, the idea that rules have
replaced discretion (as in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's "contract," for example) is not
prominent. This may have been more a matter of the reality of ultimate monetary
policymaking resting with the elected government rather than of a consciously held
conviction. As noted in the discussion of New Zealand, the extent to which inflation
targeting is treated as a rule is best seen as a design choice.4
THE OPERATIONAL FRAMEWORK
The intermediate target variable for policy set by the Chancellor and the Bank of England

is the annual change in the retail price index excluding mortgage interest payments
(RPIX). RPIX was to remain in a range of 1 to 4 percent until at least the next election,
with the intent that it would settle itself in the lower half of that range by then (2.5 percent
or less).5 The long-term intended average for RPIX is 2.5 percent or less. RPIX is meant to
capture underlying inflation and is usually reported along with RPJY, which is RPIX
74

altered to exclude the first-round effect of indirect taxes. The British have chosen to include

the effects of commodity price shocks, including oil shocks, in their target. In all inflation
targets other than headline inflation, there is some trade-off between transparency (because
headline CPI is what people are accustomed to following) and flexibility (because then

onetime or supply shocks are defined out of the target requirement).
RPIX has proved to be an effective measure for the Bank, however, with the
financial press and the public adapting to it over time. There was some consideration of a

change to RPIY in 1995, but that was seen as switching too often and opening the
possibility of being perceived as constantly expanding the list of shocks for which monetary
policy would not be responsible. Indeed, to discourage this perception, the Office for
National Statistics, an agency separate from the Bank (the forecaster), was asked to calculate
the various inflation series (and thus the actual results to be compared with the forecasts).
The target band width, set by the Chancellor, was intended to limit the scope for
both slippage and countercyclical monetary policy. Later interpretations by the Bank and
the U.K. Treasury, however, indicate that it was never intended as a range strictly speaking,
but as an admission of imperfect control.6 Once set, however, the band width takes on a life
of its own, so that widening the band would likely be seen as a loosening of policy or a

failure to keep the commitment.
The official position agreed to by the Treasury and the Bank in recent years is that
there is no longer an actual range for the target, but a point target of 2.5 percent to be met
on an ongoing basis. This change was made explicit in Chancellor Kenneth Clarke's (1995)
Mansion House Speech to the City on June 14, 1995. In reality, the endpoint of such a
time horizon is likely to correspond to the lifetime of any parliamentary majority, as it did
in New Zealand when the country changed its target range after the October 1996 election.
Unlike New Zealand, however, the United Kingdom makes no explicit commitment to
remain within a range. Therefore, the U.K.'s inflation point target allows flexibility by
permitting short-run unavoidable deviations while shifting the focus away from the values
of the bands themselves.
Another issue inherent in the United Kingdom's targeting framework was the tying

of the endpoint of the target period to a specific event—the end of the then-sitting
Parliament. Unless the commitment to inflation targeting is open-ended, there is

uncertainty about whether the targeting regime will continue past the close of the
designated period. As a result, there may be increasing doubts about the country's will to
undertake necessary actions to meet the targets as the end of the period approaches and
pressures increase to let bygones be bygones. As noted in the discussion of German
monetary targets in the run-up to European Monetary Union (EMU), these doubts and

pressures will arise for any targeting framework that is not renewed far ahead of its
announced (or politically determined) endpoint. Just as the Liberal majority in Canada,
shortly after taking office in 1993, extended the 1995 targets to 1998, the British Labour
Party made clear that it would extend the inflation target of 2.5 percent or less for the

duration of its tenure in office should it win in May 1997, thereby removing a potential
75

source of uncertainty and lowering credibility.8 In contrast, in the New Zealand elections of

October 1996, there was no way to shield the time horizon of the targets from the political
process. This difference may, in part, have been related to the formal agreements tightly
tying the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's goals to the majority in government.
In reality, the actual target of Bank of England policy is the expectation of RPIX

inflation in the domestic economy. The success in meeting the target is judged by whether
the Bank's own inflation forecast over the next two years falls within the intended range.
This approach to assessing success is consistent both with a forward-looking orientation and
a belief that it takes about two years for monetary policy to affect inflation. At the time of
the Chancellor's initial announcement of the adoption of targets, he was criticized by
market observers for focusing on a lagging indicator by targeting RPJX inflation per se.
From the first Inflation Report onward, the Bank has increasingly considered private
sector inflation forecasts and their spread in addition to the distribution of the Bank's own
inflation forecasts. In recent issues of the Inflation Report, this focus has shown itself in

discussions emphasizing the skew of forecast distributions as opposed to a point estimate or
even confidence intervals.9 Most important, the Bank does appear to have successfully
communicated to the press and the public that a forward-looking monetary policy must be
designed to achieve a balance of risks rather than tight control (even with lags considered).
Since many central banks have this intellectual framework behind their policymaking, there
is much to be appreciated in the Bank's efforts in this direction.
The Bank of England does appear to be working from a standard policy feedback
framework in line with the Chancellor's and Governor's initial speeches—that is, one in
which all pieces of information are gathered and weighed. MO and M4 (narrow and broad
money) figures must be reported, with "monitoring ranges" announced for them, but with
an explicit escape clause indicating that when their information conflicts with RPIX
forecasts, the RPIX forecasts are to be believed, Exchange rates and housing prices have
been repeatedly cited as other indicator variables in the policy decisions by the chancellors
and governors over the period, but with the pointed absence of any explicit ranking of the
usefulness of different indicator variables. The Bank acknowledges that its failed
experiences with money and exchange rate targeting have made it hesitant to rely on the
stability of any one indicator or relationship.

The stated ultimate goal of the United Kingdom's inflation targets is price stability,
"namely that the rate of inflation anticipated by economic agents is unimportant to savings,

investment, and other economic decisions" (Leigh-Pemberron 1992). As in most other
countries, a target of zero inflation was dismissed as unduly restrictive given the failure to
capture all quality adjustments in price indexes (although the Bank of England points out
that RPIX is rebased far more frequently than in many other countries, so there would be
less substitution bias for the United Kingdom's price index). Consequently, price stability is
operationally defined as growth in RPIX of 2.5 percent or less. The choice of this figure
was primarily a pragmatic decision, with the likelihood that if the 2.5 percent goal
were achieved and maintained, a lower goal, say of 2 percent, would then be set. No
76

consideration of any other goals, such as exchange rate stability or business cycle

smoothing, is explicitly acknowledged within the target framework.
Like every other central bank, however, the Bank of England remains de facto
committed to trading off disinflation when necessary against its real-side costs and its
effects on the financial system. This is best illustrated by excepts from Governor LeighPemberton's November 1992 speech about the policy shift, 'The Case for Price Stability."
The speech, reprinted in the Bank of England's Quarterly Bulletin, states, "The overriding

objective of monetary policy is price stability." In the preceding paragraph of the speech,
however, the Governor explains why other factors overrode that objective and prompted the
pound's exit from the ERM:
It [the ERM) certainly offered a very visible sign of our commitment to price
stability . . [but) there was a real risk of these disinflationary forces doing quite
unnecessary damage to the real economy. Although we would have achieved price
stability very quickly—indeed there is reason to believe we might have reached that
position during 1993—there was a real danger that the deflation which was already
apparent in certain sectors of the economy (notably asset markets) would have
become much more widespread. It was not necessary to compress the transition
phase to price stability into such a short time span and could well have been
counterproductive in the longer term.10 (p. 446)
.

This trade-off is recognized even in contexts where the choice between achieving an
inflation goal quickly at a high cost in real output or more slowly at lower cost is less stark
than that presented by the divergence of German and British domestic needs within the

European Monetary System (EMS) in 1992. Why else would the achievement of price
stability be pursued gradually, as outlined by the Bank and the Chancellor for the path from
the September 1992 RPIX rate of 3.6 percent? Clearly, a gap exists between the claims and
reality of inflation as a sole goal even under inflation targeting.11 Various speeches by
Governor Eddie George in recent years have been at pains to stress that the Bank aims to

stabilize the business cycle (and thereby at least partially engender exchange rate stability)
within the target constraint.
Only three weeks after the decision to adopt inflation targeting, Chancellor Lamont

coordinated with the Bank of England an institutional implementation of the policy. The
Bank would produce its own inflation outlook on a quarterly basis, beginning with
February 1993; the Bank's medium-term forecast for inflation would be the main yardstick
of success or failure. As mentioned above, the role of this forecast in accountability for
policy becomes quite complicated. One complication arises when interest rate decisions are
inconsistent with the implications of the published forecasts, but a full explanation for the
rationale behind the decision is not made public. Nevertheless, the rapidity with which the
commitment to publish forecasts was undertaken underlines just how central

communication efforts are to the operation of the United Kingdom's inflation targets—and
how the announcement of the targets was never thought to be enough on its own.

77

As part of its role in tracking progress toward the inflation target, the Bank of
England's Inflation Report details past performance of the U.K. economy, compares actual
inflation outcomes (both RPIX and its components) with prior forecasts of the Bank,

identifies factors presenting the most danger to price stability, and forecasts the likelihood

that inflation will in two years' time be in the target range. In the words of Governor
Leigh-Pemberton (1992), Our aim will be to produce a wholly objective and
comprehensive analysis of inflationary trends and pressures, which will put the Bank's
professional competence on the line." From the third issue (August 1993) onward, the
Inflation Report has consistently followed a six-part format covering developments in
inflation, money and interest rates, demand and supply, the labor market, pricing behavior,
and prospects for inflation. In addition, the Inflation Report does not supplant the ongoing
publication of policy speeches and relevant research in the Quarterly Bulletin, in which the
authors of the research articles are always identified.

The transparency of the Bank's views and the Chancellor's reaction to them is meant
to be the check on the government's monetary stance between elections. Following the third
Inflation Report in August 1993, it was decided that the Bank would only send the report to
the Treasury after it had been finalized. Thus, the Treasury would have no chance to edit or
even suggest changes. This agreement on timing indicates the government's conscious
acceptance of the Bank's distinct voice.
The Inflation Report is best seen in the context of the Bank's traditional role as
adviser to the Chancellor on monetary policy. Even after the adoption of inflation targeting,
the Bank's contribution remains that of advice and information, just as it had presumably
been consulted on Chancellor Lamont's initial decision to implement inflation targeting and
the choice of target range and midpoint. What is innovative is the fact that the Bank would
be called upon to report to the public independently of its regular consultations with the
Treasury staff and with the Chancellor directly. Often overlooked, however, is the fact that
the Treasury, which reports directly to the Chancellor, was commissioned to produce its
own monthly monetary report from December 1992 onward. This publication, which
predates the Inflation Report and is issued more frequently, had a mandate to track the

growth of broad (M4) and narrow (MO) money in the monitoring ranges set by the
Chancellor and to keep readers apprised of moves in the foreign exchange and asset markets,
particularly U.K. housing. In other words, the Chancellor committed U.K. monetary policy
to the monitoring of a particular set of indicators compiled by his own staff, even if the
Bank of England chose to emphasize other variables or compute numbers differently. The
Bank, despite the Inflation Report, has not been given a monopoly on monetary policy
advice.

The emphasis on public explanations of policy, and especially on delineating
differences between the Chancellor's and the Bank's points of view, was buttressed by three

additional institutional changes. First, in February 1993, the monthly meeting between the
Chancellor and the Governor to set monetary policy was formalized. Second, starting in
November 1993, the timing of any interest rate changes decided upon by the Chancellor at
78

the monthly meeting would be left to the Bank's discretion as long as the changes were
implemented before the next meeting. Combined with the Bank's commitment to issue a
press release explaining the reason for any interest rate change once made, this discretion
gave the markets a great deal of information about the Bank's view of the Chancellor's
decision. Third, and most significant, since April 1994, the minutes of the monthly
Chancellor-Governor meetings have been publicly released two weeks after the next meeting
(replacing the prior lag of thirty years with one of six weeks).

In essence, the Bank has operated as the government's institutional
counterinflationary conscience. There was an underlying tension in this role because the
Bank remained under the control of the Chancellor while the instruments of monetary
policy remained out of its control. The Bank's use of public and formalized forums
to communicate its forecasts, its analyses, and even its explicit monetary policy
recommendations does increase the cost for the government of going against the Bank's
assessment and thus, presumably, of nor serving price stability. Unfortunately, since the
Chancellor did not have a requirement to report his reasoning beyond what he chose to
reveal at these monthly meetings, disputes over preference or competence can become
shrouded as competitions over forecast accuracy (see next section).

The standing given the Bank by the monthly minutes did not, however, provide
monetary policy with democratic accountability beyond that given already by elections; it
was the Bank, not the market or the people, that was passing judgment, but any
punishment or reward for that judgment (beyond market reactions) had to wait until the
next election. Even under the new Monetary Policy Committee of the Bank, which sets
U.K. monetary policy, ultimate responsibility for the goals and outcome of policy rests with
the parliamentary majority at the next elections.'2 Nor did these forums provide clarity
about the intent of ultimate policy, since, for all the Bank's statements, the Chancellor
could override them with only limited public explanation.
BRITISH MONETARY POLICY UNDER INFLATION TARGETING
This section summarizes briefly the macroeconomic outcomes and the interaction between
the Treasury and the Bank at critical junctures in the policy-setting process since target
adoption. The section draws on various issues of the Bank's quarterly Inflation Report and on

the Minutes of the Monthly Monetary Meetings between the Chancellor and the Governor.
To support this review of monetary policy, Charts 13-16 (pp. 103-4) track the path of
inflation, interest rates, the nominal effective exchange rate (henceforth the exchange rate),
GDP growth, and unemployment in the United Kingdom both before and after inflation
targeting was introduced.

The period from October 1992 until the end of 1993 was marked by the beginning
recovery of the U.K. economy. Sterling's exit from the ERM coincided with the end of
recession. GDP growth turned positive in the first quarter of 1993, and the unemployment
rate peaked at 10.6 percent in December 1992 (Chart 16, p. 104). Throughout 1993, output
growth was accelerating, and the unemployment rate declined. With some brief

79

interruptions, RPIX inflation continued its downward trend, reaching the midpoint of the
designated target range of 2.5 percent for the first time in November 1993 (Chart 13, p. 103).
The exchange rate bottomed out in February 1993, then strengthened through the remainder

of the year (Chart 15, p. 104).
Two major themes in the medium-term inflation forecasts of the first two issues of
the Inflation Report (February and May 1993) are the inflationary impulses from sterling
depreciation and the growing government budget deficit. The official interest rate (the base
rate) had been reduced from 10 percent in August 1992 to 6 percent in January 1993

(Chart 14, p. 103), reflecting the desire to escape from German monetary tightness.
Unsurprisingly, between the United Kingdom's exit from the ERM and early February
1993, sterling had depreciated by 14.5 percent.'3 In explaining why inflation expectations
might still be above the target range, the Bank mentioned fears of eventual monetization of
the unsustainable debt. The Bank did not make any call for immediate fiscal action or
actively criticize the government's stance. The Bank's inflation projections in the first two
reports continued to fall at all horizons discussed.
In the May 1993 Inflation Report, the Bank stated that it believed that the
government would manage to hold inflation below 4 percent for the following eighteen
months. This statement did not represent an endorsement of the government's monetary
stance: not only had the Chancellor committed to being within the inflation range (that is,
below 4 percent) in two years, but he had also stated that he would have inflation in the
lower half of that range (below 2.5 percent) by 1997. It is interesting that the Bank felt
comfortable tracing the source of inflation risk to the government's decisions (suggesting
that it was a matter of the government's choice), rather than to economic risks. The Bank
expressed concern about the exchange rate's potential effects, noting that the 5 percent
appreciation of sterling (trade-weighted) since February permitted only a small measure of
optimism, but surveys and financial market interest rates continued to indicate a lack of

medium-to-long-run credibility. The Bank also emphasized that the principal uncertainty
about the inflation forecast, most of it on the upside, had to do with domestic wages and
profits. The meaning of these concerns became clear three weeks later when Governor

George gave a speech explicitly warning against a rate cut. The Bank apparently feared
that with the imminent change in chancellors (from Norman Lamont to Kenneth Clarke)
and submission of the budget, a decision to ease would be made in compensation for various
fiscal measures. At the time, rates were not cut.
Six months later, in the November Inflation Report, the Bank touched on the same
themes but even more sharply. There was a slight probability now, according to the Bank,
that inflation would exceed the target in the near term. Moreover, the Bank said it foresaw
teal potential for a wage push if headline inflation were to be allowed to rise up to the
4 percent target band. Again, the Bank was responding to a political situation in which
many Conservative Party backbenchers and commentators wete expecting an interest rate
cut. The government had agreed to certain spending cuts and an extension of the valueadded tax (VAT) to domestic fuel and power starting in April 1994, while economic real80

side news was generally not good. This time Chancellor Clarke did lower rates 3/4 percent
without further fiscal tightening to compensate.

What made this conflict between Bank and Chancellor particulatly interesting was
that the Bank had already offered an out for the Chancellor in the May and November issues
of the Thflation Report. The Bank attributed 0.4 percent of the ptojected rise in inflation in
1994 to the VAT change, which it was sympathetic to in general terms as a deficit
reduction, and reminded people that if RPIY (which excludes the first-round effect of taxes)
rather than RPIX were considered, the inflation would be on target (albeit near the top of
the range and with upside risks). For whatever reason, the Chancellor did not take
advantage of the proffered defense.
Though unexercised, this sort of definitional tactic raises a real dilemma for
accountability. If indirect taxes are legitimately to be excluded, why did the Chancellor and
the Bank choose to target RPJX and not RPIY in the first place? If the government had in
fact switched to RPIY after the Bank had "allowed" (that is, explained without criticizing)
the move, how could the markets and electorate have been sure this was not just a onetime
escape clause? And if the wage spiral the Bank worried about sparking tends to run on
headline inflation, would this switch have been beside the point, or would it have allowed a
shift of blame to the unions' lack of sophistication? On the basis of this case, it would
appear that the people who set the definitions of the inflation measures should be kept
separate from the people who assess success in achieving them. The United Kingdom's
framework might be compared with New Zealand's on this score: New Zealand's central
bank—partly because of the country's small size—retains some amount of discretion over
the short-run definition of the target inflation series and, on a few occasions, has exercised it.
Around the beginning of 1994, against the background of the better than expected
inflation performance, the Chancellor eased monetary policy further. Inflationary pressures
remained subdued as the lagged effect on prices of the earlier depreciation was offset by a
reduction in unit labor costs related to continued weak employment. Jt was apparent at the
time that pass-through of the onetime drop in the exchange rate upon ERM exit had been
effectively averted—a major success for the new monetary regime.i4 This triumph was even
more impressive than the Bank of Canada's successful avoidance of passing through a
onetime rise in taxes in 1991, given that it followed a presumptive blow to U.K. credibility

upon the country's exit from the ERM. The base rate, which had been reduced from
6 percent to 5.5 percent in November 1993, was cut to 5.25 percent in February 1994. These
rate reductions occurred despite projections in every Inflation Report from August 1993 on
that inflation would rise until the end of 1995. Indeed, actual inflation did not start to rise
until the end of 1994.

When assessing its past predictions, the Bank repeatedly mentioned slow earnings
growth and a squeeze in retail margins as reasons for the unexpectedly low inflation
outcome. Although cast as a difference over the implications of incoming economic data,
the divergence between the Bank's opinion and the Chancellor's policies could, in our view,
reflect differing assessments of the importance of achieving the inflation target in the short
81

run. Indeed, as long as the elected official can appeal to differences between his or her
own private forecast and the central bank's published forecast, the official can hide what is
actually a weaker commitment to the stated inflation goal. We find this pattern again
in the next situation we consider.
Throughout 1994, GDP grew vigorously, with fourth-quarter GDP exceeding the
previous year's by 4 percent. For the first ten months, RPIX inflation was trending downward,
reaching a twenty-seven-year low of 2 percent in September and October before it started to

rise to 2.5 percent in December. The unemployment rate fell further during the year, to

around 9 percent. Sterling (according to the Bank's index) had peaked at the end of 1993
and trended slightly downward during the year.
During the summer of 1994, it became clear to the Bank that the economy was
rebounding more strongly than expected, and the Inflation Report began to cite evidence of
inflationary pressures (for example, growth in wholesale prices). Despite the still-improving
inflation performance—both RPJY and RPJX inflation at the time were below 2.5 percent
and falling—the Chancellor, on the advice of the Governor, raised the base rate on September
12, and again on December 7, by 0.5 percent each time. Unlike the previous tightening in
1988, these base rate increases were preemptive—a fact that was widely noted in the
press.15 The ability to tie current policies to a future priority, and to justify those policies as
acting with a lag, appears to be one advantage of having a specified medium-term goal
consistent across targeting regimes.
The discussions between Chancellor Clarke and Governor George during the time
leading up to the September 1994 tightening offer some insight into the role that the
Bank's medium-term inflation forecasts play in the policy-setting process. During their
meeting on July 28, the Governor pointed out that, on the basis of the Bank's latest
forecast,

he did see a risk to the inflation objective in 1996, implying a need to tighten
policy in some degree before very long. . . . He was not, on the current best guess,
forecasting a strong upturn in inflation, and there was, as always, a significant
margin of error around that best guess. But the best guess for mid-1996 was already
slightly above the mid-point of the target range, and there was an uncomfortable
sense that the upside risks to the medium-term forecast might, this time, be
somewhat greater than the downside risks.'6
The Chancellor, however, remarked that "there was a danger of trying to set a game
plan too far in advance and not looking at the actual evidence as it unfolded. . . The
.

forecasts suggested inflation might be even lower in the next few months."7 Although
agreement was reached not to raise interest rates at that time, this decision made
ambiguous the extent to which monetary policy decisions were indeed based on the Bank's
medium-term forecast. While the existence of target commitments, and the Bank's open
statements of opinion, moved the U.K. government toward a more forward-looking
monetary policy, the government could not be forced into the policy that the Bank
considered optimal. Again, the government's private forecast—even if driven as a politically
82

motivated markdown from the Bank's formal analysis—became the actual target. Moreover,

because both the estimate itself and the reasoning behind it were not shared with the
public, the government forecast could not fully serve as a transparent target.18

During 1995, GDP growth decelerated, from 4 percent between the fourth
quarter of 1993 and the fourth quarter of 1994, to 2 percent by the last quarter of 1995.
The unemployment rate continued its gradual downward trend, reaching 8 percent at
years end. RPIX inflation rose to 2.8 percent in January, and for the rest of the year
fluctuated between 2.6 percent and 3.1 percent without exhibiting any trend. Early in
1995 it became apparent that output growth, although slightly slower than in early
1994, was still running high relative to potential, and that observation contributed to the
Bank and the Chancellor's belief in a worsening inflation outlook. Consequently, on
February 2, the base rate was raised 0.5 percent, to 6.75 percent. Despite this preemptive
interest rate increase, the exchange tate fell steeply over the three months following the
February increase. By May 4, the Bank of England's sterling index was down 4.7 percent
from February 2. The depreciation was seen to aggravate the discrepancy between the
recovery in the tradables sector and that in the nontradables sector, a discrepancy that
became increasingly evident at this time, This "dual economy" was highlighted by the
contrast between 10 percent growth in export volumes during 1994 and flat retail sales and
falling earnings growth in services during early 1995.
As a consequence of the depreciation and the resulting increase in import prices,
the Bank's RPIX inflation projection in May 1995 was revised upward nearly 1 percent
throughout 1996 from the February forecast, with RPIX inflation reaching almost
4 percent in the first half of 1996 before falling to around 2.5 percent in early 1997.' The
potenrial consequences of the exchange rate development for the inflation outlook
completely dominated the discussion during the monthly meetings on April 5 and May 5.
At least indirectly, this discussion informed the public that the pass-through to inflation
from exthange rate movements was faster than that from either output or interest rates.
It was against the background of this upward revision of the Bank's inflation
forecast and the dual economy mentioned above that in their meeting on May 5, 1995, the
Chancellor overruled the Governor's advice to raise interest rates. This refusal of Chancellor
Clarke to raise rates provides an even starker example of the conflict (and the difficulties in

assigning accountability) arising from the Bank of England's dependent status than the
November 1993 episode discussed earlier. At the end of that day's monthly meeting with
Governor George, Chancellor Clarke immediately summoned the press and announced that
he was leaving rates unchanged; since, contrary to custom, the Governor was not present to
echo the Chancellor's post-meeting statement, and Clarke gave some details of the
discussion (including some of George's reasons for concluding that inflation was a real
threat) rather than waiting for release of the minutes six weeks later, it was clear that
Clarke was overruling the Bank.2° Clarke cited his personal skepticism about the
incoming and forecasted U.K. growth numbers but seemed to be as intent on making the
conflict apparent as on explaining it (Chote, Coggan, and Peston 1995).

83

Perhaps this candor from Chancellor Clarke was a response to the new strength

granted the Bank through the inflation-target-reporting framework: facing this reality,
Clarke may have felt that the best defense was a good offense, The conflict would have been
confirmed with the release of the Bank's May Inflation Report a week later. The Bank's
central estimate was for 3 percent inflation in two years' time, indicating that, contrary to
the government's pledge, inflation would be in the upper half of the target range at the end
of the sitting Parliament. Furthermore, the Bank added that the risks to its forecast were
almost uniformly on the upside and that these risks were 'large." The Bank explicitly noted
that sterling was depreciating as it had in the fall of 1992, but that, unlike then, wage and
capacity pressures were high.
Upon taking office, Chancellor Clarke had made a commitment to Governor
George that he would not censor the inflation Report at any time, but in return he reserved

the right to say he disagreed. What seems to have emerged as accountability for policy
decisions in this framework is a system in which the Chancellor has to make explicit his or
her independence from the Bank of Englands position when a disagreement exists, and to
make some modest effort to justifr the rejection of the Bank's inflation forecast. As
suggested above, however, while this system may have a salutary effect on the overall
counterinflationary stance of policy, it may undermine public trust in the competency and
objectivity of forecasting and of policymaking, and may even obscure what the actual
forecast is.

Over the following months, it became apparent that the Chancellor had guessed
right as a forecaster. GDP first-quarter growth was revised downward, new numbers on
housing and manufacturing came in below expectations, and the global bond market rally
(surrounding the expected drop in U.S. interest rates) supported the pound. In a September
1995 account of the Chancellor-Governor discussions since May, Governor George
reiterated that "we still think that the chances are against achieving the inflation target over
the next 18 months or so without some further [base rate) rise," but he conceded that "we
are not in fact pressing for one—and have not been doing so since before the summer break"
(George 1995a).
So should the Bank be taken to task for being less accurate in forecasting than the

Chancellor ex post in this one instance? Since the Chancellor's private forecast of May 1995
remained private in number and reasoning, at least in comparison with the inflation Report,
it again proved impossible to determine whether Clarke disagreed with the Bank because he
was skeptical of the growth forecasts, or simply because he was willing to take a risk of

greater inflation to achieve higher growth. Would a point-by-point rebuttal of the Inflation
Report, however, have been worth the additional information given the damage it might
have done to perceptions of the Bank's forecasting role? A record of forecast performance
clearly matters for accountability; equally clearly, however, reducing the monetary policy
debate to a Chancellor-Bank forecasting competition is undesirable. This tension appears to
be inevitable as long as the transparent (and intended-to-be-persuasive) forecast and the
interest rate decisions come from different sources.
84

The minutes of the meetings do not provide any clear answers to these questions
but accentuate the issues. Specifically, the minutes give the impression that the subject of
discussion between the Governor and the Chancellor is never the stated reasoning behind
the Bank's medium-term forecast itself, but rather whether the most recent data that feed
into the forecast represent an underlying trend or are distorted by some contemporaneous
event. The minutes of the discussion during the June 7, 1995, meeting state that "while
one strength of the policy process was that all the new evidence was examined each month
for its implications for inflation, it was important not to read too much into one months
data which could prove to be erratic."21 This sort of discussion might be construed as
undermining the importance of the Bank's medium-term forecast.

On June 14, 1995, in his Mansion House Speech to the City, Chancellor Clarke
(1995) extended the announced inflation target beyond the latest possible date of the next
general election. The Chancellor did admit, however, that inflation could well temporarily
rise above 4 percent, the top of the target range, in the following two years; he also left
some confusion about whether meeting the target entailed being below the 4 percent
ceiling or below the 2.5 percent target set by him and his predecessor for the end of this
Parliament. Governor George (1995b), in his speech to the same audience, referred only to
the 2.5 percent target, calling it achievable. Inflation expectations at a ten-year horizon, as
derived from government bond yields, then rose upon these remarks, from 4.36 percent in
early May to 4.94 percent in late July, a move that only in late 1996 began to be reversed.
The Bank's inflation outlook during the second half of 1995 was shaped by
weighing the upside risks to inflation resulting from the lagged effects of the earlier
sterling depreciation against the downside risks from increasing signs of slowing output
growth and a buildup in inventories, particularly during the second quarter of 1995.
Domestically generated inflation pressures remained weak, with tradables inflation
continuing to outpace that of nontradables. In addition, the Bank noted in its November
Inflation Report that during the current cycle, real wages had been much more subdued than
expected. Still, RPIX inflation, at 3.1 percent in the year to September, was forecast to peak
at about 3.5 percent during the first half of 1996. Substantial downward revisions of GDP
figures for the first three quarters of 1995 and an unexpectedly low RPIX inflation rate of
2.9 percent in the year to November set the stage on December 13 for the first of four
successive quarter-point cuts in the base rate.
The hoped-for "soft landing" of the U.K. economy materialized in 1996. GDP
growth picked up toward the end of 1996; in the third quarter, GDP was up 2.4 percent
over its level for the third quarter of 1995. The unemployment rate continued its gradual

decline, dropping to 6.7 percent by December 1996. From October 1995 to September
1996, RPIX inflation fluctuated only between 2.8 percent and 3 percent, then rose to 3.3
percent in October and November. From January to the end of September, sterling
strengthened gradually from 83.4 to 86.1 according to the Bank's exchange rate index, then
finished the year in a rally at 96.1, an appreciation of 11.6 percent over three months.
85

Receding cost pressures and weak manufacturing output data, as well as a GDP
figure ofo.5 percent, for the last quarter of 1995 prompted the next two quarter-point base
rate cuts on January 18 and March 8. Ar their March 8 meeting, the Chancellor and the

Governor agreed that demand and output were likely to pick up later in the year and
through 1997, and that there was a possibility that the latest rate cut would have to be
reversed at some point. Again, given the credibility of the Bank of England's role as the
Chancellor's counterinflationary conscience, the Bank granted the Chancellor a de facto
escape clause—or at least justification of future reversals as necessary and not reflective of a

shift in preferences—when the Bank supported the Chancellor's interpretation of the
economy. In May 1995, a similar defense had been offered, but not used; this time the option
was exercised by mutual agreement.
The Bank's assessment did not change during the spring, and its medium-term
projection published in the May Inflation Report was essentially unchanged from the
previous one. The central projection of RPIX inflation in two years remained at 2.5 percent,
with the risks biased downward over the short term but upward over the medium term
betause of uncertainties concerning the strength of the expected pickup in activity.

Following rhe June 5 meeting, the Chancellor announced another quarter-point cut in
the base rate despite the opposition of the Governor, arguing that the cut was sufficiently
small not to cause any significant inflationary risk, while reducing the downside risks to the
recovery. If consumer demand started growing too strongly, and put the inflation target at
risk, the rates could be raised when this became evident."22 In this instance as in those
discussed earlier, there appears to be some tension between the Bank's forward-looking
approach based on its projections and the Chancellor's tendency to emphasize the current
economic situation and the latest data. With the election approaching (and the time
dwindling for monetary policy to take effect before the election), the elected Chancellor
may have been willing to take greater inflation risks on behalf of economic growth than
before.

The August Inflation Report was unusually frank about the consequences of the June
base rate cut the Bank had opposed. Citing as evidence "lower interest rates since May, the
new Treasury forecasts for taxes and public spending, and the slightly better-than-expected
gross export performance in the first half of the year" (p. 45), the Bank projected that
inflation would rise above 2.5 percent. Consistent with this assessment, from their August

meeting on, the Governor was pressing for a rate increase, but it was only on October 30,
1996, that the Chancellor agreed to raise the base rate by a quarter point, to 6 percent.
Some in the financial press speculated that the decision to raise the base rate then might be
intended to avert further rate increases as the general elections, which had to be held by
May 1997 at the latest, approached.23
This ongoing split between the agency that makes the inflation forecast and the

agency that makes the policy decisions, and the bias it imparts to inflation expectations,
could be characterized as the basic limitation of the largely successful inflation-targeting
regime in the United Kingdom. The problem may have contributed to the decision on

86

May 6, 1997, by the new Labour Government to grant operational independence to the
Bank of England. The new Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, called a news
conference moving up his scheduled monthly meeting with the Governor of the Bank of
England; it was expected that he would announce an interest rate hike—long sought by
the Bank—to deal with mounting inflation pressures (RPIX inflation was forecast to be
2.9 percent by the end of 1997). Chancellor Brown did announce a quarter-point hike in
the base rate, the main monetary policy instrument, but then also made the surprise
announcement that control of the base rate in pursuit of the inflation targets (as well as
short-term exchange rate intervention) would now be given to the Bank of England.
One important factor in the decision to grant the Bank of England operational
independence was its successful performance over time as measured against an announced
clear baseline. Another factor cited by Chancellor Brown in granting independence was the
increased accountability achieved through the emphasis on transparency in the inflationtargeting framework—a change that made monetary policy from an independent central
bank more responsive to political oversight. When monetary policy goals and performance
in meeting them are publicly stated, as they are in the U.K.'s inflation-targeting regime,
the policies pursued cannot diverge from the interests of society at large for extended
periods of time, yet can be insulated from short-run political considerations.

Decision-making power was vested in a newly created Monetary Policy
Committee, and beginning in June, meetings of that Committee replaced the ChancellorGovernor meetings. The Committee consisted of nine members: the Governor and two
Deputy Governors (one for monetary policy, one for financial matters), two other Bank
Executive Directors, and four members appointed by the government (all well-known
academic or financial economists). Members serve (eventually staggered) three-year
renewable terms.
The elected government retained a "national interest" control over monetary policy,
in essence an escape clause allowing it to overrule the Bank's interest rate decisions or
pursuit of the inflation target when it deemed such action necessary. The government did
not specify ahead of time any formal process for implementing the escape clause or any set
of conditions under which the clause would hold.

On June 12, just prior to the first meeting of the Monetary Policy Committee,
Chancellor Brown told the Committee to pursue a target of 2.5 percent for underlying
inflation. The range was officially replaced with a 1 percent "threshold" on either side of the
target. "Their function is to define the points at which I shall expect an explanatory letter
from you [the Committee]," stated Brown. The open letter would require the Bank's
explanation of why inflation has moved so far from the target, what policy actions will be

taken to deal with it, when inflation is expected to be back on target, and how this
meets its monetary policy objectives. The Chancellor retains the ability to tell the Bank
how quickly he wishes the miss to be rectified (see Chote (1997]).

It is important to point out that the mandated response to a target miss in this
framework is to provide more public explanarion. The government is not precommitted to

87

punishing the Bank for misses, say by dismissing the Governor, nor to a specified course of
action. Thus, the government's control over the Bank of England is more like that exerted
by the Canadian Parliament over the Bank of Canada than that imposed by the New

Zealand government on its central bank through a very explicit and rule-like escape
clause. As in all the cases we consider except the Bundesbank, however, the level and time
horizon of the inflation target remained under the Cabinet's control—the Bank was not
granted goal independence.24
As we noted at the start of this section, we would expect this change in framework

to increase transparency of monetary policy by tying decisions to the published Inflation
Report forecasts (and reasoning), thereby increasing accountability and decreasing interest
rate uncertainty. In addition, such a move may be expected to increase the credibility of the
United Kingdom's commitment to its inflation targets, because deviations from target now
require the government to overrule the Bank publicly or to reset the target. Under the old
regime, the government could potentially attribute deviations from the announced target to
disagreements over short-run forecasts.
KEY LESSONS FROM THE UNITED KINGDOM'S EXPERIENCE
The United Kingdom's experience has particularly interesting lessons for inflation
targeting. Until May 1997, inflation targeting was conducted under severe political
constraints—that is, under a system in which the government, not the central bank, set the
monetary policy instruments. As a result, it was not at all clear what motivated decisions to

move (or keep steady) interest rates: was it differences in forecasts between the Chancellor
and the Governor or differences in commitment to the announced inflation goals? Also
unclear was the party accountable for achieving the inflation targets: was it the agency that
made public forecasts (the Bank of England) or the agency that set the monetary policy
instruments (the Chancellor of the Exchequer)? In addition, as we noted above, this lack of
clarity led to much confusion about the degree of commitment to inflation targets and gave

a strong impression that short-run political considerations were influencing monetary
policy.

Despite this handicap, however, British inflation targeting has helped produce
lower and more stable inflation rates. The success of inflation targeting in the United
Kingdom can be attributed to the Bank of England's focus on transparency and the effective
explanation of monetary policy strategy. Perhaps because for many years its position was
weaker than that of the other central banks discussed here, the Bank of England led the way

in producing innovative ways of communicating with the public, especially through its
Inflation Report. Indeed, the Bank of England's achievements in communication have been
emulated by many other central banks pursuing inflation targeting.

88

Part VIL

How Successful Has Inflation
Targeting Been?

An initial look suggests that inflation targeting has been a success: inflation was within or
below the target tange for all targeting countries, and noticeably below the countries'
average inflation levels of the 1970s and 1980s. The macroeconomic baselines shown
in the chart series in Parts 111-VT of this study indicate that the reduced inflation levels in these

countries were sustained without benefit or harm from unusual macroeconomic
conditions.
In New Zealand, the disinflation during the four years prior to target adoption was
accompanied by a period of sluggish GDP growth and, since 1988, rising unemployment. The

continuation of the disinflation during 1990-9 1, amid recession in many other
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) economies, led to
recession and sharply rising unemployment. In Canada, the disinflation was achieved along with

continued progress in lowering unemployment, only a brief spike in nominal interest rates,

and continued positive, though slowing, growth. Similarly, in the United Kingdom, the

disinflation begun two years prior to target adoption (during membership in the
Exchange Rate Mechanism) continued against a background of improving growth,
falling unemployment, and much lower nominal interest rates in the wake of the
United Kingdom's exit from the European Monetary System.
Yet, while the reduction of inflation in these three countries represents a genuine
achievement, it is not clear whether the reduction was the result of forces that had already
been put in place before inflation targeting was adopted. Did the adoption of an inflation
target in the countries considered here have an effect on inflation and on its interaction with
real economic variables? In this section, we provide some tentative evidence on this question

by undertaking a very simple forecasting exercise. (Additional evidence from a wider range
of statistical investigations on a larger set of countries is found in Laubach and Posen
[1997bJ.) We estimate a three-variable untestricted vectot autoregression (VAR) model of
core inflation, GDP growth, and the central bank's overnight instrument interest rate from the
second quarter of 1971 to the date of target adoption; we then allow the system to run

forward five years from the time of target adoption, plugging in the model's forecast values
as lagged values.'

This exercise is meant to give a quantitative impression of whether the interaction
between inflation and short-term interest rates exhibits a pattern of behavior after the
adoption of the inflation target that differs markedly from the pattern before.2 The
unconditional forecast of each variable represents the way we would expect the system to

behave in the absence of shocks from the situation at the time of target adoption. The

comparison between what actually happened to these variables and their unconditional
forecast is reasonable for the early 1990s, given the absence of major supply and demand
shocks since adoption for the three inflation targeters we examine.3

89

In the three countries adopting inflation targets, disinflation through tighter
monetary policy had largely been completed by the time the target was adopted, allowing
interest rates to come down. (The year or so of fbrther disinflation appears to be attributable
to prior monetary policy moves, given policy lags.) This sequence of events is consistent
with our finding in the case studies that countries adopted targets when they wished to lock

in inflation expectations at a low level after a disinflation. The key question is whether

upward blips in inflation do or do not lead to persistent rises—holding output and
inflation constant—as they would have in a system estimated under the prior regime.
Charts 17-20 (pp. 105-8) plot the results of these simulations against the actual
path of the variables over the period for each of the three inflation-targeting countries plus
Germany. As might be expected, the simulations over time flatten out toward their sample
means or a slight trend (given the absence of shocks imposed by the unconditionality of the
simulation). For all three inflation targeters, the actual inflation rate comes in consistently
below what would have been expected and exhibits something of a downward trend as
opposed to the simulation's slight upward tendency. Complementarily, for all three
targeters, the actual interest rate used as the monetary policy instrument remains well
below the simulation's forecast throughout the period. Output appears to be largely
undisturbed by the adoption of targeting, averaging around the projected path in all three
countries. In general, inflation and nominal short-term interest rates seem to have declined since

target adoption without any major effect on output.
These results can be interpreted as consistent with a greater direct response of

inflation to monetary policy with fewer output effects along the way, given the movement of

interest rates at or below those forecast on average in the three targeters. Alternatively, these
results can be an indication that in the targeting countries, disinflation through tighter

monetary policy had begun and been largely completed by the time that targeting began,
but that inflation did not bounce back up afterward as expected.4
By contrast, the simulations for Germany clearly reflect the effects of monetary
unification, with both inflation and the monetary policy instrument exceeding their
projections and returning to them only in early 1994. GDP growth initially exceeded the
projection as a result of the expansion in aggregate demand, until in 1992 and 1993 the
effects of the increasingly restrictive monetary policy—as seen in interest rates well above
those forecast into the second half of 1994—forced output growth below its projected
trend. We interpret the return over time of inflation and the monetary policy instrument
to their projected levels after a surprise demand shock of great magnitude as a
characteristic of a successful targeting regime.
Our assessment of the effectiveness of inflation targeting in New Zealand, Canada,
and the United Kingdom is on the whole positive. In all three countries, the adoption of
targets was fbllowed by the movement of inflation into, and the maintenance of inflation
within, the announced target range. In the time since the adoption of inflation targets,
our unconditional forecasts indicate that inflation and nominal interest rates have
remained low in all three countries relative to the amount of output growth seen (which

90

itself approximates the level forecast). This set of results is consistent with the
interpretation that inflation does not appear to rise with business cycle expansions as it

had in the past. Laubach and Posen (1997b) provide further support for this interpretation,
presenting evidence from private sector forecasts and interest rate differentials that
medium- and long-run inflation expectations in New Zealand, Canada, and the United
Kingdom lie within these countries target ranges.

91

Part VIII.

Conclusions: What Have We Learned?

Our case studies indicate that both the adoption of inflation targets and the design choices for
that framework have made a difference in the operation of monetary policy. The design
choices of the targeting countries have tended to converge over time with regard to the
operational design questions posed in Part IT, suggesting that a consensus is emerging on best
practice in the operation of an inflation-targeting regime. Where the design choices have
differed, however, the experiences in the countries examined provide some insight about
what has resulted from the different choices. In general, the public announcement of
numerical targets for inflation has been very effective in balancing the needs for
transparency and flexibility in monetary policy.

The areas of operational design that show a convergence of practice include
the use of inflation as the target variable. Despite all the rhetoric associated with the
pursuit of price stability, all the targeting countries examined here have chosen an inflation
target—ranging from 0 to 4 percent annual inflation—rather than a price-level target. This
choice reflects concerns that a price-level target may require deflation when ptices overshoot
the target, an outcome that could entail far higher costs in output losses than are acceptable.
Reversals of past target misses, which would be required by a price-level target, do not
appear to be necessary for the maintenance of low inflation. Relatedly, targeting countries
that have chosen target values for inflation greater than zero make the possibility of
deflations less likely. It is important to emphasize that maintaining an inflation target at a
level even somewhat greater than zero for an extended period, as the Bundesbank has done,
does not appear to lead to instability in inflation expectations or diminished central bank
credibility. Even with a positive inflation target, admission of occasional errors does not
appear to be damaging.
These design choices are also consistent with building a high degree of flexibility
into the inflation-targeting regimes in all the countries studied here, in which central
bankers do demonstrate concern about real output growth and fluctuations. This is seen
particularly in the gradualism all targeting countries have exercised when disinflating, as
well as in the treatment by some countries of the inflation target's (implicit or explicit) floor
on price movements as a stabilizing factor. While the targeting countries differ in the
degree to which they emphasize particular indicators of inflation in their decision
making, all rely on an inclusive information framework untied to specific intermediate

target variables. All of these design choices support the contention in Bernanke and
Mishkin (1997) that inflation targeting should be seen as a framework rather than a rule.

In addition, all of the targeting countries allow for deviations from their targets in
response to supply shocks. Usually, the central bank will take action at its own discretion, when

such a response is not already built into the target definition, and then explain its actions.
Only in New Zealand has an explicit escape clause been invoked to justifr such actions,
although the Reserve Bank of New Zealand has also engaged in the more discretionary
92

forms of response. Actual inflation targets have been moved over time by all targeting
countries, whether up—as in the case of Germany after the 1979 oil shock or New Zealand
after the 1996 election—or down—as in all countries considered as disinflations proceeded.
As long as target movements ate announced sufficiently far in advance, thece is no sense that

the target is being moved to meet the short-run outcome; target movements are perceived
as adaptations to economic conditions. The key to the exercise of discretion in a disciplined

manner has been the central banks' ability to convey to the public the distinction between
movements in ttend inflation and onetime events.
The second main area in which targeting regimes have converged relates to their
stress on transparency and communication. The central banks in targeting countries
communicate by responding to elected officials' mandated as well as informal inquiries.

Even more important, the central banks keep the public informed about their policies and
performance by making frequent speeches on the strategy of monetary policy, as in the Bank
of Canada Governing Council's concerted public outreach campaign, and by periodically

issuing lay-oriented publications, such as the Bank of England's Inflation Report. Both of
these efforts are designed to explain clearly to the public the goals of monetary policy, the

long-run implications of current policy, and the strategies for achieving inflation targets.
Even the fully independent Bundesbank, which enjoys strong public support, has always
made great efforts along these lines.
Indeed, the intensive efforts by the central banks we study here to improve
communication have been crucial to the success of the targeting regimes. Increased
transparency and communication make explicit the central bank's policy intentions in a
way that improves private sector planning, enhances the possibility of sensible public
debate about what a central bank can and cannot achieve, and clarifies the responsibility of
both the central bank and the politicians for the performance of monetary policy with respect
to inflation goals.

Another feature of all the targeting regimes discussed here is the increased
accountability of the central bank. This feature is most evident in the case of New Zealand,
where the Reserve Bank is accountable not only to the general public, but also (and even
more directly) to the elected government, which can insist on the dismissal of the Governor
if the inflation targets are breached. In the other targeting countries, the accountability of
the central bank to the government is less formalized, but because of the increased
transparency of the targeting regime, the central bank is still highly accountable to the
general public and the political process.
As seen in the cases of Canada and the United Kingdom, as well as in the
Bundesbank's long experience, even where a rigid format of performance evaluation and
punishment is not present, successful performance over time against an announced clear
baseline can build public support for a central bank's independence and its policies.
Inflation targeting may thus be seen as consistent with an appropriate role for a central bank

in a democratic society: though inflation performance may improve by insulating a central
bank from short-term political pressures on interest rate decisions, a central bank can only
93

sustain such performance by remaining highly accountable to the political process over the

medium term for achieving appropriate, stated goals. When monetary policy goals and
performance in meeting them are publicly stated, they cannot diverge from the interests of
society at large for extended periods of time.
Another design choice common to the inflation-targeting countries is the decision
to formally adopt the new regime only after achieving some success in lowering inflation
from high levels. This reflects a tactical decision that it is important to have a high
likelihood of success in meeting the initial inflation targets in order to gain credibility for the

inflation-targeting regime. It also reflects the reality that credibility gains in the form of

changes in the output-inflation trade-off or other economic structures will not occur
immediately. Inflation targeting has been successfully used to lock in the benefits of previous
disinflations in the face of imminent onetime shocks, as we saw in the United Kingdom's
exit from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism and Canada's 1991 fiscal
developments.
Although there are many similarities among the design choices of the targeting
countries studied here, there are also some important differences. For example, the targeting
countries differ on the precise measure of inflation that should be used for the target. Some
countries use the headline consumer price index (CPI) as the price index in the inflation
target because it is readily understood by the public, while others exclude items from the
CPI index to allow for monetary policy accommodation of first-round effects of temporary
supply shocks. In the cases of Germany, Canada, and the United Kingdom, the emphasis has

been on simple target definitions, accompanied by potentially complicated explanations
of deviations from target, while in New Zealand the reverse course has been pursued
(although the long-run goal remains underlying inflation). The primary danger for any
target series, however defined, is to sacrifice transparency for policy flexibility. So long as a
target series is neither adjusted too frequently nor set too far from headline inflation, so that
the definition remains clear in the mind of the public, the exact choice of series is not that
critical.
Indeed, this balancing of transparency and flexibility relates to the manner of
producing the measured inflation series as well as to the definition per se. To permit
flexibility in its inflation-targeting regime, New Zealand has allowed the agency that is
accountable for meeting the targets (the Reserve Bank) to measure and make adjustments to
the target variable as well. In contrast, the other countries studied separate the agency
responsible for meeting the targets from the agency that measures the target variable.
Although allowing the central bank to measure and adjust the target variable has distinct
advantages in terms of increased flexibility, it has the undesirable effect of decreasing
transparency, which can weaken the effectiveness of the inflation-targeting regime.
Another major difference in the design of inflation-targeting regimes is that some
countries have a target range for inflation while others, such as the United Kingdom, now have
a point target. The apparent advantage of a range is that it gives the targeting regime more
explicit flexibility and conveys to the public the message that control of inflation is

94

imperfect. Nevertheless, as we have seen in countries targeting an inflation range, and as
we know from the similar experience of exchange rate targeting, the bands tend to take on a
life of their own, encouraging central banks, politicians, and the public to focus too much on
the exact edges of the range rather than on deviations from the midpoint of the range.
Furthermore, because a high degree of uncertainty is associated with inflation forecasts, it is

very likely that even with entirely appropriate monetary policy, the inflation rate may
fall outside the target range. This control problem can then lead to a loss of credibility
for the inflation-targeting regime.
In addition, firm bands can also lead to an instrument-instability problem,
particularly if the time horizon for assessing whether the target has been met is short—say
on the order of a year. This problem occurs when efforts to keep the targeted variable within a

specifled range cause policy instruments, such as short-term interest rates or the exchange

rate, to undergo undesirably large movements. The control and instrument-instability
problems have been comparatively more difficult in the case of New Zealand.
One solution to these problems is to widen the target range, as New Zealand did in
October 1996. However, if the range is made wide enough to reduce the instrumentinstability and control problems significantly, the targeting regime may lose credibility.
This would be particularly true if the public focuses on the edges of the range rather than
the midpoint, with an upper limit that might then be intolerably high. The act of widening
the range (as distinct from moving the target level in accord with events) might be seen as a
weakening of resolve in and of itself.
Another solution is to use a point target rather than a range, as the United
Kingdom decided to do in 1995 and as the Bundesbank has done for inflation since 1975.
To avoid control and instrument-instabilicy problems with a point target, however, it is
imperarive that the central bank communicate clearly to the public that a great deal of
uncertainty exists around the point target. This communication imposes a greater burden
on the power and persuasiveness of the central bank's explanations for deviations from target
than exists with a range. At the same time, the central bank's actual flexibility to cope with
target misses without damage to credibility is greater as long as the explanations are
believed. With a point target, success is not measured by hitting the target exactly, but
rather by how consistently the central bank gets close to the target over a medium term.
The analysis in this paper suggests that targeting inflation—whether directly, as in
New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom, or as the basis for a monetary targeting
regime, as in Germany—can be a useful strategy for the conduct of monetary policy. Since
the defining feature of the monetary frameworks in all four countries is the publicly
announced numerical target for medium-term inflation, we do not draw as great a
distinction between these two types of targeting regimes in operation as many do in theory.
Transparency and flexibility, properly balanced in operational design, appear to create a sound
foundation for a monetary strategy in pursuit of price stability, without requiring the
imposition of unnecessary rule-like constraints on policy.

95

That said, as our case studies suggest, inflation targeting is no panacea: it does not
enable countries to eliminate inflation from theit systems without cost, and anti-inflation
credibility is not achieved immediately upon the adoption of an inflation target. Indeed, the
evidence suggests that the only way for central banks to gain credibility is the hard way:
they have to earn it.
Still, we have seen that inflation targeting has been highly successful in helping

countries such as New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom to maintain low inflation
rates, something that they have not always been able to do in the past. Furthermore,
inflation targeting has not required the central banks to abandon their concerns about
other economic outcomes, such as the level of the exchange rate or the rate of economic
growth, in order to achieve low inflation rates. Indeed, there is no evidence that inflation
targeting has produced undesirable effects on the real economy in the long run; instead,
it has likely had the effect of improving the climate for economic growth. Given inflation
targeting's other benefits for the operation of monetary policy—it increases transparency
and communication, accountability, and the institutional commitment to low inflation—it
is a monetary policy strategy that deserves further study and consideration.

96

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: GERMANY

Chart I

ANNUAL AND UNAVOIDABLE (NORMATIVE) INFLATION
PERCENT

8
German monetary
tin ("cation
(July 1990)

Annual inflation

6

4

,JJt\,fdttt'\id\

.

•

•

•

Unavoidable
(normative)
inflation

-1
U

'— Start ci monetary
targeting
(lanuary 1975)

0

. I.l_
197!

I

73

75

I

77

79

81

83

85

87

89

I

91

93

95

97

Sources: Deutsche Buridesbank; Bank for International Settlements.

Notes: 'Unavoidable inflation is the tate rhosen by the Bundesbank for use in its qua ntiry equation for monetary forecastu. In 19W,, the Bundesbank renamed
race 'the rate of normative price inrrrase.

this

(barr 2

OVERNIGHT AND LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES
PERCENT

'6
14

12

ID

8
6

1971

73

75

'7

79

8!

83

85

87

89

9!

93

95

97

Source: Bank for I nternationil Settlements

97

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: GERMANY (CONTINUED)

Chart

M0NE1ARY GROWTH AND TARGETS
PERCENT
16

i:H

German monetary —
unification
(July 19%)

-—— Start of monetary

14

targeting

(January 1975)

IC

8
6
4

0

-4

I

I

I

73

1971

I

I

I

77

75

I

79

I UJ_I_L I
81

83

:

:

.

'

I

I

87

85

89

I
93

91

95

I
97

Sources: Deutsche Bundesbank; Bank icr International Settlements.
Note: The shift en a dashed line indicates the change rn the monetary aggregate targeted from CBM (cent cal hank money stock) to MS.

Chine

GDP GROWTH AND UNEMPLOYMENT
PERCENT

12

.— Stan of monetary
targeting
January 1975)

II)

-.e— German monetary

unification
(July 1990)

at_s
Unemployment

8

—. —

,'

a

—

—

Ca

4W V
0

aGDPg
I_
(

-4L__I
1971

I

I

73

'5

'7

I

I

79

81

I

I

83

I

I

85

I

I

87

I

I

L

89

91

I

-

93

I

I

I

95

97

Sources: Bank fir International Settlements: Organization flit Econo mit Cenperation and Development, 5Iain Ecrnwmie- Isdiaatne.i -

98

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: NEw ZEALAND

Chart 5

UNDERLYING INFLATION, HEADLINE INFLATION, AND TARGETS
PERCENT

20
IS

16
14
12
10
S

6
4

I)

1980

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Source: Reserve Bank of New Zealand.

Note.

The I-shaped Ivan ndicate the target ange for oflarton In cOca before the adopt,on ofan ongoing

horizontal

targcc tangr of

0 to 2 percent in March 1994; a dashed

line marks the midpoint ofthe ongoing target range.

Chart 6

BANK BILL AND LONG-TERM INTEREST RKFES
PERCENT
50.))

Bank bill rate
27

5
4— Stan ofinflarion
target'ng
(March 1990)

25.0
22 5
20.0

17.5

15.0

12.5

10.0

7.5

5.0

:iHIHHIJIiilI
1980

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Source: International Moneraty Fund, !sta7wainna/ F,zaatcia/ Staai,t)u.

99

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: NEW ZEALAND (CONTiNUED)

Chart 7

NOMINAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
ENDEX:

1990 100

'70
160
-..—-- Srarn

a1 inflation

targeting

ISO

(March 1990)
1.40

130
120
110
100

90

soImIii,H,iIi,iI,iiImImIi,,ImImI
1980

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

1,1,1111,111,11,,7T11,
90

91

92

93

94

95

96

I

I

97

Source: Bank for International Settlements.

Chart S

GDP GROWTH AND UNEMPLOYMENT
PERCENT

Stan olinflacion —.
12

targeting
(March 199W

Unemployment

0
8
6
-I

0

-4

I,', fl,I,,' lIllifli IlIllIlIlIllIll
H11
86
1980

81

82

83

84

85

87

88

89

',1'1 ii' 'iii

90

91

92

93

94

95

iI
96

,1
97

Source Reserve Bank of New Zealand.

100

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: CANADA

Chart 9

CORE INFLATION AND TARGETS
PERCENT
14

.— Stare ciiinflation
targeting

I?

(February 1991)

ID

S

6
Target range

4

I)

1980

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Sources: Baak of Canada; Bank for I neernationa I Setilemcnes.
Note: The I-shaped bars indicate the target range kit inflation in effect before adoption ofan ongotng target range of I

to 3

percent in January 1996; a dashed line marks

the midpoint of the ongoing target range

Chart JO

OVERNIGHT AND LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES
PERCENT

20

15

10

0
1980

81

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

9!

92

93

94

95

96

97

Sources: Bank furl nrernaeionsl Settlements; International Monetary Fund, Intrraiatns,aal Financial Szarastacn,

101

ECONOMIC flME LINE: CANADA (CONTINUED)

Chart 11

NOMINAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
INDEX: 1990 = TOO

Ito
105

'00
95

90

85

80

-.5

1980
Source:

HI

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

91

92

95

94

95

96

97

Bajok fur Inrernatiorial Secelemeocs.

Chart 12

GOP GROrFH AND UNFMPWYMENT
PERCENT
15

to

N

0

1980

Source:

8!

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development Macn Economic Indicators.

102

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: UNITED KINGDOM

Cban 13

RPIX INFLATION AND TARGETS
PERCENT
14

-— Stan ol inflation
targeting
(October 1992)

12

10

8

6

4

0

1980

8!

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

9!

92

93

94

95

96

97

Sources: Bank of England; Bank for International Settlements.

Note: The chart ahown the ahife from an nfl LEnin target range of Ito 4 percent, in effeL-r (earn October '992 to june 1995, to a point target of 2.5 percent (the midpoint
of the range, marked by a dashed line).

Chart 14

OVERNIGHT AND LONG-TERM INTEREST RATES
PeRCENT

.e— Stan of inflation
targeting
(October 1992)

:?

\

ernightnt

a

—

•;r''

'a

l-oog.term race

1111111' 11111111 lillIlli I'll,' IlIllill I'll III! I! I 'Ill! Ill!'
1980

8)

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

9!

92

93

94

95

96

I

97

Source. Bank for International Settlements.

103

ECONOMIC TIME LINE: UNITED KINGDOM (CONTINUED)

Chart])
NOMINAL EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
INnEr '990

tOO

140

130

I 20

'10

00

90

80
1980

8!

82

83

84

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

85

86

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

97

Source: Bank for Incernanonal Settlenenna.

Chart /6

GOP GROWTH AND UNEMPLOYMENT
PERCENT

IS

ID

0

-5

980

8!

82

83

84

Source: Organization for Economic Cooperanion and Development. Main Economic Indicaton.

104

(barn /T

DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS: GERMANY
Pr cc tNT
8

Actual

Panel A: Inflation
6

4

0

_

larcd

German enonera r —
unification

— (Icily 1990)

I

__4p

II)

I

I

I

I

i

i

i

I

i

i

i

I

i

i

i

I

i

i

i

I

I

i

i

Panel B: GOP Growth

8

6
4

0

German m onera ry —

'4
-6
10
9

S

unification
(July 1990)

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

6

1986

87

88

89

90

91

92

93

94

95

96

Sources: Authors' calcularinns; Bank for Inr erisarJiin a' Scttlc-mcnts; Organi ,ation for Economic Cooperation and Development. Main Era wane )sd,iatvrs
Notes: The chart depicts che results of a dynastic simulation of inflation, GDP growth, and the nominal interest race based on an unrestricted vector autoregression
(VAR) ofquarrerly observations a1 these three variables from the second quarter of 1971 up to the rime of German monetary unification. The solLd line represents the
actual values of th evaniables, and the dashed line represents the unconstrained forecast ofthe variables made from unification forward using the VAR ciielfitients. The
forecasts show the Nth the variables would have taken in the absence of German monetary unification and other unforeseen s hocks. In Pairl C, the nominal interest rate
used is rIse central bank's instrument interest rate.

105

Char: 18

/i

DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS: NEW ZEAL,NO
PERCENT
14

Panel A: Inflation

12

Stan of inflation +-

ID

targeting
March 1990)

8

Sinolated

a...

l.a.

6

-41
20

•k\ns\/rt\j\vr\
I II I ii I

I

I

Panel 5 GOP Growth

15

10

0
-5

-10

35

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

i

I

I

i

i

I

I

I

Start of infiaeion—.-

'I

V

—151

I

I

I

1111111

I

Panel C: Nominal lriteresr Rate

30

Start of inflation —*-target ing

(March 1990) —

25

20

w

IS

Simulated

Actual
ID

SI

I

1986

87

88

39

90

91

92

93

94

95

Sources: Authon' calculations; Reserve Bank of New Zealand; International Monetary Fund, Intrrnatwnaal Financial ia:iJ tics.
Notes. The chart depicts th eresolts of a dynamic simolanion of inflation, GDP growth, and the nominal i merest race based on an unrescric ted vector autoregression
(VAR) ofquanerly d,servarions of chest three variables Iron the second quarter of 1971 up to the lime of inflation target adoption. The solid line rrprrsentsr he
actual va1ues of the variablea, and the dashed line represents the unconstrained forecast of the vana bles made from adoprion forward using the VAR coefficients. The
forecasts show the path the variables would have taken in the absence ofinflacion rargening and ocher unforeaeen shocks. In Panel C. the nominal interest rate used is
the New Zealand ninety-day bank bill rate.

106

Churt 19

DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS: CANADA
PERCEvT
8

Panel A: Inflation
6
Simulaced

4

0
Srart of inflation —'
-2

targeting
(February 199])

'4

'11111111 111111111 11111 11111 11111111111 I
10

Panel B: GDP Growth

-

-

Start of inflation —*-

S

(February 1991)

.....

6

4

0

-6

llIllIllIIl,I

14

Panel C: Nominal Interest Rare
12

.....

10

.. - —.

8

6

4
I

I

1986

I

I

I

8'

I

I

88

89

I

90

I

9]

92

I

i_i
93

I

I

94

i__LI
95

I

I_IJ
96

Sources: Authors' calculations: Bank for International Settlements; OrgansLzation for Economic Ceasperation and Development, Alazaia ficonrnva:r isdicaar,o.

Notes: The charc depLrts the results of a dynamsr simulation of inflation, GDP growth, and the nominal in terest rare tassed ott an unrestricted vector

(VAR) of quarterly obaervaciosss of these three variables front the second quarter of ]9 I up to thct inc of inflation target adoption. The aolid line represents the
actual values ofthe variables, and the dashed line represents the unronstraanrd foretast oIthe variables made from adoption forward using the VAR coefficients. The
forecasts show the path rhe variables would have taken in the absence of inflation targeting and other unforeseen shcic'ka. En Panel C, the nominal incerest rate used is
the central batik's instrument ml crest rate.

107

Chart 2(7

DYNAMIC SIMULATIONS: UNITED KINGDOM
PERCENT

Iii

Panel A: Inflation

Stan of inflari
targeting

12

10

8

Simulated

6
4

2

1)

I

I

I

I

I

i

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

I

10

Panel B: GDP Growth

Stan of inflation —0targeting
(October 1992)

8
6

Simulated

4
2

16

lllIllIlIlLlIIiiiiiiIilI,i
Stan of inflation —..
targeting
(October 1992) — _____________________________________________________________

14

12
Simulated

—. - a

/_/_%4f_._aaa_ii..%¼\\\%,,

10

-

--

F

8

I!HI
Actual

4111111111111! 11111111' 11111
986

87

88

89

90

91

92

95

94

95

96

I

97

Sources: Authors calculations, Bank for International Settlements; Organization for Economic Cooperation and Develcsptnent, Main Easterner Indiratora.

Notes: 'rho chart depicts the results ofa dynamic simulation of inflation, GDP growth, and the nominal interest rate based on an unrestricted vector autoregression
(VAR) ofqaarterly obsenaciona of these three variables from the second quarter of 1971 up to the tine of inflation target adoption. iThe solid line represents the
actual values ofnhe variables, and the dashed line represents the unconstrained forecast ofthe variables made from acoprion forward using the VAR coefficients. Thr
forecasts show the Nrh the variables would have taken in the absence of inflation targets'ng and other unforeseen shocks. In Panel C, the nominal interest rate used is
the central bank' sinseru nest interest rate.

108

ENDNOTES

INTRODUCTION

1. See a companion piece to this study, Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), for a more theoretical
discussion of the rationale for inflation targeting. In particular, the authors stress that
inflation targeting should be seen not as a tule, but as a framework that has substantial

flexibility.

PART I. THE RATIONALE FOR INFLATION TARGETING

1. "I believe that the potentiality of monetary policy in offsetting other forces making for
instability is far more limited than is commonly believed. We simply do not know enough
to be able to recognize minor disturbances when they occur or to be able to predict either
what their effects will be with any precision or what monetary policy is required to offset
their effects. We do not know enough to be able to achieve state objectives by delicate, or
even fairly coarse, changes in the mix of monetary and fiscal policy" (Friedman 1968, p. 14).
2. This argument is made in the leading macroeconomics and money and banking
textbooks. For examples, see the discussion in Dornbusch and Fischer (1994, p. 437), Hall
and Taylor (1993, pp. 440-1), Mankiw (1994, p. 323), and Mishkin (1994, pp. 701-4).

3. This view is accepted in the leading macroeconomics and monetary economics
textbooks. For examples, see Abel and Bernanke (1995, pp. 458-9), Barro (1993, p.497),
Hall and Taylor (1993, p. 222), Mankiw (1994, p.479), and Mishkin (1994, pp. 65 1-4).
4. This argument was developed in papers by Kydland and Prescott (1977), Calvo (1978),
and Barro and Gordon (1983).
5. Briault (1995) gives a good summary of these effects.

6. Sarel (1996), for example, presents a strong argument that the growth costs of inflation
are nonlinear and rise significantly when inflation exceeds 8 percent annually.

7. See judson and Orphanides (1996). Hess and Morris (1996) also disentangle the
relationship between inflation variability and the inflation level for low-inflation countries.
8. For central bankers' views, see Crow (1988), Leigh-Pemberton (1992), and McDonough
(1996a); for academics' views, see Fischer (1994) and Goodhart and Vinals (1995).
There is also a literature suggesting that lower inflation will not only produce a higher
level of output but also cause higher rates of economic growth, thereby providing a further

reason for pursuing the goal of price stability. For example, see Fisher (1981, 1991, 1993),
Bruno and Easterly (1995), and Barro (1995).
109

9. However, as pointed out in Bernanke and Mishkin (1997), the provisions for short-run
stabilization objectives in inflation-targeting regimes suggest that, in practice, inflation
targeting may not be very different from nominal GDP targeting.

PART III. GERMAN MONETARY TARGETING: A PRECURSOR TO INFLATION TARGETING

1. Laubach and Posen (1997a) provides a more detailed analysis of the German case as well
as a comparison with the Swiss monetary targeting regime and address many of the same
themes.

2. While this belief may indeed be consistent with later academic arguments that there is
an inflationary bias to monetary policy (for example, because of time inconsistency) requiring

a central bank to tie its hands, it is important to note that Germany's adoption of monetary
targeting precedes these arguments by several years. Some later observers have argued that
the Germans were broadly distrustful of monetary discretion, but this interpretation should
not be exaggerated through contemporary mindset. To most observers, that issue had
already been addressed by the granting of independence to the Bundesbank in 1957, the
distrust being the politicization of monetary policy.

3. The announcement was reprinted in Deutsche Bundesbank (1974b, December, p. 8).
4. The central bank money stock is defined as currency in circulation plus sight deposits,
time deposits with maturity under four years, and savings deposits and savings bonds with
maturity under four years, the latter three weighted at their required reserve ratios as of
January 1974. The Bundesbank's rationale for this choice of intermediate target variable
will be discussed in the next section.
5. Neumann (1996) and Clarida and Gertler (1997) argue both points, that the Bundesbank
has multiple goals and that it does not strictly target money. Von Hagen (1995) and
Bernanke and Mihov (1997) focus on the latter point, while Friedman (1995) discusses why
the Bundesbank might not want to look at M3.

6. The weights are 16.6 percent, 12.4 percent, and 8.2 percent, respectively.
7. See, for example, Deutsche Bundesbank (1981a, "Recalculation of the Production
Potential of the Federal Republic of Germany").
8. The vast variety and depth of information provided by the Bundesbank in its Monthly
Report and Annual Report would appear to be evidence that a wide range of information
variables, far beyond M3, velocity, and potential GDP, play a role in Bundesbank decision
making (the work involved in producing the data and analysis makes it unlikely that it is
merely a smokescreen or a public service). Nevertheless, monetary policy moves are always
justified with reference to M3 and/or inflation developments, rather than with these other
types of data.
110

9. The Bundesbank describes the Annual Report as "a detailed presentation of economic
trends, including the most recent developments, together with comments on current

monetary and general economic problems."

10. Actually, it was the third year of four in a row where the 8.0 percent CBM monetary
growth point target was exceeded by at least a percentage point (see Bernanke and Mishkin
[1992, p. 201, Table 4]).
11. Two more technical developments also suggested the switch from CBM to M3 targets.
The first was that minimum reserve requirements had changed substantially since 1974, so
that CBM, computed on the basis of 1974 ratios, corresponded less and less to the monetary
base and thus to 'the extent to which the central bank has provided funds for the banks'
money creation." The second development was the increasing need to include new
components, such as Euro-deposits held by domestic nonbanks, in some broadly defined
money stock for control purposes. Since these components had never been subject to
minimum reserve requirements, the weight at which they should enter CBM was not clear,
a problem that does not exist for some extended definition of M3.
12. "'While officially the question of the correct exchange rate was still under discussion, the
German Chancellor announced his decision on the exchange rate without informing
Bundesbank President Karl-Otto PohI, although they had met only a few hours before"
(Hefeker 1994, p. 383). See Marsh (1992) for a longer historical description. For most east
German citizens, personal assets were converted at the rate of 1 to 1. However, for larger

holdings, a declining rate of exchange was employed.

13. Since the achievement in the mid-1980s of effective price stability in Germany, the
Bundesbank has spoken of 'normative price increases" rather than "unavoidable inflation" in
response to the high inflation of the 1970s and early 1980s (we are grateful to Otmar Issing
for emphasizing this shift to us). This change in language could be interpreted as a sign that
the Bundesbank expresses greater confidence in its ability to achieve its ultimately desired
inflation goal.
14. For two recent examples of this repeated argument, see Issing (1995b) and Schmid
(1996).

PART IV. NEW ZEALAND

1. Before the passage of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act of 1989, the Reserve Bank
was ranked as low in independence. See Alesina and Summers (1993).

2. "The role of monetary policy under [the new government's] approach is aimed in the
medium term at achieving suitably moderate and steady rates of growth in the major
monetary aggregates. This is directed ultimately at the inflation rate, as control over the
monetary aggregates is seen as a prerequisite for a lower, more stable rate of inflation"
(Reserve Bank of New Zealand 1985b, p. 513).

111

3. The problem of the treatment of housing costs was addressed at the beginning of 1994,
when the weight of existing dwellings in the CPI was largely replaced by including the cost
of construction of new houses. Similar problems in the treatment of housing costs were a
feature of the CPI in the United States before 1983.
4. This is not simply a matter of who guards the guardian, serious though that may be.
"Because the Reserve Bank's estimate of underlying inflation relies on judgment in its
construction, its validity cannot be directly verified [by outside observers]. In addition, there
is room for disagreement concerning the proper model to be used in estimating the impact
of one-time shocks' (Walsh 1995). The Reserve Bank itself has made note of this potential
conflict of interest and its possible effect on credibility in articles in the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand Bulletin.

5. Strictly speaking, the first PTA only allowed for, or required renegotiation of, the
Agreement, while the second and third PTAs required such a response to shocks.
6. We are grateful to Governor Brash for clarifying this point. The exclusion of the effects
of taxes imposed by local authorities proved impractical given the difficulties of identifying
policy changes at that level. The effect, however, remained potentially quite large, with
the movement toward "user-pays pricing" of services provided by the public sector as part of
the broader reforms.
7. Some bank documents, however, have made the contradictory claim that the move to
targeting and centtal bank independence would be expected to have an effect on the potential
costs of disinflation. For example, 'in order to improve the prospects of monetary policy to
remain—and be seen to remain—on the track to low inflation, and thereby help reduce the
costs of disinflation, attention turned to possible institutional arrangements which would
improve monetary policy credibility" (Lloyd 1992, p. 208). See Posen (1995), Hutchison and
Walsh (1996), and Laubach and Posen (1997b) for econometric assessments of this effect.

8. Again, this may be contrasted to the Bundesbank's framework, which does not address
the short-run real effects of monetary policy in public statements but keeps all responsibility
for the timing and duration of disinflation with the Bundesbank.
9. The article cited here, while signed by Lloyd, not only appeared in the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand Bulletin under the authoritative title "The New Zealand Approach to Central Bank

Autonomy," but parts of it also appeared verbatim in other statements by Reserve Bank of
New Zealand officials given in 1992 and 1993, so it is reasonable to treat this statement as
representative of the Bank's view.

10. With regard to financial stability, inflation targeting has an important advantage over
an exchange rate peg because under an inflation target, the central bank has the ability to act
as a lender of last resort. This option is not as available with a fixed exchange rate regime, as
the Argentinean experience in 1995 demonstrates (see, for example, Mishkin [1997]).
112

11. A similar point about the gap between the perception and the operational reality of
monetary targeting in Germany was made in the case study in Part HI.
12 For brevity, references in this section are given by the month and year of the Monetary
Policy Statement.

13. See, for example, New Zealand Herald (1990a).

14. See New Zealand Herald (1 990b). Interestingly, after losing power, the Labour Party,
which instituted the inflation targets (and the economic reforms, more generally) after
taking office in 1984, announced its opposition to the inflation target remaining at a narrow
2 percent band, although it continued to be adamant that the center of the target range
should remain at 1 percent.

15. In March 1997, the Bank discussed moving to a more directly controlled instrument
rate, but inJune the Bank announced that a directly controlled interest rate would in fact
not be adopted.
16. See, for example, Reuters Financial Service (1991).

17. Until December 1993, the Bank's inflation forecasts assumed that the exchange rate
would remain constant at the level present at the time of the forecast. The vindication of the
statement above over the preceding two years led the Bank in June 1994 to assume from that
point on an annual appreciation equal to the difference between the trade-weighted inflation
forecasts for New Zealand's main trading partners and the midpoint of the 0 to 2 percent

target range from June 1994.
18. See, for example, Louisson (1994).

19. We are grateful to Governor Brash for his discussion of these developments.
20. Proportional representation was approved in a nationwide referendum. It was largely
interpreted as a means for the public to put a brake on activist programs by the
government—be they of the right or left reform persuasion—for under majoritarian
parliaments, New Zealand had seen major shifts (such as Labour's "Rogernomics" reforms
after 1984), whereas coalition governments would be less likely ro accomplish this. The
effects of multiple parties on inflation rates and fiscal policy (usually held to increase the
former and loosen the latter in the economics literature) do not seem to have entered the
discussions.

113

PART V. CANADA

1. To cite two examples of expectational sluggishness: "There is no doubt that Canadian
markets are not at all supportive of inflationary actions nowadays. But it does take time for
such reality to have an impact on market behavior, and on the costs and prices that flow from
this behavior" (Crow 1991b, p. 13); 'the lags in the response ofthe Canadian rate of inflation
to changes in monetary policy have traditionally been long, both as a result of institutional
characteristics . . and expectational sluggishness" (Freedman 1994a, p. 21). Moreover,
.

Longworth and Freedman (1995) explain how backward-looking expectations play a
significant role in the current Bank of Canada forecasting model.
2. See similar statements injenkins (1990), Bank of Canada (1991 c), and Freedman (1 994a).

3. The example of New Zealand was probably not yet well established, and it is not
acknowledged in public statements by senior Bank officials until Freedman (1994a).
4. Thiessen (1994a, p. 86) makes an almost identical statement of these two points.
5. "Over longer periods of time, the measures of inflation based on the total CPI and the core
CPI tend to follow similar paths. In the event of persistent differences between the trends of
the two measures, the Bank would adjust its desired path for core CPJ inflation so that total
CPI inflation would come within the target range" (Bank of Canada 1996, November, p.4).

6. "Accommodating the initial effect on the price level of a tax change but not any ongoing
inflation effects was the approach set our with the February 1991 inflation-reduction targets,
and restated in the December 1993 agreement [extending the target framework)"
(Thiessen 1994a, p. 82). Of course, unlike the assessment of differences between core and
headline CPI, the assessment of the size ofa tax increase's initial as opposed to pass-through
effect on prices depends on an analyst's assumptions. The Bank does publish its own
calculations of the price effects of tax changes.

7. "It is important to stress that the objective continues to be the control of inflation as
defined by the total consumer price index" (Thiessen 1996d, p. 4).
8. "The targets continue to be expressed as a range or a band rather than a specific inflation
rate because it is impossible to control inflation precisely" (Thiessen 1994a, p. 86).
9. "Other sources of unexpected price increases, which ate typically less significant than the
three singled out for special attention, will be handled within the one percent band around
the targets for reducing inflation" (Bank of Canada 1991c, p.4).
10. This may be due to the fact that more than any other inflation-targeting country, Canada
has had to cope with headline inflation falling below the target or reaching the target ahead
of schedule and, perhaps as a result, with greater public criticism of the targets as harmful to
the real economy. These challenges are discussed in the next section.
114

11. See Thiessen (1994a, p. 89) and Freedman (1994a, p. 20) for examples.

12. This statement is representative of the Bank's position. See also, for example, Bank of
Canada (1995, May), which states: The ultimate objective of Canadian monetary policy is
to promote good overall economic performance. Monetary policy can contribute to this goal
by preserving confidence in the value of money through price stability. In other words, price
stability is a means to an end, not an end in itself."

13. This interpretation of short-run flexibility was raised in a different context in Bernanke
and Mishkin (1992). In a more recent example, in the Bank of Canadas Annual Report, 1994,
the Bank states that "in late 1994 and early 1995, the persistent weakness of the dollar began
to undermine confidence in the currency, and the Bank of Canada took actions to calm and
stabilize financial markets" (p. 7), while the Annual Report, 1996 lists "promoting the safety
and soundness of Canada's financial system" (p. 4) as the second part of its section "Our
Commitment to Canadians." In short, the Bank found no inherent conflict between seeking
within limits either the goal of financial stability or the goal of limiting real economic
swings (as seen in the gradual convergence discussed above) and the pursuit of price stability
over the long run. In this characteristic, it is similar to all central banks we studied, though
perhaps more open about it.
14. Real—that is, inflation-indexed return—bonds have been issued in Canada since 1991
following the example of the United Kingdom. One motive cited for the creation of these
real bonds was precisely to obtain a measure of inflation expectations. As the Bank of Canada
itself has pointed out, however, the market for real bonds to date has been relatively small
and illiquid. In addition, it has only a short history, which makes direct measurement of the
implicit inflation expectations difficult.
15. This idea has been picked up since by a number of other countries and several private
sector forecasting groups as a compact means of expressing the relative tightness of monetary
policy in open economies.
16, For a more complete discussion of the MCI, see Freedman (1994b).
17. Freedman (1995, p. 30) offers the opinion that "it may well be that their [Monetary Policy

Report's) most important contribution will be to signal prospective inflationary pressure and
the need for timely policy action, at a time when actual rates of inflation (which are of course
a lagging indicator) are still relatively subdued." This scenario is premised on Canada starting
from a situation of 'relatively subdued" inflation pressures, which was the case by 1995.

18. Citing New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and Sweden, Freedman (1995, pp. 29-30)
notes, "These reports, which have both backward-looking and forward-looking perspectives,
have received considerable attention and careful scrutiny by the press, the financial markets,
and parliamentary committees." See also Thiessen (1 995d, p. 56), who states: "This report
115

will provide an account of our stewardship of monetary policy and will be useful for those
who want to know more about monetary policy for their own decision-making."
19. This move may have seemed necessary after the October 1993 election was fought in part
over the Bank's monetary policy, and Crow eventually decided not to be considered for a
second term. The newly elected Liberal Government chose to extend rather than to replace
the inflation targets. This event demonstrates how inflation-targeting frameworks can differ
or change along the axis of accountability independently of their stated inflation goals and

monetary policy procedures (which may remain the same).
20. According to Cukierman's (1992) legal index of central bank independence, the Bank of
Canada ranks, with the Danish central bank, just below the Federal Reserve in independence.

21. Laidler and Robson (1993, Chap. 9) provide an extensive discussion of the Bank of
Canada's practical independence and its limits up through 1992.

22. In this regard, Canada's framework is even more similar to that of Switzerland—a
country that, like Canada, has a small, open economy. See Laubach and Posen (1997a).
23. Creating Opportunity: The Liberal Plan for Canada, cited in Crane (1993).

24. The targets were intended to define the path implied by the various actual inflation
targets at eighteen-month intervals of 3 percent by year-end 1992, 2.5 percent by mid-1994,
and 2 percent by year-end 1995.

25. For example, 'the government is betting on its own inflation targets,' said TorontoDominion Bank chief economist Doug Peters, referring to Canada's target of 2 percent
inflation in 1995" (Szep 1991).
26. See, for example, Ip (1991).

27. The committee's formal title was the Standing Committee on Finance, Subcommittee
on the Bank of Canada, of the House of Commons, but it was called the Manley Committee
after its chairman, John Manley. See its report, The Mandate and Governance of the Bank of
Canada, February 1992.

28. It should be noted that, for all the attention central banks' written charters and legal
mandates attract, there are only a few central banks that have dedicated price stability
mandates. Not only have many inflation targeters—such as Canada, Sweden, Australia, and
the United Kingdom—adopted largely successful inflation-targeting regimes without
revision of their legal mission, but the Bundesbank is the only one of the three independent
central banks with a long-standing successful inflation record (the Swiss National Bank and
the U.S. Federal Reserve are the others) that has had such a clearly limited legal mandate.
116

29. The Liberal Party's campaign platform, Creating Opportunity: The Liberal Plan/or Canada,
included the statements: "Liberals believe that economic policies must not merely attack an
individual problem in isolation from its costs in other areas. . . . The Conservatives'

single-minded fight against inflation resulted in deep recession, three yeats without growth,
declining incomes, skyrocketing unemployment, a crisis in international payments, and the
highest combined set of government deficits in our history." See Crane (1993).
30. For a sample of private sector reactions, see Marotte (1993).
31. For press coverage of Freedman's speech, see, among others, Ip (1993).

32. During the period of an announced downward path for inflation, the emphasis in the
Bank of Canada's discussion was on the midpoint, whereas once the range of 1 to 3 percent
was reached, the emphasis shifted to the bands. We are grateful to Charles Freedman for
discussion of this point.
33. Some press observers characterized the contemporaneous developments in transparency
undertaken by the Bank as reflecting a desire to make the Bank seem more generally
accountable rather than identified with a particular individual. See, for example, Vardy
(1993) and McGillivray (1994).

34. The Bank had explained beforehand that it expected only a temporary blip in inflation
in 1995 from the depreciation of the Canadian dollar. The fact that the depreciation did not
lead to a persistent rise in inflation, even without a further tightening of monetary
conditions, helped build the Bank's credibility.
35. The body of the Monetary Policy Report states, "Since the last Report, the Canadian

economy has been weaker than expected and the degree of slack in labor and product
markets has been correspondingly greater" (p. 3). And later, "Although a slowdown had
been anticipated, the Bank was surprised (along with most others) by how abruptly the

situation changed' (p. 6).
36. For example, "for the medium-term, a key issue is whether the trend of inflation might
move below the 1 to 3 percent target range. . . This in turn would imply an easing in the
desired path of medium-term monetary conditions" (Bank of Canada 1996, May, p. 3).
Governor Thiessen and other officers made similar statements to the press.
.

37. In addition to citing Akerlof, Dickens, and Perry (1996), Fortin also gives prominence
to James Tobin's discussion of the macroeconomic significance of the nominal wage floor in
his 1971 Presidential Address to the American Economic Association (p. 779).
38. See, for example, Crane (1996) and Fortin (1996b).

117

39. The speech, reprinted in Thiessen (1996a), was delivered before the Board of Trade of

Metropolitan Toronto on November 6, 1996.
40. "However, inflation will work as a lubricant only if it fools people into believing that
they are better off than they really are. There is, in fact, every reason to expect that people's
behavior adapts to circumstances. In a low-inflation environment, employees are likely to
come to understand the need for occasional downward adjustments in wages or benefits"
(Thiessen 1996a, pp. 68-9). Note that Thiessen does not assert that such wage flexibility has
already occurred or is likely to arise quickly.

PART VI. UNITED KINGDOM

1. On May 6, 1997, the new Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown,
announced that he was granting the Bank of England "operational independence," that is,
the Bank could now set interest rates in the pursuit of the specified inflation goal at its own
discretion. We return to this development at the end of this section.
2. This announcement was made official by the simultaneous delivery of a letter from the
Chancellor to the Chairman of Parliament's Treasury and Civil Service Committee.
3. Speeches by officials of the Bank of Canada in the late 1980s leading up to that country's
adoption of inflation targets made the same point with some of the same rhetorical spirit.

4. Of course, the Bank of England and the Chancellor were aware of the innovations in
inflation targets in New Zealand and Canada, but, as typical and reasonable for national
officials, explicit references in public to other countries' behavior were avoided. Still, the U.K
adoption of inflation targeting may be legitimately thought of as part of a larger movement.

5. In a speech onjune 14, 1995, Chancellor Kenneth Clarke (1995) announced that this
objective would be extended indefinitely beyond the next general election. Without a change
in the status of the Bank of England, however, the ruling party had no power with which to
bind future governments, so the force of Clarke's statement was unclear. In late 1996, prior
to the spring 1997 election campaign, Labour Party leaders indicated that they would
continue the inflation-targeting framework (and the current targets) should they, as
expected, win the election.
6. This is akin to the Swiss National Bank's rationale for its point target for monetary
growth. As the Bank of England's own research suggests, however, if a target range were
designed to truly capture some reasonable confidence interval of outcomes, given control
problems, the range would be too wide for credibility with the general public. See Haldane
and Salmon (1995).

118

7. Note that the point target does not imply performance assessment on the basis of a
backward-looking average. Instead, the inflation performance relative to the point target is
explained as the result of past actions and intervening developments. We are grateful to
Mervyn King for clarifying this point.

8. The Labour Party's commitment to the inflation target and to greater operational
independence for the Bank of England was made explicit in the party's official election
platform. The rapid granting of independence—the day after Labour took office—
nonetheless was a surprise to all observers.

9. The conveying of this information in an appropriate way to a nontechnical audience has
challenged the staff of the Inflation Report. Initial efforts to depict the trend path of inflation
with probability "cones" moving out from it were not widely understood. The recent pictures
of a probability density for future inflation with shading from red (most likely) to pink (tail
of distribution) appear to have been well received.
10. The statements quoted represent the Bank's official stance. In the same issue of the
Quarterly Bulletin, the Bank's "General Assessment" echoes both statements—that "the
achievement of price stability remained the ultimate objective of monetary policy' (p. 355),
and that had the United Kingdom remained in the ERM, it is quite possible that price
stability would have been achieved during the next year. Although clearly desirable in itself,
price stability attained too quickly might have intensified the problems of domestic debt
deflation. Some easing of policy was, therefore, desirable' (p. 356).

11. At least, so long as an "optimal" contract for central bankers penalizing inflation
performance alone is not in force.
12. There is some requirement for the Bank and its senior staff to give testimony to the
House of Commons Treasury Committee, now on a regular basis as opposed to the by-request
(though frequent) appearances in the past. Nonetheless, the record of these past
testimonies—as well as the lack of incentives facing backbenchers on the committee to
deviate from respective party leaderships' lines on monetary policy—suggests that these
hearings are unlikely to influence Bank policy significantly.

13. The depreciation is measured by the Bank of England's exchange rate index,

14. The point should not be exaggerated, however, since Italy also managed to limit the
pass-through effect of its ERM exit without adoption of inflation targets (see Laubach and
Posen [1997bJ).
15. See, for example, Economist (1994).

16. Minutes of the Monthly Monetary Meeting, July 28, 1994, p. 5.
119

17. Minutes of the Monthly Monetary Meeting, July 28, 1994, p. 6.
18. Svensson (1996) makes clear the benefits of having the transparent target be the
monetary policymakers inflation forecast.
19. The Bank assumes in its projections unchanged official interest rates and movements in
the exchange rate reflecting the differential between U.K. and trade-weighted overseas shortterm interest rates.

20. Several British press commentators observed that the timing of the May meeting was
postponed until after some local elections, and took this as an indication that a rate hike was
coming, since Clarke would not want to implement his policy the day before the polls. While
the Bank-Chancellor meetings are monthly, the exact timing is not systematic, with
occasional reschedulings occurring. In this instance, there was a widespread expectation
before the meeting that the Chancellor would agree with the Bank's assessment; his later
public overruling of the Bank, leaving rates unchanged, might be seen as an accommodation
to broader Tory political reality, but one that emphasized the economic realities as well. As
noted below, the U.K. press tends to look for politicization of monetary policy.

21. Minutes of the Monthly Monetary Meeting,June 7, 1995, p. 8.
22. Minutes of the Monthly Monetary Meeting, June 5, 1996, p. 9.
23. See, for example, Financial Times (1996). It should be noted that the British press tends
to focus on the possibility that business and monetary cycles are governed by political and
electoral developments, despite little econometric or other evidence to believe that such
cycles are operative in the United Kingdom, an open economy with brief election campaigns
on short notice.
24. Debelle and Fisher (1994) make the useful distinction between "goal" independence and
'instrument" independence for central banks. For example, the Bundesbank has goal as well
as instrument independence because it chooses inflation targets and sets interest rates. In the
other three countries considered here, central banks have only instrument independence
because the govetnment, acting alone or jointly with the central bank, sets the goals of
policy.

120

PART VII. How SUCCESSFUL HAS INFLATION TARGETING BEEN?

1. Ammer and Freeman (1995) perform a similar exercise. They interpret their results as
showing below-predicted GDP growth after targeting, as well as lower inflation and interest
rates. Their simulations, however, were based on data series ending two years before the series
presented here. As can be seen in the GDP growth results for New Zealand and Canada
(Panel B of Charts 2 and 3), GDP growth was initially below predicted values, perhaps due
to the pre-adoption disinflationary policies. Over the whole post-targeting-adoption period,
however, GDP growth rebounds and averages the predicted level.
For New Zealand, we use the discount rate because it is the only continuously available
series that can be seen as reflecting the stance of monetary policy. Since the late 1980s, the
Reserve Bank has been keeping the discount rate 0.9 percent above the interbank overnight
rate.

2. A formal test for structural breaks in monetary policy reaction functions has three
limitations that prevent its use in this assessment of inflation targeting's effectiveness: first,
the test would be of extremely low power given the limited time since adoption even in New
Zealand; second, the test would require us to impose a structural model of monetary
policymaking for each country, which appears excessive; third, the test would provide a
yes/no answer where more qualitative results are of interest.
3. Country-specific shocks are not the only potential source of problems for this comparison.
Another possible reason why inflation and interest rates could be lower than forecast would
be the existence of a widespread disinflationary trend across many countries over this time
period, which drove these variables down in targeters and nontargeters alike. Laubach and

Posen (1997b), however, explicitly compare the simulations for targeters and nontargeters
over the same period and find that significant inflation and interest rate undershooting of
forecast occurs only in the targeting countries.

4. Additional evidence suggests that the latter interpretation should be given more weight
than the former. The effect of the adoption of inflation targeting on sacrifice ratios, or on the
predictive power of previously estimated Phillips curves to continue forecasting inflation in
the 1990s, appears to have been minimal, as mentioned at several points in the case studies.

121

REFERENCES

Abel. Andrew B., and Ben S. Benianke. 1995. MACROECONOMICS. 2d ed. Reading, Mass.:

Addison-Wesley Publishing Company.
Advisory Commission to Study the Consumer Price Index. 1996. "Toward a More Accurate Measure

of the Cost of Living: Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee." Washington, D.C.,
December 4.
Akerlof Geürge, William Dickens, and George Perry. 1996. "The Macroeconomics of Low
Inflation." BROOKINGS PAPERS ON ECONOMIC ACTIVITY, no. 1: 1-59.

Alesina, Alberto, and Lawrence H. Summers. 1993. "Central Bank Independence and
Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence." JOURNAL OF MONEY,
CREDIT, AND BANKING 25: 15 1-62.

Ammer,John, andRichard Freeman. 1995. "Inflation Targeting in the 1990s: The Experiences
of New Zealand, Canada, and the United Kingdom." JOURNAL OF ECONOMICS AND
BUSINESS 47 (May): 165-92.

Bailey, MartinJ. 1956. "The Welfare Cost of Inflationary Finance." JOURNAL OF POLITICAL
ECONOMY 64: 98-110.

Ball, Laurence. 1994. "What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?" In N. Gregory Mankiw, ed.,
MONETARY POLICY. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Bank of Canada. 1991-96a. ANNUAL REPORT, various issues.

199 lb. "Targets for Reducing Inflation: Announcements and Background
Material." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, March: 3-21.

1991c. "Targets for Reducing Inflation: Further Operational and Measurement
Considerations." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, September: 3-23.

1993-94. "Statement of the Government of Canada and the Bank of Canada on
Monetary Policy Objectives." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, winter: 85-6.
1995-97. MONETARY POLICY REPORT, various issues.

Bank of England. 1992-96. BANK OF ENGLAND INFLATION REPORT, various issues.

Barro, Robertj. 1993. MACROECONOMICS. 4th ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

122

1995. Inflation and Economic Growth." BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY
BULLETIN 35 (May): 166-76.

Barro. Robert]., and David Gordon. 1983. "A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural
Rate Model." JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 91: 589-6 10.
Bernanke, Ben S., and I/ian Mihov. 1997. "What Does the Bundesbank Target?" EUROPEAN

ECONOMIC REVIEW 41, no. 6 (June): 1025-53.

Bernanke, Ben S., and Frederic S. Mishkin. 1992. "Central Bank Behavior and the Strategy of
Monetary Policy: Observations from Six Industrialized Countries." In Olivier Blanchard
and Stanley Fischer, eds., NBER MACROECONOMICS ANNuAL, 1992. Cambridge: MIT
Press.

1997. "Inflation Targeting: A New Framework fot Monetary Policy?" JOURNAL OF
ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES 11, no. 2 (spring): 97-116.

Birch, W.F. 1996. 'NZ Monetary and Fiscal Policy Consistent and Has Reserve Bank
Support." FINANCIAL TIMES, letter to the editor, January 9, p. 12.

Brash, Donald T. 1996a. "Address to the Auckland Manufacturers' Association.' February.

1996b. "New Zealand's Remarkable Reforms." The Fifth lEA Annual Hayek
Memorial Lecture. Institute of Economic Affairs Occasional Paper no. 100.
1997. "Address to the Canterbury Employers' Chambet of Commerce." January.
Briault, dive. 1995. 'The Costs of Inflation." BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY BULLETIN

35 (February): 33-45.
Bruno, Michael, and William Easterly. 1995. "Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth."
NBER Working Paper no. 5209.

Bryant. Ralph. 1996. "Central Bank Independence, Fiscal Responsibility, and the Goals of
Macroeconomic Policy: An American Perspective on the New Zealand Experience."

Unpublished paper, Victoria University of Wellington, May.
Calvo, Guillermo. 1978. "On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in the Monetary
Economy." ECONOMETRICA 46: 1411-28.
Capie, Forrest, et al. 1994. THE FUTURE OF CENTRAL BANKING: THE TERCENTENARY

SYMPOSIUM OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

123

Carey, David. 1989. 'Inflation and the Tax System." RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND

BULLETIN 52, no. 1 (March): 18-26.
Chote, Robert 1997.

"Treading the Line between Credibility and Humility."

FINANCIAL TIMES,June 13, p.9.

Chote, Robert, Phi/lip Coggan, and Robert Peston. 1995. Pound Hit as Clarke Fails to Lift
Rates." FINANCIAL TIMES, May 6-7, p. 1.

Clarida, Richard, and Mark Gertler. 1997. "How the Bundesbank Conducts Monetary
Policy." In Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., REDUCING INFLATION:
MOTIVATION AND STRATEGY, 363-406. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Clarke, Kenneth. 1995. Mansion House Speech to the City, June 14. Excerpted in
FINANCIAL TIMES, June 15, p. 10.

Coote, Michael. 1996. "Price Stability Requires a Tight, Not Loose, Inflation Target."
NEW ZEALAND BUSINESS REVIEW, p. 70.

Cozier, Barry, and Gordon Wilkinson. 1991. "Some Evidence on Hysteresis and the Costs
of Disinflation in Canada.' Bank of Canada Technical Report no. 55.

Crane, David 1993. "John Crow Deserves to Be Fired, Not Rehired." TORONTO STAR,

November 14, p. D4.
1996. "Bank of Canada Should Rethink Zero Inflation." TORONTO STAR,

September 5.

Crow,John W. 1988. "The Work of Canadian Monetary Policy." The Hanson Lecture.
BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, February: 3-17.

1989. "Targeting Monetary Policy." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, December: 2 1-8.
1990. "Current Monetary Policy." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, September: 33-4 1.
1991a. "General Observations." BANK OF CANADA ANNUM REPORT, 1990: 7-12.

1991b. "Method and Myth in Monetary Policy." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW,

July: 9-14.
Cukierman, Alex. 1992. CENTRAL BANK STRATEGY, CREDIBILITY, AND INDEPENDENCE:

THEORY AND EVIDENCE. Cambridge: MIT Press.

124

Debelle, Guy, and Stanley Fischer. 1994. "How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?"
In Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed., GOALS, GUIDELINES, AND CONSTRAINTS FACING MONETARY

POLICYMAKERS. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series 38: 195-221.
Deutsche Bundesbank. 1974-96a. ANNUAL REPORT, vatious issues.

1974-96b. MONTHLY REPORT, various issues.
1995c. THU MONETARY POLICY OF TITlE BUNDESBANK. October.

Dornbusch, Rudiger, and Stanley Fischer. 1994. MACROECONOMICS. 6th ed. New York:

McGraw-Hill.
Easton, Brian. 1994. 'Economic and Other Ideas Behind the New Zealand Reforms."
OXFORD REVIEW OF ECONOMIC POLICY 10, no. 3: 78-94.

Economist. 1994. "Willkommen Herr Clarke." September 17.
English, William B, 1996. "Inflation and Financial Sector Size." Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System Finance and Economics Discussion Series, no. 96-16, April.
Fallow, Brian. 1996. "Wider Inflation Target Is Risky Policy—Brash." NEW ZEALAND
HERALD, June 28.

Feldstein, Martin. 1997. "The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price
Stability." In Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, eds., REDUCING INFLATION:
MOTIVATION AND STRATEGY, 123-56. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Financial Times, 1996. "Shares Hit as Rates Rise to 6%." October 31.
Fischer, Andreas Al., and Adrian B. On. 1994. "Monetary Policy Credibility and Price
Uncertainty: The New Zealand Experience of Inflation Targeting." OECD ECONOMIC
STuDIES 22 (spring): 155-79.

Fischer, Stanley. 1981. 'Towards an Understanding of the Costs of Inflation: II."
CARNEGIE-ROCHESTER CONFERENCE SERIES ON PUBLIC POLICY 15: 5-41.

1987. "Monetary Policy and Performance in the U.S.,Japan, and Europe,
1973-86." In Y. Suzuki and M. Okabe, eds., TOWARD A WORLD OF ECONOMIC
STABILITY: OPTIMAL MONETARY FRAMEWORK AND POLICY. Tokyo: University of

Tokyo Press.

125

1991. "Growth, Macroeconomics, and Development." In NBER MACROECONOMICS

ANNUAL, 1991, 329-79. Cambridge: MIT Press.
1993. 'The Role of Macroeconomic Factors in Growth." JOURNAL OF MONETARY
ECONOMICS 32: 485-512.

1994. "Modern Central Banking." In Forrest Capie et a!., THE FUTURE OF
CENTRAL BANKING: Ti-IF TERCENTENARY SYMPOSIUM OF THE BANK OF ENGLAND.

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

1995. 'Modern Approaches to Central Banking." NBER Working Paper no. 5064,
March.
Fortin, Pierre. 1996a. "The Great Canadian Slump." CANADIANJOURNAL OF ECONOMICS 29,

no. 4 (November): 76 1-87.
1996b. "Raise the Inflation Target and Let Canada Recover." GLOBE AND MAIL,

September 26.

Freedman, Charles. 1994a. "Formal Targets for Inflation Reduction: The Canadian

Experience." In J. Wijnholds, S. Eijffinger, and L. Hoogduin, eds., A
FRAMEWORK FOR MONETARY STABILITY. Dordrecht and Boston: Kiuwer Academic.

1994b. "The Use of Indicators and of the Monetary Conditions Index in Canada."
In T. Balino and C. Cottarelli, eds., FRAMEWORKS FOR MONETARY STABILITY: POLICY

ISSUES AND COUNTRY EXPERIENCES. Washington, D.C.: International Monetary Fund.

1995. "The Canadian Experience with Targets for Reducing and Controlling
Inflation." In Leonardo Leiderman and Lars EQ. Svensson, eds., INFLATION TARGETS,
19-3 1. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Freeman, Richard, andJohn Willis. 1995. "Targeting Inflation in the 1990s: Recent
Challenges." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System International Finance
Discussion Papers, no. 525.
Friedman, Benjamin 41. 1995. "The Rise and Fall of the Money Growth Targets as Guidelines
for U.S. Monetary Policy." Paper prepared for the Bank ofJapan Seventh International
Conference. Preliminary draft.
Friedman, Benjamin M., and Kenneth Kuttner. 1996. 'A Price Target for U.S. Monetary Policy?
Lessons from the Experience with Money Growth Targets.' BROOKINGS PAPERS ON
ECONOMIC AC-rlvrrY, no. 1:77-125.

126

Friedman. Milton. 1968. "The Role of Monetary Policy." AMERICAN ECONOMIC REvIEW 58:

1-17.
Fuhrer, Jeffrey C. 1995. "The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well.' Federal Reserve Bank of
Boston NEW ENGLAND ECONOMIC REVIEW, March-April: 41-56.
George, Eddie. 1995a. "Monetary Policy Realities." BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY

BULLETIN 35, no. 4 (November): 388-94.

1995b. "The Prospects for Monetary Stability." Speech to the City, June 14.
Reprint, BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY BULLETIN 35, no. 3 (August): 295-6.

Goodhart, Charles A. F. 1981. "Problems in Monetary Management: the UK Experience."
In AS. Courakis, ed., INFLATION, DEPRESSION AND ECONOMIC POLICY IN THE WEST.

Totowa, N.J.: Barnes and Noble.
Goodhart, Charles A.E., ant/José Vi,ials. 1995. "Strategy and Tactics of Monetary Policy:
Examples from Europe and the Antipodes." InJeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed., GOALS, GUIDELINES,
AND CONSTRAINTS FACING MONETARY POLICYMAKERS. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston

Conference Series 38: 139-87.
Gordon, Robert R. 1985. "Understanding Inflation in the 1980's." BROOKINGS PAPERS ON
ECONOMIC ACTIVITY, no. 1: 263-302.

Groshen, Erica L., and Mark E. Schweitzer. 1996. "The Effects of Inflation on Wage
Adjustments in Firm-Level Data: Grease or Sand?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York
Staff Reports, no. 9.
Ha/dane, Andrew G.,s and Christopher K. Salmon. 1995. "Three Issues on Inflation Targets."
In Andrew G. Haldane, ed., TARGETING INFLATION, 170-201.London: Bank of England.
Hall, Robert B., andJohn B. Taylor. 1993. MACROECONOMICS. 4th ed. New York: W.W.

Norton and Company.
1-fall, Terry. 1995. "NZ Bank Chief Admits Price Rise Slippage." FINANCIAL TIMES,

June 30, p. 6.
1996a. "NZ Central Bank Hints at Monetary Easing." FINANCIAL TIMES,

October 25, p. 6.
1996b. "NZ Bank Cautious on Wider Inflation Target.' FINANCIAL TIMES,

December 18, p. 8.

127

Hansen, Lan Peter, and RobertJ. Hodrick. 1980. 'Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal
Predictors of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis." JOURNAL OF POLITICAL
ECONOMY 88: 829-53.

Hefeker, Carsten. 1994. "German Monetary Union, the Bundesbank, and the EMS Collapse."
BANCA NATIONAL DEL LAVORO QuARmRLY REVIEW 47 (December): 379-98.

Hess, Gregory D., and Charles S. Morris. 1996. "The Long-Run Costs of Moderate Inflation.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City ECONOMIC REVIEW, second quarter: 71-88.
Housejoint Resolution no. 409. 1989. 101st Cong., 1st sess.

Huh, Chan. 1996. "Some Evidence on the Efficacy of the UK Inflation Targeting Regime:
An Out-of-Sample Forecast Approach." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
International Finance Discussion Papers, no. 565.
Hutchison, Michael AL, and Carl E. Walsh. 1996. 'Central Bank Institutional Design and the
Output Cost of Disinflation: Did the 1989 New Zealand Reserve Bank Act Affect the
Inflation-Output Tradeoff?" Reserve Bank of New Zealand Research Paper G96/6.
Ip, Greg. 1991. "Inflation War is Won, Bank of Canada Says." FINANCIAL POST, October 15,

p. 40.
1993. "Drop in Inflation Rate Beats Expectations." FINANCIAL POST, December 8,

p.5.
Issing, Ot?nar. 1995a. "Monetary Policy in an Integrated World Economy." Unpublished
paper, University of Kid, June.

1995b. "The Relationship Between the Constancy of Monetary Policy and the
Stability of the Monetary System." Paper presented at the Gerzensee Symposium of the
Swiss National Bank.
Jenkins, W. 1990. 'The Goal of Price Stability." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, July: 3-7.

Judson. Ruth, and Athanasios Orphanides. 1996. "Inflation, Volatility, and Growth."
Unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Kenig. Reiner, and Caroline Willeke. 1996. "German Monetary Reunification." CENTRAL
BANKING, May: 29-39.

Kydland, Fin, and Edward Prescott. 1977. "Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency
of Optimal Plans." JOURNAL OF POLITICAL ECONOMY 85: 473-92.

128

Laidler, David, and William Robson. 1993. TuE GREAT CANADIAN DISINFLATION. Montreal:

C. D. Howe Research Institute.
Lamont, Norman. 1992. Mansion House Speech to the City, October 29. Reprint, FINANCIAL

TIMES, October 30, p. 14.
Laubach, Thomas, andAdam S. Posen. 1997a. 'Disciplined Discretion: The German and Swiss
Monetary Frameworks in Operation." Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper
no. 9707, March.

1997b. 'Some Comparative Evidence on the Effectiveness of Inflation Targeting."
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Research Paper no. 9714, May.
Leigh-P embenon, Robin. 1984. "Some Aspects of UK Monetary Policy." BANK OF ENGLAND

QUARTERLY BULLETIN 24, no.4 (December): 474-81.

1990. "Some Remarks on Exchange Rate Regimes.' BANK OF ENGLAND
QUARTERLY BULLETIN 30, no. 4 (November): 482-4.
1991. "Stability and Economic Policy.' BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY

BULLETIN 31, no.4 (November): 496-7.
1992. "The Case for Price Stability." London School of Economics—Bank of England
Lecture, presented on November 11, 1992. Reprint, BANK OF ENGLAND QUARTERLY
BUlLETIN 32, no.4 (November): 441-8.
Lloyd, Michele. 1992. "The New Zealand Approach to Central Bank Autonomy." RESERVE
BANK OF NEW ZEALAND BULLETIN 55, no. 3: 203-20.

Longworth, David, and Charles Freedman. 1995. "The Role of the Staff Economic Projection in
Conducting Canadian Monetary Policy." In A. Haldane, ed., TARGETING INFLATION, 101-12.
London: Bank of England.

Louisson, Simon. 1994. "New Zealand Inflation May Burst Target." Reuters World Service,
December 6.
Mankiw, N. Gregory. 1994. MACROECONOMICS. 2d ed. New York: Worth Publishers.

Marotte, Bertrand. 1993. 'Markets Endorse New Governor: Central Bank to Continue
Inflation Battle." OnAWA CITIZEN, December 23, p. D6.
Marsh, David. 1992. TuE BUNDESBANK. London: William Heinemann.

129

McCaIlum, Bennett T. 1995a. "Inflation Targeting in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden, and the

United Kingdom, and in General." Paper prepared for the Bank ofJapan Seventh
International Conference. Preliminary draft.
1995b. 'Two Fallacies Concerning Central-Bank Independence." AMERICAN
ECONOMIC REVIEW 85, no. 2 (May): 207-11. Papers and Proceedings of the 107th Annual

Meeting of the American Economic Association, Washington, D.C.,January 6-8.
McDonough, WilliamJ. 1996a. "A Strategy for Monetary Policy." Speech given before the
Annual Financial Services Forum of the New York State Bankers Association, New York,
N.Y., March 21.
1996b. "The Importance of Price Stability." Speech given before the Economic
Club of New York, New York, N.Y., October 2.
McGillivray, Don. 1994. "Bank Still Headed in Wrong Direction." CALGARY HERALD,

January4, p.A4.
Meek, Paul, ed. 1983. CENTRAL BANK VIEWS ON MONETARY TARGETING. New York:

Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Mishkin, Frederic S. 1994. ECONOMICS OF MONEY, BANKING AND FINANCIAL MARKETS.

4th ed. New York: HarperCollins.
1996. 'Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective."

In Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., ANNUAL WORLD BANK CONFERENCE ON
DEVELOPMENT ECONOMICS, 1996, 29-62. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.
1997. "Strategies for Controlling Inflation." In Reserve Bank of Australia,
MONETARY POLICY AND INFLATION TARGETING. Forthcoming.

Montagnon, Peter. 1995. 'Bank Governor Passes First Inflation Test." FINANCIAL TIMES,

October 22, p. 4.
Neumann, Man/red 1996. "Monetary Targeting in Germany." Paper prepared for the Bank
of Japan Seventh International Conference.

Neumann, Manfredj.M., andJurgen von Hagen. 1993. "Germany." In M. Fratianni and
D. Salvatore, eds., HANDBOOK OF MONETARY POLICY IN INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES.

Westport, Conn.: Greenwood.

New Zealand Herald 1990a. "Pressure on Government to Relax Inflation Target." August 4.

130

1990b. Most Voters Back Target of Lower Inflation. October 25.
Nicholl, Peter WE., and Davidj. Archer. 1992. "An Announced Downward Path for Inflation."
In Richard O'Brien, ed., FINANCE AND THE INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY, no. 6. Oxford:

Oxford University Press. Reprint, RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEAL&NI) BUllETIN, December.

Obstfeld, Maurice, and Kenneth Rogoff 1995. "The Mirage of Fixed Exchange Rates." JOURNAL
Of ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVES 9, no. 4 (fall).

Posen. Adam 5. 1995. "Central Bank Independence and Disinflationary Credibility:
A Missing Link?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, no. 1, May.
Reddell, M ichaet 1988. Inflation and the Monetary Policy Strategy." RESERVE BANK OF
NEW ZEALAND BULLETIN 51, no. 2 (June): 81-4.
Reserve Bank ofNew Zealand 1985a. "Reserve Bank Annual Report." RESERVE BANK OF

NEW ZEALAND BULLETIN 48, no. 8 (August): 446-54.
1985b. "The Functions of the Reserve Bank." RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND

BULLETIN 48, no. 9 (September): 5 12-3.

1987. "A Layman's Guide to Monetary Policy in the New Zealand Context.'
RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND BULLETIN 50 (June): 104-10.
1990. RESERVE BANK OF NEW ZEALAND BULLETIN 53, no. 1 (March).
1991. MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT. August.
1992a. MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT. February.
1992b. MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT. June.

1995. MONETARY POLICY STATEMENT. December.

Reuters Financial Service. 1991. "Lower NZ Dollar Not a Threat to Inflation—Bolger."
October 24.
Ro14 Eric, et at 1993. INDEPENDENT AND ACCOUNTABLE: A NEW MANDATE FOR THE

BANK OF ENGLAND. London: Centre for Economic Policy Research.

Sarel, Michael. 1996. "Nonlinear Effects of Inflation on Economic Growth." IMF STAFF
PAPERS 43 (March): 199-2 15.

131

Schlesinger, Helmut. 1983. "The Setting of Monetary Objectives in Germany." In Paul Meek,
ed., CENTRAL BANK VIEWS ON MONETARY TARGETING. Federal Reserve Bank of

New York.
Schmid, Peter. 1996. Monetary Policy: Tatgets and Instruments." CENTRAL BANKING,
May: 40-5 1.
Shapiro, Matthew D., and David W. Wilcox. 1996. "Causes and Consequences of Imperfections

in the Consumer Price Index." In Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.,
NBER MACROECONOMICS ANNUAL, 1996. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Stevens, Glenn, and Guy Debelle. 1995. "Monetary Policy Goals for Inflation in Australia." In
Andrew G. Haldane, ed., TARGETING INFLATION, 81-100. London: Bank of England.

Svensson, Lan. 1993. "The Simplest Test of Target Credibility." NBER Working
Paper no. 4604.

1996. 'Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation
Targets." NBER Working Paper no. 5797, October.
Szep,Jason. 1991. 'Canada Plans to Introduce Inflation-Indexed Bonds." Reuters Financial
Service, May 28.
Tait, Nikki. 1995. "NZ Bank Chief Sticks to Policy." FINANCIAL TIMES, May 3.
1996. "NZ Deal Gives Rise to Faith and Doubt." FINANCIAL TIMES, December 20.

Tay/or,John B. 1995. "The Inflation/Output Variability Trade-off Revisited." In
Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, ed., GOALS, GUIDELINES, AND CONSTRAINTS FACING MONETARY

POLICYMAKERS, 2 1-38. Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series 38.

Thiessen, Gordon. 1991. "Notes for Remarks by Gordon G. Thiessen, Senior Deputy Governor
of the Bank of Canada." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, July: 15-21.

1994a. "Further Direction for the Bank of Canada and Monetary Policy." BANK OF
CANADA REVIEW, spting: 85-90.

1994b. "Opening Statement before the Standing Senate Committee on Banking,
Trade, and Commerce." BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, spring: 81-90.

1995a. "Notes for Remarks to the Winnipeg Chamber of Commerce."

132

_______• 1995b. "Opening Statement before the Standing Senate Committee on Banking,

Trade, and Commerce.' BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, spring: 85-8.

______• 1995c. "Statement from the Governor." BANK OF CANADA ANNUAL REPORT,
1995: 5-8.
_______ 1995d. "Uncertainty and the Transmission of Monetary Policy in Canada."

The Hermes-Gordon Lecture. BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, summer: 41-58.

1996a. "Does Canada Need More Inflation to Grease the Wheels of the Economy?"
BANK OF CANADA REVIEW, winter: 47-62.

1996b. "Monetary Policy and the Canadian Economy in a Changing World.'
The Siebens Lecture.
1996c. "Statement from the Governor." BANK OF CANADA ANNUAL REPORT,

1995: 5-8.
1996d. "Towards a More Transparent and More Credible Monetary Policy."
Remarks delivered at rhe Ecole des Hautes Etudes Commerciales.

Vardy, Jill. 1993. "Crow Out, Thiessen In: New Bank of Canada Governor Will Continue
Inflation-Fighting Policies." FINANCIAL POST, December 23, p. 1.
von Hagen,Jurgen. 1995. "Inflation and Monetary Targeting in Germany." In Leonardo
Leiderman and Lars EQ. Svensson, eds., INFLATION TARGETS. London: Centre for
Economic Policy Research.

Walsh, Carl E. 1995. "Rules vs. Discretion in New Zealand Monetary Policy." Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco ECONOMIC LEnER, no. 95-09 (March 3).
1996. "Accountability in Practice: Recent Monetary Policy in New Zealand."
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco ECONOMIC LETTER, no. 96-25 (September 9).

133

