                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          SOCIAL SECURITY AND RETIREMENT
                                     IN SPAIN




                                       Michele Boldrin
                                     Sergi Jimenez-Martin
                                       Franco Peracchi




                                      Working Paper 6136



                    NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                             1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                   August 1997


This paper is part of the NBER Project on International Social Security Comparisons. We thank Jon
Gruber and David Wise for their comments, Almudena Duran and Vincenzo Galasso for helpfiul
discussions, and Luis Martin for his research assistance. Financial support from DGICYT (Project
#PB94-0378), CICYT (Project #SEC96-0738), and the Fundacion Marc Rich is gratefully
acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER's research programs in Aging and Public Economics.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1997 by Michele Boidrin, Sergi Jimenez-Martin and Franco Peracchi. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided
that fall credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Social Security and Retirement in Spain
Michele Boidrin, Sergi Jimenez-Martin
and Franco Peracchi
NBER Working Paper No. 6136
August 1997
Aging and Public Economics


                                           ABSTRACT

         We describe the historical evolution of the Spanish Social Security system and its current
organization. Our attention concentrates on the main public pension scheme for private employees
in the manufacturing and service sector (RGSS) which covers by far the largest majority of Spanish
workers. After describing the way in which pension and retirement decisions are regulated by this
system, we try to compute the incentives to early retirement it provides to different kinds of
individuals. We show that the Spanish SS legislation generates strong incentives to retire early and
that Spanish workers tend to do so.
         In particular, our findings support the idea that pensions-induced incentives matter for the
labor supply behavior of Spanish workers. While the Spanish system does not pay a particularly
generous average pension relative to GDP per-capita, its "generosity" concentrates on providing
large minimum pensions to individuals with below average working histories and/or low wages. At
the same time, the pension system provides workers earning average or above average salaries and
with complete working histories with relatively weak financial gains from not retiring after the age
of 60.
         The combination of these features of the Spanish legislation seems to account well for the
observed increase in the percentage of early retirees among Spanish pensioners during the nineties.


Michele Boldrin                                               Sergi Jimenez-Martin
Departamento de Economia                                      Departamento de Economia
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid                              Universidad Carlos III de Madrid
28903 Getafe - Madrid                                         28903 (letafe - Madrid
SPAIN                                                         SPAIN


Franco Peracchi
DMQTE
Università d'Annunzio
1-65127 Pescara
ITALY
1 Introduction
Public pensions represent the most important welfare program in Spain, absorb-

ing almost 70 percent of the total expenditure for social protection programs,
and representing about 11.5 percent of GDP in 1994. Average annual growth
rate of public pension expenditures over the period 1980—95 has been 13.1 per-

cent, about 1.5 times higher than the GDP growth rate.
   All available studies indicate a progressive worsening of the financial situ-

ation of the Social Security system (sistema de la Seguridad Social), the most
important public pension program in Spain. While we concentrate here on the
retirement incentives provided by the current system without addressing its
long-run viability, a brief overview of its aggregate evolution is useful to place

the subsequent analysis in a proper perspective.
   The fraction of annual Social Security (SS) expenditures which is covered
through direct contributions, from either workers or employers, has decreased
steadily from 89.4 percent in 1980 to 66 percent in 1995, the difference be-
ing made up by increasingly large transfers from the government. Even the
most optimistic projections forecast a continuous increase in the current ac-
count deficit of the Spanish SS system. Normalizing to zero the deficit of the
pension system in 1995, the deficit in 2010 is expected to range between .8 and
3.5 percent of GDP [Herce (1997)3. The worsening of the deficit reflects the
expectation that the growth of SS revenues will not be able to keep up with the
strong increase in SS expenditures, which should grow in real terms between
2.5 and 3.2 percent annually over the next two decades.

    As we explain in more detail below (Section 3), the current SS system pro-

vides five types of contributory pensions: old-age, disability, widowers, orphans,
and other relatives. Over the three subperiods 1980—85, 1985—90 and 1990—95,


                                        1
total expenditure on each type of contribution-based pension has grown in real

terms at annual rates given in Table 1. The most important source of pension

expenditure growth has    been   demographic changes, followed by the widening
of coverage, and the increase in real average pensions. We now provide some
aggregate indices of the more recent evolution of these three factors.
   Life expectancy at birth has increased by seven years over the last three
decades, from 69.9 years in 1960 to 76.9 in 1991. This, together with the concur-

rent sharp decline in natality rates and the impact of the aging baby-boomers,
is reflected in Figure 1, which presents the basic trends in the structure of the

population of working age (16+) over the last twenty years. We distinguish
between men and women and 3 broad age groups: 16—24, 25—54 and 55+. The

fraction of 16—24 reached a peak between 198'2 and 1987 and has beenfalling

since. The fraction of 25—54 has been declining till 1988 and is now rising as the

baby boomers get older. On the other hand, the fraction aged 55+ has been

increasing steadily. although at a decreasing rate.
   Over the three intervals 1980—85, 1985—90 and 1990—95, the annual growth

rate of the total number of public pensions has been equal to 4.2, 2.8 and
2.8 percent respectively (Table 1). As of 1994, the total number of contribu-
tory pensions outstanding was equal to 6.9 millions according to the official SS
records, of which 3.2 millions for old-age, 1.7 millions for disability, 1.8 millions

for survivors, 168 thousands for orphans and 42 thousands for other relatives.
    The third factor, namely the increase in the real value of average pensions,
is also captured in Table 1, which reports the annual growth rate of real average

pensions for each group and time interval. Notice that Spanish pensions are
not particularly generous, at least with respect to the European average. For
example, the average pension in 1994 was equivalent to only 47 percent of per-
capita GDP against a European average of 62 percent. In the same year. the

                                         2
average pension was equal to 63 percent of the average wage and 70 percent of
the pensions were below the minimum wage.

   This fact suggests, as a tentative hypothesis, that the financial imbalance of

the Spanish system may not come from its particular generosity but, instead,
from other factors. The aggregate data reported above illustrate two of them:
the dramatic shift in the demographic structure and the rapid growth of the
public pension system. As illustrated in Section 3 the latter has come about
since 1972 through the extension of coverage to various groups with either very

short contributive histories or with a very low contribution-to-pension ratio.
   A third determinant of the system financial imbalance is the loss of con-
tributions and the increase in pension payments induced by the shortening of
professional lifes and the parallel growth of early retirement. In this study we
try to document the extent to which this third factor may be "endogenous"
to the 55 system. We show that the Spanish SS legislation generates strong
incentives to retire early and that Spanish workers tend to do so.
   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents some basic

facts about labor market behavior and social insurance use of older workers in
Spain. Section 3 describes the evolution of the Spanish system since its inception

and illustrates in relative detail its current institutional features. Section 4
presents a set of simulations that illustrate the incentive effects of the current
system upon labor market participation and retirement decisions. Section 5
offers some conclusions. Finally, Appendix A describes the main data sets used

and other sources of information about retirement behavior in Spain, whereas
Appendix B briefly reviews the recent literature about retirement in Spain.




                                        3
'1
 period 1964—75, and the number of workers affiliated to the SS system (en alto

 laboral) after 1979. The data for the period 1976—79 are not reported because
 they are considered to be of poor quality and fundamentally unreliable.
    In 1964, only half of the workers were covered by mandatory insurance.
Since then, the proportion covered has grown steadily. This is due mainly
to the progressive integration into the SS system of a number of professional
pensions schemes (Mutualidades) , to the legislation of mandatory public pension

for many categories of self-employed workers, and to the widening of coverage of

the disability insurance plan. Historical details are provided in the next section.

    Notice that the number of workers covered by SS has surpassed, in the most

recent years, the official employment level. This provides strong support to the
view that the EPA grossly underestimates the actual level of employment (and

overestimates, consequently, the level of unemployment). For more details on
this issue see, e.g. Villagarcia (1995).

   Figure 5 shows the share of population aged 55+ receiving old-age, disabil-
ity, or some other type of pension. Data are again from the EPA, which asks
respondents to report their status in the week before the survey, distinguish-

ing between being retired, being permanently disabled, and receiving another
pension different from old-age or disability. The latter category is particularly
important for women, since it includes survivors' pensions. The upper profile
indicates the fraction of older men receiving public pensions. The profile imme-

diately below indicates the fraction of older men receiving old-age or survivors'

pensions. The lower profiles correspond to females.

   The figure shows clearly the steady increase in pension recipiency rates. The

nature and the dynamics of the benefits, however, are quite different between the

two sexes. Most men aged 55+ receive old-age or disability pensions, whereas
survivors' pensions are by far the most common type of benefit among women.

                                           5
 In particular, for the years after 1986, for which a reliable comparison can be
 made, the growth rate of survivors' pensions among females greatly outpaces
 the growth rate of both old-age and disability pensions, the share of which
 remains rather stable at about 20 percent.

     The difference between the two sexes in the relative importance of the var-
 ious sources of pension income is readily understood by combining two factors.

 One is the increased coverage of males by means of old-age or disability pen-

 sions1 the other is the longer life expectancy of females which transforms males'
 pensions into females' survivors benefits.

    Although reliable estimates of replacement rates over time are not available,
 we were able to obtain some information using administrative records from

SS. The old-age (OA) and disability (Dl) pension replacement rates presented
in Figure 6 are computed as the ratio between the initial pension award and
the benefit base or base reguladota (defined in Section 3.4.3) at the time of

retirement. Until 1985, the benefit base is a very good measure of pre-retirement

earnings, being computed as the average salary over the last two years of work.
After 1985, it is computed over a longer period of eight years before retirement

(see below).

    Female old-age pension replacement rates surge to 100 percent in the early
seventies. This is due to the fact that in the years immediately after the intro-

duction of the current system, pensions were granted to individuals with very
short work-histories and, simultaneously, pensions were adjusted to their mini-

mum level. Replacement rates decline rapidly after 1979 as female wages move
closer to those of men. After 1986, the female replacement rates become indeed
lower than the male ones. In all other cases, the figure shows a steady decline of

replacement rates over the period considered, which becomes more pronounced

after the 198.5 reform (see next section). Because of the way in which the initial

                                        6
pension is computed (see Section 3.3), this phenomenon suggests a continuous
reduction in either the number of contributory years, or the age of retirement,

or both. The existence of strong incentives to early retirement is, in our view,
a critical feature of the Spanish 55 system. We will come back to a detailed
analysis of this issue in the last two sections of the paper. We will argue there
that the main incentive to early retirement comes from the generous mechanism

determining the minimum pension.

2.2 Contemporaneous age patterns
This section focuses on the age range from 45 to 75. Unless indicated otherwise
the data are tabulations based on the pooled EPAs for the second quarters of

the years 1993—95.
    These results are consistent with the ones obtained using the 1990—91 House-

 hold Budget Survey (Encuesta de Presupucstos Familzarcs or EFF), which we
 do not report.
    Figure 7 compares cross-sectional LFPR by age for men and women. At age
 45, female LFPR are less than 50 percent, about half the ones of men. After
 that age, LFFR decline steadily with noticeable differences between the two
 sexes. For women, LFPR decline linearly, with a sizeable jump only at age 65.
 For men, the decline tends instead to accelerate with age, at least until age 65,

 and shows two noticeable jumps at ages 60 and 65.
     Figures 8 and 9 show, for each age, the distribution by main activity (em-
 ployed, unemployed, disabled and retired) separately by sex. Overall, the pat-
 terns of LFFR are confirmed but two interesting features appear, common to
 both men and women. First, the fraction of the population classified as unem-

  ployed declines rapidly with age. Second, the residual fraction of individuals
  not belonging to any of the previous four categories (not reported in the Fig-
ures) increases steadily until age 65 when it suddenly falls. This downward

jump is due to the award of non-contributory old-age pensions to people aged
65 who were previously out of the labor force or covered by other welfare pro-

grams (see below). After age 65, there are almost no men left in the residual
category, whereas the fraction of women classified in this category declines due

the increase in the fraction receiving survivors' pensions.
    The next set of pictures are based on the Spanish household budget survey

(Encuesta de Presupuesto.s Familiares, or EPF) for 1990. They are meant to
assess the extent to which transfers from the SS system affect the income of
older men and women.
    Figure 10 shows the fraction of men that receive some form of public in-

 come at each age. Public income, identified in e EPF with welfare payments
 (prestaciones sociales), is broken down into three categories: old-age and sur-

 vivors' (OAS) pensions, disability (DI) pensions, and other welfare payments.
     The fraction of men receiving disability pensions increases sharply right
 before age 65, suggesting a strategic use of this kind of pensions to anticipate

 retirement and avoid the cuts that the legislation would otherwise impose on
 old-age pensions. In fact, those who are declared disable can stop working,
  collect a disability pension immediately, and still receive their old-age pension

  in full once they reach age 65. For individuals that have already cumulated
  35 years of work, are younger than 65, belong to SS regimes that do not allow
  for early retirement and do not expect any substantial real wage increase, the

  "disabled first — retired later" strategy is clearly a dominant one.

      A precise assessment of the number of those who participate to or receive
  income from private pension schemes is very hard to come by, due to the lack of

  data. Figure 11 reports data from the EPF and gives a breakdown of the sources
  of family income (earnings, assets, private pensions, and public transfers) by

                                           8
the age of the (male) family head. The graph suggests the irrelevance of private

pensions. Notice that the fraction receiving such transfers, beside being almost
negligible (less than 3 percent) for both men and women, remains practically
constant at alt ages.

3 Institutional features of SS
3.1 Historical evolution

Mandatory insurance for job related accidents was introduced in 1900, through
a bill that also authorized the creation of some funds, for public employees only,

paying disability and retirement pensions.
   In 1919, mandatory retirement insurance (Retiro Obrero Obligatorio) was
introduced for private sector employees aged 16—65 whose total annual salary
was below a certain threshold. Contributions to the fund came from both the
employer and the employee in a 3 to 1 ratio.

   In 1926, a universal pension system for public employees (Regimen de Clases

Pasivas, or RCP) was established, providing a minimum pension and the option

of contributing, out of the salary and up to a maximum amount, towards acom-

plementary pension. By the late 1930s, most Spanish employees were covered,
in one form or another, by some minimal, government mandated retirement
insurance program.

   With the end of the Republic and the advent of Franco's regime, a number
of more or less connected changes were implemented. In 1939, Workers' Re-

tirement (Retiro Obrero) was replaced by Old Age Insurance (Seguro de Vejez).
While the former was based upon a capitalization system, the latter was from
the beginning a completely unfunded pay-as-you-go scheme. At the same time,
the regime promoted the creation of complementary pension funds, called Mu-
tualzdades y Monteplos Laborales, which were jointly managed by the Ministry


                                       9
of Labor and the regime-sponsored trade-unions.

    By 1950, the system had acquired its basic organization in two pillars, which

remained essentially unchanged until the mid 1970s, when the collapse of the
dictatorial regime brought about major changes. Public servants were all cov-
ered by the RCP, while private sector employees with annual earnings below a
certain ceiling were covered by the Old Age Insurance. Both public and private

employees could also enroll in complementary pension plans (the Mutualidades)
which, despite the apparently private nature, were under complete government
control.

   Variability in benefit and tax rates across different professional groups and

sectors of activity was not negligible. A ceiling on covered earnings was leg-
islated in 1950 and updated more or less regularly after that. For most Mu-
tualidades, covered earnings were computed as the average annual salary over
a period of 24 consecutive months chosen by the retiree within the last seven
years of work.

3.2 Major reforms since 1960

The 1963 Social Security Act (Ley de Bases de Ia Seguridad Social) eliminated
the income ceiling for enrollment in the Old Age Insurance, unified the various

contributions for retirement, disability, etc., in a general SS contribution, and
modified the percentages contributed by the employer and the employee.
   Another consequence of the 1963 reform was the creation of a very large
number of special funds (Reg&nertes Especiales) next to the general scheme
(Regimen General), generating a jungle of special treatments and privileges for
sectors and categories that were either politically close to the regime, or enjoyed
the support of a particularly strong trade union.
   The 1963 act also defined, for each professional group and sector of activity,


                                        10
the tax base (buses de cotizaciórz) upon which SS taxes were levied. Such tax
base, however, had little to do with actual earnings. The difference between the

two increased sharply over time until the 1972 reform, which effectively linked
the tax base to wages (overtime pay excluded).

   Besides linking the tax bases to actual wages, the 1972 bill also loosened sig-

nificantly the eligibility criteria and began undoing the system of Mutualidades
by establishing common replacement rates in place of the previous system where

each category had its own. Finally, it established the principle that pensions
should be indexed to both the cost of living and the real wage growth.
   In 1977, a reform bill made a first attempt at harmonizing the many existing

funds, by reducing the differences in the treatment they offered and by putting
(in 1979) the administration of the whole system under the newly created Na-
tional Social Security Institute (Irtstituto Nacional de Ia Seguvidad Social, or
INSS). Overall, this process increased the percentage of workers covered by the

public SS system1 as it is clearly reflected by the aggregate data reported in the
previous section.

   The last major reform process, which came to shape the current regime,
began in 1985. Three important changes were introduced. First, eligibility
criteria for disability pensions were tightened. Second, the minimum number of
years of contributions required to obtain an old-age pension was increased from

8 to 15. Third, the number of years entering the computation of the benefit
base was increased from 2 to 8. The reform also provided for a reduction in the

number of existing special funds, either through their integration in the general

scheme or by merging them together. This process, which began in 1986, is
not yet completed, as various small groups of public employees retain their
privileges. Overall, the 1985 reform had more impact on the replacement rates
than on the percentage of covered workers, as the latter had already reached a

                                       11
very high level.
   In 1986, the Spanish Government established a public health insurance sys-
tem (INSALUD) covering the whole population, which was largely financed by

the contributions to the SS system. This arrangement ended with the budget
year 1989, when the whole cost of INSALUD was attributed to the general
Government budget. A set of regulations for complementary private pension
plans was introduced in 1987, and further modified in 1995.

   Another important change was the introduction, in 1990, of non-contributory

pensions for elderly people aged 65+ and for disabled people aged 18+, who
live in households with income below a certain minimum and satisfy a residency

requirement. Financing of these non-contributory pensions is attributed to the

general Government budget.
   Finally on June 26, 1997, when this paper was already completed, the Par-
liament introduced a number of changes in the parameters to be used for the
computation of benefit bases and pensions. The number of contributive years
over which the benefit base is computed will progressively increase from the
current 8 to 15 between now and 2001. The formula for the computation of the

replacement rate a (see below) has also been made less generous, whereas the
8%: per-year penalty applied to early retirees between the ages of 60 and 65 is
reduced to 7% for those individuals with 40 or more contributive years at the
time of retirement.

3.3 The current situation

Under the current legislation, public contributory pensions are provided by the
following programs.

   • "General Social Security Scheme" (Regimen General de Ia Seguridad So-
      cml. or RGSS) and "Special Social Security Schemes" (Regimenes Es-

                                      12
  peciales de Ia Seguridad Social, or RESS): They cover all private sector
  employees, self-employed workers and professionals, members of coopera-

  tive firms, employees of most public administrations other than the central

  government (e.g. municipalities, local corporations), the clergy, convicted
  individuals working while in jail, professional athlets, members of the
  Parliament, and unemployed individuals who comply with the minimum

  number of contributory years when reaching 65. The general and the spe-
  cial schemes together covered 12.4 million workers in 1996, of which 8.7

  million (70 percent) were covered by RGSS and the remaining 3,7 million

  (30 percent) by the RESS. The latter include five special schemes set up
  for particular classes of workers:


    1. Self-employed (Regimen Especial de Trabajadores AutOnomos or RETA),

       covering 2,3 million workers on average during 1996.

    2. Agricultural workers and small farmers (Regimen Especial Agrario

       or REA), covering about 1,2 million workersin 1996, of which 65 per-

       cent are employees and the remaining 35 percent are self-employed.

    3. Domestic workers (Regimen Especial de Empleados de Hogar or REEH),

       covering 144 thousand individuals in 1996.

    4. Sailors (Regimen Especial de Trabajadores del Mar or RETM), cov-
       ering 82 thousand workers in 1996, of which 84 percent are employees

       and the remaining 16 percent are self-employed.

    5. Coal miners (Rig?merl Especial de Ia Minerla dcl Carbon or REMC),
       covering 28 thousand workers in 1996.


• Government employees scheme (REgzmen de Closes Pasivas. or RCP): It

  includes public servants (both military and civil) currently employed by


                                       13
     the central government and its local branches. It also covers, through
     a number of small special funds, all civil war veterans and survivors, a
     variety of semi-public employees, the victims of terrorist attacks, etc. The
     number of workers covered by RCP was 806 thousands in 1994.

   • "Special Funds": This is a family of special funds, remnants of the old

     Mutualidades y Montepios, paying small supplementary pensions and pro-
     viding basic health insurance to certain groups of civil servants (MU-
     FACE), military personnel (ISFAS) and members of the judiciary system
     (MUCEJU). These pensions complement the basic ones paid by the RCP
     or by the RGSS.

   • "Insurance Systems of Regional Governments and Local Administrations":

     These are small programs, covering employees of certain regional govern-
     ments or local administrations, and are financed through transfers from
     the central government.

   • Finally, there exists a long array of small pension plans, covering employ-
     ees of other institutions (e.g. the Bank of Spain, a number of formerly
     public banks, many local corporations, special branches of some regional
     government, etc.), which managed to maintain their special treatments
     despite the process of homogenization started in the 1980s.

   The legislation approved by Parliament on June 26, 1997 establishes the
progressive elimination of all the special regimes by the year 2001. Aside from
the pension scheme for public employees (RCP), the Spanish SS system will
then be structured around only two "schemes" for the private sector: one for
the employees and one for the self-employed.




                                       14
   The number of workers affiliated to the general scheme increased from 6.7

million in 1982 to 8.7 million in 1996. As we have argued already, a large
part of this growth simply reflects the progressive incorporation of a variety of
previously autonomous funds. At the same time, the number of people affiliated

to the special schemes decreased from 3.9 to 3.7 million. Overall, the number
of people affiliated to SS (excluding RCP and the smaller funds) increased from
10.6 million in 1982 to the current 12.4 million.

   Figure 12 shows the distribution of the affiliated to SS (excluding RCP)
by program. The fraction affiliated to the general scheme grew from about 63
percent in 1982 to about 70 percent in 1996, with a corresponding decline of
the fraction affiliated to the special schemes. It is interesting to notice that all
special schemes except the self-employed have lost affiliates. The decline has
often been dramatic, as in the case of domestic workers and small farmers.

3.4 The general scheme
This section describes the rules governing old-age and survivors' pensions under

the general scheme (RGSS), the main SS program in Spain and the benchmark
for our simulations. Many of these rules also apply to the special schemes
(RESS) and the scheme for government employees (RCP). The main differences

will be noted below when we discuss these other programs.

3.4.1 Financing

RGSS is a pure pay-as-you-go scheme financed partly by contributions from
earnings (about two thirds in 1996) and partly by transfers from the Govern-
ment budget (about one third in 1996).
    Contributions are a fixed proportion of covered earnings, defined as total
earnings, excluding payments for overtime work, between a floor and a ceiling

that vary by broadly defined professional category. Currently, eleven categories

                                         15
are distinguished. For the first seven of them, floors and ceilings apply to
monthly earnings. These floors and ceilings are shown in Table 2 for the years

1990 and 1996. They are approximately equal to, respectively, the professional
minimum wage and three times the professional minimum wage. For the last
four categories, floors and ceilings apply to daily earnings and are not reported
in the Table.

   As the table shows, a process of slow convergence between floors and ceilings

and across categories is in place. This process is generated by asymmetric
inflation adjustments and an intentional effort to control total expenditures on
pensions by slowing down the growth of the higher ones. Over time, these
modifications have substantially weakened the link between covered earnings

and lifetime wage and work effort, especially for workers earning relatively high
wages and salaries.

   SS tax rates have fluctuated over time, being lowered in the early 1980s
and increased afterwards. The current tax rate is 28.3 percent (it was 29.3
percent until January 1995), of which 23.6 percent is formally attributed to the
employer and the remaining 4.7 percent to the employee. A tax rate of only 14
percent is levied on most earnings from overtime work, of which 12 percent is

paid by the employer and the remaining 2 percent by the employee.

3.4.2 Eligibility

Entitlement to an old-age pension requires the number of years of contributions

to be at least 15 (only 8 were required until 1985), of which at least 2 within
the last 8 years immediately before retirement.
    As a general rule, recipiency is conditional on having reached age 65 and is

incompatible with income from any employment that requires affiliation to SS.




                                        16
3.4.3 Benefit computation

Suppose that the eligibility conditions are met and consider a person aged 65+
who retires in month t after n       15 years of contributions. Its initial monthly
pension P1 is computed as
                                    Pt =   a BR1,
where the benefit base (base rgu1adora) BR is a weighted average of covered
monthly earnings W..j over a reference period that consists of the last 8 years
before retirement


                    BR = ( WI_i +
and I_, is the consumer price index for the j-th month before retirement.
   The replacement rate a,, depends on the number of years of contribution
and is equal to

                          (0,              ifn<15,
                    a,, = ( .6+.02(n— 15), if 15< ii <35,
                                                if 35 < ii.
It may be further adjusted in the case of early retirement as described in Sec-
tion 3.4.4.

    A few remarks are in order. First, after 15 years of contributions the pension

is already equal to 60 percent of the benefit base. After 35 years of contributions

the pension is equal to the benefit base and there is no direct advantage from

contributing further, although contributions are mandatory until retirement.
   Second, if there were no inflation and no wage growth in the reference period,

that is, Wj was constant over the last 8 years, then the benefit base would be
equal to 6/7 =    .857   of the last monthly social security wage. This is because

pensions (and, usually, salaries) are paid in 14 monthly installments, whereas
monthly social security contributions are levied on yearly salaries divided by


                                           17
12. For a person with 35 years of contributions, the annual benefit base would
then be equal to the last annual wage.

   Third, earnings in the last two years before retirement are not adjusted
for inflation. For earlier months, they are adjusted and converted to money
equivalents of the 25-tb month before retirement. In periods of high inflation,
these aspects of the benefit formula imply that the benefit base may be well
below the average real wage in the last 8 years.

   Fourth, beginning July 15, 1997, the number of reference years will be in-
creased by one every year until 2001 and could then be increased further up to
15 years. Moreover, the formula for computing a,, has also been changed to the

following
                            0,               ifn<15,
                  &fl
                        —
                        —   .5+.03(n— 15), if 15< n <25,
                            .8+.02(n—25), if25< n <35,
                            1,               if3S<n.
In all of our simulations we obviously used the old formula, which was in place
over the relevant sample period.

3.4.4 Early retirement

The normal retirement age is 65, but early retirement at age 60 is permitted for
those who became affiliated to SS before 1967. Currently, more than one third
of those who retire under the general scheme take advantage of this possibility.

   The current legislation distinguishes between two cases. The first one, rep-
resenting the vast majority of those currently retiring between age 60 and 65
[Duran (1995), p. 472], is the case of workers who started contributing as de-
pendent employees to some Mutualidad Laboral before 1967. In this case, the
replacement rate is reduced by 8 percentage points for each year under age 65.
Table 3 shows how replacement rates vary with age and the number of years of
contribution. Notice the different incentive to work an extra year for a person


                                       18
aged 60 and one aged 65, both with 34 years of contributions. In the former

case, the pension increases from 56.8 to 68 percent of the benefit base, while in
the latter it only increases from 98 to 100 percent. As of July 15, 1997 work-
ers who retires after the age of 60 with 40 or more contributive years will be
charged a penalty of only 7 percent for each year under age 65.
   The second case, representing about 10 percent of the early retirees, is the

case of workers with dangerous or unhealthy jobs (e.g. bullfighters, employees
of railroads, public transportation companies and airlines, etc.), or workers who
were laid off for industrial restructuring regulated by special legislation. In this
case, no reduction applies. Notice that these exemption rights are "portable",
as the minimum retirement age without penalty, for an individual who was
previously employed in one of the sectors deemed dangerous or unhealthy, is
reduced in proportion to the number of years of work spent in such sectors.
   Unless there are collective agreements that prescribe mandatory retirement,

individuals may continue working after age 65. There is no direct incentive for

delaying retirement, however, at least for those individuals who have already
reached 35 years of contribution at the age of 65. The only indirect form
of incentive would be the prospect of a particularly high wage growth in the
forthcoming years, as this would proportionally increase the benefit base (recall
that only the last 8 years of wages are taken into account in this computation).
For those with less than 35 years of contribution, a small direct incentive to
postpone retirement is provided by the fact that the ratio of the pension to the

benefit base grows 2 percentage points per year of contribution until reaching
100 percent.




                                        19
3.4.5 Maximum and minimum pension

Pensions are subject to a ceiling legislated annually and roughly equal to the
ceiling on covered earnings. The 1996 ceiling corresponds to about 4.3 times
the minimum wage (salario mInirno interprofesional, or SM!) and about 1.6
times the average monthly earnings in the manufacturing and service sectors.
If the computed old-age pension is below a minimum, then a person is paid
a minimum pension legislated annually. Minimum and maximum pensions,
as well as the annualized SM!, are reported in Table 4. Other things being
equal, minimum pensions are higher for those who are older than 65 or have a

dependent spouse.
   In the last decade, minimum pensions grew at about the same rate as nomi-

nal wages, whereas maximum pensions grew at a lower rate that is about equal

to the inflation rate. The ratio between the minimum old-age pension and
the minimum wage has been increasing steadily from the late 1970s (it was 75
percent in 1975) until reaching almost 100 percent in the early 1990s. On the
other hand, the percentage of pensioners of the general scheme receiving the
minimum pension has been declining steadily, from over 75 percent in the late
1970s to 27 percent in 1995.

    In Figure 13 we analyze the relative importance of complements to the
minimum, that is, the difference between the actual pension amount and the
"virtual" pension in the absence of minimum pension rules. The sample, from
administrative SS records as of January 1993, includes people who retired before

1985 with only 8 years of contributions.

    The fraction of the total pension which comes from complements varies with

the pension type. It is 10.1 percent for men and 12.5 percent for women in the
case of old-age pensions, 5.8 and 6.2 percent respectively in the case of disability
pensions, and 19.4 percent in the case of survivors' pensions. Not surprisingly,

the fraction of pensioners who receive complements to the minimum and the
share of the pension due to complements both decrease with the number of years

of contribution. For example, people who retire with 10 years of contributions
get 40 percent of their pension from complements, whereas people who retire
with 35 years get less than 10 percent from complements.

   It is interesting to note that both indices are higher for men than for women

for longer contributory lives. This result has to be interpreted with care, how-
ever, since there are very few women (less than 10 percent) among pensioners
who contributed for 35 years or more, whereas they represent the majority
among pensioners who contributed for 15 years or less.

3.4.6 Pension indexation

Pensions are fully indexed to inflation, as measured by the Consumer Price
Index (Indice de precios de corzsurno, or IPC). Until 1986, pensions were also
indexed to real wage growth.

   It should be noted that indexation is to expected inflation, as defined an-
nually by the Central Bank and the Treasury. If actual inflation is above the
expected one, then the difference is paid only to the pensions that are below the
minimum wage. No adjustment is made, however, if actual inflation falls below

the expected one, as it occurred during the last two years. Pensions that have
already reached the legislated ceiling are not indexed but are automatically
adjusted with the ceiling.
   While this indexation mechanism could, at least theoretically, induce large
reductions in the real value of higher pensions and a strong tendency to pension

equalization, in practice this has occurred only to a limited extent.




                                       21
3.4.7 Family considerations

A pensioner receives a fixed annual allowance for each dependent child that
is younger than 18 or disabled. In 1996, this allowance was equal to 408,840
pesetas (pta), corresponding to about 45 percent of the annualized minimum
wage. In addition, the minimum pension is increased by a fixed amount if a
pensioner has a dependent spouse (Table 4).
   Survivors (spouse, children, other relatives) may receive a fraction of the
benefit base of the deceased if the latter was a pensioner or died before retire-

ment after contributing for at least 500 days in the last 5 years. The benefit
base is computed differently in the two cases. If the deceased was a pensioner,
the benefit base coincides with the pension. It the deceased was a wetter, it
is computed as an average of covered earnings over an uninterrupted period of
2 years chosen by the beneficiary among the last 7 years immediately before
death. If death occurred because of a work accident or a professional illness,
then the benefit base coincides with last earnings.

   The surviving spouse gets 45 percent of the benefit base of the deceased. In
case of divorce, the pension is divided between the various spouses according to

the length of their marriage with the deceased. Such a pension is compatible
with labor income and any other old-age or disability pension, but is lost if the
spouse remarries. As a token of curiosity, we point out here that the remarriage

rate among spanish widows is particularly low compared to other countries.
   Surviving children get 20 percent each of the benefit base of the principal
as long as they are less than 18 or unable to work, and stay unmarried. A full

orphan who is a sole beneficiary may receive up to 65 percent of the benefit
base. If there are several surviving children, the sum of the pensions to the
surviving spouse (if any) and children cannot exceed 100 percent of the benefit


                                       77
base.

    A Spanish peculiarity is the "pension in favor of family members". This

pension entitles other surviving relatives (e.g. parents, grandparents, siblings,
nephews, etc.) to 20 percent of the benefit base of the principal if they satisfy
certain eligibility conditions (older than 45, do not have a spouse, do not have
other means of subsistence, have been living with and depending economically

upon the deceased for the last two years). To this pension, one may add the 45

percent survivors' pension if there is no surviving spouse or eligible surviving
children.

    There are specific minimum pensions for the different types of survivorship.

In particular, the minimum pension to a surviving spouse has been raised in
1992 and is now equal to the minimum old-age pension for a person without a

dependent spouse.

3.5 Special schemes
In this section we sketch the main differences between the general and the special

schemes. Whereas rules and regulations for sailors and coal miners are very
similar to the ones for the general scheme, special rules apply to self-employed,

farmers, agricultural workers, domestic servants, and a few other categories
not discussed here, such as part-time workers, artists, traveling salespeople,
and bullfighters. Beside differences in the SS tax rate and the definition of
covered earnings, an important difference is the fact that the affiliated to the
special schemes have no early retirement option (exception made for miners and

sailors).
    The rest of this section focuses on the special schemes for self-employed

workers (RETA) and for farmers (REA), which together represent 93 percent
of the affiliated to the special schemes and 86 percent of the pensions that they


                                       23
pay out.

3.5.1 Self-employed

While the 55 tax rate is the same for the RETA and the general scheme (28.3

percent in 1996), covered earnings are computed differently, as the self-employed
are essentially free to choose their covered earnings between a floor and a ceiling

legislated annually. Not surprisingly in the light of the strong progressivity of

Spanish personal income taxes, a suspiciously large proportion of self-employed
workers report earnings equal to the legislated floor.
   In 1996, the floor and the ceiling were equal to 101,940 pta and 374,880 pta

per month respectively, corresponding to 1.6 and 5.8 times the minimum wage,
and .5 and 1.9 times the average earnings in manufacturing and services. For

a self-employed aged 50+, the ceiling was only about half, namely 195,000 pta
per month, which was about equal to the average monthly earnings.
   A crucial difference with respect to the general scheme is that, under the
RETA, recipiency of an old-age pension is compatible with maintaining the self-

employed status. This provision effectively configures the RETA pensions as

pure old-age pensions, completely independent from labor market participation
decisions.

   Some other important provisions are the following. RETA only requires at
least 5 years of contribution in the 10 years immediately before the death of the
principal in order to qualify for survivors' pensions. Under RETA, the latter
is 50 percent of the benefit base. If the principal was not a pensioner at time
of death, the benefit base is computed as the average of covered earnings over
an uninterrupted period of 5 years chosen by the beneficiary among the last 10
years before the death of the principal.




                                        01
3.5.2 Farmers

In this case, both the SS tax rate and the covered earnings differ with respect
to the general scheme. Self-employed farmers pay 18.75 percent of a tax base
that is legislated annually and is unrelated to actual earnings. In 1996, this was

equal to 80,490 pta per month, corresponding to 1.24 times the minimum wage

and about 40 percent the average monthly earnings in the manufacturing and
service sectors.

   Farm employees, instead, pay 11.5 percent of a monthly base that depends
on their professional category and is legislated yearly. In addition, for each day
of work, their employer must pay 15.5 percent of a daily base that also varies

by professional category and is legislated annually.

3.6 Government employees

We now describe briefly the main differences between the general scheme and
the RCP, the pension fund for the employees of the central government.
   Public servants are divided into 5 categories, labeled from A to E, corre-

sponding loosely to decreasing schooling levels: A for college graduates (doctor,
Iicenciado, arquitecto o equivalente), B for people holding certain kinds of col-

lege diplomas (ingeniero técnico, diplomado, etc.), C for high school graduates
(bachiller o eqnzvalente), D for junior high school diplomas (graduado escolar
o equivalente), and E for individuals with lower education levels (certificado de

escolarzdad). There were many more categories before the 1985 reform. For
each of these categories, the budget law defines every year a theoretical 55 wage

(haber regulador) which is used to compute SS contributions and pensions. The
implied wage scale has remained relatively constant since 1985. So, for exam-
ple, the ratio of level A to level E wages was equal to 2.39 between 1985 and
1989, dropped to 2.33 in 1990, and rebounced and remained constant at 2.45

                                        25
afterwards.

     SS contributions are the sum of three parts, each proportional to the leg-

islated covered wage, according to proportionality factors legislated annually:
a) derechos pasivos (3.86 percent in 1995), b) cuota mensual de Mutualidades

(1.89 percent in 1995), and c) aportación del Estado (paid by the government, it
varies between 6 and 10 percent depending on the sector of the administration).

     To parallel this three-part contribution structure, actual pensions are com-

puted by adding up three sources of benefits: a) the basic pension (derechos
pasivos), b) a portion directed to the pensioner's family (ayuda familiar), and
c) a complementary portion coming from the various Mutualidades (ISFAS,
MUFACE, MUGEJU).
     The basic monthly pension of a public servant who retires in month t af-
ter contributing for n years to RCP is computed as             =   a BR, where the
dependence of a,.. upon the numbers of years worked has been changed quite
frequently during the last 10 years. For n    15, the last table of proportionality

factors, legislated in 1990, can be reasonably (but not exactly) approximated
by
                            = min(1,   1 — .0366   (35— n)).

     The differences with respect to the general scheme are various. First, while
the entitlement to a pension still requires at least 15 years of contributions,
the replacement rate (the ratio of the pension to the benefit base) increases
somewhat irregularly with seniority, up to 100 percent after 35 years. So, for

example, 15 years of service give right to a pension equal to only 26.92 percent
of the benefit base, against 60 percent of the general scheme. After 30 years the
same ratio has increased to 81.73 percent, against 90 percent for the general
scheme). Historically, this replacement ratio has been rather unstable as it can



                                        26
be modified year-by-year through the budget law.

   Second, the benefit base is computed as a weighted average of covered earn-

ings, upon which the worker paid the contributions, with weights equal to the
percentage of the career spent at each level, that is,

                                 BR =

where   p1 is the fraction of the career spent on level i and   are the covered
earnings corresponding to level i, as determined by the current law at time t.

   Third, llnlike the general scheme, the RCP imposes mandatory retirement
at age 65. Exception are made for a few special categories, such as university
professors and judges. On the other hand, the RCP allows for early retirement
at the age of 60, without any penalty for public servants with at least 30 years
of service (20 for military personnel).
   A fourth important difference with respect to the general scheme is compat-

ibility between RCP pensions recipiency and income from continuing to work.
In a number of special cases, RCP pensioners are allowed to keep a public sec-

tor occupation, as long as this does not provide them with a "regular flow of
income" (for example, this is the case of members of legislative bodies). More
importantly, the legislation allows RCP pensions to be cumulated with earnings
from employment in the private sector.
    It should be noted that those who leave the public administration after
contributing the minimum number of years but before reaching the retirement
age, can claim an RCP pension once they reach age 65. The benefit base used
to compute such pension does not refer to the time when the individual left the
public administration but is instead the one legislated for the year when they
turn 65. Furthermore, any future modification in the law will have no impact
upon the pensions which are already being paid. The latter will be forever

                                          27
regulated by the legislation of the time when the individual matured the right
to the RCP pension.
   When a public servant is dismissed because of disability (and therefore starts

drawing a disability pension) or dies (and the survivors are therefore entitled
to a pension), the missing years between the person's age at the time of the
event and 65 are counted as actual years of service in the computation of either
the disability or the survivors' pension. Should the disability be caused by an
accident while on duty, the disability pension is doubled.

3.7 Disability pensions
The SS system provides insurance against both temporary and permanent ill-
ness or disability.

3.7.1 Temporary illness or disability

The subsidy for temporary illness or disability (irzcapacidad laboral transitoria)
was not regulated by the 1985 reform, and its terms of provision have undergone

frequent changes.
    Eligibility requires affiliation to the SS system for a minimum period that
depends upon the nature of the covered risk. Common illness requires only 180
days of contributions during the last 5 years, paid maternity/paternity leave
requires at least 9 months before the date of delivery and 180 days during the
last 12 months, whereas no minimum eligibility criterion is imposed for work-
related accidents or illnesses.

    The benefit base depends on actual earnings during the last 12 months. In
case of common illness or work-unrelated accident, the subsidy is equal to 60
percent of the benefit base for each day of absence between the 4-th and the

20-tb, and to 75 percent of the benefit base aftwerwards until the maximum
period is reached. It is always equal to 75 percent in case of work-related

                                       28
accident or illness and in case of maternity/paternity (only one of the partners
being allowed to use the subsidy per each child). The maximum period for
which the subsidy can be received is 18 months, after which the worker has
either to return to work or be classified as "permanently disabled".

3.7.2 Contributive disability pensions

Permanent disability pensions have played an important role in allowing Span-
ish workers to retire at ages earlier than 60. In particular, they have been used
extensively during the late 1970s and early 1980s as an early-retirement mech-

anism for workers in restructuring industries (shipbuilding, steel, mining, etc.),
or as substitutes for long-term unemployment subsidies in depressed regions.
The total disability rate (as a percentage of the workforce) doubled in less than

ten years, from about 0.7 percent in 1975 to 1.5 percent in 1983. The 1985

reform, by tightening the requirements, managed to bring the phenomenon un-
der partial control. Disability rates have since decreased, stabilizing around 0.6

percent.
    Disability pensions are distinguished into contributory and non-contributory.
This section deals with the contributory pensions. The non-contributory ones
are dealt with in the next section.
    Eligibility and pension amounts depend on the level of disability. The 1985

reform distinguished four levels of permanent disability characterized by in-
creasing severity. Since then, the legislation has formally reduced them to
three, but has also created a special subcase of the first level with the explicit
purpose of using the disability funds to subsidize the dismissal of old workers
from certain sectors or geographic areas.

    The first level (incapacidad permanente total para Ia profesión habitual, or
IPT) corresponds to inability to do the usual job. A special subcase (incapaci-


                                        29
dad permariente total cualificada pam la profesión habitual, or IPTC) applies
only to employees older than 55 which are in particular socio-economic situa-

tions. The second level (irzeapacidad permanente absoluta, or IPA) corresponds
to inability to do any kind of job. The third level (gran invalidez, or Cl) re-
quires, in addition, continued attendance by other persons in order to carry out
the basic vital functions.

    When disability is caused by an ordinary illness, eligibility to a pension
requires from 5 to 15 years of contributions, depending on the age when the
person fell ill and the seriousness of the disability. There is no contributive
requirement when the disability is caused by an accident, whether or not work-

related, or a professional illness.

    Eligibility requirements are fairly complicated. We try here to streamline
their presentantion. In the cases of IPA or CI, 15 years of contributions are
required, of which at least 3 during the last 10 years. For the other two cases

(IPT and IPTC), eligibility depends on age. For persons aged 26 or younger,
the requirement is half of the number of years between the age of 16 and the
age when disability began. For persons older than 26, the requirement is either
5 years or a fourth of the number of years between the age of 20 and the age
when disability began, whichever is largest. Furthermore, at least a fifth of the
required contributory years must have occurred during the last 10 years.
    The benefit base depends on the source of disability. In case of ordinary
illness, it is computed as for old-age pensions. For work-unrelated accident, it is

 the average annual wage over a period of 24 consecutive months chosen by the

 person within the last 7 years of work. For work-related accident or professional
 illness, it is the average wage in the last year of work.

    The pension equals 55 percent of the benefit base under IPT, and increases
 to 75 percent under IPTC. In case of IPA. it is equal to 100 of the benefit base,

                                         30
whereas for CI it is equal to 100 percent of the benefit base plus another 50
percent covering the person taking care of the disabled.
   Disability pensions are indexed to inflation like the other pensions of the
RCSS. Unlike the latter, however, disability pensions may be kept while earn-
ing income from a job different from the one for which the disability (even a

complete one) was determined.
   We mentioned earlier that disability pensions were awarded very generously

until 1985. This is illustrated in Figure 14, which reports the distribution of

male disability pensions outstanding in 1993, by age and year of award, based
dn administrative records from SS. For all age groups, awards peak between
1980 and 1982, when the growth rate of the number of outstanding disability
pensions reached 6 percent a year. Between 20 and 25 percent of the outstanding

disability pensions were granted during those years which correspond to the
most severe post-war recession in the Spanish economy. For women, a very
similar picture is obtained.

   The extent to which disability pensions may have been used as instruments
to absorb the reduction of employment in certain sectors of the Spanish economy

is evident in Table 5 which reports the percentage ratio between the number of

disability pensions paid and the number of workers covered by the various SS
programs for the years between 1981 and 1994.

   While certain sectors are clearly characterized by a higher risk of work
related accidents, this fact cannot explain the persistently higher percentage
of disabled among the domestic or the agricultural workers, nor the strong
countercyclical pattern of the disability ratios reported.
   A second interesting element is the age distribution of the new recipients
of disabilit' pensions. In 1994, for example, the average age of new recipients
as of 51? years on average. with a value of 50 for the RCSS and of 54, 55.6

                                       31
and 57.9 respectively for RETA, REA and REEH. Table 6 shows, for each 55
program and each level of disability, the fraction of new disability pensions
awarded in 1994 to individuals aged 55+.
   Criteria are now much stricter, although Court rulings often recognize claims

to a pension that have been rejected by the SS administration. At least in
principle, a person receiving a disability pension may be subject to periodic
checks in order to determine whether the conditions for a pension are still met.

3.7.3 Non-contributory disability pensions

They are granted, through a special branch of the SS system called Jrtstiluto
National de Servicios Sociales (INSERSO), to disabled people aged 18 to 65
who are ineligible for contributory pensions, have been legal residents of Spain
for at least 5 years (of which at least 2 immediately before applying for such
pension). and whose annual income is below a certain threshold. INSERSO
also provides its beneficiaries with basic health insurance, free medicines, and

other complementary social services.
    Iii 1990. a   number of pre-existing non-contributory programs were ratio-
nalized and unified under INSERSO. As of 1995, the total annual budget of
INSERSO was 418 billions pta, of which 64 percent were direct Government
transfers while the rest was financed through SS contributions. Just to give
an idea of the relative magnitude of this program, which represents about 0.7
percent of Spanish GDP, notice that total expenditures for the public university
system in 1995 was only slightly higher, at about 0.9 percent of GDP.

    Of the total annual budget of INSERSO in 1995, about 39 percent was
spent either in direct monetary transfers or services to disabled individuals,
about the same amount went to non-contributory old-age pensions (see next
section), 20 percent was transferred to the regional governments (Comunidades


                                       32
Autónomas) providing similar services, and 2 percent covered INSERSO ad-
ministrative costs.

   The basic annual disability pension paid by INSERSO in 1996 was 498,120
pta, corresponding to 55 percent of the minimum wage (SM!) and 19 percent

of average monthly earnings during the same year. Such amount may vary
according to the economic and physical conditions of the individual and may
be increased up to 50 percent.
   At the end of 1995, there were about 163 thousands recipients of non-
contributory disability pensions residing in Spain, of which 36 percent were
males and 64 percent females. Another 198 thousands people (22 percent males

and 78 percent females) received one of three other monetary subsidies also ad-
ministered by INSERSO.

3.8 Other transfer programs
We now describe a few other transfer programs that are either conditioned on
age, or for which the elderly can qualify based solely on having low incomes.

3.8.1 Unemp!oyment benefits

There exists a special subsidy for unemployed people that are older than 52,
lack income sources, have contributed to unemployment insurance for at least
6 years in their life and, except for age, satisfy all requirements for an old-age
pension. This subsidy pays up to 75 percent of the minimum wage and may
be received until the person reaches the age at which it can access an old-
age pension. Years spent unemployed count as contributive years towards an

old-age pension.




                                       33
3.8.2 Non-contributory old-age pension

A person aged 65+ who does not qualify for an old-age pension, is entitled to

a non-contributory pension (pension    de   jubilaczón no contributiva) if he/she
has been a legal resident of Spain for the last 10 years and his/her annual
income is below a certain threshold. This program is also administered by
INSERSO. Recipiency of such a pension guarantees recipiency of public health
care assistance and other benefits available to 55 pensioners.
   The annual pension amount is equal to the minimum income threshold and

both depend on whether the person lives with others or not. Tithe person does
not live with others, then the pension is equal to the basic amount paid out
by INSERSO to disabled individuals. If the person lives with others, then the
pension amount varies with the number of household members.

    At the end of 1995. 186 thousands people received a non-contributory old-

age pension from INSERSO. Of these. 14 percent were males and 86 percent
females.

3.8.3 Other programs run by INSERSO

In addition to its duties in the field of disability and old-age pensions, INSERSO

runs a variety of other programs aimed at the elderly population. These pro-
grams include creating and maintaining residential and day-care centers open
to retirees aged 60+ and their spouses, and managing the "Social Thermal Pro-

gram" (Programa de Terrnalisrno Social) and the "Program for Elderly People's
 Holidays" (Frograrna de Vacaciones Tercera Edad). The latter two programs
offer paid or subsidized vacations to pensioners or people aged 65+, as well as
 paid or subsidized stays at spas and thermal resorts within the country. The
 spouse of an eligible person is also covered by the program.

    Recent!. most regional governments have also begun to provide a number

                                        34
of services for retired people, from subsidized holidays to reduction in the cost

of public transportation, special medical and psychological care, special houses
for the elderly, etc.

3.9 Private pensions
Private pension coverage is voluntary but not very widespread. Yet, the number
of participants to private pension plans has more than doubled in the last few
years, from 628 thousands in 1990 to 1,525 thousands in 1994 [de las Fuentes

and Gonzalo (1996), p. 255]. Assets of private pension funds still represent only
a small but growing fraction of GDP, estimated to be 4.7 percent in 1997 [de
las Fuentes and Gonzalo (1996), p. 251].
    The main incentive to participation is tax deferral. Contributions can be
entirely deducted from taxable income up to a maximum (equal to 1 million pta
in 1996, corresponding to 1.1 times the annualized minimum wage), provided
that they do not exceed 15 percent of total annual income. Upon recipiency,
pension benefits are treated as regular components of labor income and taxed

accordingly.
    There are three forms of organization of a private pension plan. The first
(szstema asociado), open to all members of the association that promotes the
plan (e.g. a trade union), is rather rare, The second (sistcrna de ernpleo), open
to all employees of the firm that promotes the plan, is confined to a few large

firms, mainly publicly owned, in the banking and electricity sectors. The third

(sisterna individual) is open to everybody and is the predominant one, covering
about 85 percent of the participants to private pension plans.

3.10 Rights of older workers

Only public sector employees are subject to mandatory retirement. The manda-

tory retirement age is normally 65, but it can be earlier for certain categories

                                       35
(military, police, etc.). There is no mandatory retirement in the private sec-
tor, unless it is specifically contemplated by collective agreements, which occurs

rarely.

    In principle, age discrimination is prohibited by the law. Indeed, a govern-
ment attempt of introducing mandatory retirement at age 69 was rejected by
the Spanish Supreme Court on the ground that it would represent a form of
age discrimination that violates constitutional principles.

4 Retirement incentives under the SS system
We now present the results of calculations carried out to evaluate the retire-
ment incentives provided by the Spanish SS system. These calculations refer
only to the general scheme. We exclude disability insurance because of two rea-

sons. First, it is now more severely screened than during the 1980's. Second,
the extent to which it is used as an early retirement device follows political
criteria that vary greatly between regions and sectors and cannot be properly
formalized. Private pensions are also excluded, since they are voluntary and
only cover a very small fraction of the workforce.

    Replacement rates are net of SS contributions and personal income taxes.
Although there is no difference in the tax treatment of labor earnings and
pensions. our simulations take into account the effects of the highly progressive

nature of the Spanish tax system. This does not affect the qualitative picture,
but it has a sizeable impact upon the final magnitudes. In order to provide
the reader with a clearer picture of the powerful role that, over and above the

pension system. a very progressive income tax schedule may play in determining
labor supply decisions, we also report simulation results gross of income taxes
for some of the most significant cases.

    Exact calculations of the after-tax wealth and replacement rates are com-

                                          36
plicated by the fact that the number of bend points in the Spanish marginal
tax schedule is high (34 in 1985 and still 17 in 1995). As an approximation,
we proceeded as follows. We first used the 1995 tax schedule to trace out the
relationship between average tax rate (net of standard deductions) and income
(net of 55 contributions paid by a worker). We then fitted by least squares a
fourth-order polynomial to this relationship. Finally, the estimated coefficients
were used to determine after-tax income for all previous and subsequent years.

4.1 Base case
Our base case is a male employee, born on January 1, 1930, who has been
.contributing toSS without interruption since he turned 20, on January 1, 1950.
He reaches the early retirement age of 60 in 1990 and the normal retirement
age of 65 in 1995. He is married to a womart who is three year younjer and
never worked. They have no dependent children and their conditional survival
probabilities at each age are equal to the ones obtained by the latest mortality
tables published by the National Statistical Institute (INE) with reference to
the year 1990. We assume that the survival probabilities of the husband and
the wife are independent.
    Our base-case worker has a real discount rate of 3 percent and his age-
earnings profile has been constructed as follows. First, using the EPF for
1980—81. we computed median annual earnings in 1980 for a full-time, non-
agricultural male employee born in 1930. We then predicted annual earnings in
all other years using the annual growth rate of nominal earnings, as computed
by the INSS. After 1995, we assumed an annual growth rate of nominal wages
of 4.5 percent and an annual inflation rate of 3 percent. These assumptions are
in line with the main macroeconomic scenarios summarized in Herce (1997).

    Simulations start in year 1985, when our base-case worker turns 55 and


                                       37
completes 35 years of contribution, and run for each year until he turns 70, in
year 2000. At age 55, his benefit base is already equal to 100 percent of the
average wage during the last eight years of work. For the period between 1985
and 1996, we use the historical data for all the relevant SS parameters. For the
subsequent years, SS tax rates are assumed to remain constant at their 1996
level, the pension is assumed to be perfectly indexed to price inflation, whereas
the floors and ceilings on earnings, as well as the minimum and maximum
pensions, are assumed to grow at the same rate as nominal wages.
   Our basic hypotheses are the following. First, if the worker stops working

before age 60, then he elects to begin receiving his old-age pension at age
60, which is the earliest possible, whereas if he stops working past the age of
60, then he starts receiving his old-age pension immediately. Second, if he
stops working before age 60, then he receives no benefits or unemployment
compensations in the interim years until he starts drawing a pension. Third,
the wealth calculations are all net present values as of January 1, 1995.
    It may be worth summarizing the main qua]itative effects of working one
more year beyond age 60 in the simulations that we are about to present.

   1. It may increase SS benefits by increasing the benefit base BR or the
      replacement rate a, (see Section 3.4.3). The benefit base increases if
      earnings from the extra year of work exceed average earnings during the

      last 8 years. The replacement rate increases if the worker has contributed
      for less than 35 years, in which case an extra year of work buys an extra
      2 percent of the benefit base. If the worker has already contributed for 35

      years. as in the base case, only the effect on the benefit base is relevant.

   2. It reduces the penalty for early retirement by 8 percentage points.

   3. It reduces by one year the expected period over which the worker will

                                        38
     receive a pension.

  4. It implies paying additional SS contributions.

  5. The marginal tax rate on labor income may turn out to be higher than
     the marginal tax rate on pension income, due to the high progressivity of
     the Spanish income tax schedule. This effect is likely to be important for
     workers that are in the higher portion of the earnings distribution.

   Table 7 presents our calculations of replacement rates, SS wealth (SSW),
55\\T accrual   (the changes in SSW with respect to one year earlier), SSW ac-
crual rates (the rates of change in SSW), projected earnings, and the implicit
tax/subsidy rates on continuing to work (minus the ratio between SSW accrual

and projected earnings) at each age between 54 and 69. Both earnings and
SS\V wealth are net of personal income taxes and are expressed in thousands
pta at 1995 prices.
   55W starts up at 11.3 million pta (about $87,000), but it loses about 15
percent of its value between age 54 and age 59 because the growth of median
wages during the period 1986-90 has not been enough to compensate for the
additional contributions paid. SSW rises again between age 59 and age 63,
mainly because of the progressive reduction in the penalty for earlier retirement

(effect (2)), but falls very rapidly after age 64, when additional years of work
add nothing to the expected pension amount while effects (3)-(4) become very
strong. As a result of this, the implicit tax rate on continuing work increases
rapidly between age 54 and age 58, when it reaches 36 percent. It turns negative
(subsidy) between ages 60 and 62 as the penalty associated to early retirement
is progressively reduced. The net tax or subsidy is almost zero at age 63, but

becomes again positive (tax) and rapidly increasing afterwards.
   Notice that the net replacement rate increases from about 60 percent at

                                       39
age 59 to about 100 percent at age 65, and declines slightly afterwards. Also
notice that SSW reaches its maximum value at age 54, long before the worker
is allowed to retire.

4.2     Other cases

Table 8 presents the incentive calculations for the case of a single worker. The
main difference with respect to the base case is that the household he represents

(missing a female spouse) has smaller effective survival probabilities at each
age, resulting in a lower SSW. The age profile of tax/subsidy rates is not very
different from the base case, except for the fact that there is hardly any subsidy
for continuing work between age 60 and age 63. In other words the reduction in

the expected length of time over which pension benefits will be received (effect

(3)) and the higher marginal tax rates on earnings completely wash out with
the increase in the benefit base brought about by effects (1) and (2). Also in
this case, 55W is maximized at age 54.
      Table 9 presents the incentive calculations for the case of a median wage

profile with "incomplete" earnings history. This worker started working at age
30, so that he does not fully qualify for a pension until he reaches age 65 in
1995. The high tax rate on continuing workg at all ages between 55 and 59
is counter-intuitive but it helps illustrating the dramatic importance of a sixth
effect embedded in the Spanish SS system, the "minimum pension effect".

      If the worker stops working at age 55, with only 25 years of contributions,
the pension that he will receive after turning 60 will be low and hit the lower
bound on pensions when he reaches age 64. Since minimum pensions grow at
the same rate as nominal wages, there is no advantage in working one extra
year in order to raise the initial pension. as the latter is in any case low and
going to be equal to the minimum pension after just a few years. Notice that


                                        40
the situation is completely different if the worker considers ret ring when lie
turns 60. In this case, as shown in Table 3, working one extra year till age 61
would increase his pension from 54 to 62.6 percent of the benefit base.
   Table 10 differs from the base case because we used the 10th percentile of
annual earnings as our 1980 anchor. Given the 1980 anchor, annual earnings for

all other years are predicted as in the base case. Table 11 presents a parallel set
of calculations using the 90th percentile of annual earnings as our 1980 anchor.
Tax/subsidy rates for these two cases are also presented in Figure 15 along with
the base case.

   We have already seen that the incentives to retire at the earliest possible
date are much stronger for individuals with an incomplete earning history. The

bias of the system toward "forcing out" low-wage earners is confirmed by the
different patterns of the tax/subsidy rate faced by individuals at the 90th and
10th percentile of the wage distribution. Whereas for the former there is an
incentive, stronger than for the base case, to keep working past 60 and until
about the age of 63-64, for the latter the disincentive to do so peaks at 60, both
in terms of accrual and tax/subsidy rates.
   Figure 15 also shows that the tax rate for low-wage earners increases sharply

in the 60—64 age range, contrary to what happens to high-wage earners. In other

words, should a low-earnings individual be working at the age of, say, 61, he
would still find it advantegeous to quit immediately, whereas this is not true

for the base case or a high-earnings person.

   Table 12 provides the reader with a further appraisal of the extent to which
the minimum-pension mechanism creates incentives to early retirement for low-

wage earners. It reports tax/subsidy rates with and without minimum pensions
in the base case, the incomplete earning history case and the 10th percentile
case.

                                        41
   The impact on the incentives to early retirement is very strong for the
low-income individual. The variation caused by the minimum-pension on the
implicit tax from continuing to work is already very high at the age of 55 it
peaks at 60 and remains substantial also at much later ages. For a worker with

incomplete earnings history the effect of the minimum-pension provision is also

quite relevant until the age of 60 but vanishes rapidly afterwards. Instead the
difference caused by the existence of the minimum pension on the tax/subsidy
for the base case worker is always negligible.

4.3 Discussion
Our first concern is with the relationships between the incentives effects we
have computed and the retirement facts available.

   Figures 16 and 17 show hazard rates by age for men and women respectively.

The hazard rate is defined here as minus the percentage change in the cross-
sectional age-participation profile. For men, the hazard increases smoothly
with age and shows clear peaks at 60 and 65 corresponding, respectively, to

the Spanish early and normal retirement ages. This is consistent with our
calculations which show a strong incentive to retire either as early as possible
(age 60) for low income earners and/or workers with incomplete histories and
at 65 for everybody else.

   Among women things are harder to judge. The behavior of the hazard rate
for women is very herratic at almost all ages and there are various small peaks at

ages between 52 and 61, followed by the prominent one at age 65. Our reading
of the data is that the only significant peaks in the hazard for women occurs
at ages 61 and 65. All the other ones are likely to reflect pure sample noise,
although one could rationalize the presence of a spike at age 54 through the
interaction between eligibility requirements and minimum pension provisions.


                                       42
   Next, we would like to verify if the recent trends in the patterns of retire-
ment are also consistent with the structure of incentives we have derived. It is

pointless to apply our calculations to years before 1985. In fact, due to the slow

implementation of the 1985, reform only very recent years may reveal anything
informative with respect to the working of the curren system.
   Table 13 (based on SS administrative data) reports the distribution, accord-
ing to the age of the pensioner, of the new retirement pensions awarded by the
general scheme (RGSS) during the year 1991 and 1994. For workers aged 64 or
less we also report the percentage of the new pensioners who, for the reasons

detailed earlier, were exempted from the 8 percent penalty generally applicable
for each year of early retirement.

   The results are startling: in spite of the fairly heavy penalties associated
with early retirement, more than 40 percent individuals retire at age 60 or
earlier. Furthermore the percentage of those retiring earlier than 65 has been
increasing steadily in the last few years, from 64 percent in 1991 to 70 percent

in 1994. The intermediate years (not reported) are perfectly consistent with
this trend.

   Summing up: the Spanish SS system makes retirement at earlier ages than
65 the only rational strategy. Indeed, for workers with earning profiles below
the median or with incomplete earning histories (a situation particularly fre-
quent among women), the incentive to retire as early as possible, i.e. at age
60, is particularly strong. The available data on hazard rates and the recent
retirement patterns are completely consistent with this prediction.

5 Conclusions
The Spanish pension system has witnessed a remarkable evolution in the la-st
25 years. moving away from a collection of dispersed and uncoordinated profes-

                                       43
sional schemes toward a more uniform and comprehensive public system. Such

process has generated a tumultuos growth in the size and nature of the public
pension schemes, as well as a rapid increase in the number of retirees with short

contributive histories receiving the minimum public pension. Together with the

dramatic demographic changes affecting Spain since the late seventies, the con-
tinuos enlargement of the public pension system has been a major cause of
the large financial imbalances which have come about in the last decade. This

evolution is not yet completed and the recently enacted changes (June 1997)
suggest that further razionalization and uniformization of treatments will be
taking place between now and the beginning of the next century.

   A third factor underlying the emergence of financial distress is the strong
reduction in labor force participation rates among individuals aged 55-65, which

began between 1975 and 1980 and is still taking place. This paper examines
the interplay between the incentives generated by the public pension system
and the decision to retire after the age of 55. We quantify such incentives by
computing measures of Social Security Wealth and of the implicit tax/subsidy

to keep working, generated by the current system.
   Our findings support the intuitive idea that pensions-induced incentives
matter for the labor supply behavior of Spanish workers. While the Spanish
system does not pay a particularly generous average pension relative to GDP
per-capita, its "generosity" concentrates in providing relatively large minimum
pensions to individuals with below average working histories and/or low wages.
We show how this fact generates very strong incentives for this people to retire as

soon as possible. At the same time, the pension system provides workers earning

average or above average salaries and complete working histories, with relatively

weak financial gains from not retiring after the age of 60. These financial gains

completely disappear and turn into losses around the age of 63. particularly for

                                        44
workers who have already reached 35 years of contributions. We have also shown

how the disability insurance system is being used "strategically" by individuals

who cannot legally anticipate retirement (e.g. self-employed and farmers) to
actually achieve early retirement.
   The combination of these three salient features of the Spanish legislation
seems to account well for the observed increase in the percentage of early retirees

among Spanish new pensioners during the nineties.
   It should be stressed, though, that the possibility of retiring before the age
of 65 is, according to current legislation, restricted to those workers who began
their contributive lifes before 1967. While this group represents today the bulk

of the labor force nearing the age of retirement, its quantitative relevance will
be rapidly decreasing in future years.
   It is yet unclear if such privilege will be progressively extended also to
invididuals who began contributing after such date. Political pressure toward
such extension is currently being exercised from various parts and the final
outcome is hard to predict.

   Legislation just enacted (June 26, 1997) is ambivalent on this matter. On
the one hand, it links more closely initial pensions to lifelong contributive his-

tories, thereby starting to cut down on opportunities for "pension purchases"
especially among self-employed. On the other, it mildly reduces the penaliza-
tion for retiring younger than 65 for individuals with long contributive lifes and
it leaves untouched both the disability and the minimum pension mechanisms,
which we have singled out as the most powerful incentives for early retirement.

   If anything, in fact, the extension from 8 to 15 of the number of years
over vhich the benefit base is computed may have the effect of increasing the
number of individuals for which the minimum pension is binding. As we have

documented. workers expecting to receive a minimum pension have a strong

                                         45
incentive to anticipate retirement. The final outcome of the recent legishition
may therefore be that of just increasing the proportion of the work force for
which such incentive matters.




                                      46
                                 References
Argimón, I.. and J.M. González-Paramo (1987), "TranslaciSn e incidencia de
     las cotizaciones sociales por niveles de renta en Espana, 1980-84", Docu-
     rnentos de Trabajo, 1, Fundacion FIES, Madrid.
Bandres, E. and A. Cuenca (1996), "Capitalización y transferencias en las pen-
    siones de Ia Seguridad Social" IIS!rnposio sobre Igualdad, y Distribución
     de Ia Renta y Ia Riqueza, vol. 7, Fundación Argentaria, Madrid.
Barea, J. (ed.) (1995), El Sisterna de Pensiones en Espana: Anellisis y Prop-
     nestas para su Vzabilidad, Circulo de Empresarios, Madrid.
Barea, J., and J.M. González-Páramo (eds.) (1996), Perzsiones y Prestaciones
     por Desernpleo, Fundacion BBV, Bilbao.
Castellano, F. (1977), "Distribucidn por niveles de ingreso de Ia cuota patronal
     de Ia Seguridad Social en Espafla", Investigaciones Econornicas, 2, pp.
      103-124.
de las Fuentes, J.M., and B. Gonzalo (1996), "Modelos de aseguramiento en
      Espafla del riesgo de pérdida de Ia renta derivada de la actividad laboral
      a causa de Ia vejez", Docurrtento de Trabajo, Serie Economla PtThlica,
      Fundación BBV, Bilbao.
Durán. A. (1995), "Politica de pensiones: Situacidn y perspectivas", in SECOT,
     Las Actividades Econornicas de Ia Ia Personas Mayores, Madrid.
Fernández Cordon. J.A. (1996), "Demografia, actividad y dependencia en Espana",
     Docnraento de Trabajo. Serie Economia Ptiblica, FundaciOn BBV, Bilbao.
Herce. J.A. (1997), "La reformade las pensiones en Espafla: Aspectos analiticos
     '  aplicado&', Moneda y Crédito, forthcoming.
Herce, J. A., and V. Perez Diaz (eds.) (1995), La reforrna del sistema ptlblico
     de pensiones en España, Coleccion de Estudios e Informes. 4, Servicio de
     Estudios de "La Caixa", Barcelona.
Herce, J.A., S. Sosvilla, S. Castillo, and R. Duce (1996), El Futuro de las Pen-
     siones en España: Hacia un Sisterna Mixto, Colecci6n de Estudios e In-
     forrnes, 8, Caja de Ahorros y Pensiones de Barcelona, Barcelona.
INVERCO (1996). Andlisis de los sistemas de pensiones, Inverco—Towers Per-
     nfl, Madrid.
Jimeno, J.F.. and 0. Licandro (1996), "El equilibrio financiero de un sistema
     de reparto de pensiones de jubilacion: Una aplicaciOn al case espaflol"
     Documento de Trabajo, 96—21. FEDEA, Madrid.
Martin      and L. Moreno (1990), "Efectos de las pensiones de Ia Seguridad
     Social sobre Ia oferta de trabajo en Espafla", Jnvestigaciones Econórnicas,
      14. pp. 29 1-303.
Medel. B., A. Molina, and J. Sanchez (1988), "Los efectos distributivos del
    gasto publico en Espana", Docurnentos de Trabajo, 28, Fundación FIES,
     \ Tad rid.


                                      47
Melis, F., and C. Diaz (1993), "La distribution personal de salarios y pen-
     siones en Las fuentes tributarias", I Sirnposio .sobre Igualdad, etc., vol. 11,
     FundaciOn Argentaria, Madrid.
Ministerio de Trabajo (1995), La Seguridad Social en el Umbra! dcl Siglo XXI:
     Estudio Econdrnico Actuarial, Madrid.
Monasterio, C., and J. SuIrez (1992), "Gasto social en pensiones", Hacienda
      Publica Espanola, 120—121, pp. 119—143.
Piflera, J., A. Weinstein (1996), Una propuesta de reforma dcl sistema de pen-
      siones en Espana, Circulo de Empresarios, Madrid.
Vereda, J., and F. MochOn (1978), "Efectos redistributivos de Ia Seguridad
     Social", Hacienda Püblica Española, 52, pp. 83—93.
Villagarcia, T. (1995), "Esiste un sesgo de inactividad en Ia encuesta de poblaciOn
      activa?", Documento de Trabajo, 95—04, Universidad Carlos 111, Madrid.




                                       48
A Data appendix
In what follows we briefly describe the most important data sources employed

in this chapter. We also mention some other potentially useful data sources.

A.1 Microdata
A.1.1 Encuesta de Población Activa (EPA)

This is a quarterly CPS-like survey of roughly 60,000 Spanish households car-
ried out by the Spanish National Statistical Institute (INE). It contains fairly
detailed information on labor force status, education and family background
variables but, unfortunately, no information on wages and incomes. This fea-
ture is common to most European-style labor force surveys. Publicly released
cross-sectional files are available from 1976.

   From 1987, INE also releases the Ericuesta de Poblacion Activa Enlazada,
which is the panel version of EPA obtained by exploiting the rotating cross-

section nature of the survey. It contains fewer   variables,   but it permits to
follow individuals for up to 6 quarters.

A.1.2 Encuesta de Presupuestos Familiares (EPF)

It is a cross-sectional household budget survey carried out by INE in 1973—
74, 1980—81 and 1990—91, with reference to income and expenditure in the

previous calendar year. The 1990—91 sample, used in this paper, contains 21,155
households and 72,123 persons.

A.1.3 Administrative records from Social Security

The third microdata set used in this paper is a random sample of 1 every
200 pensioners on file at the INSS on January 1993. The sample consists of
32,366 observations out of a universe of 6,473,200 pensioners. The data pro-
vide information on initial and current pensions. The difference between these

                                       49
two concepts is broken down into revalorization and complement to minimum
pension, which permits us to construct a measure of SS generosity.

A.1.4 Other microdata

Encuesta de Estructura Salarial: It was carried out by INE in 1995. It provides

detailed information on wages, working hours and personal characteristics for
about 175,000 workers in 19,000 establishments.

   Encuesta Continua de Presupuestos Farniliares: This is a rotating household

survey carried out quarterly by INE since 1985. It collects data on income,
consumption and personal characteristic for about 3,000 households. One eigth
of the sample is replaced at each rotation.

A.2 Aggregate annual or monthly data

Boletin de EstadIstzcas Laborales: Published by the Ministry of Labor (MTSS),
it contains data from 1981 on the most important SS programs.

   Ba/din Inforrnativo de la 88: Published by the Dirección General de Ia
SS, MTSS, it contains detailed information on social security expenditures,
including medical care, from 1981.

   Encuesta de Salarios en Ia Industria y los Seruicios: It is a quarterly survey
on wages and hours worked carried out by INE at the establishment level.




                                      50
B Overview of the literature on SS and retirement
          in Spain
We have been able to trace the existence of only one investigation of the impact

of the Spanish SS system upon labour supply and, in particular, retirement

decisions. Martin and Moreno (1990) look at weekly work hours over the period

1964-84 using net and gross SS wealth as explanatory variables. A fairly simple

econometric analysis leads to the conclusion that the negative income effect

associated toSS contributions more than compensate for both the susbstitution

effect toward leisure and the increase in expected wealth induced by the promise

of a pension payment, thereby increasing the overall labor supply.

    The rest of the existing literature concentrates almost exclusively upon two

issues:



   1. The financial evolution of the system and the dramatic increase in its

      current account deficit as a consequence of both the system's generosity

      and the adverse demographic evolution.


   2. The redistributive features of the system and, in particular, the existence

      of a wide dispersion in the internal rates of return across different pro-

      grams.

B.1       Analysis of the long-run sustainability
Recent years have witnessed the publication of a large number of studies con-
cerned with the long-run viability of the Spanish public pension system and with

its capability to sustain the undergoing demographic changes. Among them are

the monographs by Barea (1995), Barea et al. (1996), Herce et al. (1995), IN-

\ERCO (1996), Ministerio de Trabajo (1995), Piflera and Weinstein (1996), as
vell as the interesting papers by fIerce (1997) and Jimeno and Licandro (1996).


                                      51
    While the various authors reach different conclusions upon the type of re-
form which would result more appropriate, they pretty much express similar
concerns about the economic viability of the existing system.
    Normalizing at zero the deficit of the Social Security system in 1995, the
estimates for 2010 range from -.8 to -3.5 percent of the GDP, with an average of

-1.5 percent. For 2025 the average deficit prediction is of-2.6 with a range going

from -1.0 to -4.2 percent of GDP. Most studies are based on a set of macroeco-

nomic predictions that, while not exagerately optimistic, are nevertheless not
obviously achievable. In general an average growth rate of GDF at 3 percent
per year is assumed, together with a substantial increase in labor participation
rates (up to 70 percent in 2010) and a reduction in the unemployment rate fromt
he current 23 percent to about 16—18 percent. Barring substantial structural
reforms these predictions are hardly realistic in the light of the performances of
the Spanish economy over the last 20 years.

B.2 Analysis of the redistributive effects

Most studies concentrate upon the period prior to the 1978 reform and only a
few are able to cover more recent years. The unit of investigation is always the

individual agent. not the household, and income is very often measured as an
annual flow and not as total lifetime income.

   For the earlier period there is a widespread consensus on the regressive
nature of the combined SS and fiscal system [see, e.g. Castellano (1977) and
\'ereda and Mochón (1978)]. The studies we have exhamined, though. are rather

imprecise and naïve in both their theoretical apparatus, the quality of the data
available and the econometric techniques adopted. We find their conclusions
rather dubious.

   After 1978 things look quite different. While an early study [Argimôn


                                       52
and González-Páramo (1987)] still finds evidence of a regressive effect in the
structure of contributions, this is not the case when pension expenditures are

taken into consideration [Medel eta!. (1988)]. More recently a number of fairly
complete studies [(Monasterio and Suárez (1992), Me!is and Diaz (1993) and
Bandrés and Cuenca (1996)] unequivocally document the very strong and pro-

gressive redistribution accomplished by the post-1978 and post-1985 Spanish
pension systems.
   These more recent studies do not restrict their analysis to annual income
flows but manage to construct relatively credible indeces of life-time contribu-

tions and payments according to professional status and decile position in the
overall distribution of earnings, and to compute internal rates of returns for
different SS programs and income profiles.

   Their, fairly uniform conclusions, can be summarized as follows:

   • For most SS programs, both past and current contribution/payment pro-

     files give rise to a rather large intergenerational transfer. For example, the
     ratio of net transfers to the total present value of pensions for individuals

     affiliated to the REEH went from 61.2 percent before the reform to 52
     percent after (using a discount rate of 3 percent).

   • The only important exception to this rule is given by the genera] scheme
     before and, especially, after the 1985 reform. In this case, the net lifetime

     SS wealth was positive (and equal to about 30 percent of total pension
     present value) before the reform, only if a real discount rate of 1 percent
     were used. It turned negative when a 3 percent discount rate was applied,

     and it remained negative in either cases after the reform. It turns out
     to be particuarly large (50 percent of total pension present value) when
     discounted at 3 percent.

                                       53
• Both the old and the current Spanish SS systems generate very large

  intragenerational transfers from the general to all the special schemes.
  Domestic workers and small farmers are by far the largest beneficiaries of
  such transfers.

• If one looks at the intragenerational transfers occurring not across pro-
  grams but across income deciles, the Spanish SS system turns out to be a
  very progressive one: up to 90 percent of the total present value of pen-
  sions to which individuals in the first decile of the earnings distribution are

  entitled are a pure transfer. This transfer's percentage decrease rathers
  slowly as one moves up with earnings and changes sign only for the very
  last decile (or the last two, depending on details of the calculations).




                                    .54
Table 1: Annual growth rates of real pension expenditures, number of pen-
sions and real average pension (1994 prices), 1980—1995. Source: Ministerio de
Trabajo (1995).


                                                 Type of pension                             Total
                           Old-age     Disability Widows Orphans Other rel.
 Pension expenditures
        80—85                   5.5            9.3           4.6          3.2          4,9     6.4
        85—90                   5.9            3.5           7.8          2.2          3.5     5.5
        90—95                   5.8            3.9           6.3          1.4          6.3     5.3
  Number of pensions
        80—85                   2.4            7.3           4.7          2.5          3.7     4.2
        85—90                   2.9            1.6           4.0          1.0          3.0     2.8
        90—95                   3.2            1.3           3.5           .7         12.1     2.8
   Average pension
        80—85                   1,8            1.3           -.9           .3         -1.1     1.1
        85—90                   2.7            2.3           3.7          1.4           .9     2.6
        90—95                   2.4           2.2            2.7           .3         -4.7     2.3




Table 2: Floors and ceilings on monthly earnings (1000 pta. at current prices).
           Professional category                     1990                    1996
                                                floor    ceiling         floor    ceiling
      Engineers and college graduates         87.150 291.540          113.070 374.880
      Technical engineers                     72.270 291.540           93.780 374.880
      Supervisors and foremen                 62.820 291.540           81.510 374.880
      Administrative assistant                58.350 291.540           75.690 374.880
      Clerks                                  58.350 185.820           75.690 279.390
      Janitors                                58.350 164.400           75.690 279.390
      Clerk Assistants                        58.350 164.400           75.690 279.390




  Table 3: Replacement rates by age and number of years of contribution.
                   Years of                            Age
                 contribution     60     61       62       63        64    65+
                      15        .360   .408     .456     .504      .552    .600
                     20         .420   .476     .532     .588      .644    .700
                     25         .480   .544     .608     .672      .736    .800
                     30         .540    612     .684     .756      .828    .900
                     31         .552   .626     .699     .773      .846    .920
                     32         .564   .639     .714     .790      .865    .940
                     33         .576   .653     .730     .806      .883    .960
                     34         .588   .666     .745     .823      .902
                     35+        .600   .680     .760     .840      .920   1.000




                                          55
Table 4: Annualized minimum wage (SMI) and minimum and maximum annual
pensions (1000 pta. at current prices).
            Annualized                    Minimum pension                  Maximum
    Year       SM!             With dep. spouse Without dep. spouse         pension
                                <65        ?65       <65       ?65
     1985     520380           355.530    406.000   336.490   384.860      2631.300
     1986     561.960          399.000    455.840   364.000   417.200      2631.300
     1987     590.100          430.920    492.310   412.860   442.260      2631.300
     1988     616.560          465.500    532.000   411.040   471.100      2631.300
    1989      650.720          520.870    595.350   441.490   505.960      2710.400
    1990      700.140          575.820    658.140   488.040   559.300      2900.128
    1991      745.500          614.460    702.240   520.800   596.820      3094.448
    !992      787.920          649.530    742.280   550.550   630.840      3270.834
    1993      819.420          682.710    780.150   578.690   663.040      3437.644
    1994      847.980          712.810    814.520   604.170   692.230      3557.960
    1995      877.800          744.240    850.360   630.770   722.750      3714.508
    1996      908.880          770.350    880.180   652.890   748.090      3877.944




Table 5: Percentage ratio between the number of disability pensions paid and
the number of workers covered by the various SS programs, 1981—1994: General
Fund (RGSS), self-employed (RETA), agricultural employees (REAa), farmers
(REAb). coal miners (REMC), sailors (RETM), domestic workers (REEB).
   Year     RGSS     RETA        REAa      REAb     REMC      RETM      REEH    Total
    1981      .79       1.06      2.29       2.14     2.33               2.32    1.10
    1982     1.15       1.06      3.17       2.34     3.61       —       2.79    1.45
   1983      1.31       1.03      3.02       2.33     3.21       —       2.88    1.54
   1984      1.17        .83       2.41      2.14     2.91       —       2.57    1.33
   1985       .72        .58       1.61      1.80     1.52       —       2.48     .90
   1986       .62        .57       1.67      1.97     1.80     1.58      1.93     .83
   1987       .55        .51       1.34      1.84     1.42     1.34      2,00     .72
   1988       .52        .51       1.21      2.06     1.69     1.45      2.21     .70
   1989       .43        .43       1.13      1.95      1.64    1.12      2.25     .60
   1990       .44        .51       1.21      2.38     2.36     1.22      2.90     .62
   1991       .41        .57       1.30      2.58     2.18     1.18      3.30     .62
   1992       .47        .64       1.37      2.53     2.37     1.26      3.12     .67
   1993       .47        .68       1.25      2.15     2.29     1.25      2.85     .64
   1994       .44        .77       1.35      1.91     2,03     1.24      2.75     .61




                                              56
Table 6: Fraction of new disability pensions awarded to individuals aged 55+ by
SS program and level of disability: Inability to do the usual job (IPT), inability
to do any kind of job (IPA), complete inability (GI). Year 1994.

                           Program       IPT    IPA     GI
                           RGSS           4.0   43.5   39.3
                           RETA          53,4   64.4   49.3
                           REA           58.5   63.7   68.9
                           REMC            .3   48.6   60.0
                           RETM          14.9   32.1   32.0
                           REEH          25.0   75.0   80.6




Table 7: Incentive calculations for base case. After-tax values in 1000 pta. at
1995 prices.
    Age at last   Replacem.     SSW        Accrual Accrual        Projected   Tax/
   year of work         rate                          rate         earnings subsidy
        54                 .   11343.7            .           .      1533.6
        55                     11006.9      -336.8      -.030        1557.5    .216
        56                 .   10836.9      -170.0      -.015        1572.4    .108
        57                 .   10598.0      -238.9      -.022        1558.8    .153
        58                 .   10025.0      -573.1      -.054        1582.3    .362
        59              .590    9566.8      -458.2      -.046        1603.8    .286
        60              .661    9809.7       242.9       .025        1625.2   -.149
        61              .730   10008.0       198.3       .020        1648.2   -.120
        62              .816   10193.3       185.3       .019        1648.6   -.112
        63              .895   10117.1       -76.2      -.007        1649.4    .046
        64              .996    9860.6      -256.5      -.025        1606.9    .160
        65              .998    8629.4     -1231.3      -.125        1627.5    .757
        66              .996    7364.4     -1264.9      -.147        1648.4    .767
        67              .988    6067.9     -1296.5      -.176        1669.6    .777
        68              .981    4815.7     -1252.2      -.206        1691.0    .741
        69              .973    3608.2     -1207.5      -.251        1712.7    .705




                                          57
Table 8: Incentive calculations for the case of a single worker. After-tax values
in 1000 pta. at 1995 prices.

    Age at last   Replacem. SSW Accrual Accrual Projected                        Tax/
   year of work         rate                              rate        earnings subsidy
        54                     .   9159.8                     .        1533.6
        55                     .   8847.4     -312.4      -.034        1557.5     .201
        56                     .   8697.0     -150.4      -.017        1572.4     .096
        57                     .   8459.9     -237.1      -.027        1558.8     .152
        58                     .   7897.5     -562.4      -.066        1582.3     .355
        59              .590 7449.4           -448.1      -.057        1603.8     .279
        60              .661 7570.2            120.8       .016        1625.2    -.074
        61              .730 7553.3            -17.0      -.002        1648.2     .010
        62              .816 7501.2            -52.1      -.007        1648.6      .032
        63              .895 7226.1           -275.1      -.037        1649.4      .167
        64              .996 6802.1           -424.0      -.059        1606.9     .264
        65              .998 5616.4          -1185.7      -.174        1627.5      .729
        66              .996 4421.8          -1194.6      -.213        1648.4      .725
        67              .988 3222.7          -1199.1      -.271        1669.6      .718
        68              .981 2078.4          -1144.2      -.355        1691.0      .677
        69              .973        989.5    -1088.9      -.524        1712.7      .636




Table 9: Incentive calculations for the case of incomplete earnings history.
After-tax values in 1000 pta. at 1995 prices.
    Age at last   Replacem.         SSW      Accrual Accrual Projected Tax/
   year of work        rate                             rate   earnings subsidy
        54                 .       10446.4            .           .     1533.6
        55                 .       10022.4    -424.0      -.041         1557.5     .272
        56                 .        9664.3    -358.1      -.036         1572.4     .228
        57                 .        9406.9    -257.5      -.027         1558.8     .165
        58                 .        9005.5    -401.4      -.043         1582.3     .254
        59             .536        8687.4     -318.1      -.035         1603.8     .198
        60             .613        8886.4         199.0    .023         1625.2    -.122
        61             .691        9253.5         367.1    .041         1648.2    -.223
        62             .787        9670.8      417.3       .045         1648.6    -.253
        63             .880        9851.4      180.6       .019         1649.4    -.109
        64             .996        9860.6        9.3       .000         1606.9    -.006
        65             .998        8629.4    -1231.3      -.125         1627.5     .757
        66             .996        7364.4    -1264.9      -.147         1648.4     .767
        67             .988        6067.9    -1296.5      -.176         1669.6     .777
        68             .981        4815.7    -1252.2      -.206         1691.0     .741
        69             .973        3608.2    -1207.5      -.251         1712.7     .705




                                             58
Table 10: Incentive calculations for the 10th percentile earnings case. After-tax
values in 1000 pta. at 1995 prices.
   Age at last    Replacem.        SSW       Accrual Accrual              Projected   Tax/
   year of work        rate                              rate              earnings subsidy
       54                  .       10621.0            .           .           889.8
       55                  .       10334.2    -286.9         -.027            904.1    .317
       56                  .       10052.2    -282.0         -.027            913.1    .309
        57                 .        9776.9    -275.2         -.027            904.9    .304
        58                 .        9513.9    -263.0         - .027           919.0    .286
        59             .741        9255.8     -258.1         -.027            931.9    .277
        60             .731        8444.5     -811.3         -.088            944.8    .859
        61             .722        7659.2     -785.3         -.093            958.6    .819
        62             .810        6954.4     -704.8         -.092            958.9    .735
        63             .892        6431.7     -522,7         -.075            959.3    .545
        64             .996        6070.7     -361.0         -.056            933.8    .387
        65             .998        5342.6     -728.1         -.120            946.2    .770
        66             .996        4604.1     -738.5         -.138            958.8    .770
        67             .988        3855.8     -748.4         -.163            971.5    .770
        68             .980        3132.6     -723.1         -.188            984.4    .735
        69             .972        2435.9     -696.7         -.222            997.4    .698




Table 11: Incentive calculations for the 90th percentile earnings case. After-tax
values in 1000 pta. at 1995 prices.
    Age at last   Replacem.         SSW      Accrual       Accrual        Projected   Tax/
   year of work        rate                                   rate         earnings subsidy
        54                     .   18450.0             .              .      2561.6
        55                     .   17800.3    -649.7         -.035           2603.0     .250
        56                     .   17427.6    -372.7         -.021           2630.5     .142
        57                     .   16829.3    -598.3         -.034           2610.5      .229
        58                     .   15565.3   -1264.0         -.075           2631.4      .480
        59              .561       14789.6    -775.7         -.050           2666.6     .291
        60              .627       15210.1     420.6          .028           2701.7    -.156
        61              .691       15398.5        188.4       .012           2739.6    -.069
        62              .776       15711.9        313.4       .020           2740.2    -.114
        63              .859       15710.4         -1.5      -.000           2741.5      .000
        64              .966       15490.9     -219.4        -.014           2671.6      .082
        65              .982       13769.4    -1721.5        -.111           2705.6      .636
        66              .996       12002.4    -1767.0        -.128           2739.9      .645
        67              .988        9802.4    -2200.0        -.183           2774.7      .793
        68              .981        7677.5    -2124.9        -.217           2809.9      .756
        69              .973        5628.5    -2049.0        -.267           2845.6      .720




                                             59
Table 12: Tax/subsidy rates with and without minimum pensions.

 Age at last        Base case          Incomplete history       10th percentile
 year of work   with without            with     without        with without
       55        .216          .172    .272             .058     .317        .150
       56        .108          .050    .228         -.052        .309        .027
       57        .153           .123   .165         -.000        .304        .101
       58        .362           .372   .254             .217     .286         .355
       59        .286           .284   .198             .141     .277         .267
       60       -.149          -.221   -.122        -.331        .859        -.264
       61       -.120          -.127   -.223        -.256        .819        -.172
       62       -.112          -.112   -.253        -.254        .735        -.161
       63        .046           .046   -.109        -.109        .545         .001
       64        .160           .160   -.006        -.006        .387         .118
       65        .757           .757    .757         .757        .770         .738
       66        .767           .767    .767         .767        .770         .751
       67        .777           .777    .777            .777     .770         .762
       68        .741           .741    .741            .741     .735         .726
       69        .705           .705    .705            .705     .698         .691




  Table 13: Age—distribution of new pensioners, 1991 and 1994.

                        1991                                   1994
 Age  Penalty No Penalty Total Penalty No Penalty Total
 < 60  38.61        1,81 40.42   37.84      2.89 40.73
 61         5.91                .32 6.23         7.20                  .34   7.54
 62         5.72                .27  6.00        7.39                  .35   7.74
 63         4.71                .51  5.22        6.13                  .34   6.46
 64         4.22               1.83  6.04        5.22                 2.25   7.47
 65             —                — 31.38            —                   — 26.39
 66                              —     1.71         —                   —     1,17
 67             —                —
                                        .93         —                   —      .72
 68             —                 —
                                        .58         —                   —      .50
 69             —                —      .41         —                   —
                                                                               .39
 70             —                 —
                                       1.07         —                   —      .89
 C 65       59.17              4.74 63.92       63.79                 6.16 69.95
 > 65           —                 — 36.08           —                    —
                                                                             30.05




                                       60
                               List of Figures Legends


Figure 1:
    Age structure of the population of working age (16+) by sex and year.
Figure 2:
    Historical trends in labor force participation of older men.
Figure 3:
    Historical trends in labor force participation of older women.
Figure 4:
    Fraction of workers covered by the SS system.
Figure 5:
    Old-age and survivors' (OAS) and disability (DI) pension recipiency among people
aged 55+.
Figure 6:
    Replacement   rates.
Figure 7:
    Participation rates by age and sex.
Figure 8:
    Distribution of activities of men by age.
Figure 9:
    Distribution of activities of women by age.
Figure 10:
    Public income recipiency by age for men.
Figure 11:
    Distribution of family income by source.
Figure 12:
    Distribution of affiliated to SS by program: General scheme (RGSS), self-employed
(RE TA), agricultural workers and small farmers (REA), domestic workers (REEH). An-
nual averages 1982-1996.
Figure 13:
     Fraction of pensioners receiving complements to the minimum and share of the pension
due to complements by number of years of contribution, 1993.
Figure 14:
    Distribution of male disability pensions outstanding in 1993 by age group and year of
award.
Figure 15:
     Tax/subsidy rates across earnings profiles.
Figure 16:
    Hazard rate out of the labor force for men.
Figure 17:
    Hazard rate out of the labor force for women.
Figure 1: Age structure of the population of working age (16+) by sex and
year.

               o
                   IThIFIIlIIlII:lIII
                   ageo 16—24
               S aopd 55*
                                              £ aged 25—54




                                                             I   I   I
                                                                         Ig
                                           v es'




                                   61
Figure 2: Historical trends in labor force participation of older men.

                    o       age 45—54              o age 55-59
                               60-64                 age E5
            lOG


            90 —


            93 —

                    —Oocs0oG0O0O0soOoz-G:Goo--o-
            ED —


            5D
        C
             40


             30 —




              OH                                                              F-
                        I                     I                    I     p
                    65                  70   75     80            90     94
                                                  pear




                                             62
     go




C




C


C'
Figure 4: Fraction of workers covered by the SS system.

         I         I




    .2




                                   year




                          64
Figure 5: Old-age and survivors' (OAS) and disability (DI) pension recipiency
among people aged 55+.

                     o OAS/D1. Men                 o GAS. Men
                     O CAS/DI. Women                  GAS. Mor'en


                .8




                .0



            C   .5
            C




                4




                2




                                                                                 r
                        65             70   75     80               90      95
                                                 veer




                                            65
                    Figure 6: Replacement rates.

            o   ratio                         a 6 ratio
            o 5 ratio                           6 ratio
     Ii -

      1—

ci
0
     .9
C
ci
C
ci
U
      8
a
ci
L

     .7 -                                                      F




      5-
                I          I             I
            72            75            80                05
                                  year pension sas awarded




                                 66
          Figure 7: Participation rates by age and sex.

            C   ren                           A women
                                          I                    I


     .9 -

     B


     .7

     .6
n0
     .5
C

C
     .4




     .2 —


     .1 —



     C—

            45        Sb       55                         7b   75
                                         age




                                67
     Figure 8: Distribution of activities of men by age.

            o employeu                  A uneiwlayed
            o CzsaOled                       retired


      -9




      7


      .6
C
0
      S
(0

      4


      -3                                                             r

       I—


      0—

                         Sb                                70   75
                                       dye




                              68
Figure 9: Distribution of activities of women by age.

          o employed                     uflemploded
          o disabled                     ret ireo




   7—


   .6

   .5

   .4 —


   .3

   .2 —


   .1 —


   0—

                       Sb          Lb                  65   75
                                   age




                            69
    Figure 10: Public income recipiency by age for men.

             o 059   Dension               unemployment flenelits
             001 PeflslOfl                 other public assistance
                                                     I_________


      -9 -




      7-
C



0
o
0



      .3 —




      .1 —


      0—

             45                                      65              7b   75
                                     age




                               70
    Figure 11: Distribution of family income by source.


           o earnings                     a capital income
           o private pensions               puolic programs



      .9




      .6

t     .5




      .3

      2




      0-
           45            50     55       60           65      70   75
                                     age 0* heaC




                                71
Figure 12: Distribution of affiliated toSS by program: General scheme (RGSS),
self-employed (RETA), agricultural workers and small farmers (REA), domestic
workers (REEH). Annual averages 1982—1996.


                 o    PGSS                        a PGSS+PEA
                 o PGSS+PEA+PEIA                     PGSS+PEtPETA+PEEH
                  I                                     I        I           I




                                   °   0               -e-9 0            0   0




                                                year
                                                       96                    9   96




                                           72
Figure 13: Fraction f pensioners receiving complements to the minimum and
share of the pension due to complements by number of years of contribution,
1993.


                    o snare o1 pension — men                       a snare of pension - women
                    o eae recipiency rate                             tesate recipiency rate




             .6




              0—i
                       I          I             I          I           I         I
                       53        tO            20         25         30         35
                                                    fonDer of ye&rt of rontrobution




                                                     73
Figure 14: Distribution of mate disability pensions outstanding in 1993 by age
group and year of award.

                       o Men aged 50-                a Men aged 50—54
                       OMen aged 54—59                     Men aged 60—64


                08




                06 -



            C
            a
            e
                04




                02 -




                 0-
                        I        I             I
                       73       75            60                       95   90
                                              retirecent   year




                                         74
Figure 15: Tax/subsidy rates across earnings profiles.

              o base case                                       a 101k percentile earnings
              o 00cr' percentile earnings
                                            I               I          I




     .6 -


          —
     .4
V
n
r


      0—



    -.2


    —a—
                     I          I               I           I          I
                    55         57           59              61         63        55          67   69
                                                    age DI last year o work




                                            75
Figure 16: Hazard rate out of the labor force for men.




    -9




    .6
C




    3


    2




                                   age




                          76
Figure 17: Hazard rate out of the labor force for women.




     9-.



     .7 —


     .6 -
 C
 0
 t
     4-


     .2 -


      I—


     0—

            45     sb           55         60          55   69
                                     age




                           77
