                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          ADAPTING TO CIRCUMSTANCES: THE
                            EVOLUTION OF WORK, SCHOOL,
                             AND LIVING ARRANGEMENTS
                           AMONG NORTH AMERICAN YOUTH




                                          David Card
                                        Thomas Lemieux




                                      Working Paper 6142


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         August 1997

Prepared for the NBER Youth Unemployment and Employment in Advanced Countries Research
Project. We are grateffil to Francine Btau, David Blanchflower, Richard Freeman, and Francois
Vaillancourt for comments and suggestions. Card's research was funded in past by a grant from the
NICHD to the National Bureau of Economic Researcb and by an NSF grant to the Center for
Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. Lexnieux's research was fimded in part by SSHRC.
F CAR, and the Hoover Institution. This paper is part of NB ER's research program in Labor Studies.
Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 1997 by David Card and Thomas Lemieux. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Adapting to Circumstances: The Evolution
of Work, School, and Living Arrangements
Among North American Youth
David Card and Thomas Lemieux
NBER Working Paper No. 6142
August 1997
Labor Studies


                                           ABSTRAfl

       We use comparable micro data sets for the U.S. and Canada to study the responses of young

workers to the external labor market forces that have affected the two countries over the past 25

yeaa We find that young workers adjust to changes in labor market opportunities through a variety

of mechanisms, including changes in living anangeinents, changes in school enrollment, and

changes in work effort. In particular, we find that poor labor market conditions in Canada explain

why the fraction of youth living with their parents has increased in Canada relative to the U.S.

recently. Paradoxically, this move back home also explains why the relative position of Canadian

youth in the distribution of family income did not deteriorate as fast as in the U.S.




David Card                                                    Thomas Lemieux
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
University of California                                      Université de Montréal
Berkeley, CA 94720                                            CR 6128, succursate Centre-VilLe
and NBER                                                      Montréal, Québec 113C 337
card@casbsstanford.edu                                        CANADA
                                                              and NBER
                                                              lem ieuxtplg c n . umontre at. Ca
       The past three decades have witnessed a series of challenges to the economic well-being

of youth in Canada and the United Slates. During the 1960s and early 1970s the Thaby boom

led to a substantial increase in the relative fraction of young people in the population. This

massive supply shock is generally thought to have exerted downward pressure on the relative

earnings of younger workers. In the late 1970s, just as the demographic bulge began to

subside, the demand side turned against less-skilled workcr resulting in falling real wages for

youth and other groups at the bottom of the labor market (see Levy and Mumane, 1992).

Meanwhile, secular trends in family structure, including the rise in the fraction of children

born out of WedlOCk and increasing divorce rates, have also worked to the relative

disadvantage of youth.'

       In this paper we take advantage of the rich micro data sets available for the U.S. and

Canada to study the responses of young workcrs to the external labor market forces that have

affected the two countries over the past 25 years. Our key hypothesis is that young workers

adjust to changes in labor market opportunities through a variety of mechanisms, including

changes in living arrangements, changes in school enrollment, and changes in work effort. A

comparative perspective offers at least two distinct benefits for evaluating this hypothesis.

First, since the nature and timing of cyclical and secular shocks in the U.S. and Canada are

slightly different, we gain valuable leverage for measuring the responses to these shocks.

Second, a comparative perspective makes it immediately clear which modes of behavior are

driven by country-specific policies or factors, and which are attributable to broader forces.




    'Eggenbeen and Lichter (1991) conclude that changes in family structure between 1960 and
1988 account for as substantial fraction of the rise in child poverty rates in the U.S. over the
period.
       The first part of the paper provides a descriptive overview of youLh behavior in the two

countries. Looking at such diverse outcomes as the fraction of youth who live with their

parenLs and the fraction who work while attending school, we find relatively similar behavior

in the U.S. and Canada, with a general tendency toward convergence in outcomes over the

period from 1970 to 1990. In particular, school enrollment rates, which were traditionally

lower in Canada than in the United States, are now slightly higher in Canada. Very recently,

U.S. -Canadian differences have been accentuated by the prolonged and severe recession in

Canada. Some differences in family structure -- associated with the higher fraction of female-

headed families in the U.S. -- stand out. Other differences arise because the distribution of

family income has been more stable in Canada, while widening sharply in the U.S.2

       In the second part of the paper we develop and estimate a series of models for a variety

of youth outcomes. Traditionally, economists have focussed on youth employment or

unemployment. Consistent with much of the existing literature, we interpret variation in youth

employment as arising mainly from the demand side. On the supply side, we shift attention to

three other behavioral outcomes that provide important mechanisms for adapting to external

shocks: the decision to continue living with ones parents; the decision to attend school; and

the decision to receive welfare benefits. Building on a standard choice framework, we

emphasize two key exogenous" variables: the wage rate available to young workers in the

local labor market; and a measure of cyclical conditions in the local labor market. We take as

our unit of observation the set of individuals of a given gender and age in a specific regional



    2This observation has been made by many other researchers, e.g. Blackburn and Bloom
(1993).

                                               2
market. This group-level analysis helps to solve a number of econometric issues (associated

with the measurement of wages for non-workers) while retaining substantial variation in the

exogenous variables across observations. We use a pooled data set based on six

provinces/regions in Canada and nine Census divisions in the U.S. over the period from 1973

to 1994 to estimate our models.

       The results of our analysis suggest that youth in the U.S. and Canada exhibit a multi-

dimensional response to changing labor market conditions. As in most of the literature, we

find that the traditional locus of economists interest -— youth employment -- is highly

responsive to local cyclical conditions but relatively insensitive Lo changes in wages. But other

aspects of youth behavior are also affected by local labor market conditions. In particular,

"home leaving" behavior and the enrollment decisions are relatively sensitive to cyclical

conditions and to the relative level of youth wages.



L.A&Ovee,iewsfSuthlabotMatkets aniOutcomes

2 AggwgI. I MLMaxkeLData

       We begin with an aggregate overview of the youth labor markets in Canada and the

United States. The first three columns of Table I present data on thefraction of young

workers in the population, the civilian labor force, and civilian employment! In both the U.S.




   'Pie addition of members of the armed forces to the population and labor force has a modest
effect on the trends in the data in Table 1. For example, there were roughly 500,000 fewer
members of the armed forces in the U.S. in 1980 or 1990 than in 1970. Assuming that 80 percent
of the difference were aged 16-24, the addition of armed forces members would raise the
employment-population rate in 1970 (relative to later years) by 0.6 percentage points.

                                                3
and Canada the youth share ol population peaked around 1980 and has fallen steadily since

then. Similar patterns hold for the labor force and for employment. A longer term

perspective on the effect of the "baby boom on employment shares is provided in Figure 1,

which plots the relative size of different age groups over the period since 1950. After a

decade of stability in the 1950s, the fraction of; jobs held by youth rose by over 200 percent in

both countries 1mm 1960 to 1980. The relative fractions of jobs held by 25-34 and 35-44 year

old age groups follow parallel paths with 20 and 20 year lags, respectively.1

         Despite the relative supply shock crcaled by the baby boom, the economies of Canada

and the U.S. were able to create jobs for young workers at a roughly comparable pace. Thus,

the ratio of the employment-population rate of youth to the overall employment-population rate

was constant (or even rising) in both countries over the 1970s and 1980s. Another aspect of

the supply side that underlies the data in Table 1 is the rising labor force attachment of

women. This phenomenon accounts for the roughly 6 percentage point rise in overall labor

force participation and employment from the 1970s to 1990. A similar trend occurred for

young women, leading to proportional shifts in the employment and participation rates of

youth.

         The three right-hand columns of Table I present data on unemployment rates. In the

U.S., young workers historically have accounted for a disproportionate share of

unemployment: the unemployment rate of 16-24 year olds ranges from 1.9 to 2.2 times the




    'The sharp decline in the relative employment share of 15-24 year old group in the 1990s in
Canada is due to the recession, which led to an unprecedented drop in the employment-population
rate of youth.

                                                4
overall unemployment rate. In Canada unemployment is more evenly distributed by age: the

unemployment rate of 15-24 year olds ranges from 1.6 to 1.8 times the overall rate.

Interestingly, there is littLe evidence of a systematic relaliye trend in labor market opportunities

for youth over the past 25 years in either country.

       Both the U.S. and Canadian economies have strong regional components that lead to

differential labor markit outcomes for youth in different parts of the country.' The disparities

in regional economic conditions are illustrated in Figure?, wInch shows overall employment-

population rates and youth employment rates by province (for Canada) and by region (for the

U.S.). All provinces and regions experienced a peak in employment in the late 1970s,

followed by downturn in the early 1980s. The timing and strength of the subsequent recovery

vanes somewhat by region, with the sharpest gains in the East coast, Mid-West, and Pacific

regions of the U.S., and in Ontario, Quebec and British Columbia in Canada. The subsequent

recession in the early 1990s was particularly pronounced in the New England and Paciflc

regions of the U.S. and in the eastern and central provinces (especially Ontario) of Canada. A

prominent feature of Figure 2 is the excess cyclical volatility of youth employment-population

rates: national or regional fluctuations in overall employment are typically magnified by a

factor of 1.5-2.0 in youth employment. We return to a more detailed analysis of this

phenomenon in Section II.




h Th&Rejajjxejncom&_Rosijion.oLYouth


   'See Altonji and Ham (1990) for an interesting model of the regional components of the two
economies.

                                                 5
        While the employment and unemployment data in Table I show little evidence of a

shift in the relative economic status of North American youth, a somewhat different conclusion

emerges from an analysis of family income. Table 2 presents data on the family income

distributions and the relative position of youth in Canada and the U.S. in 1970, 1980, 1990,

and 1993. We divide individuals (age 16 and more) into four quartiles on the basis of their

adjusted family income.' The upper panel of Table 2 shows the fractions of totaL adjusted

family income received by individuals in each quartile. The table indicates that the

distribution of family income has grown increasingly unequal in the U.S. while remaining

stable in Canada.7

       The lower panel of Table 2 shows the position of individuals age 16-24 in the quartiles

of the adjusted family income distribution in the U.S. and Canada. In both countries, the

fraction of youth living in families in the lowest quartile of the income distribution has risen

since 1970. The rise is particularly dramatic in Lhe U.S.: whereas 26.5 percent of youth lived




    'The data for the U.S. am based on the March 1971, 19$], 1991, and 1994 Current Population
Survey. The data for Canada are based on the 1971, 1981, and 1991 Census, and on the 1994
Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF). In constructing the table we use family income adjusted
for family composition (i.e., family income divided by the poverty threshold income level for the
appropriate family size and composition). Families are "economic" families in the CPS and the
SCF (consisting of alt related people who live in the same household) but "Census" families in
the Canadian Census (i.e., related subfamilies are assigned their own family income, rather than
the total income of all related individuals in their household).

    7As we note below, the Canadian distilbutional data are not strictly comparable between 1990
and 199. However, consislent data from the SCF over the 1980s and 1990s show a vesy stable
distiibution of family income in Canada (see Beach and Slotsve, 1990) ova the past decade. The
1993 Canadian data are directly comparable to the 1993 U.s. data.

                                                6
in bottom quartile families in 1970, the fraction had risen to 33.9 percent by 1993 (a 28

percent increase in concentration in the bottom quartile).

       By contrast, in Canada the fraction of youth living in the lowest deciLe only increased

by 2.3 percentage points, from 24.1 percent in 1970 to 26.4 percent in 1993. Note, however,

that the distribution of family income in 1993 is not strictly comparable to other ycais because

of data differences. Whereas family income in the 1993 SCF represents total income of the

.w.nnmit family, in the Census (1970, 1980, and 1990) it represents total income of the

census family. Using census family as opposed to economic family income tends to understate

the position of youth in the family income distribution.' To estimate the magnitude of this

bias, we used the 1990 SCF to compute the fraction of youth in the lowest quartile of the

distribution. In the 1990 SCF, only 25.7 percent of youth are in the lowest quartile, compared

to 28.5 percent in the Census. The fraction of youth in the lowest quartile is thus overstated

by 2.8 percentage points in the Census. Note, however, that even if we add this correction

factor (2.8 percentage points) to the measured increase in the fraction of youth in the lowest

quartiLe in Canada (2.3 percentage points), we still find a smaller increase in Canada (5.1

percentage points) than in the United States (7.4 percentage points).

       In terms of relative purchasing power, the economic status of U.S. youth fell even

further than suggested by their position in the relative income distribution. This is because, as

shown in the upper panel of Table 2, the fraction of total adjusted income earned by first


    'Since the economic family (all related people who live in the same household) is a broader
concept than the census family, economic family income is more likely to include the income of
the parents --which tends to improve the relative position of youth-- than census family income.
See appendix 1 for more detail.

                                                7
quartile families fell by roughly 1 percentage point (a 14 percent decline) between 1970 and

1993. In Canada, on the other hand, the share of adjusted income earned by first quartile

families actually rose from 1970 to 1990.

        What can explain the relative deterioration of family incomes of youth over the past

two decades -- especially in the U.S.? One potential explanation is changing living

arrangements: if youth who live with their parents have higher family incomes than those who

live alone or head their own families, then a shift in the fraction who live with their parents

would be expected to shift the relative family income status of youth. Table 3 describes the

evolution of living arrangements among youth by country, year, and gender for the U.S. and

Canada, while Table 4 illustrates the link between the living arrangements of youth and their

family income quartile. In both of these tables, living arrangements are based on the

composition of the economic family in which a young person lives. For example, a young

woman who lives in the same household as her parents wiLl be classified as "living with

parents even if she heads her own family (either as a lone mother or as a married person).

Appendix 1 explains in detail how the living arrangement status was determined in the U.S.

CPS and in the Canadian Census and SCF.

       As shown in Table 3, the overall fraction of youth who live with their parents has risen

in the U.S. and especially in Canada. Table 4 documents that in both countries, youth who

live with their parents are distributed fairly evenly across the income distribution, whereas

those who live alone or head their own families arc disproportionately poor. Furthermore, the

relative income position of youth who have left home has declined substantially between 1970

and 1993. Among youth who have left home, the traction in the lowest quartile increases

                                                 8
from 30 percent in 1970 to 50 percent in 1993 in both Canada and the U.S. Among youth

who live with their parents, the fraction in the lowest quartile is stable both in the U.S.

(around 25 percent) and in Canada (15-20 percent).

       Taken together, these tables reveal two important conclusions. First, the deterioration

in the relative family income status of youth is mostly due to a sharp fall in the relative

incomes of youth who have left home. This fall is attributable in part to a rise in the fraction

of youth not living with their parents who live alone or head a single-headed family (versus

living with a spouse, see Table 3) and in part to a relative decline in the income of younger

individuals (see Table 5 and the discussion below for more detail). Second, in the U.S. and

especially in Canada, the rise in the fraction of 16-24 year olds who remain with their parents

has forestalled a potential deterioration in the relative incomes of youth. Indeed, the simple

simulation reported in the last column of Table 4 suggests that had the fraction of youth living

with their parents remained at 1971 levels, the percent of youth in the bottom quartile of the

family income distribution would have risen by an additional 0.9 percentage point in the U.S.

(34.8-33.9) and by an additional 3.4 percentage points in Canada (298-26.4). In other words,

the larger "move back home in Canada has reduced the percent of youth in the bottom

quartile by 2.5 percentage points.

        Interestingly, we noted earlier that the percent of youth in the bottom quartile of the

family income distribution rose 2.3 percentage points more iii the U.S. than in Canada

between 1971 and 1994, taking account bf differences in the definition of family income in

the SCF (1993) and the Canadian Census (1970, 1980, and 1990). Thus, if the move back



                                                  9
 home had not been more pronounced in Canada than in the U.S., the fraction of youth in the

 lowest quartile would have risen by about as much in the Iwo countries.

        These results suggest that in the U.S. and especially in Canada, the famiLy has played

an important role in dampening the effect of the decline in the economic status of youth. The

 relative expansion of this family safety net for Canadian youth is potentially surprising, given

 the much wider public safety net in Canada (see e.g. Blank and llanratty (1993)). Tbere is

certainly no indication that broader public safety net programs in Canada have "crowded out"

the role of families in coping with adverse economic conditions.




   living AnngementsyQendetan&Age
        A striking feature of the data in Table 3 is the difference in living arrangements

between young men and young women. In both Canada and the United States, young women

are less likely to live with their parents and more likely to head their own families than young

men. In part this reflects the difference in average age at marriage between men and women.

In addition, the much higher fraction of women who head their own single-parent family

contributes to the mate-female gap in living arrangements.'

       A richer portrait of the changing living arrangements of youth in the two countries is

provided in Figures 3 and 4. Figure 3 shows the fraction of youth remaining with their

parents, by age, for men and women in the two countries in 1971 and 1994. Almost all 16



    9Note that for the U.S. we include women who have their own children but live with either
or both of their parents as "living with parents" in table 3. II these women were considered as
heading their own families the fraction of single-head women would rise by about 3 percentage
points in 1994.

                                               10
year-olds live with their parents. By age 19, 10-20 percent of men have left home, while 30-

35 percent of women have left. Between 1971 and 1994 the most noticeable shift is the rise in

the fraction of Canadian women still at home. This change was associated with a very

substantial increase in school enrollment of Canadian women (see below).           Close

examination of Figure 3 suggests a larger average increase in the fraction of youth living with

parents between 1971 and 1994 than what is reporLed in Table 3. A weighted average of the

changes for individual age groups (with fixed 1971 weights) shows that the fraction of young

men living with their parents increased by 4.9 and 9.0 percentage points in the U.S. and

Canada, respectively (compared to 2.3 and 7.0 in Table 3). The corresponding numbers for

young women are 6.8 and 12.7 percentage points, respectively (compared to 4.5 and 11.3

percent in Table 3). The source of discrepancy between fixed-weighted avenges and the

averages for all youLh is the changing age distribution of youth. Since the youth population

was younger -- and thus more likely to be living with parents-- iii 1971 than in 1994, the

fraction of all 16-24 year olds living with their parents did not increase as much as it rose for

any single-year age group (e.g. 24 year aids). Note, however, that since the changes in the

age composition are very similar in the U.S. and Canada. these composition biases do not

affect the relative trends in family arrangements in the two countries.

       Figure 4 provides more detaiL on the changing living arrangements of youth by age and

gender. Perhaps the most striking feature of this figure is the relaLively high incidence of

single motherhood among U.S. women in 1994. About 11 percent of American women age

20-24 are currently supporting a family without a male head. Even restricting attention to




                                                11
white women, 8-9 percent of U.S. women of age 20-24 were single mothers in 1994,

compared to a rate of 4-5 percent in Canada.'°

        The relatively lower rate of single female headship in Canada also contributes to the

higher relative income status of youth in Canada. In both countries, families headed by lone

mothers are very likely to be poor (Hanratty and Blank (1993)). Among lone mother heading

their own households in the U.S. in 1994, for example, 89 percent were in the lowest quartile

of the adjusted family income distribution. The U.S.-Canada gaps in both the fraction of

young women heading lone-parent families (about 5 percent in 1994) and the fraction of youth

living in single-headed families (about tO percent in 1994) thus accounts for some of the

higher relative income status of youth in Canada.



cLSelatbi&Eamingtnfxouth

       A second explanation for the declining relative income status of youth is a decline in

the relative earnings of young workers. This is in fact the primary explanation for the sharp

decline in relative income position of youth who live on their own. The lower panel of Table

5 shows the changing distribution of young men and women across the quartiles of the overall

earnings distributions. In both Canada and the U.S., a higher fraction of youth were


    '°We have not attempted to decompose the higher incidence of single motherhood in the U.S.
into differences in out-of-wedlock births and differences in marital stability. Overall, the divorce
rate is about twice as high in the U.S. as Canada. According to Vital Statistics data (e.g.
StatisticaLAbstracLoL.thei.Ls, Tabl& 1358), the percentage of children born to unmarried
mothers was about 18 percent in the U.S. in 1980 versus 13 percent in Canada. By 1991 the
rate was 30 percent in the U.S. and 29 percent in Canada. However, Vita! Statistics data on
marital status of mothers are not strictly comparable across countries because of differences in
common-law marriage rates and other factors.

                                                12
concentrated in the bottom quartile of the earnings distribution in 1990 than in 1970. The

increase is more pronounced for women than for men, and greater in Canada than the United

Slates. The greater effect for young women reflects the widening of age differentials among

female workers in both countries over the I 980s. Whereas historically the wage gaps between

younger and older women were much smaller than the corresponding gaps for men, over the

past two decades age differentials among women have risen sharply." The greater fall in the

relative earnings of young workers in Canada than the U.S. has been noted in other recent

studies (e.g., DiNardo and Lemleux, 1997). Compared to the U.S., age differentials among

male workers rose faster in Canada over the 1980s.

       Table 5 also shows the fractions of overall earnings accruing to each of the earnings

quartile in the U.S. and Canada over the past 25 years (upper panel). Among male workers,

earnings inequality increased in both countries, while among female workers the tzend was

ambiguous. Taken together with the trend toward an increasing fraction of young workers in

the bottom earnings quartile, however, the growth in overall earnings inequality presents at

least part of the explanation for the lalling relative income of youth.

       Although we have treated changes in family structure and changes in the relative

earnings position of youth as separate phenomena, it is possible that family structure exerts

some causal effect on earnings, or vice versa. For example, Korenman and Neumark (1991)

have attempted to estimate the causal effect of marital status on male wages. While we place




    "It cauld be argued that the rising return for labor market experience among women reflects
a tendency for women to take less time off work for chitd-rearing, and to choose careers with
greater returns to experience.

                                                13
no causal interpretation on the correlation between wages and family structure, for

completeness we estimated a series of linear regression models to measure the wage

differentials associated with three living situations: living with ones parents; living alone; and

heading ones own family. The results are summarized in Appendix Table A, and are fairly

similar across countries. As one might expect, young men who live a!one or head their own

families eani higher average hourly or weekly earnings than those who live with their parents,

with a generally larger differential (10-35 percent) for those who head their own families and a

smaller effect (5-20 percent) for those who live alone." Among young women the wage

differentials associated with different living arrangements are smaller, and tend to be close to

zero in more recent years.




eworlcancLSchoot

       While economists' attention is traditionally directed toward the labor force activities of

youth, school attendance is at least as important an outcome for many youth. Figure 5

presents some simple aggregate statistics on overall employment and full time enrollment rates

among youth in the U.S. and Canada." (Full-time enrollment rates exclude individuals who




           axe estimated 1mm linear regression models that control for age, education, race, and
location, estimated by gender and country using data for log avenge weekly or hourly earnings
in 1970 1980, 1990, and 1993.

   "The Canadian data underlying this figure are for individuals age 15-24 whiLe the U.S. data
are for individuals 16-24. We have adjusted the Canadian enrollment figures to a U.S. basis
assuming that tOO percent of 15 year olds are enrolled. We have not adjusted the Canadian
employment rates: observe that any reasonable adjustment would raise the Canadian employment
rates (by 4-5 percentage points).

                                                14
attend college part-time: total enrollment rates are about 4-5 percentage points higher).' In

the early 1970s, full Lime enrollment rates were 5-10 percentage points higher in the U.S. than

in Canada. Throughout the 1980s, however, relative enrollment rates in Canada rose, so that

by 1990 the fraction of 16-24 year olds enrolled full-time in Canada actually surpassed the

U.S. rate. This cross-over marks an historic turning point: throughout the 20th century the

U.S. has had a much better-educated labor force than Canada." The data in Figure 5 suggest

that the rankings will be reversed within the next 25 years.

        Table 6 gives a more detailed breakdown of work and school activity rates by gender

and age category over our sample period. We distinguish four types of activities: school only,

work and school, work only, and 9nactivity (neither work nor school).t' Our data on school

enroltment and employment for the U.S.    ale taken from the October CPS, and pertain to
enrollment and employment as of the survey week. Our data on enrollment and employment

for Canada are taken from two different sources. The rows labelled SCF" present data from

the Survey of Consumer Finances, a supplement to the labour Force Survey much like the

March CPS. Enrollment and work activities refer to the SCF survey week, in April of the

corresponding year. The other rows present data from the Canadian Censuses of 1971, 1981,




   "The Canadian data in Figure 5 are from published tabulations from the October LFS. The
U.S. data are our own calculations using the Octobef CPS files.

    "See e.g. Freeman and Needels (1993).

    "We classify as inactive" individuals who do not actively participate to the labor market by
working or investing in human capital (going to school). Many individuals classified as "inactiv&'
am of coune actively involved in home production activities such as child-rearing. They are only
inactive from a labor market point of view.

                                               IS
and 1991. Enrollment in these data sources refers to school attendance at any time over the 9-

month period from September of the previous year to the "Census Week" (in June of the

corresponding year), while work acLivity refers to the Census week. Complementing the data

in Table 6, Figure 6 shows decompositions of work and school activities by age for U.S. and

Canadian men and women in 1971 and 1994.

        Among the notable features of Table 6 and Figure 6 is the rapid rise in school

enrollment rates of women over the past two decades. For example, in 1981 the enrollment

rate of 20-21 year women was about 30 percent in both the U.S. and Canada. By 1994 this

rate was 46 percent in the U.S. and 52 percent in Canada. Coupled with this rise in school

attendance (and an increase in employment rates) was a drop in inactivity rates. In 1971 over

40 percent of 23-24 year old women in the U.S. and Canada were 9nactive". (Many of these

were of course homemakers). By 1994 this rate had halved in both countries.

       A more subtle feaLure of the data in Table 6 is the reiative propensity of enrolled youth

to work in Canada versus the U.S. For example, among 16-17 year old enrollees in 1994, 27

percent of U.S. men worked versus 33 percent of Canadian men. At higher ages, however

the relative comparison was reversed. Among 23-24 year old enrollees, for example, 61

percent of U.S. men worked versus 48 percent of Canadian men. A similar pattern hoLds

among women: in Canada, younger students are more likely to work than their U.S.

counterparts, while older students are less likely to work. It is interesting to speculate as to

whether this pattern is driven by the higher average cost of U.S. colleges.




                                                16
       Schooling and work activity of youth are intimately connected to their choices of living

arrangements. Many youth who want to attend school full time, for example, must live with

their parents, while those who want to live atone are forced to work to support themselves. In

Appendix Table B we present cross-tabulations of work/school activity rates with living

arrangements for men and women in 1971 and 1994. For simpliciLy we limited the analysis to

older youths (20-24 year olds) whose work, school, and living arrangements exhibit more

variability than those of teenagers. The cross-tabulations show many of the expected patterns.

For example, in both the U.S. and Canada, young men who live with their parents ale more

likely to be inactive, whereas young women who live with their parents are less likely to be

inactive (presumably reflecting the importance of full-time home-makers in the group of

women who head their own families). Interestingly, differences in school and work activity

rates of young men and women who live with their parents and those who do not tended to

narrow over the 1911-94 period in both countries.




LWelfar&Recipiency

       A final important determinant of the overall income status of youth is participation in

government transfer programs. Table 7 gives the fractions of all youth who reported receiving

"welfare" payments in the two countries, and the fractions of youth not living with the parents

who reported welfare recipiency." The data reveal several interesting similarities and


    "In our U.S. data files, welfare receipt is defined as receipt of AFDC or Public Assistance.
In our Canadian SCF files for 1990 and 1993, welfare receipt is defined as receipt of Social
Assistance. We do not report numbers for earlier years in Canada because of data limitations in
the Canadian Census (welfare receipts cannot be distinguished from other transfers like workers'

                                               17
differences between the U.S. and Canada. FirsI, in the both countries overall recipiency rates

have risen over the past 25 years. Second, despite the much higher rate of single headship

among U.S. women (see Figure 4), welfare recipiency rates are similar for women in the two

countries. This presumably reflects more generous Canadian benefits, as well as the

availability of Social Assistance payments in Canada to dual-headed families and individuals

living alone.' Third, welfare recipiency rates are much lower for young men than young

women in the U.S. • but only marginally lower for men than women in Canada. We believe

that this reflects the much greater availability of cash welfare benefits to men in Canada than

in the U.S. The major welfare benefit available to men in the U.S. (Food Stamps) are not

accurately recorded in the CPS and are not included in our tabulations.




Thná
llnatyti&MLdeUingoLYouliLBehaYior



       Much of economists' attention on youths has focused on the determination of

employment!' A conventional framework for modelling youth employment is a supply-

demand model, in which wages and employment are jointly determined by demand-side factors

(e.g. the state of the business cycle) and supply-side factors (e.g. the relative size of the youth

population). As we have emphasized throughout this papeT, however, youth behavior is



compensation in the 1981 and there is flQ iniormaUon at all on transfers in the 1971 Census).

   "See Blank and Hanratty (1993) and Hanratty and Blank (1992).

     "See e.g. Freeman and Wise (1982). A voluminous literature focuses on the effect of
minimum wages on youth employment. See Card and Krueger (1995).

                                                IS
characterized by far more than simply holding a job. In principle, the same exogenous factors

that affect employment and wages also affect other aspects of youth behavior. Thus, a natural

approach to modelling the evolution of youth living anangements, school enrollment, and

program participation would be to estimate reduced form" models, compambleto standard

reduced form models for employment and wages, which show the dependence of living

anangements, enrollment, etc. on such exogenous shift factors as the state of the business

cycle and the relative size of the youth population.

         On the other hand, most research on youth employment in both the U.S. and Canada

has   (at least implicitly) assumed that minimum wages andlor other institutional features lead to

above-equilibrium wages in the youth labor market. In this case, the wage is exogenous to

supply-side factors and employment is determined "on Ihe demand                 According to this

view of the youth labor market, the youth wage rate and demajid-side shift factors (such as the

state of the business cycle) also determine other behavioral responses of youth, such as the

decision to live with ones parents or the decision to attend school.

         While a full investigation of the question of which (if either) of these two models of the

youth labor market is correct is beyond the scope of this paper, we attempted a very simple

test based on the effect of supply-shift (actors on the youth wage. Specifically, we

investigated the effect of changes in the relative population share of youth on the level of youth

wages in different regional labor markets in the U.S. and Canada." Contrary to the prediction



      '°See e.g. Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen (1982).

   "We used data for 9 regions in the U.S. and 6 provinceslregions in Canada for 1971, 1981,
1991, and 1994. In our models we regressed average wages of youth on the relative fraction of

                                                 19
of an unconstrained supply-demand model, but consistent with a model in which wages are

held at above equilibrium rates by minimum wage regulations or other institutional factors, we

found no evidence that a larger youth population share is associated with a lower youth wage.

(Indeed, our point estimates typically showed higher youth wages in regions/time periods with

larger youth population shares). Based on this evidence, we decided to adopt a modelling

framework in which the youth wage and the slate of demand (i.e. the business cycle) are taken

as exogenous, with youth employment determined on the demand side (i.e. by employers'

demand functions) and youth living arrangements, school enrollment, and program

participation determined on the supply side (i.e. by individuals).



rReginnaLLabocMarkets

       As noted in Figure 2, labor markets in Canada and the U.S. exhibit significant regional

differences. This regional variation provides a valuable tool for understanding the

determinants of youth employment and other behaviors like leaving home or deciding to enroll

in school.22 For example, even in the presence ci unspecified aggregate-level taste shifts, it is

possible to identity the effect of changing business cycle conditions on the probability that a

young person lives with his or her parents by correlating differences in living arrangements

across regions with differences in local labor demand indicators. By pooling cross-sectional




the local population age 16-24, the employment-population rate of adults, region dummies, and
yearcountiy dummies.

   "Regional variation has been used in some stuciies of the effect of minimum wages: see Card
and Krueger (1995).

                                               20
data for several years and including unrestricted region effects, iL is also possible La account

for any pennanent differences in a particular outcome across different regions.

       In this paper we combine region-specific data for the 9 Census divisions in the United

States with data for the 6 major provinces/legions in Canada (the Atlantic Provinces, Quebec,

Ontario, the Prairie Provinces, Alberta, and British Columbia)." Our U.S. data are drawn

from the 1971, 1981, 1991 and 1994 March Current Population SurveysY Comparable

Canadian data are drawn from the 1971, 1981, 1991 Censuses and the 1994 Survey of

Consumer Finances.

       Table 8 provides a brief overview of the regional differences within the U.S. and

Canada in three key youth outcomes: the fraction who live with their parents, the fraction

employed, and the fraction enrolled in school. In both 1971 and 1994 the data for the two

countries show sizeable differences across regions. For example. in 1971 the fraction of youth

living with their parents ranged from 53.5 percent (Mountain region) to 72.5 percent (Mid-

Atlantic region) in the U.S., and from 53.8 percent (Alberta) to 69.9 percent (Quebec) in

Canada." The range of inter-regional differences in the fraction living with their parents was



   "The use of regional data (as compared to state data, for example) greatly increases the
number of observations far youth in each age group.

   'We augment the March 1971 and 1981 data with enrollment data from the October 1970 and
1980 CPS. Beginning in the mid-1980s the March CPS conthins enrollment information for youth
-- thus our 1991 and 1994 enrollment data are taken from the March Cl's's. A comparison of
enrollment rates in the March 1991 and October 1990 CPS's reveals a high degree of consistency
across regions and age groups in the two surveys.

     "One possible explanation for the high employment-population ratios and the low fraction
living with parents in high-growth regions like Alberta is the internal migration of young workers.
It would be interestthg to analyze the role of migration as another form of adjustment to changing

                                                21
comparable in 1994. Similarly, in 1971 the fraction of youth enrolled in school ranged from

42.7 percent (West South Central region) to 49.4 percent (Mid-Atlantic region) in the U.S.,

and from 45.2 percent (Quebec) to 49.7 percent (Ontario)!' Inter-regional differences in

school enrollment were even wider in 1994: for example Canadian enrollment rates ranged

from 47.9 percent (British Columbia) to 60.3 percent (Ontario).

        A second fact revealed by the data in Table 8 is that although inter-regional differences

tend to persist, they are far from permanent. In the U.S., for example, the New England and

Mid-Atlantic regions had among the highest enrollment rates and fractions of youth living with

their parents in both 1971 and 1994. However, youth in the Mountain region moved from

having among the lowest employment rates in 1971 to among the highest in 1994. Another

remarkable change is the school enrollment rate of youth in Quebec, which moved from the

lowest in Canada in 1971 to the second-highest in 1994.




cStimaflonSesufls

       Our goal is to estimate the effects of changes in youth wages and local labor demand

conditions on four youth outcomes: the probability of employment, the probability of living

with ones parents, the probability of being enrolled in school, and the probability of receiving

welfare payments. To analyze these outcomes we first compute the proportion P of youth of




economic circumstances.

    "Note that the 1971 enrollment data for Canada is defined as enrollment at any lime over the
9 months prior to the Census, as compared to a "point-in-time enrollment rate in the U.S. and
for the 1994 Canadian data.

                                              22
a given age (i=16,17,...24) and a given region (j) and time period (t) who are employed,

living with their parents, enrolled, or receiving welfare." We then estimate grouped linear

probability models' of the form:

(I)      P = EAy, +            + EYIo, +         +        +

where A1 is a set of age dummies; lR is a set of region dummies; Y1 isa set of year dummies;

      is an index of youth wages in region j and year t; and   is a measure of local labor

demand in region j and year L. Note that for each region-year observation we have 9 age-

specific observations on the fraction who exhibit the behavior in question. Since the key

covariates -- the wage index and the labor demand index -- are the same for all age groups,

and since the error terms for different age groups in the same region-year may have a shared

component of variance, conventional standard errors reported for OLS estimates of (1) are

likely lo be biased (Moulton, 1986). We therefore report corrected standard errors which

allow for an unrestricted covariance structure between observations for different age gwups in

the same region-year.

         As an index for local labor market conditions we use the employment-population rate

of 25-45 year old adults of the same gender (estimated from the same sources as the dependent

variables).2' The derivation of an appropriate wage index is more difficult. For the later U.S.




   "Note that employment status, living anangements, and enrollment are all measured as of the
survey dates of the CPS, Census, or SCF, whereas welfare recipiency is measured for the previous
year.

      2tAfter some experimentation, we found that the employment-population rate of 25-45 year
old women was a better proxy for local labor market conditions of young women than the
employment -population rate of 25-45 year old men.

                                                23
data (1981, 1991 and 1994), it is possible to use reported annual earnings, reported weeks of

work, and reported hours per week over the previous calendar year to construct a measure of

average hourly earnings of employed youth. However, neither the 1971 CPS nor the Canadian

Census files contain direct measures of hours per week in the previous year, and both the 1971

CPS and the 1971 and 1981 Canadian Census flIes include only a categorical measure of weeks

worked in the previous year. Thus, a direct measure of the hourly wage cannot be computed

from these data sets. For each year and each gender, we therefore computed a regional wage

index for youth by running a regression of log annual earnings on a standard set of

demographic variables, a set of controls for weeks worked last year and hours worked in the

survey week, and a set of region dummies." Our regional wage index is simply the coefficient

on the corresponding region dummy from this regression.

       In Appendix Figure I, we plot the values of the wage index in each region for young

men and young women. In this figure, the wage index is expressed in terms of deviations

from the annual mean for each gender in each country. One noticeable pattern is how the real

price of oil (which increased sharply in the 1970s and thçn declined in the 1980s) drives

relative youth wages in the oil-rich regions of Canada (Alberta) and the U.S. (West South




    "The control variables are a set of age dummies, years of education, and years of education
interacted with age. The weeks and hours variables for Canada are a set of 5 dummies for
categories of "weeks worked last year" fully interacted with a dummy for part-timelfull-time
status last year and a set of 8 dummies for categories of "hours worked last week". These hours
vanables ale used because they am the broadest set that can be constructed on a comparable basis
acmss years. A similar approach is used with the U.S. data. Note that the wage regressions are
estimated using observations on youth (age 16-24 in the survey month) who reported positive
earnings and positive weeks of work in the previous calendar year. (IndividuaJs who worked last
year but not during the survey week are used in the estimation).

                                               24
Central). One can also see how the "Massachusetts Miracle" pushed up youth wages in New

England in the 1980s after these wages had declined sharply in the t970s.

       A final issue concerns the functional form of equation (I). As written, this equation

implies that changes in the key covariates -- the wage index and the local demand index --

exert the same effects on the probabilities of a given outcome for all 9 individual age groups.

Since younger individuals have very high enrollment rates and very high rates of living with

their parents (close to 100 percent for 16-year olds) this specification is clearly inappropriate.

One possibility would be to use the log-odds of different outcomes as the dependent variables.

As an alternative, we actually estimated an interacled version of (1), including both the levels

of the wage and local demand indexes, and their interactions with the age of the specific

subgroup. This specification allows the effects of higher adult employment rate, for example,

to exert a systematically larger effect on the enrollment rates of older than younger individuals.

       Estimation results for this interacted version of equation (1) are reported in Table 9.

For simplicity, we report the effects of the two key covariates on 20-year olds. The first part

of the table show results for men while the second part shows results for women. For both

genders, we report three sets of estimates: estimates for U.S. data alone; estimates for

Canadian data alone; and estimates from a pooled U.S./Canada sample. In the Latter case, we

include country-specific year dummies, as well as region dummies for each of the 15 "regions"

in the combined two-country sample. The estimates are derived from a weighted OLS




                                                25
procedure, using as a weight for each region-yearage observation the estimated population of

individuals of that age in the region in that year.'°

       The results in the first part of Table 9 indicate that, as expected, a rise in the

employment-population ratio of prime-age males has a strong positive effect on the

employment rate of young men in the same region, Tbe estimated coefficient in both the U.S.

and Canada is larger than one, indicating that the employment rate of young men is more

cyclical than the employment rate of prime-age males. Improving local demand conditions

also tend to lower both the probability of staying at home and the probability of attending

school among young men in the two countries. The cyclical effect on "staying at home" is

larger in Canada while the cyclical effect on "going to school is larger in the United States.

The estimated effects of improving cyclical conditions on the probability of welfare receipt

vary by country, although in the pooled model (as in the U.S.) better local demand leads to a

modest fall in welfare recipiency among young men. The positive and significant effect of

local demand on welfare recipiency of Canadian men is an anomaly. It shoutd be noted,

however, that because of data limitations, comparable welfare recipiency rates are only

available for the last two years of our sample pcriod for Canada. Thus the welfare rccipiency

model for Canada is fit with only 12 observations on the underlying regional data.

       The estimated effects of the wage index in the first part of Table 9 are quite interesting.

In the employment models in column (2), wages exert essentially no effect. It should be noted

that these estimated wage coefficients may be upward-biased by unobserved region-specific



   '°ln the pooled models, we multiply the weighted number of individuals in Canada by ten to
give a relatively similar weight to the two countries in the regressions.

                                                26
factors that Jead to higher employment demand for youth and at the same tune exert upward

pressure on youth wages. We attempted to instrument the youth wage using the fraction of

youth in the regional population (a "supply-shift" variable) but as noted earlier this variable

has an insignificant (and "wrong-signed") effect on wage levels in the first-stage equation. In

future work it would be interesting to evaluate the performance of other potential instruments,

such as a minimum wage measure.

       In contrast to the negligible effect of the wage index on employment, the estimates in

Table 9 suggest that higher wages exert a more systematic effect on the living arrangements

and enrollment behavior of young men, in particular, rising wages are associated wiLh a lower

probability of living with ones parents, and a lower probability of enrollment. Both effects

are marginally signiñcant in the country-specific models and in the pooled model.

Overall, the results in Table 9 suggest that external labor market conditions exert a fairly

strong effect on a wide range of behaviors of young men. In regions with stronger local

demand conditions and higher wages, young men are more likely to work, more likely to

strike out on their own and move away from their parents home, and less likely to go to

school. In regions with depressed local demand conditions and lower wages, young men adapt

by continuing to live with their parents and by attending school. The latter mechanism leads to

an interesting paradox: a depressed labor market may lead to greater human capital

accumulation and (presumably) to enhanced long-mn growth.

        In comparison to the results far men, Ihe results for women in the second part of Table

9 are more variable across countries. The employment models (in column 2) show that young

womens employment is less responsive to changes in the prime-age adult employment rate

                                                27
(the employment rate of adult women in this case) than the employment of young men. There

is no indication that higher wages lower young women's employment. Better cyclical

conditions (as measured by the employment rate of prime-age women) exert a strong negative

                                                                                 weak
effect on the probability of living at home among Canadian women, but only show a

                                  Perhaps surprisingly, the estimated cyclical effects on
negative effect among U.S. women.

enrollment are positive (but onLy significant in the U.S.) for the two countries.

       As in the case of men, the estimates suggest that higher wages exert a systematiceffect

on the living arrangements and enrolimeni behavior of young women. In particular, rising

wages are associated with a lower probability of living with ones parents, and a lower

probability of enrollment. Both effects are statistically significant in the country-specific

models and in the pooled model.

       The cyclical effects on welfare recipiency in the U.S. are relatively strong but for

Canada are again 0wrong signed", perhaps as a consequence of the limited amount of data

used in the Canadian welfare models. On Ihe other hand, the wage has a negative and

significant impact on welfare recipiency in Canada, as expected.

        Overall, the estimation results are fairly similar for young men and young women.

 Looking at the pooled models for outcomes other than welfare recipiency, the only systematic

difference between men and women is that the employment-population rate of prime age adults

 has a negative and significant effect on the probability of attending school for young men, but

 a positive and insignificant effect for young women. All the other estimated effects conform

 to our expectations, except perhaps for the effect of the wage on employment which should be

 negative when wages move employment aiong a fixed demand curve.

                                                 28
ii Am 11 S -rsr, flifcerenceskaouthMutcomesi)riveithy.RegionaLLabocMarkels2
       The results presented in Table 9 suggest that the state of the regional labor market has

important influences on youth decisions to stay at home, work, or enroll in school. We now

turn to the question of whether changing regional labor market performance can account for

differential U.S-Canada trends in these outcomes over the last 25 years.

       Table 10 shows the changes in the U.S.-Canada gaps in each "outcome from 1971 to

1991 and from 1991 to 1994, along with the changes in each outcome predicted by our model

as a consequence of changing regional labor market conditions, and the residual"

component." To measure the total changes and predicted changes in each outcome we fit

pooled models for the 6 Canadian provinces and 9 U.S. regions using a full set of country-

specific year effects. In the first specification we excluded the regional labor market variables

(the wage index and the adult employment rate), while in the second specification these

variables were included. The total changes are measured by the differences in the differences

of the U.S. and Canadian year effects between the base year and the end year (e.g. 1971 and

1991) in the model that excludes the labor market variables. The unexplained changes are

measured by the differences in the differences between the base year and the end year in the

model that includes the labor market variables. Finally, the explained changes are measured

by the differences between the total and unexplained changes.




    31Note that our regional wage indexes have the same mean in every year. By construction,
then, the avenge changes in the wage index variable over time are 0 for both country, and this
variable cannot explain" any relative trends between the two countries.

                                               29
       Panel A of Table 10 indicates that, for both men and women, the proportion of youth

                                                                                in the two
living with their parents and the proportion of youth working evolved similarly

countries between 1971 and 1991. By contrast, the proportion of youth attending school

increased much faster (10 percentage points more) in Canada than in the U.S. In the case of

men, the slightly better labor market conditions in Canada account for a small increase in the

probability of working and a small decrease in the probability of living with parents. Note that

these effects are substantially larger for women. This is due to the fact — not shown in the

tables -- that the employment rate of adult women increased substantially more in Canada than

in the U.S during this period.

       Note also that labor market condiLions do not account for any of the relative growth in

the fraction of young Canadians enrolled in school, If anything, slightly better labor market

conditions should have reduced this proportion in Canada relative to the U.S. Overall, none of

the relative changes in aggregate youth outcomes between the U.S. and Canada between 1971

and 1991 are explained by our labor market variables.

       By contrast, Panel B shows thaL the poor performance of the Canadian labor market

between l991 and 1994 fully explains of the "move back home" of young Canadians. For

both men and women, the proportion of youth living with their parents increased by about 3

percentage points more in Canada than in Lhe U.S. (row 1), which corresponds to the change

predicted by the relative deterioration of the Canadian labor market (row 2). Similarly, the

sharp drop in the relative employment rate of young Canadians is explained by the poor labor




                                               30
market conditions in Canada" If anything, in fact, the employment rate of young men in

Canada should have dropped slightly more than it actually did. The proportion of young

Canadian men attending school also increased less than predicted between 199! and 1994.

Changing labor market conditions should have pushed up the enrollment rate by 2.7 percentage

points more in Canada than in the U.S., while the actual rate only increased by 1 percentage

point. In the case of women, there was no substantial change (actual or predicted) in

enrollment rates in Canada relative to the U.S.

       Overall, our findings suggest that young Canadians have adjusted to the poor conditions

of the Canadian labor market during the 1990s by slaying with their parents longer (and

working less). By contrast, labor market conditions explain little of the sharp increase in

enrollment rates in Canada relative to the U.S. between 1971 and 1991. The explanation for

this increase has to be found elsewhere. One conjecture is that Canadian youth were simply

catching up to American youth through the 1970s and 1980s. Lower tuition costs in Canada

may also explain some of the change.




Concincinilt

        In this papa we take advantage of the rich micro data sets available for the U.S. and

Canada to study the responses of young workers to the external labor market foices that have



      In Canada, there is a spurious negative trend in the proportion of youth working or attending
school because of changes in the definition of these variables between 1991 (Census) and 1994
(SCF). The numbers reported in Panel B of Table 10 have been adjusted using an adjustment
factor computed by comparing employment rate and the enrollment rate in the 1991 SCF and the
1991 Census. The adjustment factor is 5.4 percentage points for employment and 7.1 percentage
points for school enrollment.

                                                  31
affected the two countries over the past 25 years. Our key hypothesis is that young workers

adjust to changes in labor market opportunities through a variety of mechanisms, including

changes in living arrangements, changes in school enrollment, and changes in work effort.

       In the case of young men, the results support this hypothesis. In regions with stronger

local demand conditions and higher wages, young men are more likely to work, more likely to

strike out on their own and move away from their parents home, and less likely to go to

school. In regions with depressed local demand conditions and tower wages, young men adapt

by continuing to live with their parents and by attending school. The results for young women

are similar except that local demand conditions (the employment-population rate of adult

women) have no significant effect on school enrollment.

       In fact, poor labor market conditions in Canada explain why the fraction of youth

Living with their parents has increased in Canada relative to the U.S. recently. Paradoxically,

this move back home also explains why the relative position of Canadian youth in the

distribution of family income did not deteriorate as fast as in the U.S. Other factors like the

relatively high rate of single-headed households in the U.S. also have a negative impact on the

relative income position of U.S. youth. However, unlike the move back home in Canada

which is a recent phenomenon, the high incidence of single-headed households in the U.S

relative to Canada has persisted throughout the period considejed here (1970 to 1994). Short-

run factors like the state of the labor market cannot account for the permanent difference in the

fraction of youth who live in single-headed households in Canada and the U.S.

       The descriptive analysis presented in this paper raises a number of other interesting

issues for future research. For example, enrollment rates were tiaditionally higher in the U.S.

                                               32
than Canada but the situation has been reversed in the early 1990s. it would be interesting to

know whether differences in college and university tuition levels and student loan programs

carl explain this reversal olhisloric trends. It would also be interesting to explore what

analytical models of family behavior are consistent with our empirical observation that the

fmily acts as a "safety net" for young people during difficult economic times.




                                               33
IALS_Data
       We used the household and family relationship variables in the CrnTent Population

Survey (CPS) to distinguish between three living arnngements: living with ones parents;

living outside one's parent's home as a head (or wife) of one's own family; and living outside

ones parents home as a lone individual (with or without roommates). Individuals who head

their own family but live with their parents (or parents-in-law) are considered to be living with

their parents. In addition, individuals who live with some other relative (e.g. a grandmother

or aunt) with or without their own family are classified as living with (heir "parents".

       Individuals who head their own family but live with their parents (or parents-in-law)

are classified as living in related subfamilies in the March CI'S. For these individuals (and

their children) we used the family information for the associated primary family to determine

whether the parental family has dual heads, a single female head, or a single male head. For

all other individuals we used the family information for their own family to determine whether

the family has dual heads, a single female head, or a single male head.

        Specific details for the various CPS surveys are as follows:

MarchJ27J.

        We use "family relationship summary" (columns 43-44 of the person record) to

determine living anangements. This variable combines primary and related subfamilies.

        Individuals coded as children, grandchildren, or other relatives of the head (codes 3-9)

are classified as living with their parents. Individuals coded as not in a family (codes 10-il)



                                                34
are classified as living alone. Individuals coded as heads or wives (codes 1-2) are classified as

heading their own family.



March i981

       We use "relationship to householder" (column 103 of the person record) plus

 subfamily relationship" (column 106 of the person record) to determine living anangemerits.

Individuals whose relationship to householder is child or other relative (column 103 =4-5) plus

individuals who are unrelated subfamily members (column 103=6) and whose subfamily

relationship is child or other relative (column 106=3-4) are classified as living with their

parents. Individuals who are non-family householders or unrelated individuals (column

103=2,7) are classified as living alone. Individuals whose relationship to householder is

householder or spouse (column 103 = 1,3) plus individuals who are unrelated subfamily

members (column 103=6) and whose subfamily relationship is reference person or spouse

(column 106=1,3) are classified as heading their own families.



Mprrii 1Q91 M2rrh 1994

       We use "family type" (column 31 of the person record) plus "family relationship"

(column 32 of the person record) to determine living arrangements. individuals whose family

type is primary family or unrelated subfamily (column 31 = 1 or 4) and whose family

relationship is child or other relative (column 32=3-4) plus individuals whose family type is

related subfamily (column 31=3) are classified as living with their parents. Individuals whose

family type is non-family householder or secondary individual (column 31=2 or 5) are

                                               35
classified as living alone. Individuals whose family type is primary family or unrelated

subfamily (column 31 = I or 4) and whose family relationship is reference person or spouse

(column 32=1-2) are classified as heading their own ftniilies.



2.flnadianJ)ata

197.1,1981, and 199l Census.

       In the Canadian Census (1971, 1981, and 1991), we use the variables "census family

status" and "relationship with the head of household" to determine the same type of family

anangernents as in the U.S. data. We classify as "living with parents" all individuals whose

census family status is "child". By definition, these individuals live with their parents, have

never been married, and have no children. We also classify as "living with parents" some

individuals whose relationship with the head of household is "child" or "child-in-law" but who

are not themselves children a census family. Most of these individuals are either "heads"

(husband or single parent) or wives" of their own census family who happen to live with their

parents or in-laws. We also classify as "living with parents" few individuals who are "child"

or "child-in-law" of the head of household but whose census family status is "non-census

family member living with relatives". Examples of these cases would be a divoiced daughter

living with her parents or a widower living with his in-laws.

       Among individuals who were not classified as "living with parents", we classify as

"living outside ones parents home as aiicad (or wife) of one's own family" those who axe a

head (or wife) of a census family. All other individuals do not live in a census family and are

classified as "living outside one's parents home as a lone indIvidual (with or without

                                               36
 roommates)". In the 1981 and the 1991 Census, the "censusfamily status" can also be used to

 find out whether a child in a census family lives in single- Sr dual-headed family. Since no

 such information is available for other individuals classified as living with parents", we

 assume that all these individuals live in dual-headed households. This assumption is innocuous

 since only about 2 percent of individuals classified as "living with parents" are not a child in a

 census family. The "census family status" variable can also be directly used to classify

 individuals who are the head of their own family as "head of a dual-parent family" or "head of

a single-parent family".

        In the 1971 Census, however, the "census family status" variable provides no

information on whether a family is single- or dual-headed. This explains why the sub-

categories that refer 10 living with parents in a single- or dual headed family are left blank in

Table 3 in 1971. On the other hand, we use the martial status variable to classify as "single

parent" an individual who is the head of a census family and is not married.



1 9Q4 Siitwy nf rn,mEj,
       In the 1994 SCF. we used three variables --census family status, economic family

status, and family type-- to determine the living arrangements of individuals. We classify all

individuals whose economic family status is "child or child-in-law as "living with parents".

We also classify as "living with parents" individuals who are neither head, spouse, or

child/child-in-law in an economic family (the residual category mother in the SCF) and are




                                                37
                                                                                         and his
also in the "other" category for census family status." A son living with his mother

                                     family) would falL into this particular category.
grand-father (head of the economic

       Individuals not classified as "living with parents" are classified are head or spouse of

their own family when the census family status is head" of "spouse". Individuals in the

census family category "not in census family or lone parent" are classified as head of their own

(single-headed) family when the "family type" variableindicates that they live in a lone parent

household. All other individuals are classified as "living alone". Finally, the "family type"

variable is also used to determine whether individuals who live with their parents live in a

single- or a dual-headed family.




    "l'here am four possible categories for the census status variable: "head", "spouse", "notin
 a census family or lone parent, and "other". Logically, all individuals in the "other" category
 should be children in a census family but few of them (0.21 percent of the sample) are also
 classified as head of an economic family. We classified this latter group of individuals as "living
 alone".

                                                 38
                                        REFERENCES

Altonji, Joseph G., and John C. Ham. "Variation in Employment Growth in Canada: The Role
of External, National, Regional, and Industrial Factors," JeumaLnLlabocEconomict8 (January
1990): S198-S236.

Beach,    Charles M., and George A. Slolsve. Are We Becoming Two Societies?: Income
Polarization and the Myth of the Declining Middle Class in Canada. Toronto: C.D. Howe
Institute, 1996.

Blackburn, McKinley L., and David E. Bloom. "The DisLribution of Family Income: Measuring
and Explaining Changes in the 1980s for Canada and the United States," in D. Card and R.
Freeman (eds.) Small fliffnp,wc (Ira M,ttn T }ww Markp4 and Inrnrn&. Mninln,ann in flnada
M the IlniledSratts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 233-266.

Blank, Rebecca M. and Maria!. Hanratly. "Responding to Need: A Comparison of Social Safety
Nets in Canada and the United States," in D. Card and R. Freeman (eds.) Sm211 fliffnp,wn iht
Mafl I hor..Marke&anth1ncomt.Mainthnanc&infln,d2 2n&JhaJJnUSitates. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 191-232.

Brown, Charles, Curtis Gilroy, and Andrew Kohen. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment," JeurnaLoLBconomic.LLteraturel0 (June 1982): 487-528

Card, David and Alan B. Krueger. h4than&Meswernent.lh&liew.lconomictnLlhe
Minin,iim Wage. Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995.

DiNardo, John, and Thomas Lemieux. "Diverging Male Wage Inequality in the United States and
Canada, 198 1-1988: Do Institutions Explain the Difference?" forthcoming in the Industrialand
Labor Relations Review, July 1997.

Eggenbeen, David I. and Daniel T. Lichter. "Race, Family Structure, and Changing Poverty
Among American Children". AmeiicamtSociologicaLReiiew 56 (December 1991): 801-817.

Freeman, Richard S., and Karen Needels. "Skill Differentials in Canada in an Era of Rising
Labor Market Inequality," in D. Card and R. Freeman (eds.) SmalLflifferences..tha.Maliec
LabocMarJcetjandjncomejbjajnLenancejn_Qanada2ndjhejjnited.Stajes. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1993, pp. 45-67.

Freeman, Richard B. and David A. Wise. The Youth 1,hnr Mgrkpf Pinhl.nr ilg N2h1n,       flsi
and.fonsequences. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1982.
Hanatty, Mazia I. and Rebecca M. Blank. Down and Out in North America: Recent Trends in
Poverty Rates in the U.S. and Canada." Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (February 1992):
23 3-54.

Korenman, Sanders, and David Neumark. "Does Marriage Rally Make Men More Productive?"
Journal of Human Resources 26, (Spring 1991): 282-307.

Levy, Frank and Richard .1. Murnane. "U.S. Earnings Levels and Earnings Inequality: A Review
of Recent Trends and Propose Explanations." lnumaLoLpconomic_Literahlre 30 (1992): 1333-
1381.


MOUlton, Brent. "Random Group Effects and the Precision of Regression Estimates," 10uD23L01
V       m.nirt 32 (1986): 385-397.




                                             40
     Figure I: Effect of Baby Boom on Employment by Age

            Relative Size of Age Cohorts
                    United States

t
•0
0
U
U
C,

C


C,
U

C




               I 6-24 yr nids   2-34 yr t,ItIs   35-44 yr ulds
               1950-55=1.0       1960-65=1.0      197(1-75=1.0


            Relative Size of Age Cohorts
                      Canada
00
U
a.
C)
C,

0
U)

C,
C)


C
C)


0
0-
E
LU




               16-24 yr aids    25-34 yr aids    35-44 yr aids
               1950-55=1.0       1961    .0         97! = 1.0
                     Maritinles                            Quebec                             Ontario

.1                                         .7                                  .7

            Adults             Youth                                           .6


5
            —



                                                                                            St 8 91I
                      —

                          ek 9I9
.1 ________________________
   7b    8t                                      7      Si 8 g1O
                                           .4 ________________________         .4


                 Prairies                                  Alberta                        British Columbia
.7                                         .7

.6                                         .6                              -    k

.5                                         .5                                  .5



      ik        Si        S ii
.4 ________________________
                                                 1 St
                                           .4 ________________________
                                                              S'S     gj
                                                                               .4
                                                                                     7      8't     B RI 9

                New England                           Middle Atlantic                    East North Central

 .1                                         .7                                  .7


 .6                                         .6                                  .6


 .5                                         .5                                  .5

                                            .4 ___________________________      .4
 .4   .
      507277 52              0'7   g'29á             6ä72 7 0 O 929t                     sb 12 * 0201 Q2OE
       West North Central                              South Atlantic                    East South Central




 .5                                         .5 '\# ''                           .5          ,•,.._
                                                                                             ' 'I '''
 .4
      Shl2 ñ ek a 929i                               a7k   ña
                                            .4 ________________________
                                                                     e g29t
                                                                                .4
                                                                                         6a7 1)         0)

           West South Central                              Mountain                               Pacific
 .1                                         .7                                      .7


 .6                                             .6                                  .6

 .5                                             .5                                  •
       sb770flgk9ó
 .4 ________________________                    4
                                                     sa,k7ekeO%                          sb,ki)okoak9t


                          Figure 2: Regional Variation iii Employment
    Figure 3: Fractions of Youth Living with Parents by Age


                                a. Men Age 16-24

    1.0



    0.8


0.6
    0.4


    0.2



           16      Il      18      19    20      2!      22     23   24

    —e—   US '94        —'-— US '71      a Q,nada '94 ----- Canada '7!


                            b. Women Age 16-24

    1.0



    0.8


-L 06

    0.4


I   0.2



           16      17      18      19    20      21      22     23   24

          us '94             US '71     ----   CHiulda '94   3< Canada 7
                         a. US   Men 1971                                     b. Canadian Men 1971




                                      MarñS    Lone Parent      With Parent    Alone       M.TTiCd       Lone Pareftt
    C With   Pmrcrti   AIoq.c                                                                        •
                         c.   US Men 1994                                     d. Canadian Men 1994




5




                                      M.nied                                   MOM          Manied       Lone   Punt
       With Parefil    AJo@c                   tat P.rI      C With P.nni

                        Figure 4 (Part 1): Living Arrangements
                                                               of Male Youth by Age
                        a. US   Women 1971                                        I,. Canadian Women 1971




                                                           0

I                                                          I


      C   Wbh Pare,i   Alone         Mn1S    Lone   P.,        C   Wiih "Meal       Alone       MaSS            Lan Parcal

                       c. US Women 1994                                           d. Canadian Women 1994




0                                                          0
0
t
€1!




      U   Wilh PannI   Al.,na        M.nl    Lout Parent           Wllh   rar'u     Alone       Mards           Lone Parent
                                                               C                                            —

                         Figure 4 (Part 2): Living Arrangements      of Female          Youth by Age
                                        Figure 5:


                     Employment-Population Rate and
                   Full-time Enrollment Rate of Youth
4-

     60




j    50




     40




I    30
                                 1979          1983   1985       1987   1989   1991   1993   1995
          1973     1975   1917          1981


                 JnpJpyrnent-IPulatiQw..                     -   Full-time Enrollment:
          —— United States —0— Canada                 —*—    United States —I--— Canada
                      Figure 6 (Part 1): School and Work Activities of Male Youth By Age



                             a. U.S. Meu 1971                                                  & Canadian Men 1971




I                                                                     I


    C &ooIOnly a                           W.,tO.     — laaiw                   &boSO.Iy   C    Wofl,Sdo.I        WectO.     — I.cth
                                                                                           d. canadian        Men 1994
                             c. U.S.   Men 1994
    IC                                                                    '.0 —,


    01
                                                                          Os



                                                                          0.6



I                                                                         0.4



                                                                          0.2
    12


                                                                          0t
                                                                                It    I?   IS        9       20      2k     fl   E     24
         '6      Il     IS      19           21       U   0      24

         khocl O.ly      W.à•&bocI         Won                                  saosO&,    C                      W.dO.Iy   — l..nw
    C                                            0*       '..,
                 Figure 6 (Part 2): School and Work Activities
                                                                     of Female Youth By Age


                      e. US. Women1971                                              t. CanadianWomen 1971
    IA   —




    as




                                                          U
    .4                                                    a


    12



    ..—I6 ii is       S                ix       is   S
                                    Woqk 0.17                       School   O.ly                Woa   04         I.w.
     C S10* W4+S€ImoI                            — I...       C                     0 wt,sci
                      g. (LS.   Women 1994                    1.0



                                                              .5

                                                              0.6



                                                              0.1

I
                                                              0.2



                                                              -.     m         ff ii      ñ    1 1           is    t     24


             S                       w_*                       o StoC.b EWat+sth                  WoqkOily
                                           o.    —   i.
           Appendix Figure I: Regional Variation in Youth Wages



             Maritimes                          Quebec                           Ontario
                                  .2                                 .2
.2




:: :iT :HC
                                  .1                                 .1
.1           Wosen       Hen




      71                  919.          71        52          9191        71       02       0291
             Prairies                           Alberta                        British Columbia
                                                 'N

:"'T  7!       SI          919k
                                  ::;
                                        71        01          9i9
                                                                     :     ______________
                                                                          71       01       9191




           New England                       Middle Atlantic               East North Central




::;.. __ __
 .2
      7!     01       SiQI
       West North Central
                                   .2
                                        7!        81

                                             South Atlantic
                                                              9191

                                                                     .2
                                                                          7!       01       9104
                                                                           East South Central

 .1                                                                  .1




::
      71
               Tt/
              01

       West South Central
                          91g
                                         ____________________
                                        71      8!
                                                 Mountain
                                                         9J9
                                                                     :     ____________________
                                                                          7!      0!
                                                                                 Pacific
                                                                                           919

 .2                                .2                                .2

 .3                                A                                 .1




'i 7!          SI          9191
                                  :      ______________________
                                        7!        01          919.
                                                                     ': 7! ______________________
                                                                                   01       919
Table 1: Ba.ic Data on the Relative Labor Force Status of Youth in the U.S.                 nd Canada


                 Youth Shares   of:                       LFP11   Rates              Pop Rates                   OneiiplOyTIent Rates

          Pop.     Lr      1.         Uz.iç.     Youth      All      Youth/All Youth       All     Youth/All   Youth    All Youth/All

A.     United States Ace   16—341

1970      0.22     0.22    0.20        0.4$       59.8      60.4          0.99    53.2     57.4       0.9       11.0        4.9    2.23

1975      0.23     0.24    0.22        0.45       64.6      61.2          1.06    54.2     56.1       0.97      16.1        5.5    1.90

1980      0.23     0.23    0.21        0.45       68.1      63.8          1.07    58.7     59.2       0.99      13.1        7.1    1.94
1905      0.19     0.21    0.19        0.39       65.3      64. I         1.05    59.0     60.1       0.98      13.6        1.2    1.19

1990      0.11     0.17    0.16        0.35       67.3      66.4          1.01    59.8     62.7       0.95      11.2        5.5    2.02

1995      0.16     0.16    0.15        0.35       66.3      66.6          0.99    50.3     62.9       0.93      12.1        5.6    2.16

L. Canada (Me 15—24)
1970      0.26     0.25    0.24         0.45       56.0       57.0         0.97    50.3     54.5       0.92      10.0        5.7    1.77

1975      0.26     0.27    0.26         0.47       62.9       61.1         1.03    55.3     56.8       0.97      12.0        6.9    1.74

1980      0.26     0.27    0.25         0.47       67.1       64.6         1.05    59.0     59.7       0.99      13.1        7.5    1.74

1905      0.22     0.23    0.22         0.36       68.1       65.0         1.03    57.0     58.9       0.97      16.3       10.5    1.55

1990      0.19     0.19    0.18         0.30       69.2       67.3         1.03    60.4     61.9       0.90      12.7        0.1    1.56

          0.17     0.16    0.15         0.27       62.2       64.0         0.96    52.5     58.7       0.90      15.6        9.5    1.63
1995


Notes: Based cc authors' tabulation, of published data derived frca the                   CPS    (U.S.) mid LFS (Canada).
           Population, labor force, and        e1oysnt are for civilians and         exciuda     fler. of the aneed forces.
Table 2: Inequality in Adjusted Family Income and Position
       of Youths in the Family Income Distribution'



         1. share of Adjusted Family Income (in percentage) by
                 Quartile among Individuals of all Agesb


                     United States                Canada

                 1970 1980 1990 1993       1970 1980 1990 1993
bottom 1/4        7.3   7.5   6.5    6.2    6.9   7.7      7.9   9.2

2nd quartile 17.2 17.3 16.1 15.7           17.1 17.3 17.6 18.4
3rd quartile 26.2 27.1 26.3 26.3           26.4 26.6 27.0 27.8
top quartile 48.8 49.2 51.1 51.9           49.6 48.4 47.5 44.6


  2. Fraction of Youth (in percentage) by Quartile of Adjusted
                   Family Income Distribution


                     United States                Canada
                 1970 1980 1990 1993       1970 19B0 1990 1993
bottom 1/4       26.5 28.5 32.6 33.9       24.1 25.5 28.5 26.4
2nd quartile 26.5 25.9 24.9 25.6           25.7 25.7 24.0 24.1
3rd quartile 25.9 25.7 23.4 22.1           26.7 26.1 24.8 25.8
top quartile 21.1 19.8 19.1 19.4           23.5 22.7 22.7 23.7


Notes:
a. U.S. data based on the March CPS. Canadian data based on the
Census (1970, 1980, and 1990) and the SCF (1993) . Families are
"economic families in theCPS and the SCF but "Census' families
in the Canadian Census. See text for details.

b. Adjusted family income is family income divided by the poverty
level (low income cutoff in Canada) for a family of this size.
Table 3: Living Arrangements of Youth in Canada and the united States



                                                  A. lall

                                 United   States                     Canada

                          1911    1981     1991      1994    1971   1981   1991      1994

                          71.9    70.7     74.0      74.2    70.3   60.6   73.8      77.3
Living with parents
 Husband/wife family      50.3    52.6     52.3      52.3           57.5   60.8      65.1
 Single headed family     13.6    18.1     21.7      22.0           11.1   12.9      12.1

Head or spouse of         21.7    15.9     11.2      10.6    15.5   15.3       9.9    7.8
own family
 Harried                  21.2    14.7      9.6       8.8    15.3   15.2       9.8    8.0
 Single parent             0.5     1.2      1.6        1.9    0.2    0.1       0.1    0.1

Living alone               6.4    13.4     14.8      15.1    14.5   16.1   16.3      14.9



                                                  B. IaN
                                 United States                        Canada

                          1971    1981     1991      1994    1971   1981   1991      1994

Living with parents       57.8    58.7     62.5      62.3    55.0   55.3   62.4      66.3
 Husband/wife    family   47.2    43.9     44.2      43.0           46.7   51.7      56.7
 Single beaded family 10.6        14.9     18.3      19.3            8.6   10.8       9.4

Head or spouse of         35.8    29.6     24.3      23.6    31.5   30.4   22.9      19.7
own fatly
 Married                  33.2    25.1     17.9       16.0   30.4   28.4   20.0      16.8
 Single parent             2.7     4.5      6.5        7.7    1.1    1.9    2.9       3.1

Living atone               6.4    11.6     13.1       14.1   13.5   14.3   14.7      14.1

Notes: U.S. data based on the March CPS. Canadian data based on the Census
11971, 1981, and 1991) and the 5cr 11994). See text for details.
Table 4: Effect of Living Arrangement Status on the Fraction of Youth
         by Quartile of Adjusted Family Income Distribution



             1. Fraction of Youth by Quartile: United States

                     1970                  1993             1993 with
                                                          1970 family
              Live   With   All    Live With All           arrangements
              Alone parents        alone parents

bottom 1/4    31.2   24.0   26.5   50.].   26.4    33.9        34.8
2nd quartile 30.5    24.3   26.5   30.5    23.4    25.6        25.9

3rd quartile 24.6    26.7   25.9   14.6    25.5    22.1        21.7

top quartile 13.7    25.1   21.1    4.8    24.7    18.4        17.7

Percentage
of youth;     35.4   64.6 100.0    31.7    68.3 100.0         100.0



                2. Fraction of Youth by Quartile: Canada
                     1970                  1993             1993 with
                                                          1970 family
              Live   With   All    Live   With All         arrangements
              Alone parents        alone parents
bottom 1/4    31.5   19.6   24.1   49.9    16.5    26.4        29.8

2nd quartile 25.9    25.6   25.7   24.6    23.9    24.1        24.1

3rd quartile 24.4    28.1   26.7   15.1    30.4    25.8        24.8

top quartile 18.3    26.6   23.5   10.4    29.3    23.7        21.8

Percentage
of youth:     37.7   62.3 100.0    29.7    70.3 100.0         100.0

Note: U.S. data based on the March CPS. Canadian data based on the
Census (1970) and the SCF (1993). The category "Live Alone" includes
all youth who do not live with 'their parents. The last column of the
table (1993 distribution with 1970 family arrangements) indicates the
distribution of youth that would have prevailed in 1993 if the
fraction of youth living with their parents had remained as in 1970.
See text for details.
Table 5: inequality in Annual Earnings and Position of Youth
         in the Earnings Distribution


                                      A. MEW

         1. Earnings Shares (in percentage) by Quartile among
             Hen (age 16 and more) with Positive Earnings

                  United States                       Canada


               1910 1980 1990 1993             1970 1980 1990 1993
bottom 1/4     4.7       4.6   4.8    4.2      5.8    5.5      4.7   4.0
2nd quartile 17.4 17.3 15.4 15.6               14.1 17.9 12.8 15.8
3rd quartile 28.0 29.3 28.0 26.3               32.4 28.8 32.8 28.9
top quartile 48.7 49.8 51.8 53.8               47.7 48.4 49.7 51.3

    2. Fraction (in percentage) of Young Men with Positive EaEnings
             by Quartile of the Male Earnings Distribution

                      United States                   Canada


               1970 1980 1990 1993             1970 1980 1990 1993
bottom 1/4     65.2 60.7 66.6 67.2             59.9 59.9 69.4 68.6
2nd quartile 23.0 27.8 24.3 25.1               29.3 26.8 23.5 23.5

3rd quartile    9.8      9.6   1.9    6.3       8.0 11.6       6.4   5.8

top quartile    2.0      2.0   1.2    1.4       2.8   1.7      0.7   2.1




Notes: U.S. data based on the March CPS. Canadian data based on
the Census (1970, 1980, and 1990) and on the SCF (1993). Sarnings
are defined as all wages and salaries received during the year.
Table 5: continuation

                                         B. WOIWN


             1. Earnings Shares (in percentage) by Quartile among
                Women (age 16 and more) with Positive Earnings
                        United States                     Canada


                 1970 1960 1990 1993             1970 1980 1990 1993
bottom 1/4        2.7      3.5   3.8      3.5       4.0   3.7      4.1   3.8

2nd quartile 12.8 14.2 14.2 14.7                 15.0 15.1 15.0 14.2
3rd quartile 29.1 28.7 27.6 26.7                 29.0 29.0 28.6 28.7
top quartile 55.5 53.5 54.4 55.1                 52.0 52.2 52.3 53.3

   2. Fraction (in percentage) of Young Women with Positive Earning.
            by Quartile of the Female Earnings Distribution

                         United States                    Canada


                 1970 1980 1990 1993             1970 1980 1990 1993
bottom 1/4       40.3 43.5 53.1 54.8             36.0 39.5 54.5 56.3
2nd quartile 28.3 27.4 27.4 28.3                 25.8 28.6 27.5 26.7
3rd quartile 20.1 21.3 14.9 13.7                 28.5 26.2 15.7 12.4

top quartile 11.4          7.8   4.5      3.2       9.7   5.7      2.3   4.6



Notes: U.S. data based on the March CPS. Canadian data based on
the census (1970, 1980, and 1990) and on the SCF (1993). Earnings
are defined as all wages and salaries received during the year.
Table 6: Activity Rates of Youth in Canada       and the       United    States



                       United States                               Canada

              school School    Work                 School       School      Work
               only    work    only      Inactive    only        & work      only   Inactive
                 (1)     (2)       (3)      4)        (51          (6)        (7)      (8)



                                    Hen: Age 16—17
1971            61.7    30.4       4.5     3.5       61.9         23.0        6.6     8.6

19e1            58.0    31.6       5.5     4.8       55.3         22.2       10.7     11.8

1991            63.4    29.2       3.4     4.1       57.3         30.0        5.0      6.1
1991 (SCF)                                           53.6         38,8        3.2      4.5
1994            68.1    25.4       2.3     4.3       64.3         31.0        1.9     2.7

                                    1n; Age      20-21

1971            26.8    18.6   44.3       10.4       15.5         24.2       47.3     13.0
1981            18.4    15.7   51.0       14.1       10.4         24.0       54.0     11.5
1991            20.1    20.3   48.2       11.5       16.6         34.2       35.7     13.5
1991 (8Cr)                                           26.1         14.3       30.6     21.0
1994            23.1    19.4   41.7       15.7       30.0         16.9       35.5     17.6
                                    )n:   Ag. 23—24
1971             8.3    14.7   70.2        6.0           7.2      16.2       65.7     10.9
1981             5.9    10.0   70.4       13.6           5.7      18.7       66.2      9.5
1991             7.1    11.2   71.0       10.7        9.4         21.1       54.6     14.9
1991 (SCF)                                           13.2         10.1       56.0     20.7
1994             8.3    13.0   63.9       14.7       12.8         11.6       55.8     19.9

Note: U.S. data for 1971, 1981, and 1991 are from the October CPS; data for
1994 are from the March CPS. Canadian data for 1971, 1911, and 1991 are from
the Ceneus; data for 1994 are from the SCF. Data from the 1991 SCF are also
reported. In the SCF and the CPS, enrollment and work activities refer to the
survey week (Ppril in the 5Cr) .  In the Canadian Census, enrollment refers to
school attendance at any time over the 9-month period from September of the
previous year to the "census Week" (in June of the corresponding year), while
work activity refers to the Census week.
Table 6: continuation

                        United States                      Canada

               School school   Work            School   School      Work
                only    work   only Inactive    only     work       only Inactive
                 (1)      2)    (3)      (4)     (5)      (6)        (7)    (B)


                                 Women: 7g. 16—17

1971            64.8    24.6    3.2      7.4    67.8     15.2        6.5   10.5

1981            58.9    30.4    3.9      6.8    58.7    20.4         7.3   13.5

1991            63.5    28.9    2.7      4.9    59.6    29.9         4.6    6.0
1991 (SCFI                                      56.0    35.8         2.9    5.3

1994            65.1    28.0    1.7      5.2    61.6    34.0         1.5    2.9

                                 Woan: Ag• 20—21
1971            15.3    11.7   41.5     31.5    13.0    14.5        44.5   28.0

1981            16.0    14.7   46.3     23.1    10.2    20.6        49.4   19.7

1991            17.3    21.8   38.6     22.4   18.4     36.4        30.9   14.3
1991 (SCF)                                     24.9     18.3        38.5   18.4

1994            21.5    25.2   31.2     22.1   30.2     22.6        30.6   16.5

                                 Nn: Ag. 23-24
1971             3.4     5.6   47.4     43.5     4.4     8.3        46.3   40.9

1981             5.5     8.7   56.1     29.6    5.2     13.8        55.2   25.7
1991             5.9    11.3   58.3     24.6     9.0    20.6        50.2   20.1
1991 (5Cr)                                      9.7     12.6        58.4   19.2

1994             7.6    13.2   55.6     23.6    14.9     10.2       53.0    21.9


Note: U.S. data for 1971, 1981, and 1991 are from the October CPS; data for
1994 are from the March CPS. Canadian data for 1971, 1981, and 1991 are from
the Census; data for 1994 are from the SCF. Data from the 1991 5Cr are also
reported. In the SCF and the CL'S, enrollment and work activities refer to the
survey week (April in the 5Cr). In the Canadian census, enrollment refers to
school attendance at any time over the 9—month period from September of the
previous year to the "Census Week" Un June of the corre,ponding year), while
work activity refers to the Census week.
Table 7: proportion of Youth Receiving Welfare Payments in the
         United States and Canada

                                             Youth not living
                       All Youth           with their parents

                  United       Canada      United       Canada
                   States                   States
                Men Women    Men Women    Men Women Men Women




1970             1.0 2.8

1980             1.2   5.7    ———   ———    1.6 6.6     ———   ———




1990             0.9 6.6      3.6   5.3    1.3 12.9    8.4 11.2

1993             1.0 7.9      6.3   7.4    0.9 14.1   15.4 17.8



Note: U.S. data are from the March CPS. Canadian data are from the SCF.
Table B:    Fraction (in percentage) of Youth who Live    at   Hoiae, Work, and Ar.
            Enrolled in School by Region, 1971 and 1994

                                      1971                           1994

                          Live at    Work    Enrolled     Live at     Work   Enrolled
                           home                            home

                            (1)        (2)      (3)            (4)     (5)       (6)


                                    1. United States

New England                69.5       53.2     51.0        75.2       56.9      55.2

Middle Atlantic            72.5       45.5     49.3        78.5       48.3      56.1

East North Centre].        64.5       50.9     46.2        68.0       59.5      52.6

West North Central         63.3       52.4    52.4         59.6       63.8      55.7

South Atlantic             64.4       47.1    43.4         68.2       53.1      49.2
East South central         64.3       45.0    43.6         67.8       52.0      51.4

West South central         62.4       48.4    46.9         68.4       51.5      52.3
Mountain                   53.5       47.6    46.6         59.4       64.3      50.2
Pacific                    58.7       45.7    50.4         64.8       51.0      52.9


National Average           64.6       48.2    47.9         6B.2       54.5      52.6


                                       2. Canada

Maritime.                  66.4      46.0     45.9        78.1        40.0      53.8

Quebec                     69.9      45.4     45.2        75.1        47.5      60.0
Ontario                    60.1      57.5     49.7        75.1        51.1      60.3
Prairies                   58.8      58.1     48.1         64.8       56.8      50.9
Alberta                    53.3      59.2     48.3        59.9        59.6      48.7

British Columbia           55.6      55.4     45.6        62.2        58.3      47.9


National Average           62.5      52.8     47.4        71.9        51.4     56.3


Note: U.S. data based on the CPS. Canadian data based on the census (1971)
and the SCF (1994). In the SCF and the CPS, enrollment and work activities
refer to the survey week (April in the ScF) .  In the Canadian Census,
enrollment refers to school attendance at any time over the 9—month period
from Septeater of the previous year to the "Census Week" (in June of the
corresponding year), while work activity refer to the Census week.
Table 9: 01.5    estilnatesOf the        impact    of   Wages and Cyclical Factors
             on Youth Outcomes

                                DSP. variable: Proportion of Youth

                             Living with    Working        Attending    Receiving
                                                             school      Welfare
                               parents
                                 (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)



                                                  A. lax
1. united States
                               —0.127         0.002          —0.087       —0.010
Average Log wage                                                          (0.011)
 of 16—24 years old            (0.057)       (0.084)         (0.042)

Employment—POP, ratio —0.378                  1.326          —0.122       —0.064
                       (0.190)               (0.252)         (0.171)      (0.032)
 of nn aged 25—45

2. Canada
                               —0.190         0.008          —0.102       —0.289
Average Log wage
 of 16—24 years old            (0.071)       (0.055)          (0.044)     (0.084)

Employment—pop, ratio —0.472                  1173           —0.105        0.614
 of man aged 25—45             (0.238)        (0.290)         (0.229)     (0.227)


3. United States and Canada

                               —0.163         0.004          —0.090       —0.030
Average Log wage
 of 16—24 years old            (0.049)        (0.048)         (0.032)      (0.015)

Employment—pop, ratio —0.434                      1.232      —0.368       —0.032
 of men aged 25—45    (0.157)                 (0.204)         (0.175)      (0.053)


Note.:
      sample consists of age x region x year cells: all models also
include unrestricted age, region, and year effects, a. well as interactions
between age and the wage and employment—population ratio (of men aged 25—44)
variables. The reported wage and employment-population ratio effects are for
youth of age 20.
       There are 6 regions in Canada and 9 regions in the U.S. (See Table a).
Years are 1970, 1900, 1990 and 1993. The models are thus estimated using 324
age it region x year cells for the U.S. and 216 cells for Canada, except for
the Canadian welfare models in which only the years 1990 and 1993 are
available.

           Pooled U.S. and Canada models include country it year effects.

           Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for arbitrary forms of
 heteroskedasticity     and for residual correlation among age groups within each
 year it    region   cell.
Table 9: continuation


                            Dep. variable: Proportion of Youth

                        Living with   Working   Attending    Receiving
                          parents                 School      Welfare

                            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)

                                       B .


i. united States

Average Log Wage          —0110       —0.041     —0.088        —0.039
 of 16—24 years old       (0.060)     (0.095)     (0.036)      (0.031)

Employment—pop, ratio —0.159           0.687       0.193        0.208
 of women aged 25—45  (0.134)         (0.189)     (0.089)      (0.072)


2. Canada
Average Log Wage          —0.219      0.095      —0.131         0.045
 of 16—24 years old       (0.054)     (0.087)     (0.007)      (0.125)

Employment—pop, ratio —1.479          0861        0.197         0.472
 of women aged 25—45  (0.262)         (0.318)     (0.344)      (0.285)


3. united States and Canada

Average Log Wage          —0.102      0.045      —0.114        —0.033
 of 16—24 years old       (0.048)     (0.056)     (0.059)      (0.031)

Employment—pop, ratio —0.688           0.732      0.198         0.234
 of women aged 25—45      (0.193)     (0.166)     (0.151)      (0.071)


Nøte.;
      Sasiple consist, of age x region x year cell.: all model, also
include unrestricted age, region, and year effect,, as well  as interactions
between age and the wage and employment—population        ratio (of
                                                              men aged 25—44)
variables. The reported wage and employment—population ratio effects are for
youth of age 20.
      There are 6 regions in Canada and 9 regions in the U.S. (see Table 8).
tear, are 1970, 1980, 1990 and 1993. The models are thus estimated using 324
age x region x year cells for the U.S. and 216 cell, for Canada, except for
the Canadian welfare model, in which only the years 1990 and 1993 are
available.

         Pooled U.S. and Canada model. include country x year effects.

      Standard errors (in parentheses) are adjusted for arbitrary form, of
hetero.kedasticity and for residual correlation among age groups within each
year x region cell.
Table 10: Effect of Labor Market conditions on Canada—U.S. Differences
          in the Percentage of Youth Living with Parents, Working, and
          Enrolled in School

                              A. 1971 to 1991

                                     Men                      Women

                           Live wI   Work   Enroll    Live W/ Work Enroll
                           Parents                    Parents

Total Change                 1.1     —0.3     9.1       2.0       2.1    10.0

Changes explained by                                              3.7
labor market conditions:    —1.4      0.9    —0.9      —3.6              —1.5

Unexplained Change:          2.5     —1.2    10.0       5.6      —1.6     8.5
                              B. 1991 to    1994

                                     Men                        Women

                           Live ii Wori&    Enrolla   Live w/ WorIè Enrolic
                           Parents                    Parents

Total Change                 2.7     —3.9     1.0       3.5       —2.9    0.4

Changes explained by                                                     —0.4
labor market conditions:     3.8     —5.6     2.7       2.7       —2.4

Unexplained Change:         —1.1.     1.7    —1.7       0.8        0.5    0.8
Notes:
      a. The row labelled "Total Change" is calculated from the
estimated coefficients (translated in percentage points) on the full set
of interactions between country and year effects when the labor market
variables (adult employment—population rate and wage index) are not
included in the pooled U.S.—Canada model (see panel 3. of Table 9). The
row entitled "Changes Explained by Labor Market Conditions" indicates
how the estimated coefficient change when the labor market variables are
included in the regression models.
      b. The change in the fraction of youth working has been adjusted
to account for changes in the definition of employment in the Canadian
data (work in the reference week in June in the 1991 census versus work
in the reference week in April in the 1994 SCF). The adjustment factor
of 5.4 percentage points was obtained by comparing the traction of youth
working in the 1991 census and in the 1991 ZCF.
      c. The change in the fraction of youth enrolled in school has been
adjusted to account for changes in the definition of school enrollment
in the Canadian data (enrolled at any time in the 9 months before June
in the 1991 census versus enrolled in the reference week in April in the
1994 SC!).   The adjustment factor of 7.1 percentage points was obtained
by comparing the fraction of youth working in the 1991 census and in the
1991 SCF.
appendix Table A, Zstiiuated Regression Coefficients of Living Arrangement
                        Status on Log Wages of youth
                                       Young Men           Young Women
                                     All     Age 20+    All      Age 20+

                                     A. United States
1. 1970 Weekly Earnings
    Controlling for hours      in survey week
        a. live alone                0.06       0.07     0.15      0.16
                                    (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.03)

          b. head own family         0.34       0.34     0.10      0.11
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

2. 1980 Weekly Earnings
   Controlling for hours       in survey week
       a. live alone                 0.16       0.16     0.12      0.11
                                    (0.02)      0.02)   (0.02)    (0.02)
          b. head own family         0.2?      0.27      0.12      0.12
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)
 3. 1960 Hourly Earnings
          a. live alone              0.11       0.13     0.04      0.06
                                    (0.011    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.02)

          b. head   own family       0.22       0.23    0.06       0.08
                                    (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.01)

 4. 1990 Hourly Earning.
          a. live alone              0.06       0.07     0.05      0.07
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.02)

          b. head own     family     0.11       0.12     0.02      0.03
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

 5. 1993 Hourly Earnings
          a. live alone              0.13       0.14     0.01      0.02
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

          b. head   own family       0.16       0.17    0.00       0.01
                                    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)    (0.02)

Not.:   Table   entries
                      are estimated coefficient, of living arrangement
        status (living alone, living as head of ones own family)  in a linear
        regression model for log average weekly earnings or log average hourly
        earnings over the previous calendar year. The omitted status is living
        with one. parent.. Other covariates are age dujreies, education, a
        nonwhite dusmty, and region duiuies. The models in rows 1 and 2 also
        include the log of reported hours in the cPs survey week (set to 0 for
        nonworkers) and an indicator for individuals who did not work in the
        survey week. Samples include individuals age 16—24 in the March CPS
        who reported positive earnings and weeks of work in the previous year.
t.ppendix Table A: Continuation
                                           Young Men           Young Women

                                         Ml       Age 20+    All      Age 20+


                                              B. Canada

1.    1980 weekly Earnings (Census)
      controlling for hour. in survey week
                                                             0.08       p.07
          a. Live alone           0.10     0.09
                                         (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

                                         0.19       0.19     0.10       0.10
          b. Head own family         .


                                         (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

2. 1990 weekly Earnings Census)
   Controlling for hours in survey week
       a. Live alone          0.10      0.08                  0.07      0.05
                                         (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)    (0.01)

               Head own family            0.20      0.19      0.10      0.08
          b.
                                         (0.01)    (0.02)    (0.01)    (0.01)
3. 1990 Weekly Earnings (SCF)
      controlling     for hours in survey week
                                                              0.10      0.10
          a.   Live   alone          0.22      0.22
                                         (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)    (0.03)

          b. Head own family              0.23      0.24      0.00     —0.01
                                         (0.04)    (0.04)    (0.03)    (0.03)
 4.   1993 Weekly Earnings (SCF)
      Controlling for hours in survey week
          a.   Live alone                 0.16      0.15      0.03      0.05
                                         (0.04)     (0.04k   (0.04)     (0.04)

          b. Head own       family        0.29      0.31      0.01     —0.02
                                         (0.05)     (0.04)   (0.04)     (0.04)

Note:   Table entrie, are estimated coefficients of living arrangement
        status (living alone, living as head of one's own family) in a linear
        regression model for log average weekly earnings or lag status
                                                                 average hourly
                                                                       is living
        earnings over the previous calendar year. The omitted
        with ones parents. Other covariates are age dugiües, education, and
        province durpaies. The models in rows 1 and 2 also include the log of
        reported hours in the survey week (set to 0 for nonworkers) and an
        indicator for individuals who did not work in the survey week. Sa2Iple.
        include individuals age 16—24 in the Canadian    Census (1980 and 1990)
        and the 5Cr (1990 and 1993) who reported positive earnings and weeks of
        work in the previous year.
Appendix Table B: Activity Rates and Living Arrangement. of Youth of Age 20
                  to 24 in Canada and the United States

                          United States                    Canada

                   All      Living w/     Living    All    Living   ../   Living
                   youth     parents      alone    youth   parents        alone
                    (1)         (2)         (3)      (4)

                                            )n: 1971
Inactive            9.0        12.6         5.7     11.9     15.0          8.6

School only        16.4        26.1         7.7     11.2     17.0          5.2

Work & school 16.1             17.1       15.2     20.9      24.1         17.5

Work only          58.5        44.1       ,71.4     56.1     43.9         68.7

Fraction of       100.0        47.3       52.7     100.0     51.0         49.0
all youth
                                           Noaen: 1971
Inactive           36.8        19.0       44.7     34.9      19.6         41.7

School only         9.0       20.9         3.7       8.1     17.4          4.0

Work & school       8.3        13.8        5.9     10.9      17.3          8.2

Work only          45.9        46.3       45.7     46.0     45.7          46.2

Fraction of       100.0        30.8       69.2     100.0    30.6          69.4
all youth
                                            In 'Sn
Inactive           15.2        16.8       12.9     19.1      17.3         22.2

School only        15.4       20.9         7.3     21.0     26.4          11.9

Work & school 16.0             17.7       13.5     13.4      16.7          7.8

Work only          53.4        44.5       66.2     46.5     39.6          58.2

Fraction of 100.0             59.0        41.0     100.0    63.2          36.8
all youth
                                            Wsn: 1994
Inactive           23.0        16.3       28.2     19.1      11.4         26.5

School only        13.8       21.0         8.3     21.7     29.1          14.5

Work &   school    18.6       26.0        12.8     16.4     23.9           9.2

Work only          44.6       36.7        50.7     42.9     35.6          49.8

Fraction of       100.0       43.6        56.4     100.0    49.0          51.0
all youth

Note: U.S. data based on the CPS. Canadian data based on the census (1971)
and the SCF (1994).  In the SCF and the CPS, enrollment and work activities
refer to the survey week (April in the SCF). In the Canadian Census,
enrøllment refers to school attendance at any time over the 9—month period
from Septenter of the previous year to the 'tensus Week' (in June of the
corresponding year), while work activity refer to the Census week.
