                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             IMPLICATIONS OF SKILL-BIASED
                               TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE:
                               INTERNATIONAL EVIDENCE




                                          Eli Berman
                                          John Bound
                                        Stephen Machin




                                       Working Paper 6 166
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w6166


                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02 13 8
                                   September 1997

We appreciate the helpful comments and suggestions of Jonathan Eaton, Christine Greenhalgh, Larry
Katz, Kevin Lang, John Martyn, participants in the Bureau of Industry Economics conference at
ANU, NBER Productivity, Labor Studies, International Trade and Growth sessions, an OECD
conference in Paris, an IFS conference and in seminars at Amsterdam, Boston University, Florence,
IUI (Stockholm), LIE, Manchester, Montreal, NYU, Oxford, Tel Aviv, Yale, Wisconsin and the New
York Federal Reserve. The Sloan Foundation supported plant visits. We thank Thibaut
Desjonqueres and Noah Greenhill for research assistance. We especially appreciate results provided
by Ken Troske. This paper is part of NBER’s research programs in International Trade and
Investment, Labor Studies and Productivity. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and
not those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

0 1997 by Eli Berman, John Bound and Stephen Machin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.
Implications of Skill-Biased Technological Change:
International Evidence
Eli Berman, John Bound and Stephen Machin
NBER Working Paper No. 6166
September 1997
JEL Nos. Fl, J31,03
International Trade and Investment,
Labor Studies and Productivity

                                          ABSTRACT

       Demand for less skilled workers decreased dramatically in the US and in other developed
countries over the past two decades.   We argue that pervasive skill-biased technological change
rather than increased trade with the developing world is the principal culprit. The pervasiveness of
this technological change is important for two reasons.     First, it is an immediate and testable
implication of technological change. Second, under standard assumptions, the more pervasive the
skill-biased technological change the greater the increase in the embodied supply of less skilled
workers and the greater the depressing effect on their relative wages through world goods prices.
In contrast, in the Heckscher-Ohlin model with small open economies, the skill-bias of l o c a l
technological changes does not affect wages. Thus, pervasiveness deals with a major criticism of
skill-biased technological change as a cause. Testing the implications of pervasive, skill-biased
technological change we find strong supporting evidence. First, across the OECD, most industries
have increased the proportion of skilled workers employed despite rising or stable relative wages.
Second, increases in demand for skills were concentrated in the same manufacturing industries in
dz@rent developed countries.


Eli Berman                                                   John Bound
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
Boston University                                            University of Michigan
270 Bay State Road                                           Ann Arbor, MI 48 109
Boston, MA 022 15                                            and NBER
and NBER                                                     j bound@umich.edu
eli@bu.edu
http://econ.bu.edu/eli

Stephen Machin
Department of Economics
University College London
Gower Street
London WClE 6BT
UNITED KINGDOM
                                                                                                               1

I. Introduction’
        Less skilled workers have suffered declines in relative wages, increased unemployment and
sometimes both in the OECD economies over the 1980s. In the United States the real wages of young men
with twelve or fewer years of educationfell by 26 percent between 1979 and 1993, and have not recovered
since.’ Between 1979 and 1992 the average unemployment rate in European OECD countries increased
from 5.4 percent to 9.9 percent3 and has remained high, with most of the unemployment concentrated
among unskilled workers, In the same period relative wages of less skilled workers declined slightly in
several OECD countries and sharply in others. Over the last few years, several authors have documented
the decline in the relative wages of less skilled workers in the US and the concurrent decline in their
employment in manufacturing (e.g., Murphy and Welch, 1992, 1993; Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and
Murphy. 1992; Blackbum, Bloom and Freeman, 1990) and a number have documented similar trends in
wages, employment or unemployment in other OECD countries (e.g., Freeman, 1988; Freeman and Katz,
1994: Katz and Revenga, 1989; Katz, Loveman and BlancMower, 1995; Davis, 1992; Machin, 1996a;
Nickel1 and Bell, 1995). Over the past two decades despite the fact that rapid increases in the supply of
skilled labor in the OECD have made the less skilled increasingly scarce: their labor market outcomes have
clearly worsened.
        The literature has proposed several reasons for this decline in the demand for unskilled labor,
including both Stolper-Samuelson effects of increased exposure to trade from developing countries and skill
biased (or unskilled labor saving) technological change (SBTC). While there is no consensus, labor
economists generally believe that skill-biased technological change is the principal culprit. That belief is



   ’ We appreciate the helpful comments and suggestions of Jonathan Eaton, Christine Greenhalgh, Larry
Katz, Kevin Lang, John Martyn, participants in the Bureau of Industry Economics conference at ANU,
NBER Productivity, Labor Studies, International Trade and Growth sessions, an OECD conference in
Paris, an IFS conference and in seminars at Amsterdam, Boston University, Florence, IUI (Stockholm),
LIE, Manchester, Montreal, NYU. Oxford, Tel Aviv, Yale, Wisconsin and the New York Federal Reserve.
The Sloan Foundation supported plant visits. We thank Thibaut Desjonqueres and Noah Greenhill for
research assistance.We especially appreciate results provided by Ken Troske.

   ’ Calculated for high school graduates with 5 years of labor market experience in Current Population
Survey from Bound and Johnson (1995), table 1.

   3 Source: OECD (1992, 1993). For specific countries, the 1979-92 increases in unemployment were: 5.0
percent to 10.1 percent (U.K.); 3.2 percent to 7.7 percent (Germany); 7.6 percent to 10.7 percent (Italy);
5.9 percent to 10.2 percent (France). All are considerably larger than the American increase from 5.8
percent in 1979 to 7.4 percent in 1992.
                                                                                                                 2

based on a combination of three factors: a) employment shifts to skill-intensive sectors seem to be too small
to be consistent with explanations based on product demand shifts, such as those induced by trade, or
Hicks-neutral, sector biased technological change (Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992;
Berman, Bound and Griliches, 1994 (BBG); Freeman and Katz, 1994); b) despite the increase in the
relative cost of skilled labor, the majority of US industries have had within sector shifts in the composition
of employment towards skilled labor (Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992; BBG), and C)
there appear to be strong, within sector correlations between indicators of technological change and
increased demand for skills (Bemdt, Morrison and Rosenblum, 1994; BBG; Autor, Katz and Krueger,
1997; Machin, 1996b; Machin, Ryan and Van Reenen, 1996).
        ln this paper we make the stronger claim that skill biased technological change was pervasive in the
OECD over the past two decades, occurring simultaneously in most, if not all, developed countries.
Pervasiveness is important for two reasons: First, at the current level of international communication and
trade it is hard to imagine major productive technological changes occurring in one country without rapid
adoption by the same industries in countries at the same technological level, Thus pervasive SBTC is an
immediate implication of SBTC, which invites testing. If we didn’t observe evidence of SBTC throughout
the OECD, we would be forced to doubt if it occurred in any OECD country.
        Second, the more pervasive the SBTC, the greater its potential to affect relative wages. To
illustrate that point consider a Heckscher-Ohlin (H-O) model with small open economies and two factors of
production. ln that context skill-biased technological change cannot change the wage structure in an H-O
model unless it is also sector-biased. On those grounds, Learner (1994, 1995, 1996) has objected to the
notion that SBTC is the dominant factor explaining the decline in the demand for skilled labor. This
critique is powerful, as the long run H-O model is widely considered to be the relevant model for analyzing
the effect on wages of the increased exposure of developed economies to LDC manufacturing over the past
few decades. (The long run is long enough for factors to detach themselves from industries, allowing wages
to be set by perfectly elastic demand curves.4) However, as Krugman (1995) has pointed out, pervasive
skill-biased technological change will affect relative wages, since an integrated world economy will
respond to such technological change as a closed economy would. Under standard assumptions, including


         4 The H-O model has been criticized, as its property of perfectly elastic labor demand curves is
inconsistent with evidence that labor supply affects wages (Freeman (1995)). One way to reconcile those
two views is to recognize that the H-O model applies only in the long run, so that the short and long run
effects of a local SBTC or of an increase in trade may differ. Since the trend increase in relative demand
for skilled labor seems to have persisted for decades, long run models deserve consideration.
                                                                                                               3

homothetic preferences, a sector-neutral skill-biased technological change would release less skilled
workers from industries, depressing their relative wages, Pervasive skill-biased technological change in the
developed world provides an explanation consistent with both increased wage premiums for skilled workers
and within-industry substitution towards skilled workers. That conclusion generalizes to the large open
economy H-O model as well.
        Pervasive SBTC has two testable implications. 1) The within sector shifts away from unskilled
labor observed in the US should occur throughout the developed world. 2) These shifts should have been
concentrated in the same industries in different countries. Using data on the employment of production and
nonproduction workers in manufacturing for 10 OECD countries, we find evidence consistent with both
predictions. In all countries in our OECD sample we find large scale within-industry substitution away
from unskilled labor despite rising or stable relative wages. Moreover, the cross country correlations of
within-industry increases in employment of skilled workers are generally positive and often quite large.
        The manufacturing industries which experience the greatest skill upgrading across our OECD
sample are those we commonly associate with the spread of microprocessor technology. They are eIectrica1
machinery, machinery (including computers), and printing and publishing. Together, these three account for
40% of the within-industry increase in the relative demand for skills. Case study evidence reveals that all
three of these industries underwent significant technological changes associated largely with the
assimilation of microprocessors.’ Casual empiricism suggests that the spread of microprocessors within
these and other manufacturing industries was pervasive in the 1980s. This pattern, combined with the
correlation of skill upgrading with measures of technological change cited above, provides further evidence
that technological change is the driving force behind increased demand for skill.
        The little evidence we have from the developing world is also consistent with the SBTC hypothesis.
Several studies have found increased relative wages of skilled labor in LDCs undergoing trade
liberalization, despite the Stolper-Samuelson prediction (Feliciano, 1995; Hanson and Harrison, 1995;
Robbins, 1995). We examine a larger sample of developing countries and check for evidence that increased
trade in the 1980s depressed the wages of skilled workers. We find, on average, constant relative wages,
despite the fact that the proportion of skilled workers increased as fast in the rapidly growing
manufacturing sectors of the LDCs as in the shrinking manufacturing sectors of developed countries.




   ’ U.S. Department of Labor, 1982a, 1982b, 1986.
                                                                                                             5



Now consider the “integrated equilibrium” for all countries. Using Xw, to denote the world output level of
good i and VW = [SW, Uw] the world endowments of factors, the equilibrium conditions are:



   1.              p, = ci(w) for all i,

  2.       C aIjw)X,w = y” for all 1,
           I

                     P/i,”
 3. a,(P)=
                  cp,(ww,w for a11 i.



The conditions state that 1) goods are priced according to marginal cost as free entry of firms in any
country and constant returns to scale dictate zero profits, 2) factor markets clear and 3) commodity markets
clear.
         The concept of an integrated equilibrium allows a convenient comparison of labor demand under
trade and autarky. Consider the skill-abundant country with (S/U > SwAJw). In trade, the Heckscher-Ohlin-
Vanek theorem states that it will export services of its abundant factor and import services of its scarce
factor, thus the world price of the skill abundant good must exceed the price under autarky.
Implication for within-industry demandfor skills
         The Stolper Samuelson Theorem states that an increase in the price of the exported good will
increase the return to the abundant factor (w& and decrease the return to the scarce factor (wJ.~ So an
opening up to trade will increase ws/w,, for a skill abundant country.
         As a result, within each industry in the skill (u&ill) abundant country, transition from autarky to
trade will decrease (increase) the demand for skilled workers.
         To see this, note that:




   6 To see this fully in the N=2 case differentiate (1) to get dw= A-’ dp since dAw=O by cost minimization.
The result follows from A being positive semi-definite. For N>2, a positive definite 2x2 matrix exists by
assumption 6, and its inverse is used.
                                                                                                                 6




by cost minimization and the quasi-concavity of the underlying production function.
        This is just an expression of the fact that for a single industry only substitution effects are at work.
Note that within-industry substitution away from skilled workers will be compensated by a between-
industry shift in employment toward skill intensive industries, which increase production for export.


Sector-Biased Technological Change
        Consider the effect of a change in the technology of production so that a skill-intensive sector
becomes more efficient in a single country. Learner (1994) reproduces the result that only the sector-bias of
a technological change affects relative wages, That argument is most clearly demonstrated by a Lemer
diagram (Figure I) which corresponds to the zero-profit conditions (equilibrium condition (1) above) for the
hvo traded goods that allow factor price equalization. (Assumption 6 guarantees existence of two such

goods.) In the diagram the curves C 1 and C2 are unit cost combinations of inputs in production of goods 1
and 2 respectively. Assuming that these goods are traded, their prices are taken as parameters under the
small country assumption. The wage ratio WJW, consistent with cost minimization at zero profit is the
absolute value of the slope of the line AB tangent to unit cost curves C 1 and C2. Now consider a Hicks-
neutral technological improvement in the production of good 1, the skill-intensive good, which shifts C 1 to
lower levels of inputs at Cl’. This shift is Hicks-neutral since at the old wage ratio the ratio of inputs S/U
is unchanged. In the diagram this is reflected by CD being parallel to AB. Because the technological
improvement occurred in the skill-intensive sector, it implies an increase in output of good 1, and increased
demand for skills. This is expressed as a decreased relative wage of unskilled labor or a shallower slope of
the new line EF joining the points of tangency with C 1’ and C2, the new equilibrium.
        Note that, at the new equilibrium, the ratio of skilled to unskilled labor is lower in each sector.
This is due to substitution away from skilled labor in each sector in response to an increase in the relative
wage of skills, as above.
Skill-Biased Technological Change
        A skill-biased technological change is an exogenous change in the production function that
increases the unit demand ratio as, / a,, at the current wage level. A sector neutral, skill-biased
technological change is illustrated in Figure II in the shift of unit cost curves C 1 and C2 to C 1’ and C2’.
This change is sector neutral in the sense that both Cl and C2 shift towards in to lower levels of inputs in a
way reduces costs by the same proportion. The line CD, tangent to C 1’ and C2’ reflects the new zero profit
condition, and is parallel to AB, reflecting the same relative wages. These shifts are skill-biased as the new
equilibium ratios skilled to unskilled workers are higher than the old. (Rays from the origin are steeper.)
While this sector neutral technological change may seem artificial it provides a useful point of comparison
in the discussion below. Note that unlike sector biased technological change and Stolper-Samuelson effects,
skill-biased technological change directly increases the proportion of skilled labor employed in each sector.


Learner Critique: Skill vs. Sector Bias
        One feature of technological changes in this model with fixed goods prices is that only the sector
bias of technological changes has any effect on relative wages (Learner, 1994). To see this, imagine sliding
the isovalue curve C 1’ along unit cost line so that the point of tangency moves to a different ratio of skilled
to unskilled workers. Any of those locations represent the same level of costs for production of good 1: so
that the sector bias of each of those technological changes is the same. Though the skill-biases of those
locations differ, they all share the same solution for relative wages. Thus, in the small open economy
model, a skill-biased technological improvement has no effect on relative wages except through the implied
sectoral bias. This argument appears particularly damning for the widespread conclusion of the literature.
Local skill-biased technological change, the champion explanation of increased wage inequality among
most labor economists, cannot have any effect on wages in the two factor Heckscher-Ohlin model with
small, open economies.
        Now consider a pervasive skill-biased technological change occurring simultaneously in all
economies in the production of some traded good. In the integrated world economy, the response to such a
change would be like that of a closed economy. SBTC would cause a disproportionate expansion of
production of the good intensive in unskilled labor (good 2) as each industry reduces its proportion of
unskilled labor. Under homothetic preferences that would induce a decrease in the relative price of good 2
and in the relative wages of unskilled labor. That decrease in the relative price of the good intensive in
unskilled labor is illustrated as a shift of the unit cost curve from C2’ to C2” as more inputs are required to
                                                                                                                8

provide the same value of output, That shift implies a decrease in the relative wages of unskilled labor,
reflected in the slope of line EF, which is shallower than that of CD. Thus pervasive, sector-neutral, skill-
biased technological change is a possible explanation for the increased skill premium even in the small open
economy model.’ Note that unlike the two alternative explanations of the increased skill premium, Stolper-
Samuelson effects and sector-biased technological change, it implies within-industry increases in the
proportion of skilled workers.
        How general is the result? Consider relaxing the small economy assumption in the integrated
equilibrium. The more we allow local conditions to affect world prices, the greater the effect of a local
SBTC in increasing the relative price of the skill-intensive good and the relative wages of skilled labor.’
Analytically, pervasiveness and bigness work in the same direction, allowing SBTC to affect relative wages
through their effect on world prices. By the same token, both pervasiveness and bigness reduce the
importance of sector bias, as productivity gains which produce the sectoral increase in input demand are
offset by reduced goods prices. Of course, barriers to free trade will also tend to work in the same direction?
making local prices and wages more responsive to a local technological change and increasing the ability of
a SBTC to increase the local skill premium. In any case, the effect of a pervasive SBTC on relative wages
in the small open economy H-O model is robust to making the economy larger or more closed.


III.Testing
Evidence-from the United States and the United Kingdom
        The US and the UK experienced the greatest increase in the skill premium among developed
countries in the 1980~.~ The manufacturing sectors of both countries, in which most trade occurs,
experienced large reductions in employment and a trend increase in the share of nonproduction workers in
employment, as shown in Figure III. We treat nonproduction workers as skilled and production workers as
unskilled, and justify that classification below.



        ’ Homothetic preferences are sufficient but not necessary for the increased skill premium. Krugman
(1995) points out that a limit on the cross-elasticity of demand will do.

         * For a clear graphical presentation of this argument see Baldwin (1994). The integrated
equilibrium behaves like the closed economy analyzed in Jones (1965).

        9 The U.S. college/l-IS ratio for males increased by 14% in 1979-89. The U.K. nonmanuaVmanua1
wage ratio increased by 15% for men and 23% for women in 1979-91 (see Katz, Loveman and
BlancMower, 1995).
                                                                                                              9

        Let Sn, be the share of nonproduction workers in manufacturing employment in industry i
(Sn, = S, / (S, + U,). The analysis in Section II predicts that an increase the relative wages of nonproduction
workers imply a decrease in Sn, if the cause is a Stolper-Samuelson effect or sector biased technological
trade (biased toward the skilled sector), whereas an increase in Sn, accompanied by an increase in the
relative wage is evidence of pervasive skill-biased technological change. Consider the average change in
Sn,, weighted by employment,

                                                      c, ASn,S
where S, is the employment share of industry i. Table I reports that for American manufacturing the
average annual increase in Sn, (i.e., the within-industT increase) is 0.387 percentage points between 1979
and 1987. For the UK the comparable figure is 0.301 between 1979 and 1990. In both countries relative
wages of nonproduction workers increased: in the US the nonproduction/production worker wage ratio rose
from 1.53 in 1979 to 1.57 in 1987 and to 1.64 in 1990; in the UK the ratio rose from 1.31 in 1979 to 1.50
in 1990. Substitution of production for nonproduction workers despite the increase in their relative wages is
evidence of skill-biased technological change in both countries.”
        To put these magnitudes into context, consider how much of the aggregate increase in the
proportion of nonproduction workers is due to substitution within industries. The change in aggregate
proportion of nonproduction workers can be decomposed into two components, one due to reallocation of
employment between industries with different proportions of skilled workers and another due to changes in
the proportion of skilled workers within industries:

                                      ASn = c ASi@ + c ASn;!$
                                                  i              i




where an overstrike indicates a simple average over time. Table I reports that these within-industry
components are not only positive, but quite large, accounting for 70 percent of the aggregate increase in the
US share of nonproduction workers and 82 percent of the British. In the presence of increased relative




   lo Lawrence and Slaughter (1993) present the same argument for the U.S. These results are from
Berman, Bound and Griliches (1993,1994) and Machin (1996b), who make similar arguments.
                                                                                                                    11

    of H-O theory we interpret this substitution toward skilled labor within plants despite an increase in relative
    wages as evidence for SBTC.
            More concrete evidence that this within industry (and within plant) skill upgrading reff ects
    technological change is available from three sources. Within industry increases in the proportion of
    nonproduction workers are correlated with indicators of technological changes such as investments in
    computers, investment in R&D and significant innovations (Bemdt, Morrison and Rosenbhun, 1994; BBG;
    Autor, Katz and Krueger, 1997; Machin, 1996b; Machin, Ryan and Van Reenen, 1996).16 Case studies
    such as those conducted by the BLS Office of Productivity and Technology can give use some sense of the
    nature of the actual innovations involved (Mark, 1987). These often mention innovations that lowered or
    are expected to lower production labor requirements. Along similar lines, as part of the NBER - Sloan
    Plant Visit program, we saw evidence that microprocessor technologies played a key role in allowing
    production processes to be programed, monitored and centrally controlled, replacing tasks formerly
    performed for the most part by production workers.
            Examples from two plant visits can help illustrate skill biased technological change. We visited a
    metal fabrication plant where metal was stretched and thinned to precise specifications by a large number
    of machines working in parallel. The old technology involved one operator per machine who monitored by
    eye, stopping and adjusting the process when necessary. The new system allowed three machines to be
    monitored and controlled by a single operator at a console, and run three times as fast, resulting in a
    ninefold increase in labor productivity. In a modernized steel mill we saw a steel rolling line controlled by
    tens of operators and technicians at consoles in a cavernous building that formerly housed thousands of
    production workers. The new line ran faster and produced more output than the old. In visits to several
    manufacturing plants in these and other industries we saw evidence that microprocessor technologies
    played a key role in allowing processes to be programmed, monitored and centrally controlled, replacing
    tasks formerly performed for the most part by production workers.


    Outsowcing
\
    ---     A potential problem with the evidence cited above on within-industry substitution toward skilled
    labor is that firms may “outsource” low-skill parts of the production process abroad, replacing in house


              l6 Plant level studies using finer measures of technology adoption, such as use of computer aided
    manufacturing, yield mixed results. Doms, Dunne and Troske (1997) find that technology adoption is not
    correlated with changes in the proportion of nonproduction workers, though computer investment is. Siegel (1995)
    finds that technology adoption is correlated with increased proportions of high skill occupations in employment.
                                                                                                            12

production with imported materials. Imagine a production process made up of high-skill and low-skill
subprocesses. The H-O effect would be to increase imports of the low-skill and exports of the high skill,
increasing the ratio of skilled to unskilled labor in the aggregated production process. This apparent
contradiction of Stolper-Samuelson is empty, since unskilled labor is replaced with imported materials.
        While it is hard to measure such outsourcing, let alone its impact on US employment, we have
done some simple calculations which suggest that outsourcing cannot be responsible for the bulk of the
changes we observe. The 1987 Census of Manufacturing included a direct question regarding the purchase
by establishments of foreign materials. These data show that in 1987 the total cost of material purchased
by establishments from foreign sources was 104 billion dollars, or 8 percent of all materials purchased and
30 percent of all imported manufactured goods. Foreign materials purchased include substitutes for
domestically produced materials as well as substitutes for products that would have been produced within
the purchasing establishment’s own industry. While we know of no reliable way to distinguish uses for the
material purchased from foreign sources, we note that census data show that only a small fraction (<lo
percent) of purchased materials come from an establishment’s own industry.” This fact suggests that only
a small fraction of foreign materials purchased represent outsourcmg (as they do not replace domestic
production in the same industry).
        In our calculation we assume that imported materials displace production but not non-production
labor. In particular we assume that imported materials embody the same amount of production labor as do
domestically produced goods in the same industry, but no non-production labor. Thus, for each industry,
we calculate that the number of production workers displaced by outsourcing as of 1987 as (imported
materials/total shipments) x production employment. These calculations suggest that the employment of
production workers would have been 2.8 percent higher in 1987 had there been no outsourcing. This
translates into a 0.76 percentage point increase in production workers’ share in total employment, Within
industry, production workers’ share had dropped 4.22 percentage points between 1973 and 1987. Thus, this
calculation would suggest that outsourcing could directly account for 16 percent of the decline in the
production worker share of employment that occurred over this time period.
        While we expect that only a fraction of the materials that an establishment purchases from foreign
sources will represent outsourcing, the Census category misses one dimension of outsourcing. The census



         I7 Data drawn from the materials files of the 1987 Census of manufacturing shows that 2 percent
of materials purchased originate in the same four-digit industry as purchased the material. 7 percent
originate in the same three-digit industry.
                                                                                                              13

instructions state that “items partially fabricated abroad which reenter the country” should not be included
as “foreign materials.” Such items would normally enter the country under items 806 and 807, schedule 8
of the Tariff Schedule of the United States. In 1987 the value of such items totaled a not insignificant 68.6
billion dollars. However, the automobile industry that accounted for only 3 percent of total skill upgrading
accounted for roughly two-thirds of such imports. Eliminating both the auto industry and domestic content
of such items reduces the 68.6 billion to 14.0 billion or roughly 0.5 percent of the value of manufacturing
shipments that year---too small a quantity to matter very much (U.S. International Trade Commission,
1988).
         Outsourcing may be important in some industries. For example, as of 1987,806 and 807 imports
represented 57 percent of imports in the auto industry and 44 percent of imports of semiconductors. A
calculation similar to the one done above suggests that these imports are sufficient to account for more than
100 percent of the shift away from production workers that occurred in the auto industry and one-third of
the shift that occurred in semiconductors.” However, the point is that foreign outsourcing is concentrated
enough in specific industries that it is hard to imagine that it can account for anything more than a small
fraction of the total, within-industry shift away from production labor.
         Our estimates are crude, but they err on the side of overestimating the effects of outsourcing on
demand for production workers: Not all foreign materials represent outsourcing. For those that do, some
nonproduction labor is certainly. embodied in the domestic production replaced by outsourcing. Still, these
calculations suggest that while outsourcing might be important for some industries it cannot account for the
bulk of the skill upgrading that occurred within manufacturing over the last two decades, I9



        ” Figures on the overseas production of semiconductors (U.S. International Trade Commission,
1982) are consistent with these calculations.

         I9 Feenstra and Hanson ( 1996b) use a somewhat different method to estimate the magnitude of
foreign “outsourcing”. Using census of manufactures data, they multiply materials purchased by the
proportion of imports in their source industry. Their estimate is that 11.5% of materials could represent
outsourcing, rather than the 8% reported by BBG. Feenstra and Hanson emphasize that contract work
could explain the difference between these estimates, since it is included in imports, but not in imported
materials. Nevertheless, both figures are likely to be substantial overestimates, as most imported materials
probably do not replace in house production. Using regression techniques, Feenstra and Hanson estimate
that outsourcing can account for as much as 5 1% of the within industry shift away from production labor.
However, given the calculation reported in the text, this estimate seems improbably large. What is more, in
unpublished work Baru (1995) uses regression techniques and measures similar to those used by Feenestra
and Hanson, but when calculating her measure of oursourcing, Baru uses only purchases within the same
three digit industry. She finds no association between her more narrowly defined measure and skill
                                                                                                              14

A correspondence between measures of skill
        All of the work we discuss in this paper is based on manufacturing data in which the only available
measure of skill is the proportion of nonproduction workers in employment. This measure is viewed with
skepticism by Learner (1994), who points out that skilled jobs such as line-supervisor, product development
and record keeping are classified as production worker jobs while jobs such as sales delivery, clerical,
cafeteria and construction are classified as nonproduction. BBG defend the production/nonproduction
classification, showing that the proportion of nonproduction workers follows the same trend increase as the
proportion of skilled workers in U.S. manufacturing.20
        A powerful new data set offers a way of examining how the production / nonproduction
classification compares to educational and occupational measures of skill. The Worker Establishment
Characteristics Database (Troske, 1994), matches individuals from the Census of Population in 1990 to
plants in the Census of Manufactures in 1989. Combining the educational and occupational information we
find a close correspondence between the different classifications of skill: 75% of nonproduction workers are
in white collar occupations, while 8 1% of production workers are in blue collar occupations. Details are
given in the appendix and in Table A 1.
        While there seems to be lots of scope for the nonproduction/production categories not to
correspond with other measures of skill, these are the exceptions rather than the rule. For the educational
and occupational categories in the Appendix Table Al, they correspond quite well. This one cross section
does not conclusively demonstrate a correspondence between changes in the proportion of nonproduction
workers and changes in other measures of skills, but we find it convincing enough to adopt the
nonproduction / production classification as our measure of skill.


Evidence from Manufacturing Sectors of the Developed World
        If the dominant cause of increased relative wages of skilled workers in the US and UK is pervasive
SBTC, then it must be occurring in other developed countries. The United Nations General Industrial
Statistics Database (United Nations, 1992)contains manufacturing employment data for a large number of
countries categorized into 28 consistently defined industries. We are interested in the most productive




upgrading

  ” Sachs and Shatz (1994) also discuss the suitability of a production/nonproduction classification as a
measure of skill in their appendix.
                                                                                                            15

economies under the assumption that they are most likely to use the same production technologies as the
United States, From the set of countries without data problems we define our developed sample as the top
twelve countries, ranked by GNP/capita in 1985. They range from the United States ($16,910) to Belgium
($8290). Appendix Table A2 gives the rankings. The table also reports employment shares of
nonproduction workers in manufacturing in the 1970s and 1980s. The nonproduction employment share
has generally increased in both the 1970s and 1980s in our developed sample. In eight of the twelve
countries total manufacturing employment fell through the 1980s.
        Among the developed countries we study, the employment share of skilled labor increased in all
hvefve in the 1970s and 1980s. Relative wages of skilled labor either increased or remained constant in
most.” A common description of European labor markets in the 1980s is that they share the same
phenomenon of decreased demand for less-skilled workers but differ in how it is expressed. In the US and
UK where wages are flexible, the relative wages of the less-skilled declined sharply, while in other
countries collective bargaining and minimum wages moderated the decline in relative wages but caused
high levels of unemployment.*’
        Table II reports the increased proportion of nonproduction workers in manufacturing employment
and the percentage of that increase due to within-industry components in the 1970s and 1980s. Across
countries with very diverse labor market institutions, two common features stand out:
1) an increased proportion of nonproduction labor in manufacturing,
2) substitution toward nonproduction workers within industries in the 1980s despite increased or flat
        relative wages of nonproduction workers.
Not only was within-industry substitution positive, it was quite large, accounting for most of the increase in
the aggregate in all countries (except Belgium where it accounts for 49%). Large within-industry skill
upgrading despite rising or constant relative wages is evidence of skill biased technological change in each
of these countries. Taken together, they provide evidence for pervasive skill-biased technological change in
the developed world.


          *’ The US, UK, Austria and Denmark experienced large increases in the skill premium. Australia,
Japan and Sweden had modest increases. Germany and Italy had no change. Finland had a modest decrease
and Belgium had a large decrease. We lack information about Norway and Luxemburg. (Freeman and Katz
(1994) supplemented by calculations for manufacturing from UN data for countries not covered in the
former .)

        I2 Freeman and Katz (1995) and Krugman (1995) offer this interpretation of inequality in OECD
labor markets.
                                                                                                             16

        A limitation of this data is this 28 industry classification much more aggregated than those reported
in Table I, allowing more room for composition effects to masquerade as within plant effects. But, note that
the 28 industry “within” figure for the US in Table II is only 3% higher (as a proportion of the aggregate
change) than the comparable 450 industry figure in Table I, so a 28 industry decomposition may provide a
good approximation of the substitution and composition effects at the finer levels of disaggregation that we
report in Table I.
        In many of these countries within-industry skill upgrading increased more in the 1970s than in the
1980s. However, this should probably not be interpreted as evidence of an overall slow down in the rate of
SBTC. In most of these OECD countries the relative wages of nonproduction workers decreased during the
1970s but increased or remained stable during the 1980~‘~. These changes in relative wages would tend to
induce within industry skill upgrading during the 1970s and downgrading during the 1980s through
substitution effects. Without netting out these substitution effects, something that would be hard to do, it is
impossible to tell whether the rate of SBTC accelerated , remained constant or decelerated during the
1980s. (Bound and Johnson, 1992; Katz and Murphy, 1992). Similarly, we are reluctant to interpret
differences across countries in terms of the rate of within industry skill upgrading as evidence of cross
country patterns in the rate of technological change. Bather, these patterns could plausibly reflect cross
country differences in other factors that effect wage setting. Some of the cross-country variation in changes
in the relative wages of nonproduction workers seems to be due to cross-country variation in the supply of
college educated workers. The overall pattern is consistent with a trend increase in both supply and demand
of skills, with either accelerated demand or decelerated supply in the 1980s increasing the skill premium,
while local changes in supply affects relative wages as well.
        ln summary, in the ten developed countries for which we have manufacturing data in the 1970-90
period, we find widespread within-industry substitution towards skilled labor despite either constant or
increased relative wages in the 1980s. Applying the predictions of the analysis in the last section, this
pattern indicates skill-biased technological change in all of these countries.




         23 These effects, in turn, are likely to be a symptom of decelerating skill supply. While all these
countries show a trend increase in the proportion of college educated in the labor force in the 1970s that
proportion decelerated almost uniformly in the 1980s (OECD, 1995; Barro and Lee, 1997). In the short run
or in an integrated equilibrium, supply can affect relative wages even if the small open economy
assumptions of section II apply in a longer run.
                                                                                                               17

c
IV. Cross-Count _
         In this section we test implications of the pervasiveness of skill-biased technological change. In
section II we argued that the more pervasive the SBTC, the greater its potential to affect relative wages.
Casual empiricism suggest that microprocessors, the most likely source of this technological change, have
indeed become ubiquitous throughout the OECD. The empirical literature has tied indicators of
technological change with substitution towards skilled workers such as investment in R&D, significant
innovations, increased investment in computers and in other “high tech” capital.24 In the previous section we
showed evidence for SBTC in our sample of OECD countries, Still, if SBTC is pervasive, there is another
testable implication that we can check. We should find the same industries increasing their proportion of
skilled workers in different countries.


Cross Countr?, Correlations
         Pervasive skill-biased technological change implies that within-industry changes in the use of skills
be positively correlated across countries producing that good. So we test for pervasive SBTC by examining
cross-country correlations of changes in the use of skills (ASn).
         Table III presents a correlation matrix of corr(ASn,, S,,, ASn,, S,,), the cross-country within-
industry changes in the share of nonproduction workers for nine developed countries.” Stars denote a
significant correlation at the 5 percent level. Note that the correlations are nearly all positive (34 of 36) and
some are quite high. Indeed, 13 of the 36 are significant at the 5 percent level. The shift toward increased
use of nonproduction workers has for the most part occurred within the same industries in different
countries .26
         The cross-country correlations suggest that technological change in several of the countries is quite
similar. The strongest positive correlation is between the UK and the US, but a group of countries
(especially Denmark, Finland, Sweden, the UK and the US) have very similar within-industry changes in
the proportion of nonproduction employment. Consider the US on the one hand and Sweden, Denmark and



   ” Bemdt, Morrison and Rosenblum (1994) BBG, Machin (1996b).

  ” Luxembourg has been dropped as it has only 6 observed industries in this period. Norway and
Germany was dropped for lack of employment share figures in 1980-90.

   26 Other authors have found similarities between manufacturing sectors in different countries. Both Katz
and Summers (1989) and Krueger and Summers (1987) have found that the wages of workers in the same
manufacturing industry have high positive correlations across countries.
                                                                                                                18

Finland on the other. These are economies with very different labor market institutions and very different
trade and macroeconomic experiences in the 1980s. The similarity in the pattern of decreased use of
production workers despite their different experiences is compelling evidence for common technological
changes as an underlying cause of decreased demand for unskilled labor.


Industries with Large Skill-Biased Technological Change
        The industries that drive the correlations in Table III indicate what the nature of these technological
changes may be. Figure IV displays the scatterplot of US within-industry terms against those of the UK.
The US-UK correlation is mainly due to the large common increases in the share of nonproduction
employment in four industries: Machinery (& computers), Electrical Machinery, Printing and Publishing
and Transportation.
        A more systematic way of looking for industries with large effects is to estimate industry effects in
a country%dustry panel. In a regression of “within” industry terms on country and industry indicators,

                                                  -
                                    wit,; = ASnciSci = k ai
                                                            i-l   c-l



the a, are the average industry terms once country means have been removed. A well estimated industry
effect will reflect a within term common to many countries, while a large industry effect is evidence of
increased use of skills in at least one country-industry.
        Table IV reports the three largest of the statistically significant estimated industry effects. Three
industries: Electrical Machinery, Machinery (& computers) and Printing & Publishing, together account for
40 percent of the average within-component across countries. A full set of estimated industry effects is
reported in Appendix Table A3. Case studies indicate that these industries introduced significant skill-
biased technologies during this period, especially in the automation of control and monitoring of production
lines.” For example, a principal source of SBTC in the printing and publishing industry was automated
rather than manual sorting and folding of newspapers.




   ” U.S. Department of Labor, (1982a, 1982b).
                                                                                                              19

V. Global Skill-Biased Technolopical Change?
        What about the developing world? According to the H-O approach, in a country that is abundant in
unskilled labor the opening up to trade that occurred in 1980s should have a negative Stolper-Samuelson
effect on the relative wages of skilled workers. Thus H-O and SBTC hypotheses have opposite predictions
for relative wages in LDCs. The literature reports that relative wages of skilled labor have risen in some,
though not all, LDCs undergoing trade liberalizations in the 1980s (e.g., Feliciano, 1995; Hanson and
Harrison, 1995; Robbins, 1996; Feenstra and Hanson, 1996a). Appendix Figure A 1 reproduces that result
using the UN data, showing that a number of developing countries experienced an increase in the relative
wages of nonproduction workers in manufacturing between 1980 and 1990.
        Stable and rising relative wages are particularly interesting, considering that almost all of these
countries experienced considerable increases in the proportion of skilled labor in manufacturing over the
1980s as illustrated in Appendix Figure AZ.‘* For the developing world, that increase in the proportion of
skilled labor was generally accompanied by rapid growth in manufacturing employment (see Appendix
Table A2 and Wood, 1994). While H-O logic implies that increased trade should reduce relative demand
for skilled workers in LDCs, their manufacturing sectors are expanding rapidly and upgrading skills at the
same time. Besides the effects of trade, some other effect must have more than compensated to keep wages
of nonproduction workers stable especially as their proportion increased quickly in the 1980s. Skill-biased
technological change is one possible explanation. Other causes could be increased investment and
technology transfer combined with capital-skill complementarity, or decreased protection of industries
intensive in unskilled workers. Nevertheless, these findings raise the intriguing possibility that SBTC is at
work in the developing world as well as the developed.


VI. Concluding Remarks
        In this paper we have presented evidence that the kind of skill biased technological change which
occurred in the US has been pervasive across the OECD. Our data show that : a) substitution towards
skilled labor within industries occurred in all ten developed countries that we studied in the 1970-90 period,
despite constant or increasing relative wages of skilled labor, and b) the same manufacturing industries that
substituted towards skilled labor in the US did so in other developed countries as well. The industries with
common large within-industry contributions to skill upgrading are machinery (& computers), electrical


   ” Widespread skill upgrading in the developing world is also reported in a literature survey by Davidson
(1995).
                                                                                                                20

machinery and printing & publishing. Together, these three account for 40% of the within-industry increase
in the relative demand for skills. Case studies reveal that all three of these industries undenvent significant
technological changes associated largely with the assimilation of microprocessors.
        Based on this evidence alone, it would be hard to distinguish the effects of SBTC from those of
capital-skill complementarity. Previous work (BBG) has found that capital accumulation in US
manufacturing was not large enough to generate the observed increase in relative wages using cross-
sectional estimates of the elasticity of substitution. Similarly, it would be hard to distinguish the effects of
SBTC from those of a general increase in the quality of skilled labor, due to improved sorting or improved
human capital production. We feel that pervasive improvements in the quality of skilled labor are unlikely
unless they are caused by some pervasive technological effect.
        The debate in the literature over the effects of SBTC on relative wages has often turned on the
relevance of the small, open economy assumptions (Freeman (1995) Leamer (1996)). Pervasiveness allows
SBTC to reduce the relative wages of the unskilled even in a model that assumes small, open economies
because its occurrence in a large number of countries allows analysis of the integrated equilibrium as if the
OECD were a closed economy. In the context of that model, to calculate the size of the effect of different
factors, we must gauge their relative effects on world goods prices. The relative price of skill-intensive to
love-skill-intensive goods is in turn set by the factor content embodied in increased supplies of goods to the
OECD. Using the American experience as a guide we see that the factor content of SBTC in manufacturing
alone implies a decrease in the proportion of less skilled (production) workers about eight times that
attributable to increased trade. Referring back to Table I, in the 1979-87 period, during which demand for
less-skilled workers dropped sharply in the U.S., the factor content of SBTC accounts for at least 70% of
the displacement of unskilled workers (i.e. the increase in the proportion of skilled workers) in U.S.
manufacturing. The factor content of trade accounts for about 9% (BBG, Table IV) in the U.S.*’ For the
OECD as a whole, 70% would be a typical figure for SBTC, but 9% would be generous for the effects of
trade as the U. S experienced a much greater increase in trade with the developing world than OECD as a
whole. Assuming that demand elasticities are approximately the same for imports and domestic production,
that calculation implies that the effects of SBTC on relative wages are an order of magnitude larger than
those of increased trade with the developing world.




        ” For a justification of the use of factor content calculations in approximating the effects of trade
flows on relative wages, see Krugman (1995) or Deardorff and Staiger (1988).
                                                                                                               21

        Even if pervasive SBTC is a principal explanation, there is no reason to believe that it is the sole
explanation for increased relative demand for skills. Stolper-Samuelson effects and institutional changes
such as decreased unionization and decreased minimum wages all occurred during this period and’
undoubtedly contributed to increased relative demand for skills, though the evidence weighs against any of
these causes as a principal explanation. Deviations of the supply of skill from a long run trend increase also
play a role in deter-mining relative wages, European OECD countries do show considerable variation in the
rate of growth of skill supply which appears to be negatively correlated with changes in their skill premia in
the 198Os, suggesting that the H-O short run can last for long enough for supply effects to be observed. In
an integrated equilibrium long term fluctuations in supply of s’killcd labor in the entire OECD will affect
relative wages. That is an interesting topic for future research.
        Though the evidence we present is only from manufacturing, where measurement is easiest, the
effects of SBTC on wages may be just as important in the service sectors. Jn retail and financial services,
for example, microprocessor based information processing technologies have dramatically changed
accounting and secretarial work (Levy and Mumane, 1996). At a more aggregate level, Bound and Johnson
(1992): Murphy and Welch (1992) and Katz and Murphy (1992) all present evidence of within-industry
skill upgrading in other sectors. despite increased relative wages of skilled workers. This within industry
skill upgrading outside of manufacturing also occurred in the same industries in the US and the UK. The
correlation of within ‘industry terms between the US and UK across the 15 industries outside of
manufacturing is 0.93.30 That high correlation is largely due to very rapid skill upgrading in financial
services in the two countries. Skill-biased technological change outside of manufacturing may have also
been pervasive and is an additional likely cause of decreased demand for less skilled workers.
        Pervasive skill-biased technological change suggests several avenues for interesting research. The
source of SBTC, its rate of flow across borders, the identification of the technologies involved and
especially the likely implications for labor demand in the receiving country are all interesting and relevant.
This is especially true for developing countries in which technological changes could exacerbate current
high levels of income inequality.




       3o The measure of skill is postsecondary education in this calculation. Authors calculation from the
U.S. Current Population Survey and the U.K. Labour Force Survey, 198 l-9 1.
                                                                                                            22

Appendix: A Correspondence Between Measures of Skill
         The Worker Establishment Characteristics Database, constructed at the Center for Economic
Studies (Troske, 1994) matches individuals from the Census of Population in 1990 to plants in the Census
of Manufactures in 1989. For 2490 large manufacturing plants we have information from the Census of
Population about the demographics of a sample of employees. Using the educational and occupational
information we construct estimates of the number of employees in each education or occupation category in
a plant. A regression of these estimates on the number of production and nonproduction workers in a plant
allows estimation of the distribution of nonproduction (production) workers across educational and
occupational categories.
         Let the probability that a worker is in educational category j conditional on being a nonproduction
(production) worker be lj,,, @,,). The expected number of type j workers in a plant is E, = p,,E, + &rEp,
where E, and E, are the number of production and nonproduction workers, respectively. We have X,, a
noisy measure of E, (the true 1989 employment figure). A regression of X, on E, and E, estimates 13,n and
PP.
         Table Al reports estimates for education and occupation groups.3’ The restriction that the sum
over categories j of PJn (pjp)is one has been imposed. Looking at the educational distribution, the median
nonproduction worker has some college, with 66% having some college or more education. The median
production worker has a high school education, with 6 1% having high school or less. Occupational
categories show an even closer correspondence to the production / nonproduction classification. 75% of
nonproduction workers are in white collar occupations (48% are managers and professionals, 25% are
technicians, in sales or in administrative support and 2% are in services). 8 1% of production workers are in
blue collar occupations.3’
         A possible explanation for this close correspondence is that Census of Manufactures respondents
ignore the definitions and classify hourly workers as production and salaried workers as nonproduction,
which corresponds more tightly with the other measures of skill than do the definitions. If that’s the case,
the correspondence may hold between changes in the proportion of nonproduction workers and changes in
other measures of skills as wel1.33




   3’ We thank Ken Troske for performing this analysis.

   3’ The intercept terms in this regression should be zero. Their significant difference from zero may be
due to a correlation between the proportions (p’s) and plant size. Note that the intercept is an out of sample
prediction for large plants so light effects of size on 0’s may cause large shifts in the intercept.

    33 Unfortunately, we could not check the plant level correspondence of measures of skill in other
countries. A similar exercise at the 2 digit industry level using manufacturing and labor force surveys
indicates that the correlation of nonproduction/production categories with educational categories is similar
in the UK to that in the US (Machin, Ryan and Van Reenen, 1996).
                                                                                                      23

References

Autor, David, Lawrence F. Katz and Alan Krueger (1997) “Computing Inequality: Have Computers
        Changed the Labor Market?” National Bureau of Economic Research, WP #5956, March.

Baldwin? Robert E. (1994) “The Effects of Trade and Foreign Direct Investment on Employment and
       Relative Wages,” OECD Economic Studies No. 23, Winter 1994.

Bartelsman, Eric and Wayne Gray (1994) “National Bureau of Economic Research Manufacturing
        Productivity Database” National Bureau of Economic Research, mimeo.

Barre, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee (1997) “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling
        Qualiq,” ftp://www.nber.org/pub/barro.lee.

Baru, Sundari (1995) “Essays in Trade, Job Market Skills and Employment Changes”, unpublished PhD
        dissertation, University of Michigan.

Berman Eli. John Bound and Zvi Griliches (1993) “Changes in the demand for skilled labor within US
       manufacturing industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,” National Bureau
       of Economic Research WP#4255.

Berman, Eli, John Bound and Zvi Griliches (1994) “Changes in the demand for skilled labor within US
       manufacturing industries: Evidence from the Annual Survey of Manufacturing,” Ouarterly Journal
       of Economics, 109, 367-98.

Bernard. Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen (forthcoming) “Exporters, Skill Upgrading and the
       Wage Gap,” Jcof

Bemdt, Morrison and Rosenblum (1994) “High-Tech Capital Formation and Labor Composition in
       U.S. Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis,” Journal of Econometrics,
       Annals> 65( 1). 9-43.

Blackbum, McKinley, David Bloom and Richard Freeman (1990) “The Declining Economic Position of
       Less-Skilled American Males,” in Gary Burtless (ed.), A Future of Lousy Jobs? Brookings,
       Washington, D.C.

Bound, John and George Johnson (1992) “Changes in the structure of Wages During the 1980s: An
       Evaluation of Alternative Explanations,” m,ri                      82, 371-392.

Bound, John and George Johnson (1995) “What are the Causes of Rising Wage Inequality in the United
        States?” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, January.

Davis, Steven (1992) “Cross-country patterns of change in relative wages,”
        yMacroeconomics 239-300.

Davidson, J. David (1995) “Income Inequality and Trade: How to Think, What to Conclude,” Journal of
       Economic Perspectives g(3).
                                                                                                      24

Deardorff, A. and R. Staiger (1988) “An Interpretation of the Factor Content of Trade,” Journal of
       International Economics 24, 93-107.

Doms, Mark, Timothy Dunne and Kenneth R. Troske (1997) ‘Workers, Wages and Technology,”
      Quarterlv Journal of Economics, 112( 1), 253-290.

Dunne, Timothy, John Haltiwanger and Kenneth R. Troske (1996) “Technology and Jobs: Secular Changes
       and Cyclical Dynamics,” Center for Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau, mimeo.

Feliciano, Zadia (1995) “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The Impact of Trade Reforms in Mexico on
        Wages and Employment,” Queen’s College, mimeo, May.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon Hanson (1996a) “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing, and Relative Wages,”
        in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman and Douglas A. Irwin (eds.) The Political Economy of
        L                                             ti, MIT Press, Cambridge, pp. 89-127.

Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon Hanson (1996b) “Globalization, Outsourcing, and Wage Inequality”
        IEconomic86,240-245.

Freeman, Richard (1988) “Evaluating the European view that the United States has no unemployment
       problem,” AmericanEconomic 78, 294-299.

Freeman Richard (1995) “Are Your Wages Set in Beijing?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(3),
       Summer, 15-32.

Freeman. Richard and Lawrence Katz (1994) ‘Rising wage inequality: The United States vs. other
       advanced countries,” in Richard Freeman (ed.) Workine Under Different Rules, New York: Russell
       Sage Foundation.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Ann Harrison (1995) “Trade, Technology and Wage Inequality” National Bureau
       of Economic Research Working Paper 5 110.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman (1985) Market Structure and ForeigJl Trade, MIT,
       Cambridge, Mass.

Jones, Ronald W. (1965) “The Structure of Simple General Equilibrium Models,” Journal of Political
        Economy, 73(6).

Katz, Lawrence F., Gary W. Loveman and David G. BlancMower (1995) “A comparison of Changes in
        the Structure of Wages in Four OECD Countries, ” in ed. Katz and Freeman (eds.) Differences and
        Changes in Wape Structures, University of Chicago Press.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Kevin M. Murphy (1992) “Changes in Relative Wages, 1963-1987: Supply and
        Demand Factors,” Ou
                         vvJournal
                               rl                     107(February) 35-78.

Katz, Lawrence F. and Ana Revenga (1989) “Changes in the Structure of Wages, The US vs. Japan,”
        Journal of Japanese and International Economics, III:552-553.
                                                                                                        25

Katz, Lawrence F. and Lawrence H. Summers (1989) “Industry Rents: Evidence and
        Implications,“in Brookiners Pauers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics 1989.

Krueger, Alan and Lawrence H. Summers (1987) “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage
        Structure,” in Kevin Lang and Jonathan S. Leonard (ed.) Unemuloyrnent and the Structure
       pf Labor Markets, Basil-Blackwell.

Krugman, Paul (1995) “Technology, Trade and Factor Prices,” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper 5355, November.

Lawrence, Robert and Matthew Slaughter (1993) “International Trade and US wages in the 1980s: Great
       sucking sound or small hiccup,” Brookings Pauers on Economic Activiw, Fall, n2, 16 l-227.

Learner, Edward (1994) “Trade, Wages and Revolving Door Ideas,” National Bureau of Economic
        Research Working Paper Number 47 16.

Learner, Edward (1995) “In Search of Stolper Samuelson Effects on U.S. Wages,” in Susan Collins (ed.)
        Ds.
        Im art Ex-                                The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.

Learner, Edward (1996) “What’s the Use of Factor Contents?“, National Bureau of Economic Research
        Working Paper #5448.

Levy, Frank and Richard J. Mumane (1996) “With What Skills Are Computers a Complement?” American
        Economic Review Paner and Proceedimzs, 86,258-262.

Machin, Stephen (1996a) “Wage inequality in theUK,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 12(l), 47-64.

Machin, Stephen (1996b) “Changes in the relative demand for skills in the UK labor market,” in Alison
       Booth and Dennis Snower (ed.) Acauiring Skills: Market Failures. Their Svmutoms and Policy
       Resnonses, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Machin, Stephen, Annette Ryan and John Van Reenen (1996) “Technology and changes in skill structure:
        Evidence from an international panel of industries,” Center for Economic Performance Discussion
       Paper #297.

Mark, Jerome S., (1987) “Technological Change and employment: Some Results from BLS Research,”
        Monthly Labor Review, 1 lO(April):26-29.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Finis Welch (1992) “The Structure of Wages,” Ouarterlv Journal of Economics,
       lO’I(February): 285-326.

Murphy. Kevin M. and Finis Welch (1993) “Industrial change and the rising importance of skill,” in
       Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk (ed.) Uneven Tides: Risine Inequality in America, New
      York: Russell Sage Foundation.

Nickell, Stephen and Brian Bell (1995) “The collapse in demand for the unskilled and unemployment across
         the OECD,” Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 11,40-62.
                                                                                                        26

OECD (1992) Economic Outlook Historical Statistics 1960-1990, OECD Publications, Paris.

OECD (1995) QECD Education Statistics 1985-1992, OECD Publications, Paris

OECD (1993) Employment Outlook, July, OECD Publications, Paris.

Robbins, Donald J. (1995) “Trade, Trade Liberalization and Inequality in Latin America and East Asia-
        Synthesis of Seven Country Studies.” Harvard, mimeo.

Sachs, Jeffrey and Howard Shatz (1994) “Trade and jobs in US manufacturing,” Brookinrrs Paners on
        Economic Activitv, l-84.

Siegel. Donald (1995) “The Impact of Technological Change on Employment: Evidence from a Firm-Level
        Survey of Long Island Manufacturers,” mimeo, Arizona State University.

Troske, Kenneth R. (1994) “The Worker Establishment Characteristics Database,” Center for
        Economic Studies, U.S. Census Bureau, mimeo, July.

United Nations, Dept. of Economic and Social mairs, Statistical Office (1992) Industrial Statistics
       Yearbook. Volume I: General Industrial Statistics, New York.

U S. Department of Labor (1982a), BLS Bulletin 2 104. “The Impact of Technology on Labor in Four
        Industries: Meat Packing/Foundries/Metalworking Machinery/ Electrical and Electronic
        Equipment,” written under the supervision of John J. Macut, Richard W. Riche, and Rose N.
        Zeisel; Authors: Robert V. Critchlow (electrical and electronic equipment), Gary E. Falwell (meat
        products), Richard W. Lyon (foundries), and A. Harvey Belitsky (metal working machinery),
        Washington D.C.: U.S. Govt. Printing Office.

U.S. Department of Labor (1982b), BLS Bulletin 2 137. “The Impact of Technology on Labor in Five
       Industries: Printing and Publishing/Water Transportation/Copper Ore Mining/Fabricated
       Structural MetaVIntercity Trucking,” written under the supervision of John J. Macut, Richard W
       Riche and Rose N. Zeisel; Authors: Robert V. Critchlow (printing/publishing, water
       transportation), Richard W. Lyon (copper), Charles L. Bell (fabricated structural metal) and A.
       Harvey Belitsky (trucking), Washington D.C.: U.S. Govt. Printing Office.

U.S. International Trade Commission (1982), Summary of Trade and Tarrif Information: Semiconductors,
        Publication #84 1, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington.

Wood, Adrian (199 1) “How much does Trade with the South meet Workers in the North?” World
       Bank Research Observer, vol 6, no 1. (January) pp. 19-36.

Wood, Adrian (1994) N;                  hanging Fortunes in kill-
       Driven World, Clarendon, Oxford.

World Bank (1994) World Tables, John Hopkins University Press, Washington.
                                                                                                                27

      CTable I: h             a          n           g          e          s nd the US in the 1980s


                                    United                                       United
                                    States                                      Kingdom
     Time Period                    1979-87              1977-87                 1979-90      1984-90
 Jumber of Industries/                  450              360,000                    100         402
        Plants
 Level of aggregation                 4-digit             plants                 3-digit       plants
                                      SIC                                          SIC
    Data Source                     Annual               Census                 Census       Workplace
                                   Survey of                of                      of       Industrial
                                     Manu-                Manu-                 Produc-      Relations
                                    factures             factures                 tion         Survev

   Annual Change in
    Nonproduction                    0.552                 0.483                  0.367         0.41
 Employment Share
 in percentage points)
 within-industry/plant                  ,387               .341’                ,301            0.34
 zomnonent (nercent)                    (70)                (71)                   (82)         (83)
 etween-industry/plant                  ,165                .077                   ,066         0.07
 :omponent        (percent)             (30)                (16)                   (18)         (17)
  Annual Change in
 donproduction Wage                  0.774                                       0.668
      Bill Share
 within-industry/plant
 zomponent (percent)
 etween-industry/plant
 zomponent (percent)


Sources: UK - Machin (1996b), Tables 7.2, 7.3; US industries - Berman, Bound and Griliches (1994),
Table IV, US plants - Dunne, Haltiwanger and Troske (1996) Table 1.




               ’ The Dunne et al (1996) decomposition also includes a small negative cross-product term and a
       positive net entry term for the effect of entering and exiting plants.
                                                                                                                          28

                Table II: ProDortion of Increased Use of Skills “Within” Industries

      Country                   Change in               %              Cbange in %             %                   Note
                                % non                   within         non                     within
                                production              1970-          production              1980-           /
                                1970-80                 80             1980-90                 90
                                (annual-                               (annualized)
                              A
                                ized)
      us                           0.20                   81                0.30                   73          I
      Norway                       0.34                   82                                                        1970,80,n/a
                                                                                                               I
      Luxembourg                   0.46                  112                0.30                   143
      Sweden                       0.26                  70                 0.12                   59
      Australia                     0.40                  87                0.36                   99               1970.80.87
                                                                            0.06                   121              nla*,81,90 *
                                    0.36                  83                0.41                   87               1970,80,89

                              t    0.42                   83                0.64                   79

     I W. Germanq-            I
                                   0.48                   89
                                                                                                               I    1970,79,nla

     !Austria                 1    0.46                   89                0.19                   73          I
                                                          91                0.29                   94
                                                    -     59                                 -L
                                                                                             -
                                                                                                   49               1970 80.85

Notes: 1.         The proportion within is the sum over 28 industries of (dn,, * S,)/dPn, in period t where S, is
                  [(Emp,,/Emp,)+(Emp,,-,/Emp,,)J/2, the share of manufacturing employment in industry i,
                  averaged over time.
       2.         Source: United Nations General Industrial Statistics Database.

* The sampling frame changed for Japanese data between 1970 and 198 1.
                                                                                                                  29

 Table III: Cross-Countrv Correlations of Within-Industrv Changes in ProDortion Nonproduction:
                                             1980-90


                                                 A
                                               SuJD;A
                                               W S  a e     U
                                                        n
                                                 t  P n
                                     U                  1 ;                                         u
                                               : r  a m
                                     S                  a                                           K
                                               e a  n a     r
                                               n  1
                                                        :   a
                                                  i   L
                                                 a
                                    .43*
                Sweden
                                    t.021
                                      .28      .19
                Lustralia
                                    (. 1 4 ) (.34)
                                      .32      .02     -.22
                 Japan
                                    (.ll) (.94)        (.26)
                                     .73*      .36       .37      .33
                lenmark
                                    (.OO)          (.06) (.05)   (.09)
                                     .59*     .39*      .51*      .14     .80*
                Finland
                                    (.OO)    (.04)     (.Ol)     (.47)   (.OO)
                                      .22     -.17      .52*      .12     .5 1*     .46*
                Austria
                                    (.26) (.37) (.Ol) (.54)           (.OO)        (.Ol)
                                     .76*      .18      .51*      .19     .76*      .64*    .61
                  UK
                                    (.OO) (.36) (.Ol) (.32)        (.OO)        (.OO)    (.OO)
                                      .18      .oo       .Ol      .22      .ll       .09    .37     .15
                Belgium
                                    (.44)    (.99)     (.97)     (.37)   (.63)     (.71)   (.lO)   (.53)
Notes.
1.     These are cross-country correlation coefficients of within-industry changes in nonproduction
       employment shares,
                                                   witci = Al+&

       where i is an industI); index and c is a country index.
2.     The number in brackets is the significance level of a test that the correlation is zero. Standard errors
       in parentheses. A * denotes a significant correlation at the 5 percent level.
3.     The sample was restricted to countries with GNP/capita of over $8000 US in 1985 (the top 12 in
       Table A2) and over twenty consistently defined industries observed in 1980-l 990.
4.     The 28 industries in this classification are listed fully in Appendix table A3.
5.     All correlation coefficients are calculated using a full set of 28 industries, except those involving
       Japan (27 observations), Belgium (20 observations) and Japan & Belgium (19 observations).
6.     Source: United Nations General Industrial Statistics Database.
                                                                                                              30

                     Table IV: Selected Industrv Effects in Within-Industrv Terms:
                                               1980-90

 In a regression of “within” industry terms on country and industry indicators,

                                    witci = APr& = k a , + 5 p, + Eci
                                                           i-l       c=l



the following industry effects are statistically significant and represent more than 10% of the within
component of the increase in the proportion of nonproduction workers in employment. A full set of
industry effects are reported in Table A3.



                 Industry                          Industry Effect                        Avg share of
                                                       /within                             industry in
                                                     Component                            employment

                Printing &                               ,100                                 ,061
                publishing                              (.041)

                Machinery                                I46                                  ,117
             (incl. computers)                          (.045)

                Electrical                               ,156                                 .096
                Machinery                               (.037)

                   Sum                                   ,402                                  ,273
               (3 industries)




                Number of                                249
               observations
                Root MSE                               .116284


Notes:
1.     Data are scaled so that the estimated coefficient represents the ratio of the industry effect to the
       cross country average “within” component.
2.     The root mean squared error of the left-hand side variable is .126295.
3.     Standard errors are calculated using the White heteroskedasticity robust formula.
4.     Source: United Nations General Industrial Statistics Database.
                                                                                                                    31




          Education              constant              non-               production             R-square
            &wUP                                    production
           (highest
             level
          achieved)
             <HS                   9.82                  .Ol                   .03                  .28
                                  (1.05)               (0.01)                (.OOl)

              HS                  35.52                  .23                   .58                  .91
                                  (5.33)               (004)                 (005)

             Some                 -20.96                 .30                   .30                  .93
            College
                                  (2.71)               (003)                 (.004)

           College-                15.06                 .31                   .07                  .81

          4 year dg.              (3.58)               (004)                 (005)

           Xollege                 -9.3 1                .15                   .Ol                  .68
          (>4 yr dg.)             (2.13)               (002)                 (003)

Note: Calculated from the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database for 2490 large plants. The left-hand
            side variable in each row is the estimated number of workers of that type in the firm. The right-hand
            side variables are the number of production and nonproduction workers. Coefficients are interpreted
            as the proportion of nonproduction (production) workers of each type. Each column of coefficients
            is restricted to sum to one. We thank Ken Troske for performing this calculation.
                                                                                                                    32

              Table Al (cant) : What is a Nonmoduction Worker in US Manufacturing?




               Occupation groups:                    constant              nonprodu            producti
                  (occ codes)                                                ction                on
                    Mgr & Prof                        -20.72                   .48                 .08
                      (<= 199)                        (5.27)                 (.005)              (.006)

              Tech, Sales & Admin.                     18.74                   .25                 .08
                      support
                     (203-3 89)                       (2.17)                 (.002)              (.003)

                      Service                          -0.76                   .02                 .03
                     (403-469)                        (0.54)                 (.OOl)              (.OOl)

               Farm-Forest & Fish                      0.15                   ,001                .ooo
                     (473-499)                         (.06)                (.OOOl)             (.OOOl)

                  Precision Prod                      -21.64                   .ll                 .33
                     (503-699)                        (2.86)                 (.003)              (.004)

             Operators & Fabricators                   11.42                   .lO                 .38
                     (703-79 1)                       (3.99)                 (.003)              (.005)

                     Laborers                          12.82                   .03                 .lO
                                                      (1.95)                 (.002)              (.003)

Note: Calculated from the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database for 2490 large firms. The left-hand
            side variable in each row is the estimated number of workers of that type in the firm. The right-hand
            side variables are the number of production and nonproduction workers. Coefficients are interpreted
            as the proportion of nonproduction (production) workers of each type. Each column of coefficients
            is restricted to sum to one. We thank Ken Troske for performing this calculation.
                                                                                                                                         33

                  Table A2: Levels and Changes in the ProDortion of Nonmoduction Workers




     us
  Norway
Luxembourg
  Sweden
 Australia                                                                                                                         1970,80,87
  Japan *                                                                                                                          1970,81,90
 Denmark                                                                                                                           1970.80.89
  Finland
                                                                                                                                  1970,79,nk


                                                                                                                                   1970,80,85
                                                                                                                                        . ,
   Greece
   Ireland                                                                                                                         1970,80,8S
  Barbados
   CYPJ-S
    Spain
 Venezuela                                                                                                                         1970,81,9(
     Iran                                                                                                                          1970,80,8f
    Malta                                                                                                                          1970,80,8$
Czechoslovak
Puerto RICO**
  Panama                                                                                                                           1970,79,8!
    Korea                                                                                                                          1970,81,9C
   Poland
                                                                                                                                   1970,80,8!

                                                                                                                                   1971,80,8T

                                                                                                                                   1972,80,90
                                                                                                                                   1972,80;88
                                                                                                                                  n/a,1980,9C
                                                                                                                                   1973,80,88
                                                                                                                                   1973.1988


                                                                                                                                   1970,80,85
                                                                                                                                  1970,8O,nk
                                                                                                                                   1970,80,89
                                                                                                                                  n/a,1 980,8$
                                                                                                                                  n/a,1980,8f
                                                                                                                                  1970,80,89

          Sources: 1Jnited Nations General Industrial Statistics. GNP/capita from World Bank (1994) “World Tables”, countq tbles.
          * Levels are not reliable for Japanese data as operatives are counted only for a subsample of large firms, while employment is
          counted for all firms. Differences should be accurate over the 198 l-90 period, during which the definition of large firms remained
          constant. **Rank guessed.
                                                                                                           34

                       Table A3: Industry Effects in Within-Industry Terms: 1980-90



     Code and Industry
                                     1 Coef5cient 1 t-c&&tic / cmfficient~ t&&tic
                                     I                I
     3110 Food                              -.018     1   -0.652          -.045        -1.034
     3 130 Beverages                          .032    1    2.071 0         .028         1.587
     3 140 Tobacco                            .009         2.141           .002         0.193
     32 10 Textiles                           .042         2.827           .038         2.327
     3220 Apparel                             .006         0.379           .002         0.132
II   3230 Leather Products           I        .018    1    1.379     1     .014    I    0.845
     3240 Footwear                            ,013    I    2.065     1     .009         0.801
           Wood Products                      .038         1.785           ,033         1.795
           Furniture                          ,018         1.916            ,014        1.071
           Paper Products                     .03 1        2.888           .027         2.388

         ~
     3420 P&t & Publishing
     35 10 Ind Chemicals
     3520 Othr Chemicals
                                     I        .104
                                              .049
                                              ,036
                                                      1
                                                      I
                                                           2.327
                                                           5.243
                                                           2.766
                                                                     1
                                                                     1
                                                                           .lOO
                                                                           .044
                                                                           ,006
                                                                                   1
                                                                                   I
                                                                                        2.433
                                                                                        3.942
                                                                                        0.156
     3530 Petr Refineries                     ,026         1.470           .022         1.107
     3540 Pet&Coal                          -.OOS         -0.746          -.012        -0.818
     3550 Rubber Prod                         .OlO         1.381           .006         0.505
     3560 Plastic Prod                        .OOl    I    0.196     1    -.003    1   -0.274
     3610 Potten;. China             I        ,012    I    2.006     1     .008    I    0.680
     3620 Glass Products                    -.004         -0.896          -.009        -0.703
     3690 Non metal net                       ,034         3.863           ,029         2.078
     37 10 Tron&Steel                         .I95         1.154           .165         1.322
     3720 Non-ferrous metal                   .008    1    1.448     1    -.021    1   -0.634
     38 10 Metal Products            I        ,042    1    2.058     1      ,016   1    0.413
           Machinery, computers               ,173         4.157           ,146         3.275
           Electric Machinery                 .160         4.156           .156         4.249
           Transport Equip                    ,002         0.046          -.002        -0.064
           Professional Goods                 .056         2.399           ,052         1.978
     3900 Other Goods ;              I        ,018    1    2.693     1      ,013   1    1.212

     Country Effects                        No                            Yes
     Observations                           249                            249
     Root MSE                             0.1209                         0.1163

     Notes: Estimating equation is given in Table IV. Coefficients are scaled so that the reported coefficient
     represents the ratio of the industry effect to the cross country average “within” component. The root
     mean squared error of the LHS var is .126295. t-statistics are calculated using heteroskedasticity robust
     standard errors. Countries included are all those included in Table III and Luxembourg (6 industries
     observed).
     Source: United Nations General Industrial Statistics Database.
                                                                    35




      S




Figure I: The Sector Bias of a Hicks-Neutral Technological Change
                                                               36




             x    I\




              0                           D           B    F

                                      U
Figure II: Skill-Biased, Sector-Neutral Technological Change
                                                                              37

               o UK                                  AUS


       .35 1




        .25 -
                                                     I                 I       I
                 I
               1970             1975               1980              1985   1990
                                                   year

Figure III: Nonproduction Employment Shares in UK And US Manufacturing, 1970-90


Sources: Bartelsman and Gray (1994) for US; Machin (1996b) for UK.
                                                                                                                             38


                                                                                 Machinery 8 Computers
 .0004                   Professional Services

                                                                              Electrical Machinery
                                                      Transportation Equip.

                                                                                                     Printing 8 Publishing




     .0002

to
3
                             Metal Products
               Other Goods
              Apparel                         Other Che!%%ial Chemicals
                       usmeal
                         fufNo%x%Z alit minerals
     0                 g+          f
                          oabeverage
              load G’as-
               I5ood
                 ubber
                     I                                    I                            I
                     0                                 .0002                        .0004                       .0006
                                                                   UK

Figure IV: Within Industry Changes in Nonproduction Employment Share: US and UK
Notes: Each observation is a pair of “within” industry increases in the proportion of nonproduction
       workers between 1980 and 1990, defined as the change in proportion weighted by the industry
       share in manufacturing employment,
                                                        witci = APn ct.SCl

             where i is an industry index and c is a country index. The 28 industries in this classification
             are listed fully in Appendix table A3.

Source: United Nations General Industrial Statistics Database.
                                                                                                            39

                          Fiji
                      Hungary
  .5



                                   Spain                                                  Luxembourg
                                                                    UK
              I
                      Poland
                                                              Austria      Denmark                     US

                                                                            ‘aAl 3ralia
                                                                         Finlan
                                                                                 Bweden
                  Guatemala                               Belgium
                   India                     Greece
.-E
 i?J
              I
          Ethi,bpia
 Ei
5
                                      IrYa
                                 Venezua
   -. 5     i           Korea


              I         Panama
              I
                  6                           5doo               1 oboe                       15boo
                                                      GNP/capita 1985

Figure Al: Change in Relative Wages in 1980s by GNP


Notes: The figure reports relative wage information for 33 countries judged to have reliable information
over the 1980s (of the 43 listed in Table A2). The change in wage ratio of nonproduction to production
\vorkers is recorded between 1980 and 1990 where possible. Other endpoints are used when necessary,
as indicated in Table A2.
                                                                                                                40


                                             Greece
  .Ol     i
           1 Guatemala
                                                Hong Kong
                      Korea
                                  Venezual                                Finland

  .oo5
                                     Malta
                                      Ireland                               Denmark
                                                                              Australia
                                                            Belgium UK                    Luxembourg       us
                                                                Austria
                                                                               Sweden
ii                                                                          Japan
d0
2
 CL
 E:
.-
ET       BangCade
x                     Poland
0
              I
  -.005 -j

                           Fiji
              ,
                       I                               I                            I                  I
                  0                             5000              10000                        15000
                                                       GNP/capita 1985

Figure A2: Skill Accumulation in the 1980s by GNP


Notes:   See Table A2.
