HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO ALLOCATION
      OVER THE LIFE CYCLE


         James M. Poterba
        Andrew A. Samwick


        Working Paper 6185
                              NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         HOUSEHOLD PORTFOLIO ALLOCATION
                               OVER THE LIFE CYCLE




                                       James M. Poterba
                                      Andrew A. Samwick




                                       Working Paper 6185
                               http://www.nber.org/papers/w6185



                     NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                              1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                Cambridge, MA 02 13 8
                                   September 1997


This paper was presented at the JCER-NBER conference on “The Economics of Aging” on May 8-9,
 1997. We thank Makoto Saito, Steve Venti, and conference participants for helpful comments and
Arthur Kennickell for assistance with the Surveys of Consumer Finances. Financial support from
the National Institute on Aging and the National Science Foundation through grants to the National
Bureau of Economic Research is gratefully acknowledged. This paper is part of NBER’s research
program in Aging. Any opinions expressed are those of the authors and not those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

0 1997 by James M. Poterba and Andrew A. Samwick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including 0 notice, is given to the source.
Household Portfolio Allocation Over
the Life Cycle
James M. Poterba and Andrew A. Samwick
NBER Working Paper No. 6185
September 1997
JEL Nos. E21, Gil
Aging


                                             ABSTRACT

        In this paper, we analyze the relationship between age and portfolio structure for households

in the United States. We focus on both the probability that households of different ages own

particular portfolio assets and the fraction of their net worth allocated to each asset category. We

distinguish between age and cohort effects using data from the repeated cross-sections of the Federal

Reserve Board’s Surveys of Consumer Finances. We present two broad conclusions, First, there

are important differences across asset classes in both the age-specific probabilities of asset ownership

and in the portfolio shares of different assets at different ages. The notion that all assets can be

treated as identical from the standpoint of analyzing household wealth accumulation is not supported

by the data. Institutional factors, asset liquidity, and evolving investor tastes must be recognized in

modeling asset demand. These factors could affect analyses of overall household saving as well as

the composition of this saving.      Second, there are evident differences in the asset ownership

probabilities of different birth cohorts.    Currently, older households were more likely to hold

corporate stock, and less likely to hold tax-exempt bonds, than younger households at anv given aee.

These differences across cohorts are important to recognize when analyzing asset accumulation

profiles.


James M. Poterba                                                 Andrew A. Samwick
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                            Dartmouth College
E52-350                                                          6 106 Rockefeller Hall
Cambridge, MA 02 139-4307                                        Hanover, NH 03755-3574
and NBER                                                         and NBER
poterba@mit.edu                                                  samwick@dartmouth.edu
        The recent and prospective aging of the populations in developed countries has

attracted attention in many nations, as the recent discussion in a World Bank (1994) report

attests. The potential effects of population aging on social security systems and the level of

private and national saving have drawn the most interest from both academics and policy

analysts. In the United States, particular attention has focused on the adequacy of the Baby

Boom generation’s level of retirement saving; for conflicting reports on this question, see the

Congressional Budget Office (1993) and Bernheim (1994). The way households allocate their

accumulated saving across different assets, such as stocks, bonds, and real estate, has attracted

less discussion, even though future economic security can depend as much on the way assets

are invested as on the level of those assets. Asset allocation is also essential for

understanding the behavior of individuals in the increasingly popular defined contribution

pension plans that allow participants some discretion in their investment choices and for

analyzing recent proposals for Social Security reform that call for mandatory saving accounts,

with investment responsibility delegated to individuals.’

        Although there is little empirical work on asset allocation, there is a theoretical

literature on the optimal portfolio behavior of individuals at different ages. This work is

characterized by some controversy, in part between academics and practical financial advisers.

In the standard portfolio choice paradigm that underlies most of financial economics, the only

factor that should explain age-related differences in portfolio structure is differential risk

aversion. In this setting, if a household is endowed with a time-invariant risk tolerance, then



    ‘Samwick and Skinner (1995) examine the adequacy of defined contribution plans relative to the defined
benefit plans that were popular before the transition began. Advisory Council on Social Security (1996) reports
on various reform proposals for the United States system.

                                                        1
there should be no age-related patterns of portfolio allocation. Conditional on a household’s

risk aversion, there are strong predictions regarding the mix of risky and riskless assets that a

household should hold. Moreover, regardless of their risk aversion, all households should

hold risky assets in the same proportions within their risky asset portfolios.

       A number of studies have tried to relate this theoretical result to the common practical

recommendation, documented by Canner, Mankiw, and Weil (1997), that households should

change the relative proportions of risky assets in their portfolios as they age. Samuelson

(1989, 1990) has considered the conditions on utility functions and asset returns that will lead

to age-related differences in risky asset holdings; in essence, his analysis allows for time-

varying risk tolerance. Other studies expand the traditional model of portfolio choice to study

related aspects of life cycle asset allocation. For example, if individuals can vary their labor

supply to offset fluctuations in asset returns, as in Bodie, Merton, and Samuelson (1992), or if

they accumulate assets in part for precautionary reasons, as in Kimball (1993), and

nonfinancial risks increase with age, then rational behavior may lead to a reduction in risky

asset exposure as households age.

       This paper complements the substantial theoretical discussion of age-related patterns

in asset allocation. It presents systematic empirical evidence on the basic patterns of

household asset allocation over the life cycle. This information can help to evaluate

competing models of household portfolio behavior, and more generally to assess proposals for

greater reliance on household choices in retirement preparation. Using multiple waves of the

Surveys of Consumer Finances, we are able to control for systematic differences across birth

cohorts in the age-specific pattern of asset ownership. We find that it is not possible to



                                                 2
aggregate households born at different ages for the purpose of portfolio modelling: there are

statistically and economically significant “cohort effects” for most types of financial and

nonfinancial assets.

        The paper is organized as follows. The first section describes the Surveys of

Consumer Finances and presents summary statistics for each wave of data. Section two

presents our econometric methodology for distinguishing age and cohort effects and analyzes

the patterns of ownership and allocation of financial assets. The third section places the

analysis of financial assets within the context of households’ comprehensive balance sheets.

The final section discusses several implications of our results, as well as directions for further

research.



1. Data Description

        The Surveys of Consumer Finances (SCFs) conducted by the Federal Reserve Board

are designed to be the most comprehensive sources of wealth data in the United States. They

are collected every three years, with the first one done in 1983 and the latest one (for which a

final public release is available) in 1992. Although there are limited panel dimensions

between the 1983 and 1986 and 1989 surveys, our analysis uses the SCFs from 1983, 1989,

and 1992 as repeated cross-sections. We omit the 1986 survey because it was a limited

reinterview survey of the households from the 1983 survey that does not permit us to

distinguish between all of the asset and debt categories that are found in the other surveys.

Avery and Elliehausen (1988), Avery and Kennickell (1988), Kennickell (1992), and

Kennickell (1995) provide documentation of the SCFs from 1983, 1986, 1989, and 1992,



                                                 3
respectively.

        An important feature of the SCFs is that they combine an area probability sample of

U.S. households with a sample of high income households drawn from tax records. The

oversampling of high income households allows the SCFs to provide an accurate assessment

of the upper tail of the distribution of wealth in the United States.’ In total, there are 4103,

3143, and 3906 observations in the three SCFs. In this section, we present summary statistics

on financial and total assets.

        Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for holdings of financial assets in each of the

survey years; we consider the allocation of net worth in a later table. The six main categories

of financial assets are taxable equity; tax-exempt bonds; taxable bonds; tax-deferred accounts

such as Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), Keoghs, and defined contribution pension

plans (including 401(k) plans); bank accounts (including certificates of deposit and money

market accounts); and other financial assets such as whole life insurance and trusts. In each

case, we assign mutual fund assets to the asset category corresponding to the assets held by

the mutual fund. In addition, we distinguish between taxable equity held directly in

brokerage accounts and that held indirectly through mutual funds.

        Table 1 is divided into three parts. The three panels show the probability that a

household owns a given asset, the average share of the household’s portfolio in a given asset,

and the share of total financial assets accounted for by each asset. More formally, for each




    Turtin, Juster, and Morgan (1989) compare the SCF 1983 to the wealth infomation in the 1984 Panel Study
of Income Dynamics and the 1984 Survey of Income and Program Participation.

                                                     4
financial asset j in each survey year, we define yij as household i’s holdings of asset j; Yi is

household i’s total financial assets; wi is the sample weight of household i; and N is the

number of households in the given year’s sample.3             We then tabulate:



                                                                  5 wi(Yij>“)
                              Probability of Ownership = i=l
                                                                          N

                                                                        c wi
                                                                        i=l
                                                                   N
                                                                           ..
                                                                        WY
                                                                         i$
                                                                  c
 (1)                            Average Po?@o~io share = i=’ N
                                                                    c wi
                                                                    i=l
                                                                   N

                                                                  c     wiYij
                             Aggregate Portfolio Share = ii’
                                                                  c WiYi
                                                                  i=l

The average portfolio share measures the allocation of the typical household, while the

aggregate portfolio share measures the allocation of all households taken together. These

portfolio shares will diverge to the extent that households with higher wealth levels have

different allocations of financial assets than those with lower wealth.

        The results on ownership probabilities in the upper panel of Table 1 suggest several

broad patterns. First, the probability of owning taxable equity, excluding ownership through

retirement accounts, was relatively constant over the 1983-1992 period. This constancy

occurs even though the probability of direct equity ownership declined over this time period.


     ‘Wolff (1987, 1994, 1997) has argued that the SCFs need to be reweighted in order to match the aggregate
totals in the Flow of Funds accounts of household net worth. Because it is not clear that the Flow of Funds are
a more appropriate benchmark, we use the recommended weights provided with the SCFs without any
adjustment.

                                                        5
A rising probability of equity ownership through mutual funds accounts for the difference.

The rising ownership of tax-deferred accounts during this period, however, and the attendant

equity ownership through these accounts, results in a substantial increase in the total number

of households who own corporate stock.

       Second, the fraction of households owning tax-exempt bonds increased by about three

percentage points between 1983 and 1992. This reflects the declining ownership of tax-

exempt securities by commercial banks and insurance companies over this period. There is

also a roughly-equal increase in the probability of owning taxable bonds.

       Third, there is a sharp increase in tax-deferred asset ownership: the probability of

ownership rises by roughly 5.5 percentage points between 1983 and 1992. This reflects the

expansion of Individual Retirement Accounts in the early 1980s and the rapid growth of

401(k) plans and related retirement saving plans in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Poterba,

Venti, and Wise (1996) summarize these developments.

       Fourth, the probabilities of owning bank accounts and other financial assets were

roughly unchanged over the period. This reflects in part the high initial market penetration

for these accounts and the continued household reliance on these accounts for a variety of

financial functions.

       The two lower panels of Table 1 underscore the important difference between the

average portfolio and the aggregate portfolio. For example, while assets in bank accounts

represented 52.2 percent of the total financial assets in the average portfolio, they accounted

for only 25.4 percent of total financial assets in household portfolios. The portfolios of

higher net worth households are therefore less heavily invested in bank accounts and similar



                                                6
assets than are those of lower net worth households. There are corresponding differentials

between the average portfolio and aggregate portfolio share in taxable equity, 6.15 percent

versus 19.8 percent, and in tax-exempt bonds, 2.0 versus 9.4 percent.

       The data on aggregate portfolio shares shown in the last panel of Table 1 track the

substantial growth of assets held in tax-deferred accounts between 1983 and 1992. Assets in

these accounts represented 14.7 percent of total financial assets in 1983, compared with 26.7

percent in 1992. The importance of these assets in the average portfolio also rose sharply

during this period.

       Table 1 presents summary information on portfolio allocation for all households,

pooling those of different age categories. One group of households that attracts particular

attention in studies of saving behavior and portfolio choice is the elderly. Because wealth

accumulation typically takes place over a household’s entire working life, elderly households

have higher assets, on average, than younger households. Their behavior is therefore

weighted more than the behavior of younger households in determining the composition of

the aggregate household portfolio.   In addition, for the elderly who have accumulated limited

assets, the portfolio choices made early in retirement can determine the resources available for

the later years of retirement.

       Because the elderly are of special interest, Table 2 presents information analogous to

that in Table 1, but only for those households headed by someone over the age of 65. Many

of the broad patterns resemble those in the earlier table. The bank account share of the

average household’s portfolio, 65.5 percent in 1992, is almost twice the share in the aggregate

portfolio for elderly households (36.9 percent). Tax deferred assets grew less quickly



                                                7
between 1983 and 1992 for elderly households than for the entire population, reflecting the

link between employment and access to these accounts.              The aggregate portfolio held by

elderly households differs from that for all households in that it includes more equity (23

percent versus 20 percent of total financial assets), more assets in bank accounts (37 percent

versus 25 percent), and more holdings of taxable and tax exempt bonds (20 percent versus 16

percent). The greater portfolio shares in each of these categories are counterbalanced by

significantly lower holdings in tax-deferred accounts, 11 percent versus 27 percent, for elderly

as opposed to all households.

        Table 3 presents more detailed information on the total holdings of financial assets by

households of different ages in each of our sample years. The table is designed to highlight

cohort-related differences in both the level of financial assets and the accumulation of

financial assets over the nine years spanned by the data. The two panels of Table 3 present

the mean and median financial asset holdings in each survey year by various birth cohorts,

which we define as including households headed by individuals who were born within three

years of each other. We identify each cohort by the age that the households born in its

middle year had attained in 1983. The “age 28 cohort,” for example, includes all households

in which the head of household was born in 1954, 1955, or 1956.4                 This cohort was between

27 and 29 years old in 1983, between 33 and 35 in 1989, and between 36 and 38 in 1992.

All of the entries in Table 3 are reported in constant 1992 dollars, and standard errors are

reported in parentheses below the means or medians.


    4We define the head of household for a married couple to be the spouse that earned more labor income or, if
neither worked, the older spouse. It is therefore possible that a given household would be part of different
cohorts in different years if the head of the household stops being the primary earner or leaves the household.
This may account for some of the anomalies in the tabulations of assets at older ages.

                                                       8
        Table 3 shows a number of interesting patterns in asset accumulation. For example,

the information in the table can be used to compare asset accumulation across households in

different cohorts. To illustrate these comparisons, consider the cohort that was 28 in 1983.

The mean financial assets for this cohort, $30,583 in 1989 and $27,315 in 1992, were

somewhat lower than those of the cohorts that were 34 ($33,182) and 37 ($31,195) in 1983,

respectively. This could lead to a conclusion that households in the younger cohort were

saving less than those in older cohorts.        Bemheim and Scholz (1995) focus on comparisons of

this type in their recent study of retirement saving by the “Baby Boom” generation.

        The data in Table 3 show that households enter a period of fairly rapid accumulation

of financial assets when they are about 34 years old, and that their holdings of financial assets

peak at about age 58. Movements in mean asset holdings are more pronounced than

movements in the median, reflecting the well documented fact that many households don’t

ever accumulate particularly large stocks of financial wealth.’

        The last three rows of Table 3 present summary information on total financial assets

for three groups of households in each sample year: all households, all households with a

head over the age of 62, and all households with a head over the age of 65. The comparisons

of these groups ilIustrate the greater financial assets of the elderly than of households in

general. In 1992, the average household headed by someone over the age of 65 held

$102,917 in financial assets, compared with $70,028 for all households. Median financial

assets for both the elderly ($14,550) and all households ($9,779) are much lower than mean



    ‘Poterba,Venti, and Wise (1994) show that the wealth distribution for households at retirement age is highly
skewed, and that many households reach retirement with virtually no resources other than the annuity value of
Social Security and the equity in their home.

                                                        9
assets, but they show the same pattern as the means.

       Comparisons of mean and median financial assets for the elderly households in the

three Surveys of Consumer Finance raise some questions. The mean financial assets of

households over the age of 65 in 1989 was nearly twenty percent lower than the comparable

mean assets for households over age 65 in 1983, and ten percent lower than the value for

comparable households in 1992. Yet median assets were higher for the age 65+ cohort in

1989 than in either 1983 or 1992. The patterns of mean and median asset holdings for all

households do not exhibit such reversals of trend; both mean,and median financial assets for

the whole population were higher in 1992 than in 1989, and higher in 1989 than in 1983.

       Table 3 focuses on total financial assets, the sum of all of the asset categories we

considered in Table 1. We also construct a measure of household net worth. One component

of net worth is total assets, which includes total financial assets as well as holdings of owner-

occupied real estate, other real estate assets, net equity in personally owned businesses, and

miscellaneous assets. The other component is total debt, which equals the sum of financial

debt, owner-occupied real estate debt, other real estate debt, and miscellaneous debt. We do

J& include the actuarial present value of Social Security benefits (net of taxes), or of benefits

paid by defined benefit pension plans, in our measure of net worth.

       Table 4 presents summary statistics on the ownership and allocation of the various

components of net worth. The table is structured in the same way as Table 1, which

described financial assets. Several findings on the ownership patterns for non-financial assets

bear comment. Between 1983 and 1992, the probability of holding owner-occupied real

estate assets stayed roughly constant, while the probability of owing debt on owner-occupied



                                                10
real estate increased. There were decreases in the probabilities of holding other real estate

assets, business assets, and miscellaneous debt, and little change in the probabilities of

owning financial assets, financial debt, and other real estate debt.

        The second and third panels of Table 4 show an increase in the share of household

debt between 1983 and 1992, and they suggest that this increase is particularly important for

lower net worth households.6 The middle panel in Table 4 shows that for the average

household, as a share of total assets, financial debt rose by 1.2 percentage points, owner-

occupied real estate debt rose by 2.8 percentage points, and other debt rose by 3.6 percentage

points. The aggregate household balance sheet shows an increase in owner-occupied real

estate debt of 3.3 percentage points over the same period, but little increase in other debt

components.

        The two panels also show a shift in the composition of total assets away from

personally owned businesses and toward miscellaneous assets, with little or no change in the

proportion of financial and real estate assets. The bottom panel shows that total assets are on

average comprised of 30 percent financial assets, 32 percent owner occupied real estate, 15

percent other real estate, 17 percent business net worth, and 6 percent miscellaneous assets.

        Table 5 presents information similar to that in Table 4, but the sample is restricted to

households with heads over the age of 65 in each year. There are some differences between

the elderly and the population at large in the evolution of net worth.            Owner-occupied

housing, for example, became a more important component of net worth between 1983 and


    % scale the value of net worth components relative to the average and aggregate portfolio, we divide each
component by total assets, rather than net worth, since approximately ten percent of the households report
negative net worth in each year, and for these househoIds, dividing by net worth would yield unreliable data
values.

                                                      11
1992 for elderly households, but not for households in general. The probability that an

elderly household would own a home rose from 74.6 percent to 77.7 percent over this nine

year period, and the aggregate share of owner-occupied housing as a fraction of total assets

held by elderly households rose from 24.3 percent to 28.8 percent. This increase is not

substantially offset by an expansion of mortgage debt. Over the 1983-1992 time period,

financial assets became less important as a fraction of total assets for elderly households, with

a decline from 41.6 percent to 38 percent. This occurred coincident with an increase in the

importance of financial assets, relative to total assets, for the entire population.

        Comparisons between the elderly population and the population in general also reveal

differences in the composition of net worth. Owner-occupied       real estate constitutes a smaller

share of total assets, 28.8 percent, for the elderly than for households of all ages (33 percent).

Financial assets are substantially more important for the elderly, and business net worth, an

asset that is likely to be correlated with active participation in a business, is less important.

Total debt, and especially owner-occupied debt, as a fraction of total assets are lower for the

elderly than for the general population.

        Table 6 shows the age-specific pattern of mean and median net worth for each of the

sample years. Once again, households are categorized by the age of the household head in

1983; this is the same classification scheme used in Table 3 above. The data in this table

provide the most direct evidence on the extent of household wealth accumulation at different

ages. Several findings deserve commentary. First, net worth tends to peak when households

are in their early sixties.   Median net worth at this peak, in 1992, was roughly $130,000;

mean net worth was roughly three times greater.        Second, both mean and median net worth



                                                  12
rose between 1983 and 1992 for households that were less than 52 years old in 1983, but

beyond this age, net worth did not increase and in many cases declined. Finally, the large

standard errors on the net worth entries make it difficult to draw strong conclusions at some

ages. This is particularly important to remember when evaluating the findings for older

households, where there is some evidence that net worth moves in one direction between

1983 and 1989, and then in another direction between 1989 and 1992.

       Table 7 is similar to Table 6, except that it shows the age-specific pattern of total

asset holdings rather than net worth. These summary statistics are of interest for two reasons.

First, the provide important background for interpreting the graphs shown below on the share

of total assets that are allocated to various asset categories at different ages.   Second, they

present some information on gross asset accumulation profiles. As an illustration of this use

of the data, the results suggest that young households, those between the ages of roughly

twenty and thirty-five, accumulated assets over the 1983-1992 period. For older households,

the large standard errors on the cohort-specific asset values in each year make it more

difficult to draw strong conclusions about the slope of the age-assets profile.



2. Financial Asset Allocations

       The summary statistics presented in the last section provide important evidence on the

nature of household portfolios in a cross-section of households, and on the evolution of

household portfolios over time. In this section, we impose additional structure on the net

worth and asset ownership data, and we decompose changes in financial asset allocation into




                                                  13
age and cohort effects. Our methodology is based on a specification of the form:

                                                      21
 (2)                  f(Y$     =a + 24
                                     C P,,agei,, + C YmCOhOei,m + Eij
                                       n=2            m=2


where yij is the holdings of asset ‘j’ by household ‘i,’ ageis is a dummy variable for whether

the current age of the household head is in the three-year interval centered on Age = 3*n +

16, and cohort,, is a dummy variable for whether age of the household head in 1983 fell in

the three-year interval centered on Age = 3*m + 16. Because of the oversampling of the

high-income households in the Surveys of Consumer Finances, we estimate equation (2) using

the year-specific sample weights, normalked so that the sum of the weights for the whole

population in each year is the same.

       We estimate equation (2) for each financial asset category with two forms of the

dependent variable. The first is a probit for whether the household has positive amounts of

the asset category (y, > 0 in equation (1)). The second is a Tobit for the share of the

household’s total financial assets that is held in each category (yij Ni in equation (1)). These

dependent variables correspond to summary information presented in the earlier tables.

       For each specification, we focus on three issues in interpreting the results. The first is

whether the cohort effects are significantly different from zero, or alternatively, whether there

appear to be year-of-birth related differences in the asset allocation patterns of households.

Consider the null hypothesis


 (3)                                     Ho: Ym = 0 Vm

Estimates of equation (2) with this constraint imposed are “no cohort effects” specifications;

estimates without this constraint allow for cohort effects. We use a likelihood ratio test to

                                                 14
determine whether the cohort effects are jointly significant. If they are, then different birth

cohorts have significantly different probabilities of holding or portfolio shares of given

financial assets. Finding that there are cohort effects in asset demands implies that data from

different birth cohorts that comprise a single cross-section may be difficult to aggregate.

       The second issue that we consider is whether there is the presence or absence of

patterns in the estimated age coefficients, p,. These estimates reveal whether households

follow the precepts of the simplest models of portfolio choice with time-invariant risk

aversion, which imply that p, = 0 for all n, or the precepts of financial planners, who often

suggest pD+r < p, for risky assets. Much of the remainder of this section is devoted to

describing the pattern of cohort effects for different asset categories.

       Finally, we are interested in the methodological question of how the estimated age

coefficients (j3,) change when cohort effects are introduced into the specifications. Any

changes will illustrate the importance of utilizing repeated cross-sections, as opposed to static

cross-sections, to analyze portfolio allocations.

       Figure 1 illustrates our graphical methodology for presenting the results of this

estimation. The first graph displays two age-ownership profiles for equity held in taxable

brokerage accounts.   The profile depicted with triangles represents the predicted values from a

regression of equation (2) without cohort effects. This profile is therefore the age-ownership

profile that one would expect to find in any population cross-section. The profile is

increasing with age until age 43, when it peaks at around 22 percent of households owning

corporate stock directly. The profile levels off after age 43, with a slight decline at much

older ages.


                                                    15
        The profile depicted with circles in Figure 1 represents the predicted values from

equation (2) allowing for cohort effects. The predicted values at each age are based on the

cohort effect for those households who were age 28 in 1983. This particular cohort is

roughly the middle cohort in the United States’ Baby Boom generation. The slope of the age-

ownership profile for this cohort is very close to the cross-sectional profile until roughly age

43, but, after that age, the cohort-specific profile is much lower. This difference implies that

a given cohort of households can be expected to divest their direct equity holdings as they

age faster than the cross-section evidence suggests (i.e., the cohort-specific probabilities of

directly owning corporate stock have been declining over time).

        The cohort effects are identified by the differences in the ownership probabilities of

different cohorts at the same age, which naturally occurs in different years of the survey. The

second graph, located in the lower left hand comer of Figure 1, shows the predicted

probability that households born in each cohort will own taxable equity when they reach age

46. The use of age 46 is only a normalization; the shape of this curve would be the same for

any age, since it depends only on the pattern of cohort effects. The vertical line in this figure

indicates the cohort that was age 28 in 1983; this point corresponds to the same point on the

first graph (line with circles).

        Table 8 reports statistical tests for the importance of cohort effects for various asset

categories. The entries in the first row are the p-values for the joint significance of the cohort

effects in the two specifications we consider. The results show that there are statistically

significant differences in ownership probabilities across different cohorts. Figure 1 helps the

interpretation of this finding, since it shows that older cohorts were more likely to hold equity



                                                 16
directly than were younger cohorts over this time period.’

        The two graphs in the right panel of Figure 1 present the predicted values, by age and

cohort, for estimates of equation (2) in which the dependent variable is the household’s share

of financial assets allocated to directly held stock.* The divergence between the age-

allocation profiles with and without cohort effects mirrors the divergence in the age-

ownership profiles. Average asset allocations to directly held equity peak at about five

percent at age 43 and decline thereafter. Compared to the ownership profile, the allocation

profile rises to this peak less rapidly and declines more rapidly.

        Table 8 shows the p-value for the joint significance of the cohort effects. The null

hypothesis of no cohort effects is rejected at standard significance levels. As in the estimates

of ownership probabilities, the cohort effects are increasing with the household’s age. This

suggests that currently older cohorts of households tend to devote a higher fraction of their

assets to directly-held stock.

        We now employ the graphical analysis of Figure 1 for other asset categories. Figure 2

shows analogous graphs for all taxable equity, including brokerage accounts as well as equity

mutual funds. These graphs demonstrate that the patterns in Figure 1 reflect changes in the

institutional arrangements for holding the equity, rather than changes in age-specific patterns

of equity ownership per se. The graphs in the upper panel of Figure 2 reveal virtually no




     ‘It is not possible to simultaneously estimate age, cohort, and year effects without imposing functional form
restrictions, such as a quadratic specification in age or a linear time trend. As a result, our identifying
assumption may in fact be the result of secular trends toward lower directly held equity ownership.

    ‘The estimates of equation (2) with asset shares as the dependent variable do not impose the adding up
constraint on the asset shares for taxable equity, tax-exempt bonds, taxable bonds, tax-deferred accounts, bank
accounts, and other ftnancial assets, that they must sum to unity.

                                                         17
differences in the age profiles of ownership and allocation when cohort effects are included in

the model. The relatively flat age profiles suggest that households, do not necessarily follow

the popular financial advice to switch from stocks to bonds as they approach retirement.g The

cohort differences in ownership and allocation in the bottom graphs do not display a strong

pattern with the household’s age in 1983. Additionally, the p-values shown in Table 8 for the

joint significance of the cohort effects show that the null hypothesis of no cohort effects is

not rejected at standard significance levels.

        Figure 3 shows the age profiles for tax-exempt bonds. Both direct and indirect

holdings of tax exempt bonds (through mutual funds) are included in the statistics that

underlie both of these figures. The age profiles for tax-exempt bonds are sharply increasing

when cohort effects are included, in contrast to the flat profile found in the cross-section.

The difference is primarily due to the statistically significant and downward sloping pattern of

cohort effects shown in the bottom graphs. Although the current generation of older cohorts

does not hold tax-exempts, the youngest generations do hold them, and this is reflected in the

estimated cohort effects. These findings are consistent with the growing importance of

municipal bonds as a retail financial asset, and with the greater experience with this asset on

the part of younger households.

        The age profiles for taxable bonds in Figure 4 resemble those for taxable equity, in

that the profiles increase rapidly until about age 40 and remain steady thereafter. The profiles

for taxable bonds that exclude cohort effects turn sharply lower after the peak, indicating that



    gSince tax-deferred accounts may also be invested in equities, households could be reducing their overall
equity positions if they were lowering the equity share of their tax-deferred accounts.


                                                        18
a cross-sectional analysis would overstate the reduction in taxable bond holdings over the life

cycle. The bottom graphs show a sharply declining pattern of cohort effects in both

ownership and allocation.

        Figure 5 presents the graphs for assets held in tax-deferred accounts, including

Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs), Keoghs, defined contribution (DC) pension plans, and

other employer-sponsored retirement accounts such as 401(k) plans.” In all cases, the

investment earnings on these accounts are not taxed as they compound, and, in most cases,

the initial contributions to the accounts are tax-deductible. Income tax is typically due only

when the proceeds of the account are received as income in retirement.” As in the case of

taxable bonds, the profiles with cohort effects do not slope downward later in life to the

extent that the profiles without cohort effects do. The estimates predict that the cohort that

was age 28 in 1983 will hold approximately one third of its financial assets in tax-deferred

accounts when it reaches age 60, and more generally, that younger cohorts will rely much

more heavily on tax-deferred accounts than did earlier generations.

        There is some decline with age in the reliance on traditional bank accounts, including

certificates of deposit and money market accounts, and in the holdings of other financial




     ‘The SCFs from 1989 and 1992 also report information on the assets that are actually owned in the tax-
deferred accounts (e.g., stocks or bonds). Because the SCF from 1983 does not provide this information, we do
not disaggregate this category further. Poterba, Venti, and Wise (1997) project the current rates of age-specific
401(k) contributions for individuals born in 1960 and 1970. They find that assuming that 401(k) assets are
invested in bonds, the mean 401(k) assets at retirement will be $50,111 (in constant 1992 dollars) for the 1960
cohort and $66,765 for the 1970 cohort. If these assets are invested in the S&P 500, however, and if the average
return on stocks in coming decades is similar to that in the last seven decades, then the balances in 4Ol(k)s will
be $181,567 and S256,056 respectively. These asset balances would represent very large shares of household
wealth at retirement, and could be compared with an actuarial value of Social Security wealth of $103,392 on
average.

    “See Shoven and Wise (1996) for a careful analysis of the effective tax rates on tax-deferred accounts.

                                                        19
assets, which are primarily the cash value of whole life insurance and trust accounts. Figure

6 presents the four graphs for bank accounts. ‘* The cohort effects in the portfolio share

equation are statistically significant and increasing for older ages, suggesting that younger

cohorts rely less on these fixed-income assets for holding wealth. Additionally, the age-

ownership profiles increase slowly with age while the age-allocation profiles decline over

most of the life cycle. The cohort effects in the ownership specifications do not follow an

obvious pattern over the life cycle, and in the case of Other Financial Assets, they are

statistically indistinguishable from zero.



3. Financial Assets in Total Net Worth

       This section extends our analysis of the asset ownership and allocation profiles to

broader components of net worth. We consider aggregate financial assets, owner-occupied

real estate, and holdings of business assets. The discussion and presentation parallels that for

distinct classes of financial assets in the previous section.

       Figure 7 graphs the ownership and allocation of financial assets as a share of total

assets. The estimated age profiles for both ownership and allocation show an increase when

households are young, followed by a decline until the household reaches age 40. Thereafter,

financial assets comprise a steadily increasing share of total assets. The cohort effects for

ownership increase and then decrease over the life cycle. The cohort effects for the share of

financial assets in total assets show a slightly increasing pattern with age in 1983.

       Table 9 presents the results of tests for the joint significance of the cohort effects in



   ‘The graphs for other financial assets are similar and therefore not presented.

                                                       20
the ownership and asset allocation equations based on total assets. For the asset share

equations for total financial assets, the null hypothesis of equal cohort effects is rejected at

standard significance levels. The table also shows results for other asset categories, and with

the exception of other real estate debt, finds statistically significant cohort effects for all asset

categories.

       Figure 8 presents the graphs showing ownership and share profiles for fmancial debt,

which is the sum of outstanding balances on credit cards and lines of credit that are not

directly secured by the value of real estate. The age-ownership profile shows increasing

ownership with age at young ages, peaking at about 50 percent by age 43 and then falling

steadily to below 20 percent at the oldest ages. Controlling for cohort effects leads to a

somewhat sharper decline with age. Controlling for cohort effects has little effect on the age

profile of financial debt as a share of total assets, which shows a similar pattern of a more

rapid increase to a peak of about 7 percent at age 31, declining to below 2 percent at the

oldest ages, In both the ownership and allocation specifications, the cohort effects are

statistically significant and the point estimates of these effects rise, slightly, between ages 30

and 60 (these ages correspond to the age of the household head in 1983).

       Figures 9 and 10 show the graphs for owner occupied real estate assets and associated

debt. Owner occupied real estate assets are simply the value of the household’s primary

residence. Owner occupied real estate debt includes the amounts remaining on mortgages and

home equity loans on that property plus the outstanding balances on any lines of credit

secured by the home. The age-ownership profile of owner occupied assets rises from about

10 percent for the youngest ages and then remains fairly steady above 70 percent for ages



                                                  21
above 45. More surprisingly, the fraction of total assets comprised by the value of owner-

occupied assets remains steady at about 40 percent for all ages above the mid-30s. Though

we reject the null hypothesis of no cohort effects in both cases, in neither case do cohort

effects show a systematic pattern across different ages in 1983 or affect the shape of the age

profiles.

        The age-ownership profile of owner-occupied debt more closely resembles that of

financial debt than of owner-occupied assets. It rises to a peak of about 60 percent at age 50

and then declines to about 10 percent at the oldest ages. As a percentage of total assets, the

amount of owner-occupied debt peaks at about 25 percent between ages 43 - 52 and then

declines to below 10 percent at the oldest ages. The cohort effects show a declining pattern

with age in 1983, with the cohort aged 28 in 1983 predicted to have almost twice the share of

debt in total assets when it reaches age 46 that the cohort aged 61 in 1983 had when it was

46. Younger generations clearly borrow against the value of their homes to a greater extent

than did earlier generations. Controlling for cohort effects shifts the peak of the age-

allocation profile by about 20 years, from 35 to 55.13

        Figure 11 plots the results for other real estate equity, which includes all real estate

other than the primary residence, such as second homes properties held for investment

purposes. We have combined both assets and debt into the same category in the graphs. The

age profiles reach their peaks of 27 percent ownership and 7 percent allocation at about age

60, and the inclusion of cohort effects tends to flatten out the profile. The cohort effects are


     13Figure 11 is the most obvious example of a sharp increase in the age profile for one of the later age
groups. Another example is Figure 9, which also pertains to a debt measure. Such upturns were present to a
lesser extent in taxable equity and tax exempt bonds in the previous section. A reason why such irregularities
are possible is that we havl: fewer observations at the higher ages than in the middle of the age distribution.

                                                        22
statistically significant and show both an increasing pattern with age and substantial variation

around this trend.

        Figure 12 presents the results for net equity in personally owned businesses. These

enterprises could be sole proprietorships, partnerships, or Subchapter S Corporations. In most

instances, at least one member of the household actively manages the business. In other

cases, the household holds a passive interest in the enterprise, such as a limited partnership.

The age profile for ownership of net equity in a personally held business increases rapidly

until about age 37 and then declines as the household ages. In the late thirties, about 15

percent of households own businesses and the average share of total assets comprised by

business net worth is 5 percent. The declines are much more pronounced in the profile that

includes cohort effects than in the profile that does not. The cohort effects are statistically

significant and increasing with age in 1983.14

        The results presented in this section and the previous one suggest two broad

conclusions. First, there are important differences across asset classes in the age-specific

probability of asset ownership and in the fraction of household assets that are allocated to

different assets at different ages. The notion that all assets can be treated as identical from

the standpoint of analyzing household wealth accumulation is clearly not supported by the

data. Households tend to accumulate liquid financial assets early in the life cycle, followed

by accumulation of real estate and retirement saving assets, Second, there are evident

differences in the asset ownership probabilities of different birth cohorts. Older households

were more likely to hold corporate stock, and less likely to hold tax-exempt bonds, than


     141n order to conserve space, the figures for miscellaneous assets and debts (consisting primarily of vehicles,
collectibles, and other loans owed to or by the household) are omitted.

                                                         23
younger households, at any given age. These differences across cohorts are important to

recognize when analyzing asset accumulation profiles.



4. Discussion and Conclusions

       The results presented in the previous two sections describe the evolution of household

portfolios over the life cycle. Empirical evidence on the structure of household portilios

bears on a variety of questions in financial economics and public finance.

       One question that our results address is the degree to which the standard life cycle

framework of asset accumulation can be applied to different components of wealth. The life

cycle model posits a “hump shaped” pattern of asset accumulation as households age: they

accumulate assets during their working years and spend down those assets during their

retirement years. Our results suggest that the hump-shaped pattern is not uniform across all

assets. For example, as a percentage of total assets, financial assets show just the opposite

pattern; they decline as households age, and then begin to increase at advanced ages.

Investment real estate and equity in privately-held businesses do display a hump-shaped

pattern, as in the life cycle model, but owner occupied housing does not, since there is no

evident decline in its ownership at older agesI

       The standard life-cycle model does not distinguish between various types of assets.

Yet when assets exhibit different degrees of liquidity, .with for example financial assets more

liquid than business net worth or other real estate assets, the age pattern of asset holdings

may contain important clues for evaluating competing theories of saving behavior.



   lSVenti and Wise (1990) discuss the absence of substantial dissaving out of housing assets among the elderly.

                                                      24
Precautionary saving models suggest that households should seek assets that can be liquidated

in the event of a financial need. The different age profiles that we identify should therefore

provide grist for future research on motives for saving.

       A second issue that our findings address is the importance of cohort-specific factors,

such as experience with historical returns on different assets, or exposure to financial

advertisements, in shaping portfolio patterns.   One result that our findings suggest is the

important heterogeneity in the composition of portfolios across different cohorts. Our

statistical tests show that cohort effects are significant for most components of financial assets

and net worth. Among financial assets, the only category in which there was no trend in the

cohort effects by age in 1983 was taxable equity. Baby Boomers show roughly the average

propensity to hold taxable equity and the average portfolio share of taxable equity. Younger

cohorts show greater investments in taxable bonds, tax-exempt bonds, and tax-deferred

accounts than do older cohorts. They show lower investments in bank accounts and other

financial assets. Compared to previous cohorts, the Baby Boom generation appears to be

more willing to take advantage of the more sophisticated financial instruments that have

become available over the past twenty years.

       Younger cohorts have also leveraged their assets to a greater extent than older cohorts.

The greater use of debt may also be the result of liberalization of financial markets over the

last two decades. Nonetheless, the burden of servicing this debt will reduce the extent to

which the Baby Boomers can use their assets to support consumption in retirement. Our

results suggest that borrowing behavior should receive attention, along with asset

accumulation, in studies of financial preparation for retirement.



                                                 25
        We explored some simple explanations for the estimated cohort effects by estimating

asset holding and asset share specifications including other explanatory variables, such as the

level of family income, the marginal tax rate on interest income, household size, and marital

status, as well as the set of variables in equation (2).16 While these additional covariates

generally improved the fit of the model, for most of the asset and debt categories we

analyzed, the estimated age and cohort coefficients changed very little as a result of these

specification changes.

        Detailed analysis of particular asset categories may be needed to explain some of the

cohort effects. For example, Samwick (1996) analyzes the market for tax-shelter investments

in real estate, oil and gas, and other areas, before and after the Tax Reform Act of 1986

reduced the incentives for investing in tax shelters.         Older cohorts may hold assets that were

originally purchased as part of these tax shelter investments, while younger households may

not hold these assets, because of the historical investment environment in which they made

portfolio decisions.    Further work modelling and explaining the nature of the cohort effects is

clearly needed.

        The important cohort patterns we identify suggest that it is essential to distinguish

between the saving and asset accumulation of various cohorts as they approach retirement.

The experience of one cohort as it approaches retirement may not translate to other, younger,

cohorts. These results provide a warrant for the type of research now being undertaken, in

many contexts, on the retirement planning and preparation of the Baby Boom cohort in the

United States.


    16Poterba and Samwick (1997) report more detailed results on some of these specifications, with a particular
focus on how taxation affects asset demand.

                                                       26
       One significant issue that we have not addressed is the role of financial market

frictions in explaining age-specific patterns of asset holding and portfolio structure. Down-

payment requirements for purchasing owner-occupied      homes are an example of such a

friction. In most cases, households must accumulate a downpayment of between ten and

twenty percent of house value before they can obtain a mortgage for the balance of their

home. This could explain a pattern of financial asset accumulation for young households

before they purchase a home, as well as the high level of real estate assets (and low level of

financial assets) for households in the years immediately after home purchase.

       Another example of institutional constraints that might affect accumulation profiles

arises from tax-deferred retirement saving accounts. The rapid growth of these accounts has

led to a substantial increase in the share of assets that many households hold through these

accounts. Because these accounts make it easier for households to purchase some types of

assets than others (traded equity or bonds are easy to hold in these accounts; net worth in

private businesses would be much harder), the diffusion of these accounts may in part explain

the shifting asset ownership patterns of different cohorts.

       Further work is needed to explore the implications of life-cycle models with realistic

financial market frictions, and alternative models of saving behavior based on precautionary

or other factors, for the structure and development of household portfolios. The rich variation

in portfolio structure provides a substantial body of information on motives for saving that

has yet to be fully exploited.




                                                27
                                         References

Advisory Council on Social Security (1996). Q ua drennial Report. Washington: Social
Security Administration.

Avery, Robert B. and Gregory E. Elliehausen (1988). 1983 Survey of Consumer Finances:
Technical Manual and Codebook. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

Avery, Robert B. and Arthur B. Kennickell (1988). 1986 Survey of Consumer Finances:
Technical Manual and Codebook. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

Bemheim, B. Douglas (1994). “Do Households Appreciate Their Financial Vulnerabilities?
An Analysis of Actions, Perceptions, and Public Policy.” Manuscript, Stanford University.

Bemheim, B. Douglas and J. Karl Scholz (1995). “Patterns of Saving by U.S. Households in
the 1980s: Evidence from the Surveys of Consumer Finance.” Manuscript, Stanford.

Bodie, Zvi, Robert C. Merton, and William F. Samuelson (1992). “Labor Supply Flexibility
and Portfolio Choice in a Lifecycle Model.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 16
(July-Ott), 427-449.

Canner, Niko, N. Gregory Mankiw, and David N. Weil (1997). “An Asset Allocation Puzzle.”
American Economic Review 87 (March), 18 1-191.

Congressional Budget Office (1993). Baby Roomers in Retirement: An Early Perspective.
Washington: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Curtin, Richard T., F. Thomas Juster and James N. Morgan (1989). “Survey Estimates of
Wealth: An Assessment of Quality.” in Lipsey and Tice (eds.) The Measurement of Saving,
Investment, and Wealth. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 473-552.

Kennickell, Arthur B. (1992). Description of the First Public Release of the Full 1989 SCF
Cross-Section Dataset and 1989 Survey of Consumer Finances Codebook. Washington:
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kennickell, Arthur B. (1995). 1992 Survey of Consumer Finances: Technical Manual and
Codebook. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.

Kimball, Miles S. (1993). “Standard Risk Aversion.” Econometrica 61 (May), 589-611.

Poterba, James M. and Andrew A. Samwick (1997). “Taxation and Household Portfolio
Composition: Evidence from Tax Reforms of the 1980s.” Manuscript, Cambridge:

                                              28
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise (1994). “Targeted Retirement Saving
and the Net Worth of Elderly Americans.” American Economic Review 84 (May), 180-185.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise (1996). “How Retirement Saving
Programs Increase Saving.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10, 91-112.

Poterba, James M., Steven F. Venti, and David A. Wise (1997). “Implications of Rising
Personal Retirement Saving.” Manuscript, National Bureau of Economic Research, April.

Sarnuelson, Paul A. (1989). “A Case At Last for Age-Phased Reduction in Equity.”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 86 (November), 9048-9051.

Samuelson, Paul A. (1990). “Long Run Risk Tolerance When Equity Returns Are
Mean-Regressing: Pseudoparadoxes and Vindication of Businessman’s Risk.” in W. Brainard,
W. Nordhaus, and H. Watts (eds.) Macroeconomics, Finance, and Economic Policy: Essays in
Honor of James Tobin. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Samwick, Andrew A. (1996). “Tax Shelters and Passive Losses After the Tax Reform Act of
1986.” in Martin S. Feldstein and James M. Poterba (eds.) Empirical Foundations of
Household Taxation. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 193-226.

Samwick, Andrew A. and Jonathan S. Skinner (1995). “How Will Defined Contribution Plans
Affect Retirement Income?” Manuscript, Dartmouth College, June.

Shoven, John B. and David A. Wise (1996). “The Taxation of Pensions: A Shelter Can
Become a Trap.” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 5815.

Venti, Steven F. and David A. Wise (1990). “But They Don’t Want To Reduce Housing
Equity.” in David A. Wise (ed.) Issues in the Economics of Aging. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.

Wolff, Edward N. (1987). “Estimates of Household Wealth Inequality in the United’States,
1962-1983.” Review of Income and Wealth 33 (September), 231-256.

Wolff, Edward N. (1994). “Trends in Household Wealth in the United States, 1962-1983 and
1983-1989.” Review of Income and Wealth 40 (June), 143-174.

Wolff, Edward N. (1997). “Who Are the Rich? A Demographic Profile of High-Income and
High-Wealth Americans.” Manuscript, New York University, March.

World Bank (1994). Averting the Old Age Crisis: Policies to Protest the Old and Pronwte
Growth. Policy Research Report Series. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

                                             29
                                       Table            1
        Ownership and Allocation of Financial Assets for all Households, by Year

Financial Asset               1983                     1989                    1992
                                             Probability of Ownership
Taxable Equity                20.15                    19.04                   20.98
 Directly Held                19.07                    15.91                   16.90
Tax-Exempt Bonds              3.31                     6.23                    6.77
Taxable Bonds                 23.99                    27.95                   27.23
Tax-Deferred Accts            32.86                    37.85                   39.33
Bank Accounts                 87.63                    85.65                   87.21
Other Fin Assets              36.52                    36.62                   36.60
                                      Average Share of Household Portfolio
Taxable Equity                5.78                     5.53                    6.15
 Directly Held                5.50                     4.58                    4.43
Tax-Exempt Bonds              0.76                     1.84                    1.96
Taxable Bonds                 3.61                     4.63                    4.57
Tax-Deferred Accts            15.14                    19.59                   21.67
Bank Accounts                 58.53                   54.41                    52.15
Other Fin Assets              16.19                    14.01                   13.49
                                      Share of Aggregate Household Portfolio
Taxable Equity               27.32                     17.08                   19.84
 Directly Held                26.43                    14.82                   16.18
Tax-Exempt Bonds              7.15                     9.69                    9.37
Taxable Bonds                 6.26                     7.68                    6.42
Tax-Deferred Accts            14.67                   21.39                    26.61
Bank Accounts                 27.73                   30.61                    25.44
Other Fin Assets              16.87                    13.54                   12.32

Notes: Authors tabulations of Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
                                       Table 2
     Ownership and Allocation of Financial Assets for Households Over 65, by Year
Financial Asset               1983                    1989                    1992
                                            Probability of Ownership
Taxable Equity               22.77                   20.63                    21.73
 Directly Held               21.41                   18.04                    17.44
Tax-Exempt Bonds              5.80                    9.05                    11.01
Taxable Bonds                20.44                   23.49                    23.84
Tax-Deferred Accts            7.92                   17.78                    20.74
Bank Accounts                86.75                   91.11                    90.37
Other Fin Assets             37.28                   36.52                    40.97
                                     Average Share of Household Portfolio
Taxable Equity                7.89                    6.53                    6.76
 Directly Held                7.45                    5.55                    4.74
Tax-Exempt Bonds              1.36                    2.81                    3.55
Taxable Bonds                 4.35                    5.71                    4.84
Tax-Deferred Accts            2.50                    6.56                    7.63
Bank Accounts                72.37                   68.60                    65.50
Other Fin Assets             11.54                    9.79                    11.73
                                     Share of Aggregate Household Portfolio
Taxable Equity               32.75                   18.87                    23.00
 Directly Held               31.49                   16.75                    19.21
Tax-Exempt Bonds             10.56                   13.28                    11.84
Taxable Bonds                 8.92                   11.31                    7.87
Tax-Deferred         Accts    4.71                    9.31                    10.52
Bank Accounts                32.54                   37.96                    36.90
Other Fin Assets             10.53                    9.27                    9.88

Notes: Authors tabulations of Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
                                         Table 3
                       Financial Asset Holdings by Cohort and Year

Age                          Mean                                    Median
in 1983
              1983           1989         1992         1983           1989      1992
19            3850           6861         14172        419             1019     2769
             (1641)         (2297)       (4026)       (285)           (334)     (766)
22           4362           21351        20380        1029            3450      5050
             (930)          (9763)       (5632)       (256)          (1602)    (1050)
25            7687          209 14       25777        1759            3730      3579
             (1014)         (9579)       (6989)       (354)          (1545)    (1311)
28            9818           30583       27315         1970           5329      4500
             (1235)         (21500)      (9668)       (431)          (1048)    (1225)
31           13923           43207       40793         2890           12899     9100
             (7872)         (11043)     (10198)       (576)          (3067)    (1905)
34           33182           36765        54339       10880          11989     12100
             (8545)         (40992)      (16492)      (2064)         (1840)    (2848)
37           31195           61509       74160         8750           9649      8779
            (44949)         (31017)     (20004)       (1380)         (2797)    (2734)
40           35983           63865        78316        8750           8369     16479
             (6603)         (39118)      (27374)      (1793)         (2948)    (2613)
43           37911           84058       124963        9170           11390     22200
             (9625)         (28683)      (3 1557)     (2609)         (3847)    (10434)
46            8 1064         81352       104504       11520          20370     19809
            (111616)        (18713)      (27794)      (3534)         (475 1)   (5911)
49           67821           89496        144769       10170         20479      32279
            (33285)         (39970)      (56449)      (273 1)        (8974)    (16949)
52           49144           96129       124017        12479          10520    30600
            (13479)         (44938)      (29567)      (3678)         (6884)    (8643)
55           87258          109603        94693       13409          12449     15260
            (38070)         (28301)      (50803)      (2104)         (455 1)   (4793)
58           94010          102525        80019       21040          20250     10000
            (28594)         (38764)      (39221)      (5096)         (5687)    (4452)
Continued
Age in                        Mean                                    Median
1983
                1983          1989          1992          1983          1989          1992
61              91179        107870       112358         19930         11989         23600
               (37 106)      (45402)      (47727)        (3738)        (3756)        (7759)
64             162507        105022        96608         14140         3 1450        17899
               (68483)       (30246)      (45657)        (4147)        (9395)        (7558)
67             126708         91994        9632 1         14090        21500         28899
               (44063)       (43808)      (3 1806)       (5613)       (10848)       (10550)
70              123968       106879        97555         20559         42259         14550.
               (36374)       (3703 1)     (58157)        (5111)       (13891)        (7487)
73              117941        74874        94085          15890         5539          6000
               (59195)       (43876)      (34098)        (5392)        (4806)       (13079)
76              85727        107124       125394          8430         20819          8000
               (74049)       (98454)      (98233)        (3216)       (10832)        (6596)
79              75315         52666        134576        12710         11310         48029
               (5643 1)      (46839)      (147614)       (5887)        (8539)       (28254)
Over 62        117782         94749        101407         13779        23760          15680
               (23292)       (18331)      (23209)        (1696)        (4579)        (396 1)
Over 65        107915         91998       102917         13590         20370         14550
               (23875)       (21947)      (27022)        (2112)        (4655)        (4314)
All            57816         63350         70028          7599          9279         9779
Cohorts        (8793)        (7333)        (6515)         (410)         (731)        (604)
Notes: Authors’ tabulations of the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
All dollar amounts are in constant 1992 dollars. Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
Age ‘n’ refers to all households in which the head is n-l, n, or n+l in the survey year.
                                                  Table 4
                     Ownership and Allocation of Net Worth for All Households, by Year
Wealth Component                      1983                       1989                     1992
                                                       Probability of Ownership
Financial Assets                      89.79                     87.56                     88.95
Financial Debt                       41.12                      40.90                     41.33
Owner Occupied Assets                63.41                      64.72                     63.93
Owner Occupied Debt                  36.94                      39.55                     39.03
Other Real Estate Assets             21.00                      20.40                     19.35
Other Real Estate Debt                8.19                       6.97                     7.72
Business Net Worth                    14.22                     10.89                     11.31
Miscellaneous Assets                 85.34                      85.53                     87.51
Miscellaneous Debt                   48.17                      51.72                     45.41
                                               Average Share of Household Total Assets
Financial Assets                     28.84                      26.98                     27.88
Financial Debt                        9.25                       4.54                     IO.44
Owner Occupied Assets                40.24                      41.22                     40.5 1
Owner Occupied Debt                   10.31                     11.70                     13.13
Other Real Estate Assets              6.80                       6.31                     5.46
Other Real Estate Debt                1.29                       0.97                     1.08
Business Net Worth                    4.72                       3.52                     3.79
Miscellaneous Assets                 19.39                      21.97                     22.35
Miscellaneous Debt                    18.83                     36.16                     22.63
                                              Share of Aggregate Household Total Assets
Financial Assets                     29.65                      26.70                     30.02
Financial Debt                        0.60                       0.53                     0.56
Owner Occupied Assets                31.45                      33.59                     32.96
Owner Occupied Debt                   7.31                       8.92                     10.66
Other Real Estate Assets              15.18                     15.72                     14.62
Other Real Estate Debt                2.73                       3.90                     3.25
Business Net Worth                    19.22                     16.58                     16.20
Miscellaneous Assets                  4.50                       7.41                     6.20
Miscellaneous Debt                    2.19                       2.55                     1.69
Notes: Authors’tabulations of Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
                                                  Table 5
                 Ownership and Allocation of Net Worth for Households Over Age 65, by Year
Wealth Component                      1983                      1989                         1992
                                                      Probability of Ownership
Financial Assets                      88.73                     91.96                        91.19
Financial Debt                        13.20                     17.54                        23.65
Owner Occupied Assets                 74.56                     77.18                        77.68
Owner Occupied Debt                   10.24                     14.05                        11.60
Other Real Estate Assets              23.17                     20.58                        20.49
Other Real Estate Debt                2.93                      2.03                         2.47
Business Net Worth                    9.45                      5.35                         6.03
Miscellaneous Assets                  71.46                     77.03                        80.84
Miscellaneous Debt                    13.05                     16.91                        17.52
                                               Average Share of Household Total Assets
Financial Assets                      37.22                     36.20                        34.76
Financial Debt                        15.73                     1.38                         1.73
Owner Occupied Assets                 44.90                     46.23                        47.62
Owner Occupied Debt                   1.86                      2.05                         2.07
Other Real Estate Assets              6.94                      4.90                         5.15
Other Real Estate Debt                0.18                      0.15                         0.25
Business Net Worth                    3.34                      1.41                         1.92
Miscellaneous Assets                  7.60                      11.26                        10.55
Miscellaneous Debt                    1.71                      4.85                         2.20
                                              Share of Aggregate Household Total Assets
Financial Assets                      41.56                     38.29                        37.99
Financial Debt                        0.12                      0.20                         0.30
Owner Occupied Assets                 24.26                     30.12                        28.78
Owner Occupied Debt                   0.99                      1.02                         1.36
Other Real Estate Assets              17.21                     14.45                        16.59
Other Real Estate Debt                0.86                       1.44                        1.49
Business Net Worth                    14.88                     11.76                        12.18
Miscellaneous Assets                  2.10                      5.38                         4.46
Miscellaneous Debt                    0.96                      0.62                         0.73
Notes: Authors’ tabulations of Surveys of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
                                      Table 6
                       Net Worth Holdings by Cohort and Year

AiF                        Mean                                Median
in 1983
              1983         1989        1992         1983        1989      1992
19           12692        34429        43027        3559        3640     10600
             (5649)      (11141)      (19119)      (1098)      (2388)    (2828)
22           15591        68203        64151       3000         15050    21549
             (3131)      (32811)      (15314)      (766)       (3854)    (4782)
25           27048         67639       83892        7059       10979     28409
             (6452)       (15942)     (18289)      (1489)      (505 1)   (5047)
28           34061         8935 1     113924       10659       22309     29270
             (4-402)      (38760)     (69959)      (2017)      (4235)    (4662)
31           59174        146219      121372       16319        59759    50799
            (40199)      (396 10)     (35501)      (3721)      (10252)   (6366)
34          102608        149136      174983       46520        70769     66400
            (2297 1)      (83200)     (47394)      (5652)      (10452)   (12066)
37           122283      229282       201460       49299       79199     54049
            (52928)      (94758)      (51784)      (5246)      (8980)    (994 1)
40          125330        261377      25240 1      56450        86330     81300
            (15902)       (91228)     (88956)      (5006)      (16034)   (10276)
43           139495       275855      300262       66849        104989    98500
            (21681)       (87207)     (78445)     (11430)      (19541)   (20739)
46           262211       337379       316458      90389       106129    127230
            (125622)     (156663)    (74703)      (15178)      (26894)   (16171)
49          270937        279117      357069       75779       101809    133300
            (79596)      (103127)    (121208)      (8888)      (15255)   (18553)
52          203575        2933 17     35876 1      91790        111500    130679
            (43348)      (125381)    (128429)      (9962)      (15658)   (21685)
55           269377       335652      256498       88760        956 10    82099
            (118305)     (101528)    (104563)     (16018)      (20020)   (17159)
58          292612        344166      277621      107059       111050     87419
            (62470)      (205060)    (131290)     (15831)      (28337)   (18390)
Continued
Age in                       Mean                                    Median
1983
                1983          1989          1992         1983          1989         1992
61             299167        299373       296988         127029       70150        103440
              (109138)      (143490)     (157152)       (14171)      (12058)       (19882)
64             348270        298177       257417         86269       105230         97529
              (108733)      (134406)     (147107)       (11060)      (15693)       (15454)
67             36477 1       236069       217193         98059        99569        117949
              (132656)      (116156)      (64389)       (15804)      (18400)       (24983)
70             300125       243804        259474         90400       111260         88500
               (94164)      (60066)      (181154)       (10955)      (28769)       (11196)
73             240507        176476        168679        73470        49779         42700
               (74403)      (181932)      (53405)       (11117)      (15495)       (26263)
76              167327       209846       213156         62520       100699         70699
               (82805)      (117350)     (134761)       (19669)      (16965)       (11343)
79             203574        126895       230709        73150         49439         86099
               (89658)      (101769)     (198478)       (7946)       (10348)       (41080)
Over 62        269486       232101        229822        77480         95949         86900
               (39448)      (53797)       (57221)       (4059)        (8308)        (6450)
Over 65        252104       214407        221141        74559         87120         86599
               (41520)      (57636)       (57954)       (4493)       (10296)        (6978)
All             173635      20047 1        195375       51919         62229         58400
Cohorts        (15521)      (2272 1)      (18602)       (1802)        (4040)        (2278)
Notes: Authors’ tabulations of the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
All dollar amounts are in constant 1992 dollars. Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
Age ‘n’ refers to all households in which the head is n-l, n, or n+l in the survey year.
                                       Table 7
                       Total Asset Holdings by Cohort and Year

Age                        Mean                                  Median
in 1983
              1983         1989         1992         1983         1989      1992
19           15636         53596        70036        3659         9850     18739
             (6325)       (13109)      (20843)      (1459)       (2513)    (4677)
22           21769         98828       109249        5849        23079     39979
             (3786)       (33690)      (17147)       wm          (5635)    (9607)
25           42212        107443        124134      11669         26290     52130
             (6748)       (18116)      (23368)      (223 1)      (13226)   (11154)
28           53550        137356       159089       20579         57700     61349
             (5 178)      (40134)      (70784)      (4426)       (10819)   (14089)
31           82974        202935       170710       29810        102169    104000
            (40298)       (43300)      (36822)      (7611)       (14377)   (11752)
34           142963       199395       226656       80889        113470     104569
            (23705)       (86787)      (50520)      (8279)       (16955)   (12681)
37          166289        309543       25476 1      94939         132600   103750
            (53537)      (134137)      (58159)      (7184)       (15396)   (15476)
40           165970       329990       315472        96529       125729     115099
            (19237)      (106255)      (92122)      (10598)      (25017)   (17200)
43           179442       323463       349924        101419      132139    127449
            (179442)      (95543)      (83774)      (11625)      (22972)   (23158)
46           299935       379894       355593       129039        139679    139500
            (126825)     (163085)      (80892)      (14325)      (27332)   (15927)
49          321129        333108       409372       100950       141679    167649
            (95517)      (118559)     (127382)      (12296)      (21246)   (27387)
52          228999        335278       390753       115659       130350    154300
            (45437)      (150167)     (132970)      (11052)      (8948)    (19170)
55           295926       358332       285804       109519       116180     98099
            (121699)     (108612)     (116594)      (16088)      (21234)   (20028)
58          325506        370565       300889       137 130       114269    87419
            (67749)      (252822)     (157531)      (16816)      (25345)   (18237)
Continued
Age in                        Mean                                    Median
1983
                1983          1989          1992          1983          1989         1992
61             320726        3 10893       303674       135990         76569         104309
              (112048)      (144862)      (159057)      (13551)       (11751)       (19695)
64             365917        309283        265967        94500        109750         97529
              (113134)      (167223)      (163438)      (16377)       (13908)       (15454)
67             377039        252422        227279        98889         99559        125000
              (133288)      (158361)       (71180)      (16141)       (17574)       (22511)
70             313354        247760        270004        99269         114260        94349
               (96412)       (60332)      (184700)      (15671)       (24123)       (18062)
73             244194        180738        169808        74860         509 19       42700
               (74801)      (182536)      (53484)       (11125)       (13914)      (26263)
76              176245       213574        215686        62510         100699        70699
               (85189)      (118623)      (142087)      (19666)       (14994)       (11343)
79             206733        127208        234424        73150         49439         86099
               (94511)      (101860)      (198466)       (7977)       (10342)       (45202)
Over 62        278894        239619       236992         81000         99559        89579
               (40439)       (61850)      (61098)        (4339)        (938 1)      (7846)
Over 65        259694        220964       227876         77489         87120        88400
               (423 17)      (63727)      (59865)        (5122)       (11123)       (7821)
All            200016        238725       232573         73000         91319        88430
Cohorts        (16102)       (26070)      (19935)        (2213)        (4728)       (3467)
Notes: Authors’ tabulations of the Survey of Consumer Finances, 1983, 1989, and 1992.
All dollar amounts are in constant 1992 dollars. Standard errors are listed in parentheses.
Age ‘n’ refers to all households in which the head is n-l, n, or n+l in the survey year.
                                          Table 8
        Tests for Joint Significance of Cohort Effects in Ownership and Allocation
Financial Asset                        Ownership Probits              Portfolio Share Tobits
Taxable Equity                              0.0072                            0.0134
(Directly Held Only)
-___-_-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------.
Taxable Equity                               0.1508                           0.1555
Tax-Exempt Bonds                             0.0000                           0.0000
Taxable Bonds                                0.0010                           0.0001
Tax-Deferred Accts                           0.0000                           0.0000
Bank Accounts                                0.0006                           0.0000
Other Fin Assets                             0.0750                           0.0017


Notes: Authors’ estimates from the SCFs 1983, 1989, and 1992. Joint significance tests
for probits are based on a chi-square distribution with 20 degrees of freedom. Joint
significance tests for Tobits are based on an F-distribution with 20 (numerator) and 9759
(denominator) degrees of freedom.
                                          Table 9
Tests for Joint Significance of Cohort Effects in Ownership and Allocation of Total Assets
Wealth Component                    Ownership Probits           Total Asset Share Tobits
Financial Assets                          0.0018                          0.0454
Financial Debt                            0.0000                          0.0000
Owner Occupied Assets                     0.0005                          0.0418
Owner Occupied Debt                       0.0003                          0.0000
Other Real Estate Assets                  0.0484                          0.0108
Other Real Estate Debt                    0.3 106                         0.2804
Business Net Worth                        0.000 1                         0.0003
Miscellaneous Assets                      0.000 1                         0.0000
Miscellaneous Debt                        0.007 1                         0.0678


Notes: Authors’ estimates from the SCFs 1983, 1989, and 1992. Joint significance tests
for probits are based on a chi-square distribution with 20 degrees of freedom. Joint
significance tests for Tobits are based on an F-distribution with 20 (numerator) and 10292
(denominator) degrees of freedom.
0                              I   L
    1   I    I        I   I        0    I    I              I   I

    z   *    CD       P   -4       a.   52
                                             m             CD   v




            IUaJJJd                              2UaJJad
cr(                               Y I-”




                                          2LlaJJad
                  JUaJJad




      a       I       I       I
          I                         -                0
          0                         0
          m   %       8

                                           3UaJJad
                   &da JJ+j
IlJJJJJd
IUaJJad
%       8

              IUaJJad
    JUaJJad
.




B
z              B




    aUaJJad        3lJaJJad




     IUaJJad        2lJaJJad
            Figure 8: Financial Debt

            o Age 28 II-I 1983                     h No Cohort Effects                                 0 Age 28   ln 1983                     . No Cohort Effects
     60 -                                                                                     a-


                                                                                              6-
     40 -
z                                                                                        .w
!!                                                                                        6
                                                                                         t    4-
2
                                                                                         i!
     20 -
                                                                                              2-



     O-                                                                                       O-
            20I        301        I           I         I         I            ,                       20I        30I        I          I          1         I           I
                                 40          50        60        70           60                                            40         50         60        70          80
                   Ownership of Finand! Debt by Age                                            Total Asset Share of Fir%cial Debt by Age
     60 -                                                                                     8 -1 I



                                                                                              6




                                                                                                  -I
             20I        30I           40I          I
                                                  it?1963
                                                             I
                                                            60
                                                                         I
                                                                         70
                                                                                    I
                                                                                   t?O                 20          30I            I
                                                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                                                              I
                                                                                                                                            11?~K483
                                                                                                                                                        I
                                                                                                                                                       60        70
                                                                                                                                                                    I         I
                                                                                                                                                                             80
                                            Age                                                                                       Age
                     Ownership at Age 46 by Cohort                                                     Total Asset Share at Age 46 b y Cohort
pJaJJad
                       -
0           1
                           0   iz
            Ln                 42
    5:


                                    auaJJad
         aua3Ja.j




                                      3UaJJad
           IUa JJa,j
           %lJaJJad
IUa JJad
